For iridates with large spatially extended 5d orbitals, it may be anticipated that distant neighbor interactions would play a crucial role in their ground state properties. From this perspective, we investigate the magnetic structure of Sr2IrO4 by including interactions beyond first and second neighbors, via supercell modeling. Adopting to first-principles scalar relativistic methods, it is found that the minimum in total energy among various magnetic structures correspond to a ↑↑↓↓ type antiferromagnetic ordering of the Ir ions for which the magnitude of the electronic gap, that of the Ir local moments and, the facsimile of the two-peaked structure in the optical conductivity spectra of Sr2IrO4 were found to be in good agreement with the experiments. The results unequivocally evidence that the origin of the electronic gap in Sr2IrO4 is due to an unconventional antiferromagnetic ordering of Ir ions, thereby classifying the system as a Slater magnet, rather than the spin-orbit coupling driven J ef f = 1 2 Mott insulator. Sr 2 IrO 4 is an insulator at all temperatures However, few observations had also hinted to itinerant characteristics in Sr 2 IrO 4 Significantly, what appears less emphasized in Sr 2 IrO 4 is the effect of distant near neighbor interactions on the magnetism and its electronic structure properties. The magnetic structure as refined from neutron diffraction associates a non-collinear Neel type ordering of the Ir spins in the crystallographic a -b plane, with the spin orientation rigidly tracking the staggered rotation of the IrO 6 along the c-axis Here, we present a comprehensive investigation of the electronic and magnetic structure of Sr 2 IrO 4 , by means of first principles density functional theory. To include interactions beyond first nearest neighbors, we model few antiferromagnetic structures on an underlying super-cell of dimension 2a×2a×c, where a and c are the tetragonal lattice parameters of Sr 2 IrO 4 . Consistent with the previous works, we find that the local approximations to the exchange correlation potential, such as local density approximation (LDA) Few collinear magnetic structures with different initial Ir spin alignment were considered in the study. These are shown in Table It is well known that the electron density representation of the Coulomb potential in both LDA and GGA leads to an unphysical self interaction. As a result, these approximations tend to reduce the self-repulsion of electrons thereby stabilizing artificially delocalized electronic states N N represents the i th near neighboring shell with respect to a central Ir spin (↑) ion. The first four near neighboring distances are also shown. the form t ρ is introduced in the mBJ exchange potential, the contribution of which is calculated by |∇ρ| ρ In Fig. In accordance with the ionic model which associates Ir 5d manifold with five electrons, the electronic gap is found to reside well within the Ir t 2g manifold which extends over the range E(eV) ⊂ [-1.5, 0.8]. Four distinct localized features, which are predominantly of Ir d xz / d yz orbital characters are observed in the spectra. Three of them are in the occupied part of the spectra centered at -1.32 , -0.77 and -0.31 eV below E F and, the fourth peak at 0.55 eV above E F . The position of these bands indicate to three Ir t 2g inter-band transitions with the first, second and third transition energies being 0.86 eV , 1.32 eV and 1.87eV, respectively. These energies are reasonably in good agreement with the optical conductivity measurements, where two transition peaks labeled α and β were determined to be at 0.5 eV and 1 eV, respectively However, unlike the d xz / d yz states, the d xy states appear relatively more widespread on the energy scale. We note that the Ir-O distance in Sr 2 IrO 4 corresponds to 1.98 Å and 2.04 Å, for in-plane and apical O ions, respectively. For the in-plane O2 ions, the 2p z orbitals hybridize with the Ir d xz and d yz orbitals, while the O 2p x and 2p y mix with the d xy , d z 2 and d x 2 -y 2 orbitals. On the other hand, for apical O1 ions the 2p z orbitals hybridize with the Ir d z 2 and the 2p x / 2p y mix with the d xz / d yz states. Thus, the crystal chemistry suggests a mixing of the Ir t 2g and e g states in Sr 2 IrO 4 primarily due to the rotation of the IrO 6 octahedra. The rotation of the octahedra mixes the otherwise orthogonal Ir d xy and d x 2 -y 2 orbitals and consequently push the d xy states below the Fermi energy. The d xy and d x 2 -y 2 hybridization also results in a pseudo-gap like feature which is manifested -0.6 eV below E F . Further, the valence band energy integration of the orbitals states showed that the d xy + d x 2 -y 2 orbitals are occupied with 2 electrons per Ir ion, while the electron occupation in the d xz +d yz +d z 2 sums to 3 electrons per Ir ion, with d xz and d yz occupancy being 1.15 and 1.29 electrons, respectively. Also, the integrated DOS of the d xy / d yz orbitals above E F was determined to be 1 e -per Ir ion. Thus, we find that the scalar relativistic calculations with exchange potential as described in the mBJ formalism predicts Sr 2 IrO 4 to be an antiferromagnetic insulator. The magnitude of the local magnetic moment at the Ir sites in the AF3 structure was calculated as 0.57 μ B . The value is significantly higher than those determined from experiment, the latter which deduce the value as 0.2 μ B One of the well accepted methods to validate the electronic structure is by its optical response. In experiments, a double-peak structure with maxima around 0.5 eV and 1 eV have been observed, with the former peak being relatively sharper than the latter In Fig. Our results, therefore show that the origin of electronic gap in Sr 2 IrO 4 is associated with the long ranged antiferromagnetic interactions, and hence a Slater-insulator. We also investigated the effect of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) on the electronic structure of Sr 2 IrO 4 . The GGA-mBJ+SOC density of states are shown in Fig. In summary, using the first-principles density functional theory based scalar relativistic calculations with exchange potential described in mBJ formalism, we find that Sr 2 IrO 4 is an unconventional Slater-type antiferromagnetic system. The calculated magnitude of the electronic gap, that of the Ir local moment and, the two peak structure in the materials optical conductivity are found to be very consistent with the experimental results. Contrary to the present understanding that Sr 2 IrO 4 is a SOC driven J ef f Mott insulator, our calculations show that the role of of SOC in Sr 2 IrO 4 is of lesser significance in rendering the system its insulating ground state. Our results, which are based on density functional theory, are expected to stimulate further experimental works with an objective to unravel the magnetic structure of the system and the nature of Ir magnetism, thereby providing robust understanding of iridates, in general.