Superconductivity in many strongly correlated materials appears in proximity to a density-wave or nematic order and is believed to be mediated by quantum-critical (QC) fluctuations of the corresponding order parameter. We argue that fingerprints of QC pairing can be extracted from the angular dependence of the gap ∆(θ). We consider pairing by QC nematic fluctuations and show that there exist multiple pairing instabilities within the same symmetry (s-wave in our case), with closely spaced transition temperatures Tc,n. The corresponding ∆n(θ) change sign 8n times along the FS. Only the solution with the highest Tc,0 = Tc develops, but other gap components are induced below Tc and get resonantly enhanced below Tc,n. This gives rise to strong variation of the angular dependence of the gap below Tc. The effect gets much weaker away from a quantum-critical point. Introduction -In many correlated materials superconductivity (SC) has been observed in proximity to either a density-wave or a nematic order Contrary to this view, we argue in this Letter that QC pairing can give rise to a strong temperature evolution of ∆(θ) below T c at any given ω. Specifically, we argue that this is the case for s-wave SC near a nematic transition in 2D We argue that multiple closely spaced solutions for T c,n exist only in proximity to the nematic QCP. Away from a QCP, other solutions shift to smaller T and progressively disappear as the nematic correlation length gets smaller. An experimental observation of a strong variation of the shape of ∆(θ) below T c would then be conclusive evidence for QC pairing. We begin with a qualitative description of our results and the physics behind the appearance of multiple pairing states. We consider s-wave superconductivity of 2D fermions, minimally coupled to order parameter fluctuations near a nematic QCP. Fig. Model and gap equation -We consider 2D fermions with Fermi energy E F , minimally coupled to a nematic order parameter field φ(q) by where f (k) is a form-factor, which has d-wave symmetry with respect to C 4 lattice rotations. We assume the static susceptibility of the φ-field is peaked at q = 0: χ -1 (q) = χ -1 0 (ξ -2 0 + q 2 ). We define the dimensionless coupling to be λ = g 2 χ 0 /4E F . We assume for simplicity a circular FS, but our results are readily generalized to other C 4 -symmetric FSs. Because relevant fermions are near the FS, we can approximate f (k) by f (θ) = cos 2θ (see Fig. We assume and verify that fermionic and bosonic frequencies ω and Ω, relevant to the pairing, are of order λ 2 E F E F . Then a typical fermionic momentum transfer transverse to the FS is of order Σ , it is larger by 1/λ. In this situation, one can integrate out transverse momenta in the gap equation and obtain an equation for the gap function ∆(θ, ω n ) on the FS Here D(θ, φ, Ω) = λk 2 F χ(θ, φ, Ω)/χ 0 is the normalized susceptibility and Z(θ, ω n ) = (1 + Σ/ω n ) -1 is the quasiparticle residue. Eq. ( 0) corresponds to ν = 0. To determine the actual structure of ∆(θ, n) and the correct number of solutions, we need to go beyond the leading approximation and keep the dependence on φ in the numerator in (4). The problem is analytically tractable if we utilize the fact that typical ω n,n ∼ T , i.e., typical n, n = O(1) and typical Z = O(1), and simplify the gap equation by neglecting the frequency dependence of ∆ and setting Z = 1. In this approximation, Eq. ( Here t = (T c -T )/T c , θ h ∼ λ 1/3 , η(t) ∼ t/θ 2 h , and ( θ, φ) = θ h (θ, φ) are rescaled angular variables. Because Eq. ( -1 dξ exp(iξ θ)∆( θ), we find This is the Airy equation (for ξ > 0). It has solutions where ξ n is the n th zero of the Airy function Ai(|x|) for odd ∆(θ) and of its derivative Ai (x) for even ∆(θ). As we described in the Introduction, the appearance of the Airy equation is attributed to the fact that the Cooper pair can oscillate in the 'trapping potential' set by θ h . The smallest eigenvalue η n is for the even solution with n = 0. It yields a non-oscillating gap ∆ 0 (θ), peaked at θ = 0, with the width O(θ h ). The corresponding T c,0 is the actual T c for the pairing at a nematic QCP. It differs by a numerical factor of order f 4 (θ)/f 4 (0) ∼ (1-O(λ 2/3 )) 4 from T c (0) from Eq. ( and , up to n max ∼ 1/λ 1. Fig. Nonlinear gap equation and evolution of θ h -At T only slightly below T c,0 = T c , the angular dependence of the pairing gap coincides with ∆ 0 (θ), only the overall gap magnitude increases with decreasing T . We now show that the angle dependence of ∆(θ) drastically changes at smaller T because solutions with ∆ n>0 strongly influence the evolution of the gap width. The reason for this is that below T c , ∆ 0 (θ) induces the orthogonal gap components with n > 0, and the n th component gets near-resonantly enhanced at t ∼ nλ 2/3 . These additional gap components interfere destructively in the region |θ| < θ h , where they oscillate, but constructively for θ > θ h . To study this behavior we introduce Ginzburg-Landau Free energy and include only those quartic terms that couple ∆ 0 and ∆ n : ) n , at large θ θ h all ∆ n (θ), including n = 0, decay as 1/θ 4 . We verified numerically that a n2 |a n1 |, |a n3 | for n > 1, and that a n3 ∝ (-1) n . Solving the saddle point equation, we find that immediately below T c = T c,0 , when tt 0 = t 1 and tt n ≈ -t n , we have ∆2 0 ≈ t/a 0 and ∆n ≈ -∆0 (a n3 /a 0 )t/t n , i.e., | ∆n | ∆0 . In the opposite case when t ≥ t n , we have ∆n ≈ (-1) n+1 ∆0 (a 0 (tt n ) -2a n2 t)/ta n , i.e., | ∆n | is of the same order as ∆0 . Because ∆ n (θ) ∝ (-1) n ∆ 0 at small θ and ∆n ∝ (-1) n+1 ∆0 , ∆n ∆ n (θ) for all n > 0 have opposite sign compared to ∆n ∆ n (θ ≈ 0). The original and the induced gap components then interfere destructively, and the total ∆(θ ≈ 0) decreases with decreasing T . On the other hand, at large θ θ h , ∆ n (θ) ∝ ∆ 0 , hence ∆n ∆ n (θ) oscillates in sign between even and odd n, and the sign of the largest ∆1 ∆ 1 (θ) is the same as of ∆0 ∆ 0 (θ). Then the original and the induced gap components interfere mostly constructively. As the consequence, the effective 'width' of the gap, θ h (t) ∝ ∆(t, θ)dθ should get larger with decreasing T . F or t ∼ t N , when N 1 states are hybridized, we find, using where at and bt 5/4 are the contributions from states with t n > t and t n < t, respectively. Fig. Away from the QCP -Our results are readily generalized Summary and discussion -We analyzed s-wave superconductivity near a nematic transition in 2D. We showed that the gap function, induced by quantumcritical nematic fluctuations, is peaked in hot regions, and has a strong and distinctive temperature evolution within the superconducting state. The peak width grows with decreasing temperature. The source of this evolution is the existence of multiple solutions for the pairing gap ∆ n (θ) with closely spaced T c,n . These solutions all have s-wave symmetry and can be thought of as oscillating excited states in an effective trapping potential which determines the hot region. At T c = T c,0 only the non-oscillating solution ∆ 0 (θ) develops, but other ∆ n (θ) are induced by ∆ 0 (θ) and get resonantly enhanced below T c,n . Interference effects from these resonantly induced components modify the width of the hot region and make it temperature-dependent. The existence of series of low energy states in the superconducting dome of quantum-critical systems raises several intriguing possibilities. These states may participate in subgap dynamics We thank E. Berg, R. Fernandes, S. Kivelson, M. N. Gastiasoro, S. Lederer and Y. Schattner for stimulat-Supplemental material for "Multiple pairing states and temperature-dependent gap anisotropy for superconductivity near a nematic quantum-critical point" by Avraham Klein, Yi-Ming Wu and Andrey Chubukov In these supplementary notes we describe our analytic calculations, both for the linearized and the nonlinear gap equation. In the final section we briefly describe our numerical procedure. In what follows we first consider the pairing at a QCP, and then away from it. For the latter case we introduce a finite correlation length ξ k -1 F . We consider a generic d-wave form-factor f (θ) and focus on the region -π/2 < θ < π/2. We use as an input previous works where the bosonic propagator is As we explained in the main text, the key effect of fermionic Z(θω n ) is to cancel the term with ω m = ω n in the frequency sum in the r.h.s. of (1). We eliminate this term and thereafter set Z(θ, ω n ) = 1. This simplifies the analytical consideration. We keep the full Z(θ, ω n ) contribution in numerical calculations. In order to make manifest the different roles played by the strong local fluctuations at the smallest angular transfers φ and the weak tail of the interaction at larger φ, it is convenient to split Eq. ( Here Λ0 takes care of strong local fluctuations, Because the integration over φ is confined to small |φ| 1, we can approximate f (θ + φ/2) by f (θ), and extend the limits of the φ integration to ±∞. Integrating over φ we then obtain (5) This is Eq. ( The local gap equation has a continuous set of solutions which progressively emerge at To get the exact prefactor, we note the gap equation, Eq. ( The existence of a continuous set of solutions is a consequence of neglecting the second, non-local term in the r.h.s. of Eq. (3). To obtain the actual gap function we need to account for this non-local term. We proceed with an analytic treatment by making two approximations. First, we use the fact that the frequency sum converges, arXiv:1812.00521v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 3 Dec 2018 i.e., typical ω m = O(T ). We then neglect the frequency dependence in the gap equation by taking ω n and ω m to be the smallest non-equal Matsubara frequencies, i.e., set ω n = πT, ω m = -πT . Second, we expand f (θ) and f (θ + φ/2) in small angles near θ = 0, φ = 0, i.e., around the center of the hot region. We assume and then verify that the expansion is justified everywhere in the hot region, since we will see that the width of ∆(θ, n), viewed as a function of θ, is small, θ h ∼ λ 1/3 , as long as λ 1. Using these approximations, we rewrite Eq. (3) as where we used f (θ) = f (0)(1a θ θ 2 ), and a θ and a λ are of order one. A quick study of Eq. ( ∼ λ∆(θ)/|θ| in the r.h.s. We will be interested in the gap function at θ ∼ θ h >> λ. In this region one can drop λ 3 /|φ| term in the r.h.s. of ( Rescaling θ by θ h and choosing the prefactor in θ h ∝ λ 1/3 to eliminate the numerical factor between θ 2 and integral terms in the r.h.s. of ( where θ, φ are rescaled angles and we again extended the integration to ±∞. The width of the "hot" region in Eq. ( where In original variables, Eq. This is Eq. ( where η n is the "coordinate" of the n th zero of the derivative of the Airy function Ai (|x|). This implies that there exists a discrete set of solutions for the gap ∆ n (ξ) with T c,n set by A (η n ) = 0. The corresponding ∆ n ( θ) changes sign n times in the first octant (8n times over the whole Fermi surface). For n 1, such that The highest T c = T c,0 is for the solution with n = 0. The corresponding ∆ 0 ( θ) does not change sign. In this section we solve the nonlinear gap equation. We extend Eq. ( 1 it is enough expand to 3rd order in ∆ and keep only the contribution to this order from the operator ∆0 of Eq. ( Equivalently, we can write a Ginzburg Landau Free energy and compute its saddle-point equations. We write the gap function as an expansion in the states ∆ n ( θ) that are solutions of the linearized equation, ∆( θ) = n ∆n ∆ n ( θ). For convenience, we normalize them to be orthonormal and such that ∆ n ( θ = 0) ∝ (-1) n , i.e. nonoscillating ∆ 0 is positive for ∆( θ = 0), then ∆ 1 ( θ = 0) is negative, etc. The Free energy has the form, where where and A is a constant of order one. We simplify the analysis of Eq. ( Qualitatively, we expect that |a 3n |, |a 1n | |a 2n | |a n |. This is because a 2n is an integral over a positive-definite quantity whereas the integrals that determine a 3n , a 1n oscillate. In addition, we expect that a 3n ∝ (-1) n . This is because ∆ 3 0 ( θ) is peaked in the region near θ = 0, and so the overall sign should go as the sign of ∆ n ( θ = 0). Numerically, we find that the overlap integral in Eq. ( Since a n1 ∼ a n3 and | ∆n | | ∆0 |, we can neglect the a 1n terms in F 4 . We neglect the contribution of the induced states ∆ n>0 on the nonoscillating ∆ 0 , in which case the saddle point equation for ∆0 immediately yields ∆0 ≈ t/a 0 . The saddle-point solution of Eq. ( The results quoted in the main text (after Eq. ( We can simplify Eq. ( where N (t) ∼ t 3/2 is the largest n such that t > t n , and a, b, a , b , b are constants. Eq. ( in agreement with Eq. ( The analysis of the discrete set of solutions of the gap equation can be readily extended to a finite nematic correlation length ξ. The bosonic propagator at a finite ξ is FIG. 1. An illustration of the numerical solution of Eq. ( FIG. For this figure we greatly simplified the expected dependence on the various an, anj and used A = 1, a0 = an = 1, an2 = 0.8, an3 = 0.0125. The numbers were chosen to avoid the artificial pole in Eq. ( The computational steps are the same as before. The local gap equation is given by ( where a ξ = O(1). In the nonlocal part of the equation, the finite ξ plays no role since the behavior at small φ is smooth. Consequently, the gap equation with the nonlocal term has the same form as Eq. ( The new onset temperatures are, where kF ∼ k F and λ ∼ λ. We see that, at (k F ξ) -1 λ, the effect of the finite correlation length is a uniform reduction of all onset temperatures, but multiple solutions survive and the width of the hot region θ h does not depend on ξ. In the opposite limit (k F ξ) -1 λ, Λ 0 has a BCS form, Eq. Eq. ( and Eq. Eq. We solved both the linearized and the nonlinear gap equation numerically. The details of the numerical solution of the linearized equation have appeared previously in Ref. 2. All the figures and numerical values that appear in the main text and this supplementary material were obtained for a value of λ = 0.025, with a numerical mesh of 512 points in the range -π/2 < θ < π/2, and 48 Matsubara frequencies (half negative and half positive). Regarding the nonlinear gap equation, all the figures and numerical values that appear in the main text and this supplementary material were for a value of λ = 0.03. They were obtained with a mesh of 1000 points in the range -π < θ < π and 101 Matsubara frequencies, namely we take ω n = (2n + 1)πT with n ranging from -50 to 50. The numerical solution was obtained by iteration. Both linear and nonlinear equations were solved in MATLAB (various versions). To produce the figures in this supplementary material, as well as Fig. 