This study investigates the mode I intra-laminar fracture and size effect in Discontinuous Fiber Composites (DFCs). Towards this goal, the results of fracture tests on geometrically-scaled Single Edge Notch Tension (SENT) specimens are presented and critically discussed for three platelet sizes. The results clearly show a decrease in nominal strength as the specimen size increases. This effect becomes more important as the structure size increases. It is found that, when the specimen is sufficiently large, the structural strength scales according to Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM) and the failure occurs in a very brittle way. In contrast, small specimens exhibit a more pronounced pseudo-ductility with a limited scaling effect and a significant deviation from LEFM. To characterize the fracture energy and the effective length of the fracture process zone, an approach combining equivalent fracture mechanics and stochastic finite element modeling is proposed. The model accounts for the complex random mesostructure of the material by modeling the platelets explicitly. Thanks to this theoretical framework, the mode I fracture energy of DFCs is estimated for the first time and it is shown to depend significantly on the platelet size. In particular, the fracture energy is shown to increase linearly with the platelet size in the range investigated in this work. Another important conclusion of this work is that, compared to traditional unidirectional composites, DFC structures exhibit higher pseudo-ductility and their strength is, by far, less sensitive to notches, defects and cracks. However, this aspect can be used advantageously in structural design only upon the condition that proper certification guidelines acknowledging the more pronounced quasibrittleness of DFCs is formulated. The size effect analysis presented in this work represents a first step in this direction as it allows the assessment of the severity of a defect or notch in DFCs. Composites reinforced by randomly oriented platelets or short fibers, generally called Discontinuous Fiber Composites (DFCs), offer several advantages over traditional unidirectional composites. Not only do they feature a relatively pseudo-ductile behavior Considering the remarkable properties of DFCs, it is not surprising that the scientific and industrial communities devoted significant efforts to understanding their mechanical behavior and developing proper design guidelines. Since the pioneering work of Halpin and Pagano As a consequence, the fracturing behavior and, most importantly, the energetic size effect associated with the given structural geometry, cannot be described by means of the classical Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM). To capture the effects of a finite, non-negligible FPZ, the introduction of a characteristic (finite) length scale related to the fracture energy and the strength of the material is essential Another aspect that makes the characterization of the fracturing behavior of DFCs particularly challenging is the significant role played by the platelet morphology, especially the platelet size and its spatial random distribution throughout the structure. In fact, the random orientation distribution of platelets leads to significant spatial variability of the mechanical properties as well as of the local stress field In consideration of the foregoing knowledge gaps, this study presents an investigation of the intra-laminar fracture and size effect in DFCs for three platelet sizes (75 × 12, 50 × 8, and 25 × 4 mm). The size effect on the structural strength of geometricallyscaled Single Edge Notch Tension (SENT) specimens is characterized for the first time, showing that neither stress-based failure criteria nor LEFM can solely capture the scaling effect. To capture the size effect and characterize the fracture energy, G f , and the effective length of the fracture process zone, c f , an approach combining equivalent fracture mechanics and stochastic finite element modeling is proposed in this study. The model accounts for the complex random mesostructure of the material by modeling the platelets explicitly. Thanks to this theoretical framework, the mode I fracture energy of DFCs is estimated for the first time and it is shown to depend linearly on the platelet size for the size range investigated in this work. It is found that the fracture energy of DFCs is much larger than several light alloys and always comparable to or larger than the quasi-isotropic laminate composite made from the same constituents. This aspect is significantly interesting considering the possible use of DFCs in the applications demanding crashworthiness Finally, it is shown that structures made of DFCs are significantly less brittle compared to the ones made of traditional laminated composites. This aspect is particularly important for the formulation of certification guidelines for DFCs and the development of strategies for inspection and maintenance. To control the dimensions of the platelets precisely, an in-house manufacturing process based on semi-automated manufacturing protocols were developed. The main steps of the processes used to manufacture the specimens can be summarized as follows 1. Sheets of Toray P707AG-15 with T700G-12K fiber reinforced prepreg were cut into two comb-shaped strips using a CNC fabric cutter (manufactured by Autometrix Advantage). Each strip was cut with a width corresponding to the desired platelet dimensions (Fig. A thorough analysis of the plates confirmed the robustness of the proposed manufacturing approach. In fact, the volume fraction of voids was far below 2% for all the plates manufactured in this work whereas the thickness was provided with a tolerance of ±3.31%. Previous studies Fracture tests on geometrically-scaled Single Edge Notched Tension (SENT) specimens (see Fig. To create a sharp notch, a thin, diamond-coated, razor blade saw was used. The blade thickness was 0.2 mm. The width of the notch was kept in a constant ratio relative to the structure width in this study (a 0 = D/5 in Fig. A closed-loop, servo-hydraulic Instron 5585H with 200 kN capacity was used for all the tests. The nominal strain rate was set to 0.2 %/min for all the specimen sizes investigated in this work. The load from the machine was recorded with a sampling frequency of 10 Hz. To use the DIC technique, digital images were captured using a Nikon D5600 DSLR camera with Nikon AF micro 200 mm and Sigma 135 mm DG HSM lenses. The images were taken with a sampling rate of 1 Hz. The load-displacement curves of the size effect tests were analyzed based on the displacement field computed from DIC using the GOM Correlate software In Fig. In previous studies by Feraboli et al. From the peak load P c measured during the tests, a nominal strength σ N c = P c /tD where t = thickness and D = specimen width was calculated. The average nominal strength for various specimens and platelet sizes tested is listed in Table In this study, the fracturing behavior of DFC structures is analyzed using a fracture mechanics approach which implements a characteristic length-scale to capture the effects of the FPZ. With reference to Fig. is considered, c f being an effective FPZ length treated as a material property. Following LEFM, the energy release rate G(α) is a function of the crack length as follows: with α = a/D = dimensionless crack length, σ N = the nominal stress defined as σ N = P/(tD), and E * = effective elastic constant. The function g(α) represents the dimensionless energy release rate which relates the geometric and elastic parameters of the structure to G In the condition of incipient fracture, the energy release rate G must be equal to the fracture energy G f , assumed to be a material property. By substituting Eq. (1) in Eq. ( For homogeneous structures, g = g(α) or, in other words, the dimensionless functions depend only on the geometry of the structure In view of these considerations, Eq. ( where now the dimensionless energy release is considered as a function of both the relative crack length and structure size: g = g (α, D). Performing a Taylor series expansion around α 0 for a constant structure size D one gets: After rearranging Eq. ( where g D = [∂g/∂α] D and the subscript D indicates partial differentiation with a constant structure size. As can be noted, the main difference compared to the homogeneous case, Eq. ( Different from LEFM, the foregoing equation relates the nominal strength not only to the fracture energy of the material but also a characteristic length scale c f , associated to the FPZ size. This length scale is the key to capture the transition of the fracturing behavior from quasi-ductile to brittle with increasing structure size. Finally, the previous expression can be also written as follows: where σ 0 = E * G f /c f g (α 0 , D) and D 0 = c f g (α 0 , D)/g(α 0 , D). σ 0 and D 0 are size effect constants depending on the structure geometry and the size of the FPZ. It is worth noting that for the structure sizes and the thickness considered in this study, the average dimensionless energy release functions were not found to change significantly with D based on an extensive computational study (detailed discussion in section 5.2). Therefore, for the sake of simplicity, Eq. ( Finally, it is worth concluding this section stressing the simplicity of Eq. ( While the effect of the nonlinear cohesive stresses in the FPZ is accounted for by the introduction of the length scale c f , the effects of the platelet size and morphology on the energy release are captured by the functions g and g D . These functions are calculated by explicitly modeling the platelets by FEA and characterizing the evolution of the strain energy in the structure for different crack lengths. To obtain the size effect parameters σ 0 and D 0 , regression analysis was conducted on the experimental data. To do so, the following transformation was used: Using these terms, Eq. ( with: Leveraging this equation, it is possible to perform a linear regression of the size effect data as shown in Figs. Figs. The foregoing conclusions are extremely important for the design of DFC structures featuring defects or sharp notches. The pseudo-ductile behavior reported in fracture tests on small laboratory-scaled DFC specimens may induce designers to overestimate severely the load capacity of real, large structural components if strength-criteria is used. On the other hand, LEFM does not always provide an accurate method to extrapolate the structural strength of larger structures from lab tests on small-scale specimens, especially if the size of the specimens belongs to the transitional zone. In fact, the use of LEFM in such cases may lead to a significant underestimation of structural strength, thus hindering the full exploitation of DFC fracture properties. This is a severe limitation in several engineering applications such as aeronautics and astronautics for which structural performance optimization is of utmost importance. On the other hand, LEFM always overestimates significantly the strength when used to predict the structural performance at smaller length-scales. This is a serious issue for the design of e.g. small complex-shaped components. In such cases, SEL or other equivalent material models with a characteristic length scale ought to be used. It is interesting to compare the structural behavior of DFCs to traditional continuous composite structures. To do so, quasi-isotropic (QI) laminates [0/45/90/-45] 3s with geometrically-scaled SENT specimens were manufactured with the identical prepreg system. The average thickness of the QI laminates were 3.43 mm. The test method was identical with the DFCs. The resulting strengths are listed in Table Surprisingly, the QI provides lower strength after reaching the structure size of 112 mm comparing with the DFCs made of largest platelet size (see the star mark in Fig. This result indicates that DFCs are more suitable than QI laminates for the structures with sufficiently large size containing the geometrical stress risers such as notches or holes. Figure For additional structural behavior comparison between the traditional composite structures with DFCs, a useful non-dimensional parameter called the brittleness number, β, is introduced One of the main objectives of this study is to estimate, for the first time, the mode I intra-laminar fracture energy G f of DFCs. To characterize G f leveraging Eq. ( The mesostructure generation algorithm adopted in this work represents an extension of the stochastic laminate analogy method proposed in Following the foregoing computational framework, the structure is first subdivided into several partitions, whose size is chosen to allow an accurate description of the platelets. In the present work, this size was set to be 1 × 1 mm for all the platelet sizes investigated The algorithm repeats until the average number of platelets through the thickness reaches the desired value (see Fig. First, without any restriction, the spatial variability of the number of platelets through the thickness would be unrealistically extreme. Second, since the resin flow during the manufacturing process is not modeled explicitly, the algorithm would result in an uneven thickness of the plate unless the platelets and added resin rich layers are scaled properly. To address these problems, an in-house DFC mesostructure generation algorithm is developed, as outlined in Fig. The platelet-limit zone blocks additional platelet depositions at the certain partitions when they reach the allowable limit. If a platelet is placed on top of the limit zone, the algorithm rejects it and a new platelet is generated at another random location. The saturation points decide the allowable limits in the partitions. In the case of 24 layers, every third layer is the saturation point which corresponds to the mat stacking manufacturing method as described in Section 2.1. Therefore, the allowable limits are Once the mesostructure is constructed within the desired CoV, the algorithm proceeds with the adjustment of the partitions thickness. This step is made necessary by the fact that the resin flow is not modeled explicitly. Accordingly, at the end of the algorithm, each partition will be characterized by a different thickness, in contrast to the fact that real DFC plates feature an almost uniform thickness. To overcome this issue, two possible conditions are addressed. ( The mesostructure generated by the algorithm described in section 5.1 was imported in Abaqus/Standard were used to model the structure and to calculate the reaction force, P , and the total strain energy. The behaviors of the platelets and resin layers were assumed to be linearly elastic, with the elastic properties given in Table To find the dimensionless functions g(α) and g (α) using Eq. ( Generally, a convenient method to obtain the energy release rate is using the Jintegral approach with u being the equilibrium displacement, a being the crack length, b the thickness, and Π being the potential energy of the whole specimen. Figure For homogeneous, geometrically-scaled specimens, the functions g(α) and g (α) do not depend on the structure size As can be noted, for a moderate window of the specimen and platelet size variations considered in this work, the structural size effect on the average value of these functions is not significant. A slight effect of the size on the CoV of the function g is noticeable but was neglected in this work as it does not affect the average behavior. Based on these results, the average values of the dimensionless functions were used. These values are summarized in Table Connecting the size effect parameters, A and C, with the dimensionless functions leveraging Eq. ( Table As can be noted from the Fig. The results also clearly indicate a strong effect of the platelet size on the fracture properties of the material. In particular, the fracture energy increases linearly with the platelet size in the range investigated in this work. Further computational studies are ongoing to clarify how this trend is affected by the mechanical properties of the constituents and the random orientation of the platelets. Finally, it is worth mentioning here that the platelet size also affects the effective FPZ length which is found to be 13.21, 6.41, and 6.54 mm for the 75 × 12, 50 × 8, and 25 × 4 mm platelets respectively. This is in agreement with the more pronounced quasi-ductility reported for the DFC structures made of longer platelets. This work investigated the fracturing behavior and scaling of Discontinuous Fiber Composite (DFC) structures leveraging a combination of experiments and stochastic computational modeling. Based on the results of this study, the following conclusions can be elaborated: 1. The fracture tests on geometrically-scaled Single Edge Notch Tension (SENT) specimens confirmed a remarkable size effect on the structural strength. It was found that, when the specimen is sufficiently large, the structural strength scales according to the Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM) and the failure occurs in a very brittle way. In contrast, small specimens exhibit a more pronounced pseudo-ductility with limited scaling effect and a significant deviation from LEFM. 2. The transition from pseudo-ductile to brittle fracture with an increasing specimen size is related to the development of a significant Fracture Process Zone (FPZ) whose dimensions were found to be comparable to the platelet size. In the FPZ, signicant non-linear deformations due to sub-critical damage mechanisms, such as platelet delamination, matrix microcracking, and platelet splitting/fracture, promote strain redistribution and mitigate the intensity of the stress field induced by the crack/notch. This phenomenon is more pronounced for small structures since the size of a fully-developed FPZ is typically a material property and thus its influence on the structural behavior becomes increasingly significant as the structure size is reduced. For sufficiently large structures, the size of the FPZ becomes negligible compared to the structure's characteristic size in agreement with the inherent assumption of the LEFM that non-linear effects are negligible during the fracturing process. 3. The design of DFC structures must take the foregoing size effect on the nominal strength into serious consideration. In fact, if the correct scaling is not understood and properly acknowledged, the pseudo-ductile behavior reported in fracture tests on small laboratory-scaled DFC specimens may induce designers to overestimate severely the load capacity of real, large structural components. Size effect testing and analysis can overcome this problem. Preprint submitted to Composite StructuresDecember 27, 2018