Based on the transformation acoustic (TA) methodology, an innovative approach for designing arbitrary shape concentrators is proposed. Unlike previous works, which utilized inhomogeneous and anisotropic materials to localize the incident acoustic waves in an arbitrary domain, the same functionality will be attained by introducing only one homogeneous anisotropic medium, which is called Acoustic nihility media (ANM). A great advantage of this method is that the attained materials are not dependent on the shape of the concentrator. That is regardless of the device geometry, a constant ANM will be used for each new shape and the output results do not alter. This will circumvent the conventional transformation acoustics' sophisticated and tedious calculations and could be easily implemented in real-life scenarios. Recently, manipulation of acoustic waves has gained lots of attention, due to its several applications in sonar detection TA methodology, which was proposed by Cummer et al. In this paper, a new method to attain material parameter expressions for any desired shape concentrators is proposed that is more feasible to be implemented in the real-life scenario. Due to the presented technique, the acquired materials became acoustic nihility media (also known as acoustic null materials or(ANM)) which is recently exploited by Sun. et al. to design acoustics multi emission lenses In order to achieve the perfect functionality of a concentrator, the schematic diagram of Fig. as it is indicated with blue line in the same figure. Since these two steps occur simultaneously, all the energy, which previously located in and as a result, the acoustic intensity will be increased in the mentioned domain. In addition, since the proposed transformation does not alter the azimuthal direction ( i.e.    ), the final transformation function could be expressed as: where the subscript of , csrepresents each compressive and stretching regions discussed above. From TA methodology point of view, under any coordinate transformation from original space ( , , ) x y z to a new space ( , , ) x y z    , the mass density and bulk modulus of the physical space are expressed as where 0  and 0  are the mass density and bulk modulus of the virtual domain which is assumed to be filled with air and Λ is the Jacobian matrix denoted by ( , , ) ( , , ) . By substituting Eq. (1) into Eq. ( As it can be seen from Eq.(  where i  are constant coefficients which satisfied the condition of 1 2 3     and   R  is an arbitrary shape contour as shown in Fig. where n a and n b are constant coefficients that specify the contour shape.  can achieve any arbitrary value. This will give us a degree of freedom to arbitrarily select the value of 2  in a manner that it will eradicate the off-diagonal components of 12  (also 21  ). To this aim, we will set 23   (Fig. Eq.( Therefore, after some simple calculations, the inhomogeneous and anisotropic materials of Eq.( Virtual Space Physical Space a. b. where c  , c   , s  and s   are the necessitating materials of compressive and stretching regions, respectively. The obtained materials of the stretching region are named as nihility media since they have the competency of making total transmission condition . In other words, these media could be considered as a void since no reflection/ diffraction would be generated for the incident wave inside these media To validate the concept, several innovative examples in 2D space were carried out by using COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS finite element solver. For all the performed simulations, the incident wave was taken to be an acoustic plane wave, which is illuminating under the frequency of 4 f kHz  with the amplitude of 1 A  . Since the solving area is a rectangle with the sides of ,where  is the operative wavelength, the provided simulations exhibit both near field and far field behavior of the structure. Moreover, for all the proposed geometry of and 3 1   are selected, while the coefficients of   R  will achieve different values for each new case. Therefore, according to Eq.( The first example is dedicated to cylindrical cross-section concentrators with   3 R   and its results are illustrated in Fig. To further demonstrate the independence of the proposed method to the geometry of the concentrators, the same material of Eq. ( In summary, for the first time, we have proposed a method in which any arbitrary shape acoustic concentrator will be achieved via naturally occurring materials. It was shown that the functionality of the proposed material which is an acoustic nihility media(ANM) is not restricted to the device geometry; hence, a constant ANM could be used for any shape concentrators. To validate the concept, several numerical simulations were performed , which their results were well abide by the theoretical predictions. We believe that the newly proposed method in this paper could pave the way towards the more unprecedented of acoustic manipulation especially in scenarios where the high concentration of sound waves is of utmost importance such as in sonar systems. 