In this work, we revisit the model of PbTe presented in Ref. 1. We show that the low energy theory of this model corresponds to a (higher-order) topological crystalline insulator in space group F m 3m1 , diagnosable by symmetry indicators. We show that the gapless fermions found on antiphase domain walls are the topological boundary modes of the system, due to a nonvanishing mirror Chern number. Furthermore, we show that any symmetric completion of the model must be in this same topological phase. Finally, we comment on the relationship of this model to realistic PbTe, which has recently been predicted to have a phase which realizes same bulk symmetry indicators. Introduction. One of the most striking features of topological insulators is the presence of protected gapless modes at surfaces, interfaces, and defects In light of these recent developments, we may be tempted to take a fresh look at the old observation that a simplified tight-binding model for PbTe was found to host four Dirac fermions on a two-dimensional antiphase boundary In this work, we answer this question in the affirmative. First, we review the model of Ref. 1 (hereafter referred to as the FDB model), and show how to modify it in order to respect the symmetries of the cubic space group F m 3m1 (225) Effective tight-binding model Let us start by reviewing the FDB model, exploring its shortcomings, and constructing an improved model with the same phenomenology. Let us start as did the authors of Ref. 1 by noting that PbTe has a rocksalt structure, with the symmetries of space group F m 3m1 (225), the centrosymmetric, symmorphic space group with a face-centered cubic Bravais lattice and octahedral point group. We take as a basis for the Bravais lattice (we set the lattice constant a = 1 for simplicity) The rocksalt structure has Te atoms located at the 4a Wyckoff position, with reduced coordinates q a = (0, 0, 0), and Pb atoms at the 4b Wyckoff position with reduced coordinates where we have taken the liberty of restoring a neglected factor of i in the hopping term to restore time-reversal symmetry The spectrum of this Hamiltonian consists of two sets of doubly-degenerate bands (due to IT symmetry) separated by a spectral gap which is smallest at the L point (1/2, 1/2, 1/2) and given by δE L = 2m. Depending on the sign of m, there is a band inversion at the L point: for m > 0 the valence bands carry the representation L9 of the little group of L (with inversion eigenvalues (-1, -1)), while for m < 0 the valence bands carry the representation L8 of the little group of L (with inversion eigenvalues (+1, +1)). Because there are four L points in the FCC Brillouin zone, this is not a Z 2 nontrivial TI Here, however, we run into a problem: The Hamiltonian H FDB is C 4x -symmetric, but the matrix representative of C 4x can be seen to be This has the unfortunate property that ∆(C 4x ) 4 = +1, rather than -1 as needed for a double-valued representation. Repairing this by multiplying by a factor of √ i is futile, as then ∆(C 4x ) and ∆(T ) no longer commute. Thus, the FDB Hamiltonian does not have the symmetries of the space group F m 3m1 . To repair the symmetries, we seek hopping terms which vanish at the L point, are nonvanishing everywhere else, and transform in the representation given by Eqs. In this way, we will replicate the band inversion at L in our symmetric model. Let us first fix the spin-orbit coupling term. Noting that the matrices τ x,y σ μ transform in a pseudovector representation under roto-inversions, we need them to be multiplied by functions of k which are also pseudovectors. Combining this observation with time-reversal invariance and the boundary conditions on the Bloch Hamiltonian, we find that the simplest choice of SOC term which vanishes at L is For now, let us overlook the long (5-th nearest neighbor) range of this coupling in light of its mathematical simplicity. We may be tempted to take mτ z + H SOC as our improved Hamiltonian, however H SOC vanishes along the whole Γ -L line, rather than just at the L point. To remedy this, we can add two additional spin-independent hopping terms We take for our full improved Hamiltonian when m = 0 with t and δ 2 nonzero, this model is gapless only at the L point. for m = 0, a nonzero δ 1 ensures that spectrum of this Hamiltonian is gapped. We see that there is thus an insulator-to-insulator transition driven by an inversion of bands at the L point, just as in the original F DB model. We show the bulk spectrum for positive and negative values of m in Fig. Topological properties Let us now examine the topological nature of this band-inversion transition. We will start by analyzing the band representations in the model following Refs. where 4κ 1 is the sum of occupied band inversion eigenvalues, and 2 √ 2κ 4 is the sum of occupied band IC 4z eigenvalues. Note that both κ 1 and κ 4 are integers Furthermore, note that while the original FDB model is not C 4z symmetric, it is inversion symmetric. Thus, the sum of occupied band inversion eigenvalues κ FDB 1 can be computed for that model, and is given by Next, note that IC 4z is not in the little group of any of the L points. Therefore, in any symmetric completion of the FDB model the occupied band IC 4z eigenvalues do not change as a function of m, and so neither does κ 4 . Thus, in any symmetric completion of the FDB model, the index ν must change by 4 as the sign of m changes. Assuming additionally that the m > 0 phase is connected to the (unobstructed We can make these statements more precise by examining the low-energy k • p theory for the topological transition in both H F DB and H iF DB . Starting with the original FDB model, we find by expanding Eq. ( On the other hand, performing the same expansion of H iFDB , setting δ 2 = t, and defining the rotated coordinates (k a , k b , k c ) and spin matrices (s a , s b , s c ) [41] yields to quadratic order Up to a choice of basis for the Dirac matrices, this is the BHZ model Hamiltonian for a topological insulator As pointed out in Refs. 17, 21, and 22, models in space group F m 3m1 with ν = 4 and ν m 1 10 = 2 also have a nontrivial higher order index δ S4 = 1 protected by fourfold rotoinversion symmetry. This phase has four Dirac cones on a ẑ-normal surface, thus explaining the four Dirac fermions on an antiphase boundary found in Refs. In the previous sections, we have seen how symmetrized completions of the FDB model of PbTe yield higher order topological and mirror Chern insulators. Under certain conditions, the band structure for realistic PbTe as computed with ab-initio methods realizes this same ν = 4 symmetry-indicated phase. This can be seen by analyzing the material catalogues of Refs. 30 and 31, which both report the value of ν = 4 for PbTe. For confirmation, we have recomputed the abinitio band structure of PbTe using Density Functional Theory (DFT) However, it is well-accepted that the mirror Chern number ν m 1 10 in PbTe is zero under ambient experimental conditions, while it is 2 for SnTe To investigate this systematically, we have computed the band structures and topological index ν for all 42 entries of PbTe in the ICSD, using the PBE functional. The input parameters for these compounds differ only in the reported lattice constant a 0 , which range between 6.157 Å and 6.543 Å. For the six reported structures with a 0 ≤ 6.44 Å, PBE predicts ν = 4; for the remaining with larger lattice constants we find ν = 0. In the Supplementary Material we give a table summarizing our DFT calculations Conclusion We have revisited the effective model of PbTe as presented in Refs. 1, 23, and 24. We have shown that the domain wall fermions in the FDB model, long derided as nontopological, are signatures of the topological surface states present in any symmetric completion of the model, protected by mirror and fourfold rotoin-k SnTe PbTe Γ Γ6, Γ6, Γ8, Γ11 Γ6, Γ6, Γ8, Γ11 X X6, X6, X8, X8, X9 X6, X6, X8, X8, X9 L L9, L8, L8, L4 L5, L9 L8, L9, L9, L6 L7, L8 W W6, W7, W7, W6, W7 W7, W6, W7, W6, W6 TABLE II. Occupied band irreps for SnTe and PbTe at the high symmetry points. Irreps are listed in order of increasing energy, i.e. those states closest to the fermi level appear at the end of the list. Note that the irreps at Γ and X are identical for the two materials. version symmetries. Furthermore, we show that ab initio calculations reveal that some of the reported structures of realistic PbTe are in this same symmetry-indicated class of materials, at least within the GGA. This shows that PbTe is an ideal platform for exploring structurallytunable topological behavior. Finally, while within the context of our effective model there is no difference between an antiphase domain wall and a domain wall with the vacuum, this is not necessarily true in a more realistic system. Given the recent focus on defect response of higher-order topological insulators [40] Bilbao Crystallogr. Server, "Bandrep: Band representations of the double space groups," (2017), http://www. cryst.ehu.es/cgi-bin/cryst/programs/bandrep.pl. [41] Explicitly, these rotations are given by