Superconducting ratio-frequency (SRF) cavities, cooled by superfluid helium-4 (He II), are key components in modern particle accelerators. Quenches in SRF cavities caused by Joule heating from local surface defects can severely limit the maximum achievable accelerating field. Existing methods for quench spot detection include temperature mapping and second-sound triangulation. These methods are useful but all have known limitations. Here we describe a new method for surface quench spot detection by visualizing the heat transfer in He II via tracking He * 2 molecular tracer lines. A proof-of-concept experiment has been conducted, in which a miniature heater mounted on a plate was pulsed on to simulate a surface quench spot. A He * 2 tracer line created nearby the heater deforms due to the counterflow heat transfer in He II. By analyzing the tracer-line deformation, we can well reproduce the heater location within a few hundred microns, which clearly demonstrates the feasibility of this new technology. Our analysis also reveals that the heat content transported in He II is only a small fraction of the total input heat energy. We show that the remaining energy is essentially consumed in the formation of a cavitation zone near the heater. By estimating the size of this cavitation zone, we discuss how the existence of the cavitation zone may explain a decades-long puzzle observed in many second-sound triangulation experiments. Superconducting ratio-frequency (SRF) cavities are key components in many modern particle accelerators due to their high Q factors The maximum accelerating gradient of SRF cavities can be improved by removing the surface defects via mechanical grinding, tumbling the cavity, and electron or laser re-melting A more convenient non-contacting quench spot detection method based on second-sound triangulation was later introduced by a team at Cornell University In this paper, we discuss a new non-contacting method for quench spot detection by visualizing quench-induced thermal counterflow in He II using a He * 2 molecular tracer-line tagging technique developed in our laboratory The optical cryostat used in our proof-of-concept experiment is shown schematically in Fig. The heat ejected into He II leads to the generation of a second-sound shock wave followed by a thermal counterflow of the two fluids (see detailed discussions in Sec. III). In order to visualize the flow of the normal fluid that carries the heat content in He II, we adopted our He * 2 molecular tracer-line tagging technique By adjusting the position of the fs-laser beam, we can create a He * 2 tracer line nearly in parallel to the PCB at a height h right above a chosen heater. Without turning on the heater, an image of the tracer line can be taken as a reference (i.e., the baseline). A typical baseline image is shown in Fig. Apparently, the deformation of the tracer lines contains important information about the heater location and the heat content transported through He II. In order to extract this information, a detailed understanding of the relevant heat transfer processes in He II and the expected motion of the tracer lines is needed. It is known that heat transfer in He II is via a counterflow of the two fluid components, i.e., the normal fluid flowing away from the heat source carrying all the heat content while the superfluid moving in the opposite direct to compensate the fluid mass It is worthwhile noting that Shimazaki et al. observed that in one-dimensional (1D) transient heat transfer of He II through a circular pipe, the injected heat is carried uniformly in the second-sound zone at low heat fluxes Another process that is relevant to transient heat transfer in He II is film boiling at high heat fluxes To evaluate the deformation of a He * 2 tracer line, let us consider a line segment at an initial distance r 0 from the miniature heater. As the second-sound shock front arrives at this line segment, it starts to move at the local normal fluid velocity v n . If we assume that the heat transfer is isotropic towards all directions from the heater, v n is always along the radial direction and therefore the radial displacement of the line segment dr in time dt is given by: where q(r) = Qs /(2πr 2 ) is the heat flux across the hemisphere of radius r, with Qs being the instantaneous rate of heat transfer over the entire hemispherical surface. By integrating Eq. 1, one can derive the final distance r f of the line segment from the heater as: where t 0 is the time that the second-sound zone first arrived at the line segment, and Q s denotes the total heat energy carried by the second-sound zone. The assumption that the heat transfer is isotropic towards all directions holds true only if the heater size is small (i.e., approximately a point heat source) and that the effect of the PCB can be ignored. Note that due to the no-slip boundary condition of the normal fluid on the PCB, the heat flux within a boundary layer from the PCB surface must be different from that in bulk He II. The thickness of this boundary layer increases along the radius of the PCB and can be estimated to be about 300 μm near the edge of the PCB Based on Eq. ( We have conducted the heater detection tests at various heat fluxes q 0 = Q0 /A h and pulse durations ∆t. The values of x 0 and Q s can be determined through the curve fittings as we previously discussed. The results are collected in Table In Fig. Since the heat Q s transported through He II by the second-sound zone is only a fraction of the total heat Q 0 generated by the heater, a natural question one may raise is: where does the remaining energy go? Indeed, a similar phenomenon was observed in earlier experiments on 1D transient heat transfer of He II through pipes where v ns =(ρ/ρ s )v n =q/ρ s sT is the relative velocity of the two fluids, and α and β are dimensionless parameters with known values where l = L -1/2 is the mean vortex-line separation distance and ξ 0 ≃ 1 Å is the healing length for He II. Combining Eqs. ( This generation term essentially accounts for the rate of energy that goes from the second-sound zone to the formation of vortices per unit mass of He II. Therefore, the heat flux q(r) in the second-sound zone must satisfy: where A is the cross section area at r, i.e., 2πr 2 in our experiment or a constant in those 1D heat transfer experiments. Eq. ( nucleation and growth of small vapor bubbles. Indeed, in 1D heat transfer experiments where L v and ρ v are the helium latent heat and the vapor density in the bubble, respectively. According to Eq. ( B. Possible origin of the "fast" second sound The conclusion that a large fraction of the heat energy is utilized in the creation of the cavitation zone has motivated us to propose a possible explanation for the seemingly fast second sound observed in many triangulation experiments. The formation of the cavitation zone is a very fast process, considering the rapid growth of the vapor bubbles as estimated in the previous section. The second-sound waves are indeed emitted from the surface of the cavitation zone instead of the heater surface. Therefore, for a second-sound sensor placed at a distance S from the heater surface, the actual distance traveled by the second sound is S ′ =S-r c , where r c denotes the size of the cavitation zone and is typically much smaller than S. As a consequence, the shorter travel time of the secondsound waves leads to a higher measured speed as given by c ′ 2 ≃ c 2 (1 + r c /S). This simple idea is supported by the experimental observation that the fast second sound can be observed only in quench-spot experiments with high heat fluxes such that film boiling (i.e., cavitation) does occur near the hot spot To evaluate the excess velocity ∆c 2 =c ′ 2 -c 2 , let us first estimate r c . If we assume that the cavitation zone has a hemispherical surface with a radius r c and that the heat flux on this surface is about the threshold for film boiling (i.e., 15 W/cm 2 The calculated r c values for our experiment are listed in Table In the proof-of-concept experiment presented in Sec. II, we create the He * 2 tracer lines in the vertical plane above a chosen miniature The deformation of the tracer line only provides us the position information of the heater along the line where the vertical plane intersects with the PCB. In order for quench spot detection on the 2D surface of a real SRF cavity, our technique needs to be advanced. For instance, a simple extension of the current method could be to create two orthogonal tracer lines near the surface. The deformations of the two lines will then provide us complimentary information about the hot-spot location along two orthogonal directions. A more preferable and accurate detection scheme that we would like to propose is shown in Fig. Instead of creating two tracer lines, we may first shape the fs-laser beam into a laser sheet and then pass it through a screen with parallel thin open slots to create an array of tracer lines. This can be done since the maximum pulse energy of our femtosecond laser (i.e., 4 mJ) is far greater than necessary for the creation of a single tracer line (i.e., 60 μJ We have conducted a proof-of-concept experiment to demonstrate the feasibility of a flow-visualization based non-contacting technology for SRF cavity quench spot detection. By examining the deformation of a thin He * 2 molecular tracer line created in He II nearby a miniature heater following a short heat pulse, we were able to reconstruct the heater location within a few hundred microns. The actual heat transported through He II by the propagating second-sound zone is found to be only a small fraction of the total injected heat energy. Our analysis shows that the remaining heat energy is essentially consumed in the formation of a cavitation zone surrounding the heater. The size of this cavitation zone is estimated based on the knowledge obtained about the transported heat. This information has allowed us to propose a new explanation for the decades-long puzzle observed in previous second-sound triangulation experiments regarding heat transfer at speeds higher than literature values. The excellent quantitative agreement between our predicted excess second-sound velocity and those measured in triangulation experiments provides a strong support of our model.