Acoustic metamaterials are structures with exotic acoustic properties, having promising applications in acoustic beam steering, focusing, impedance matching, absorption and isolation. Recent work has shown that the efficiency of many acoustic metamaterials can be enhanced by controlling an additional parameter known as Willis coupling, which is analogous to bianisotropy in electromagnetic metamaterials. The magnitude of Willis coupling in an acoustic meta-atom has been shown theoretically to have an upper limit, however the feasibility of reaching this limit has not been experimentally investigated. Here we introduce a meta-atom with Willis coupling which closely approaches this theoretical limit, that is much simpler and less prone to thermo-viscous losses than previously reported structures. We perform two-dimensional experiments to measure the strong Willis coupling, supported by numerical calculations. Our meta-atom geometry is readily modeled analytically, enabling the strength of Willis coupling and its peak frequency to be easily controlled. Together with its ease of fabrication, this will facilitate the design of future high efficiency acoustic devices. and 2000 Hz in 40 Hz steps. The response is measured by a microphone, which is moved in two axes by belts driven by stepper motors. The sample is a single aperture meta-atom shown in Fig. exist naturally, such as negative bulk modulus These properties have enabled the development of acoustic superlenses cloaking devices Willis coupling is a term in the acoustic and elastic constitutive relations that couples potential and kinetic energy Recently, a bound on the maximum value of the Willis coupling parameter was derived, based on the conservation of energy Experimental evidence of Willis coupling has been reported in both one-dimensional Acoustic wave interaction with a meta-atom is conveniently described by its polarizability tensor. Due to the sub-wavelength size of meta-atoms, their scattering is dominated by monopole and dipole moments, and their polarizability can be written as where M is the scalar monopole moment, D is the vector dipole moment, α is the polarizability tensor, pinc and vinc are the incident pressure and the velocity at the center of the meta-atom We show how the reported structures exhibiting Willis coupling Achieving a strong acoustic polarizability in a small volume requires a resonant structure. Inspired by resonant sonic crystals Meta-atom design coupling due to the asymmetrical neck openings. The air within each neck is treated as an incompressible mass, while the air in the cavity acts as a spring, together creating an oscillating system excited by an incident acoustic wave. Since the oscillation occurs in the fluid domain only, this avoids wave coupling through fluid-structure interfaces. Since the structure avoids long and thin channels, thermo-viscous losses are expected to be greatly reduced. FIG. Peak Willis coupling is expected to occur close to the Helmholtz resonator's eigenfrequency, which is dependent on the air mass moving within the apertures and the inner cavity volume. In two dimensions (2D), the moving mass is determined by the aperture cross-sections A n = w n and the neck length l, which is equal for all apertures due to the inner and outer cylindrical boundaries being concentric. The 2D-volume V = πr 2 i is determined by the inner radius r i = a -l, where a is the outer radius. Following this, the eigenfrequency for N apertures can be approximated as [32] Generally an arbitrary number of apertures may be included. However for controlling Willis coupling along one axis, two oppositely arranged apertures are sufficient, as illustrated in Fig. , and α vv = ik ρc α vv To show how the Willis coupling and other polarizability components can be tailored by adjusting the meta-atom geometry, we develop a polarizability theory. The predictions of this theory are shown in Figs. Here p ext n is the external pressure at aperture n, ρ 0 is the medium density, c is the speed of sound, A n = w n is the cross-section of the aperture, K = c 2 ρ 0 is the bulk modulus, V is the inner cavity volume, l eff n = l+c eff n is the effective neck length (including a radiative correction) and c rad n is the radiative loss coefficient (see Fig. We consider now the shape illustrated in Fig. The ratio between aperture widths w 1 w 2 = A 1 A 2 determines the strength of Willis coupling and can be used to optimize the structure. Expanding Eq. ( The dynamic stiffness matrix becomes a scalar equation with the remaining projection matrix being singular. The singularity arises because both the monopole and dipole moments are determined from the air movement within a single aperture, but it presents no computational difficulties, since the inverse of the polarizability tensor is not required. As the Helmholtz resonator is embedded within a cylinder (see Fig. where J n is a Bessel function, H n is a Hankel function of the first kind and k = ω/c is the wavenumber. As expected for a symmetrical geometry, the off-diagonal terms corresponding to Willis coupling are zero. Since the resonator and cylinder are superimposed, they influence the effective incident fields of each other through an additional scattered term: This results in a coupled formulation for the monopole and dipole moments of the cylinder and the Helmholtz resonator as where is the incident field vector and 1 (ka) represents the acoustic propagation from the cylinder to each of the apertures. Finally, adding the monopole and dipole moments from Eq. ( which gives the total polarizability tensor α tot . The components of α tot for a single aperture meta-atom with a = 19 mm, r i = 12 mm, w = 5.5 mm, c = 343 m/s, and ρ 0 = 1.2 kg/m 3 are shown together with the experimental results in Fig. Figure Since viscous losses have a relatively minor influence on the magnitude of the Willis coupling, the reduction observed in the experiments can be attributed to the Polylactic Acid (PLA) from which the meta-atom is fabricated not having a perfectly hard boundary. The PLA can be modelled as viscoelastic material, which can be represented within the Boundary Element Method (BEM) model through an equivalent surface admittance. The imaginary part of this admittance is expected to have negligible influence on the results. Therefore, we use a purely real admittance of 0.0057 (ρc) -1 , equivalent to an absorption of 2.25 %, consistent with experimentally measured values The polarizability relationship given in Eq. ( This method makes use of the incident and scattered pressure fields around the object and fits Bessel and Hankel functions to them as p inc (r, θ) = n β n J n (kr)e inθ and p scat (r, θ) n (kr)e inθ . Since only monopole and dipole components are of importance, the problem can be reduced to considering n = -1, 0, 1 terms. Following this, the incident pressure at the meta-atom center is pinc = β 0 and the particle velocity vinc x,y = β 1 ∓β -1 2cρ 0 . The monopole moment M = -4γ 0 ik 2 c 2 and the dipole moments D x,y = -4(γ 1 ∓γ -1 ) ik 3 c 2 can be retrieved from the scattered field. The expansion coefficients β n and γ n can be obtained from measured or numerically determined pressure on circles with radii R inc and R scat respectively. From the orthogonality of exponential functions the coefficients can be found as and To avoid the singularity of Eq. ( To fully determine the polarizability in 2D, pinc , vinc , M and D must be determined Numerical model To obtain a numerical solution for the polarizability a custom 2D boundary element method code is used, as described in Ref. Thermo-viscous losses in air are not included in this formulation. The incident field is a unit intensity plane wave, therefore pinc and vinc are known explicitly. To calculate the influence of thermo-viscous losses in air on the polarizability of the meta-atom (Fig. To experimentally determine the incident and scattered pressure fields we use a 2D anechoic waveguide chamber presented in 