We report our NMR study of the spin excitations in the quasi-one dimensional (1D) S = 1/2 quantum magnet CH3NH3Cu(HCOO)3 lying in the 1D-3D dimensional crossover regime with Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya(DM) interactions. Above TN , the spinon excitation is observed from the constant 1/T1 at low temperatures contributed from the staggered spin susceptibility. At low temperatures well below TN , the 1/T1 begins to flatten out under weak magnetic fields. With the increasing field intensity, 1/T1 tends to show a power-law temperature dependence gradually, with the index increasing from zero to ∼ 3, and finally ∼ 5, which are the respective typical characteristic for the dominating two-magnon Raman process and three-magnon scattering contributions to the nuclear relaxation in a conventional 3D magnet. A possible physical mechanism for this novel magnetic field tuning of quantum spin excitations related with the enhanced effective staggered field created by the DM interactions under magnetic field is discussed. In low-dimensional (low-D) magnets, the enhanced quantum fluctuations lead to novel states of matter, exotic elementary excitations with integer or fractional quantum numbers, as well as fascinating critical phenomena The S = 1/2 HAFC shows a gapless spin excitation spectrum with a large area of continuum, and the excitation quasiparticle is fractionalized with S = 1/2 (spinon) The quasi-1D HAFC is realized in several compounds with very different magnetic coupling strength, KCuF 3 High quality Cu-MOF single crystals are synthesized under the solvothermal conditions The CuO6 octahedron with obvious Jahn-Teller distortion is shown by the orange polyhedra. The crystallographically inequivalent positions of hydrogen is marked with H1, H2 to H6, whose distance with the nearest Cu 2+ neighbours is also shown by the dotted line and numbers in angstrom. laxation curve for I = 1/2. All the data are collected during the warming-up process for self-consistence. The Cu-MOF crystalizes in a orthorhombic structure with space group P nma (Z = 4). Fig. We conduct our NMR study on Cu-MOF via the 1 H site, as strong wipe-out effect of Typical frequency-swept NMR spectra at various temperatures are shown in Fig. As K = K spin + K orbit = A hf χ spin + K orbit , we can extract the diagonal element of the hyperfine coupling constant tensor A hf from the slope of the line by plotting the Knight shift versus dc susceptibility with temperature as an explicit parameter (See Fig. The magnetic structure with a G-type antiferromagnetism with spin-canting is suggested from the spectra. At T = 2 K well below T N with the applied field less than 3.7 Tesla, the main characteristic of the spectrum is maintained as compared with that in the paramagnetic phase (data not shown), and no additional line splitting due to the setup of the antiferromagnetic order is observed. This is very different from the ordinary antiferromagnetic order Every proton in the [HCOO] -anions has two nearest Cu 2+ neighbours along all the three crystalline directions. The angle of Cu-H 1 -Cu and Cu-H 4 -Cu is ∼ 161 o and ∼ 155 o , far from the exact geometric center between the two adjacent magnetic sites. The Jahn-Teller distortion again lowers the crystalline symmetry The increasing Knight shifts at low temperatures indicate that the upturn behavior of the dc susceptibility results from intrinsic enhanced spin susceptibility instead of the trivial impurity effect. The 1 H peaks shift further with respect to the Larmor frequency even in the antiferromagneic ordered state, which is distinct with the ordinary antiferromagnets. In Cu-MOF, the (CH 3 NH 3 ) + cations sitting on the A sites lack the spatial-inversion symmetry, resulting in the DM interaction between magnetic sites, which is important for the appearence of multiferroic behavior in its counterpart CH 3 NH 3 Co(HCOO) 3 The enhancement of the internal field and line splitting due to applied magnetic field reflect the tilting magnetic moment and spin reorientations. With B 0 //b, the internal field shown by the original peak at low frequency increases with field strength as shown in Fig. Next, we concentrate on the spin excitation and its evolution under magnetic field. The spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T 1 is a measure of the dynamaic spin susceptibility, whose temperature and field dependence reveal the nature of spin fluctuations in the strongly-correlated systems. In Fig. The 1/T 1 behavior shown in Fig. , where the the first part before "×" describes the spin fluctuations at both the directions perpendicular to the applied field The evolution of the low-energy spin excitations observed in 1/T 1 under magnetic field should be related with the enhanced effective local transverse staggered field raised by the DM interaction with the increasing field. In the well-known HAFC systems without DMinteractions such as KCuF 3 , BaCu 2 Si 2 O 7 , Sr 2 CuO 3 and SrCuO 2 , the low-lying spin excitations for the magnetically ordered state are dominated by the spin waves, and free spinons are observed at a higher energy region with a finite gap as seen from Raman scattering and neutron scattering studies For the HAFC systems with strong DM interactions and very weak inter-chain coupling, the effective staggered field can be generated by the DM interaction. In copper benzoate Cu(C 6 H 5 COO) 2 •3H 2 O, quasi-1D magnetic behavior is observed from susceptibility, ESR and NMR measurements ). This theory is evident to be successful in describing the field induced spin wave excitation gap in copper benzoate and copper pyrimidine dinitrate In the present Cu-MOF sample, the DM interactions due to lack of inversion symmetry center is significant compared with a moderate inter-chain coupling (J ⊥ ∼ 0.13 meV). In this case, the effective staggered field h creating the linear attracting potential is vector sum of that raised by the inter-chain coupling and DM interaction. With the increasing field intensity, the spincanting effect induced by the DM interaction is strongly enhanced, which is observed from the spectral analysis shown above. The staggered field created by the DMinteraction is also enhanced by increasing the magnetic field , leading to the increasing of the attracting energy potential. The increased Néel temperature under magnetic field (See Fig. In quasi-1D quantum spin systems, the magnetic field can be an effective tuning parameter to approach the quantum critical point. In the spin chain system, NiCl 2 -4SC(NH 2 ) 2 (DTN) and the spin ladder compound CuBr 4 (C 5 H 12 N) 2 (BPCB) To conclude, we have carried out NMR study on a quasi-1D S = 1/2 Heisenberg antiferromagnetic chain. The antiferromagnetic long range order is identified from the spectral analysis, and a G-type antiferromagnetism with a ferromagnetic component is proposed. Above T N , the spinon excitation is observed from the constant 1/T 1 at low temperatures contributed from the staggered spin susceptibility. At low temperatures well below T N , the spin lattice relaxation rate 1/T 1 is observed to flatten out toward zero temperature. By the applied field, 1/T 1 gradually shows a power-law temperature dependence with the index enhanced from zero to ∼ 3, and finally ∼ 5, which are the typical character for the dominating magnon scattering of the nuclear spins in the conventional 3D classical magnet. The result supplies strong evidence for the magnetic field suppression of quantum magnetic excitations in the magnetically ordered state of the quasi-1D Heisenberg spin chain system. The mechanism for this phenomena is proposed to be related to the enhanced local transverse staggered field generated by the DM interactions under magnetic field. 