The emergence of second-generation high temperature superconducting tapes has favored the development of large-scale superconductor systems. The mathematical models for superconductors have evolved from simple analytical models to complex numerical models. The available analytical models are just capable of estimating electromagnetic quantities in single wires or small arrays. The numerical models like the H formulation finite element models are useful for the analysis of more medium-size systems, but their application in large-scale systems is problematic due to the excessive cost in terms of memory and the computation time. Then it is necessary to devise new strategies to tackle this challenge. The homogenization and the multi-scale approach are methodologies that have successfully simplified the description of the systems allowing the study of large-scale systems. Recently, efficient calculations have been achieved using the T-A formulation. In this manuscript, we analyze the adequate order of the elements used in the T-A formulation. More importantly, we propose a series of adaptations to the homogenization and multi-scale methodologies in order to allow their implementation to the T-A formulation models. The proposed strategies are validated by means of comparing them with the H reference model of a racetrack coil. The computation time and memory demand are substantially reduced up to a point that makes it possible to perform real-time simulations for slow ramping cycles. At the same time the comparison demonstrates a very good agreement with respect to the reference model, both at a local and global level, is achieved. The high temperature superconductors (HTS) materials have experienced an important progress during the recent years. Nowadays, the high current capacity of second-generation (2G) HTS tapes has made possible the production and commercialization of superconducting fault current limiters and cables The first available analytical models were limited to the analysis of one single conductor The FEM models of HTS tapes use different formulations of the Maxwell's equations. The differences between the formulations comes from the variety in the state variables. The first proposed FEM model of an HTS tape uses the T-φ formulation The main concern when dealing with large-scale systems is the large number of turns. The homogenization and the multi-scale approaches can considerably reduce the description of the systems without compromising accuracy of the results. The homogenization process consists in the assumption that a tapes stack can be described by an anisotropic bulk. This approach was first proposed in In this manuscript, we present two strategies to address the numerical modelling large-scale superconductor systems. These new strategies arose from the study of the implementation of homogenization and multi-scale methodologies together with the T-A formulation models. The application is not straightforward and some delicate adaptations are required. It is also demonstrated that the T-A homogenized and T-A multi-scale models are so efficient that it is possible to achieve real-time simulations of the case study using a desktop computer. This manuscript is organized as follow. Section 2 starts with the description of the T-A formulation, then the T-A homogenized and T-A multi-scale strategies are presented. Section 3 contains the description of the case study racetrack coil as well as its T-A full model. This section ends with the study of the adequate choice for the order of the elements used in the T-A models. The description of new proposed T-A homogenized and multi-scale models of the case study is presented in section 4. Sections 5 contains the simulation results and the comparison of the different models. An important conclusion about the possibility of real-time simulations is reached in section 6. Finally, the conclusions are exposed in section 7. The T-A formulation was reported in The magnetic vector potential A is defined by The governing equations of the A formulation is where μ is the magnetic permeability. The current vector potential T is defined by The governing equation of the T formulation is where ρ is the resistivity. In the 2D case depicted in figure The necessary boundary conditions can be found considering the transport current in the tape where δ is the thickness of the HTS layer. T 1 and T 2 are shown in figure The models that consider each tape inside the system, and applies the T-A formulation as proposed in The homogenized models assume that an HTS tapes stack can be modeled as an anisotropic bulk, which is a simpler object to simulate. This simplification in the geometric description of the stack should not compromise its electromagnetic behavior, thus the model construction requires additional considerations. As well as in the T-A full models, when the T-A formulation is applied to a homogenized model, the influence of the component of B parallel to the surface of the tape is neglected, and T has only one component, the same as in the T-A formulation models, see equation The multi-scale and the iterative multi-scale method as described in The multi-scale approach proposed here is also based in the T-A formulation. As in the T-A full models, there is only one model and the T and A formulations are coupled together. Hence, these new multi-scale models simultaneously compute the J distribution in the analyzed tapes and the background field produced by all the tapes. The multi-scale T-A models consider a reduced number of analyzed tapes, each analyzed tape is modeled in detail using the T-A formulation model. The remaining non-analyzed tapes and the surrounding air are modeled using just the A formulation. The J distributions in the non-analyzed tapes are approximated by linear interpolation of the J distributions in the analyzed tapes. The interpolated J distributions in the non-analyzed tapes are also multiplied by the thickness of the HTS layer, and forced into the A formulation as surface current densities. Figure Multi-scale approach. In this example, there are 3 analyzed tapes and the J distribution in the non-analyzed tapes is approximated by linear interpolation. The case study used in this manuscript is the same racetrack coil used in The H reference model of this manuscript is also the same reference model used in The electrical resistivity of the HTS material is modeled by the so-called E-J power-law The critical current density J c is defined by a modified Kim's relation where B ⊥ and B ∥ are the magnetic field components perpendicular and parallel to the wide surface of the tape. Since there are no magnetic materials are considered, the permeability of the air and the HTS material is chosen to be the permeability of the vacuum 0. The parameters of racetrack coil are resumed in table The T-A full models consider in detail all the tapes. The mesh used in the tape's region is a structured mesh. To allow an assessment of the number of degrees of freedom (DOF) and the accuracy of the results, three models with different numbers of elements along the tape's width were built. The first model uses 100 elements distributed as in the reference model. The other two models use 50 and 25 elements along the tape's width, respectively, both with a uniform distribution of elements. It is also important to note that the T-A full models use Lagrange elements. The geometry and the mesh of the model with 100 elements along the tape's width is shown in figure A comprehensive presentation of the simulations results of the T-A full models is going to be presented in section 5, in conjunction with the results of the homogenized and multiscale models. Here, we present in advance of the J distributions obtained with the T-A full model. These results will justify the election of the orders of the elements in the rest of the models. The J distributions of the T-A models look similar to the J distributions of the reference model. But, the results show that the J distributions of the T-A models present spurious oscillations. Even though, the reference The oscillations disappear when the order of the elements is higher in the A formulation than in the T formulation. Hence, throughout the rest of this manuscript it is assumed that the T-A full models are models using first order Lagrange elements in the T formulation and second order Lagrange elements in the A formulation, unless otherwise indicated. Similarly, the homogenized and multiscale models, described in the next section, use this combination of order elements to avoid the oscillations. The problem of spurious oscillations is known to appear in other fields of physics like the fluid mechanics. There are finite element spaces that are unstable for the Navier-Stokes equations. A stable pair of elements should be used when both the velocity and the pressure are required, otherwise unwanted oscillations may be present in the pressure solution. One simple solution is the use of the Taylor-Hood elements which use first order elements for the pressure and second order elements for the velocity, see The T-A homogenized model of the case study consider 5 bulks, each per pancake, and a structured mesh with 6 elements along the bulk's width. In order to permit a fair comparation with the T-A full models, three models were built. The models use 100, 50 and 25 elements along the tape's width, with the same symmetric and uniform distributions used in the T-A full models. The geometry and the mesh of the model with 100 elements along the tape's width is shown in figure Considering the undesired ripples produced when first order elements are used for both formulations, the homogenized models use first order elements for the T formulation and second order elements for the A formulation. The hysteresis losses are computed in the center of each of the 6 elements along the bulks. These losses, corresponding to the tapes located at the center of the 6 elements, are used to estimate the losses in the rest of the tapes. The interpolation method used in this manuscript is the Piecewise Cubic Hermite Interpolating Polynomial (PCHIP) method The multi-scale models in this manuscript consider 30 analyzed tapes, the election of the analyzed tapes follows the same directives proposed in For the purpose of avoiding the undesired oscillations, the unit cells of the analyzed tapes use first order elements for the T formulation and second order elements for the A formulation. The unit cells of tapes closest non-analyzed tapes also use second order elements for the A formulation, while the rest of the system first order elements are used for the A formulation. The domains using first order elements in the A formulation are connected with the domains using second order elements in the A formulation by means of time dependent Dirichlet boundary conditions. A structured mesh is used for the domains with the pancakes, and a triangular mesh is used for the surrounding air. The unit cells where the second order elements are used consider a mesh with more elements along the tape's width than the regions where first order elements. The transition zones between unit cells with different number of elements use triangular meshes. The position of the analyzed tapes, the regions with second order elements and the mesh are shown in figure In the multi-scale model, the PCHIP interpolation method is also used, to approximate the hysteresis losses in the non-analyzed tapes based in the losses of the analyzed tapes. The H reference model as well as the T-A full, T-A homogenized and T-A multi-scale were simulated for a 11 A, 50 Hz sinusoidal transport current. The results of the reference model are considered as the best estimation for the different electromagnetic quantities. Figure The third row in figure The last row in figure , The DOF of the H reference model is 563893. Figure The DOF in the homogenized model can be further reduced by reducing the number of elements along the bulk. While, the DOF in the multi-scale model can be reduced, by reducing the number of analyzed tapes. It has been demonstrated in All the models described in this manuscript, were implemented in COMSOL Multiphysics 5.3. One important parameter is the time required to build the models. This is a quantity difficult to measure because it strongly depends on the expertise of the analyzer. The geometry and the mesh in the H reference model are not so easy to build, it is necessary to build the unit cells and then generate an array. The definitions of the integral constraints that impose the transport current in each tape is a time-consuming process, fortunately this process can be using Matlab, then the time required to build the H reference model is around 1 h. The process to build the T-A full model is easier, once the unit cell is ready, it can be copied to produce and array that includes the boundary conditions. The time required to build the T-A full model is less than 30 min. Similarly, the T-A homogenized model is easy to build, instead of a unit cell the analyzer needs to create a bulk and then copy the bulk. A smaller number of boundary conditions is required for the T-A homogenized model, anyway we consider that the T-A homogenized model requires less than 30 min for its construction. Finally, the process to build the T-A multi-scale model requires around 3 h. This large time is required to build the unit cell, create and array of unit cell, select the analyzed tapes, set the properties of the analyzed tapes as well as the properties of the non-analyzed tapes, and define the functions required to implement the interpolation of the current densities. The H reference model does not allow to simulate the coil under slow transport currents. For example, the charging/discharging cycles, with periods in the order of the hours, that are present in real operation of magnets The T-A models with 100 elements along the tape's width were simulated for the ramping cycle show in blue line in figure The T-A formulation reduces the geometric description of a 2D HTS tape with a large aspect ratio to a 1D line. The two new strategies proposed in this manuscript, the T-A homogenized and the T-A multi-scale models, are based in the T-A formulation, and also successfully take benefit of the homogenization and multi-scale methods. The homogenization was previously used with H formulation models, here we have investigated the necessary considerations to apply the homogenization together with the T-A formulation. This new strategy allows to build faster homogenized models. The main limitation of the multi-scale method described in The analyzes conducted in this manuscript show that the assumptions considered in the T-A homogenized and multi-scale models significantly reduce the DOF. These simplifications in the description of the systems does not compromise the accuracy of the results, and not only it is possible to accurately estimate the losses, but also the J distribution. The availability of the T-A homogenized and multi-scale models opens the possibility for the real-time simulation of large-scale superconductor systems. At the best of our knowledge, this last quality is new in the analysis of such complex systems.