We investigate quasiparticle relaxation dynamics in URu2-xFexSi2 single crystals using ultrafast optical-pump optical-probe (OPOP) spectroscopy as a function of temperature (T ) and Fe substitution (x), crossing from the hidden order (HO) phase (x = 0) to the large moment antiferromagnet (LMAFM) phase (x = 0.12). At low T , the dynamics for x = 0 and x = 0.12 are consistent with the low energy electronic structure of the HO and LMAFM phases that emerge from the high T paramagnetic (PM) phase. In contrast, for x = 0.1, two transitions occur over a narrow T range (from 15.5 -17.5 K). A PM to HO transition occurs at an intermediate T followed by a transition to the LMAFM phase at lower T . While the data at low T are consistent with the expected coexistence of LMAFM and HO, the data in the intermediate T phase are not, and instead suggest the possibility of an unexpected coexistence of HO and PM. Additionally, the dynamics in the PM phase reflect the presence of a hybridization gap as well as strongly interacting spin and charge degrees of freedom. OPOP yields insights into meV-scale electrodynamics with sub-Kelvin T resolution, providing a complementary approach to study low energy electronic structure in quantum materials. The metallic actinide compound URu 2 Si 2 , with its many proximal phases, offers a platform to study emergent phenomena in f -electron systems poised between localization and itinerancy. In particular, the hidden order (HO) phase, which develops from a strongly correlated paramagnetic (PM) phase below T 0 = 17.5 K An alternate route to understanding HO is to instead study the large-moment antiferromagnetic (LMAFM) phase in pressurized URu 2 Si 2 Optical Pump Optical Probe (OPOP) spectroscopy has been used to study quasiparticle (QP) relaxation dynamics in heavy fermion compounds In this letter, we investigate QP relaxation dynamics in URu 2-x Fe x Si 2 single crystals spanning a broad range of Fe substitution (x), focusing on the compositions indicated in Fig. The Fe-substituted single crystals were grown in a tetra-arc furnace using the Czochralski technique We fit the data with a multiexponential function: Where e -(t-t0)/τr )). In f (t), the first term containing the error function represents the fast rise present at all T . This term is included for completeness and σ is T independent. The term containing A r and τ r represents the slow rise dynamics that onset below T 0 . The second term in Eqn. 1 contains two exponential decays and a constant. The constant is close to the experimental noise floor of 10 -6 at all T , so our analysis will focus on the T dependence of the parameters from the exponential terms. In order to compare amplitudes above and below T 0 , we define Relaxation of photoexcited QPs in the presence of a gap requires e-h recombination with the emission of a high energy boson (HEB) with energy hω ≥ E gap . This situation is frequently analyzed using the phenomenological Rothwarf-Taylor (RT) model Fig. In Eqn. 2 and Eqn. 3, 0). E I is the photoexcited energy density per unit cell, ν is the number of modes per unit cell, and N (0) is the electronic DOS at E F . Ω c , Γ ω , and ω are the cutoff frequency, linewidth, and frequency of the modes, respectively. Eqn. 2 and Eqn. 3 can be derived from the RT model in the strong bottleneck regime. The T dependence of the gaps is modeled with a generic BCS form ∆(T ) = ∆(0)tanh(1.74 (T /T 0 -1)) Fits to the slow component, shown in (c) and (d), return values of ∆ 2 (0) = 7.5 ± 0.5 meV and ∆ 2 (0) = 9.7±1.1 meV for x = 0 and x = 0.12, respectively. These values are consistent with measurements of the charge gaps in the HO and LMAFM phases of Fe-substituted samples The gap energies extracted by the fits shown in Fig. Armed with an understanding of the dynamics for x = 0 and x = 0.12, we turn to the fit parameters for x = 0.1, shown in Fig. One particularly striking feature of the data is the abrupt increase in signal amplitude observed at the HO and LMAFM transitions. We perform a modelindependent comparison of the low T behavior of all three samples by considering the percentage change in the signal amplitude, P C x (T ) The well documented coexistence of HO and LMAFM domains in the parent compound Below T 1 , the data for x = 0.1 matches expectations. Since the amplitude in Eq. 2 depends only on band structure and lattice parameters We speculate that the anomalously small signal amplitude arises from phase coexistence of PM and HO. For example, if we assume that the signal for x = 0.1 contains contributions from HO and PM domains, we obtain a PM volume fraction V P M ≈ 0.5 The data in the PM phase is also informative. We first discuss the T dependence of A 2 , shown in Fig. The fast process A 1 and τ 1 is more difficult to interpret. As shown in Fig. To conclude, our measurements of QP relaxation dynamics in the URu 2-x Fe x Si 2 single crystals reveal several new insights. The dynamics in the PM phase, which are nearly independent of x, highlight the presence of a hybridization gap as well as the influence of strong interactions between QPs and critical MFs. Below T 0 , the dynamics in the HO and LMAFM phases reflect known differences in the low energy electronic structure. As in past measurements Our laser system consists of an amplified Yb fiber laser, producing 350 fs pulses centered at 1040 nm. 4 W of 1040 nm is frequency doubled to 520 nm and used to pump a noncollinear optical parametric amplifier with two amplification stages. This setup produces several hundred mW of power depending on signal wavelength, tunable from 650-900 nm, with a bandwidth-limited pulse duration of less than 20 fs. We use an AOM made of quartz (for reduced chromatic dispersion compared to the more common TeO 2 ) to modulate the pump beam for lock-in detection of the signal. This is synchronized with a subharmonic of the laser repetition rate, so that every pump pulse is either diffracted or blocked. Achromatic focusing on to the sample is accomplished using an off-axis parabolic mirror. Balanced photodiodes are used to enhance the dynamic range of detection and to partially remove shot-to-shot fluctuations of the laser intensity from the signal. We find that balanced detection increases the smallest signal we can resolve by slightly less than an order of magnitude. Small long term drifts in the balance arise from temperature dependent changes in reflectivity, changes in the position of beam on sample, formation of ice on the sample surface, etc. These reduce the effectiveness of balanced detection. In order to correct for this drift, the signal from each photodiode is integrated, producing a DC signal. The two DC signals are subtracted, producing a difference signal that drives a servo motor. The servo motor adjusts the position of an ND filter placed in the reference beam path in order to set the intensity of the reference beam equal to that of the signal beam. The DC signal from the sample photodiode is sent to the auxiliary channel of lock-in amplifier for continuous measurement of the reflectivity R. The use of an intermediate repetition rate amplifier has several advantages over the more common 80 MHz oscillator for low temperature OPOP measurements. For an 80 MHz system, cumulative heating due to the average optical power incident upon the illuminated spot is a large source of temperature uncertainty even at low fluences. In contrast, the repetition rate of 209 kHz is more than two orders of magnitude lower, allowing us to study a wider range of pump excitation densities without heating the sample at low temperatures. This effect likely accounts for the qualitative difference in fluence dependence between our data and the previous OPOP data on the parent compound reported by Liu et al. At the primary pump fluence of 0.5 μJ/cm 2 used in this study, analysis of the specific heat reported in The number of nonequilibrium e-h pairs created is an alternate way to assess the strength of photoexcitation. Assuming the 7 meV gap feature in optical conductivity at 5 K The temperature dependence of the anomalous rise dynamics observed below T 0 merits comment. Typically, the rise dynamics occurring within the first ≈100 fs of photoexcitation are a result of QP multiplication triggered by the scattering of hot photoexcited carriers as they relax to the gap edges V: FLUENCE DEPENDENCE Fig. This fluence corresponds to the crossover where the density of photoexcited quasiparticles approaches the density of thermal quasiparticles, meaning that the weak photoexcitation limit no longer holds. For our analysis of heterogeneity, we consider the quantity , where A x (T ) denotes the raw signal amplitude for sample x at temperature T . Since the PM component of the signal is independent x and varies relatively slowly with T , P C x (T ) has the approximate form of a percentage change of the signal amplitude due to the emergence of HO or LMAFM order for each sample. Below T 1 , P C 0.1 (T ) is larger than in the signal in the pure HO phase P C 0 (T < T 1 ) but smaller than in the the signal in the pure LMAFM phase P C 0.12 (T < T 1 ). So, we assume that the signal for x = 0.1 in this temperature range consists of HO regions with volume fraction V HO and LMAFM regions with volume fraction 1 -V HO . Thus, P C 0.1 (T < T 1 ) = (1 -V HO )P C 0.12 (T < T 1 ) + V HO P C 0 (T < T 1 ), which we write as V HO = (P C 0.12 -P C 0.1 )/(P C 0.12 -P C 0 ). Between T 0 and T 1 , P C 0.1 (T ) is larger than in the signal in the PM phase (P C P M ≈ 1 by definition) but smaller than in the the signal in the pure HO phase P C 0 (T < T 0 ) and much smaller than in the signal in the pure LMAFM phase P C 0.12 (T < T 0 ). So, we assume that the signal for x = 0.1 in this temperature range consists of PM regions with volume fraction V P M and HO regions with volume fraction 1 -V P M . Thus, P C 0.1 (T 1 < T < T 0 ) = (1 -V P M )P C 0 (T 1 < T < T 0 ) + V P M , which we write as V P M = (P C 0 -P C 0.1 )/(P C 0 -1). As shown in Fig. 