We introduce a class of models based on near crack tip degradation of materials that can account for fracture growth under cyclic loads below the Griffith threshold. We incorporate the gradual degradation due to a cyclic load through a flow equation that decreases spatially varying parameters controlling the fracture toughness in the vicinity of the crack tip, with the phase and displacement fields relaxed to an energy minimum at each time step. Though our approach is phenomenological, it naturally reproduces the Paris law with high exponents that are characteristic of brittle fatigue crack growth. We show that the exponent decreases when the phase field dynamics is of the Ginzburg-Landau type with a relaxation time comparable to the cyclic loading period, or when degradation occurs on a scale larger than the process zone. In addition to reproducing the Paris law, our approach can be used to model the growth of multiple cracks in arbitrarily complex geometries under varied loading conditions as illustrated by a few numerical examples in two and three dimensions. More than one and a half centuries after the first systematic investigations by August Wöhler Paris-law type scaling has been widely observed experimentally both in ductile materials What distinguishes our class of models is not only that the Paris law with a variable exponent emerges naturally under simple mode-I loading, but also that they enable direct numerical simulation of fatigue crack growth without a need for micro/meso-scale simulations and a priori assumptions. Within the phase-field framework, Amor et al. We can justify our phenomenological assumptions by using the experimental observations of fatigue in brittle materials. Even though dislocation processes that underlie ductile fatigue in crystalline solids are minimal or absent in brittle materials, failure under cyclic sub-critical loads has been widely reported for nominally brittle materials such as alumina, TZP, silicon nitride, and silica glasses as well as in ceramics and polymers (e.g., see Our work builds on a growing body of research aimed at expanding the phase-field approach to fracture. Since their inception Brittle fracture is signified by the Griffith criterion that states that the crack propagates if and only if the energy release rate G (i.e., the derivative of the stored elastic energy with respect to crack length under constant loading) from the tip of the crack is larger than the fracture toughness of the material G c . We define the free energy F by combining the elastic (bulk) and fracture (surface) energies for an elastic domain Ω ⊂ R n containing fracture set R n-1 ⊃ Γ ⊂ Ω and due to deformation u = {u i } , i = 1 . . . N as where W (u) = (C ijkl e kl (u)e ij (u))/2 is the elastic energy density, e ij (u) = (u i,j +u j,i )/2 is the linear strain (i.e., symmetric gradient) of the displacement vector u, where for Lame parameters λ, μ we write the fourth order linear elastic constitutive tensor (i.e., Hooke's law) as C ijkl = λδ ij δ kl + μ(δ ik δ jl + δ il δ kj ). Furthermore, H n-1 (Γ) is the Hausdorff measure of the crack set i.e., the aggregate length of cracks in two dimensions or aggregate surface area of cracks in three dimensions. The classical elasticity boundary conditions are given as external forces f acting on part of its boundary The phase-field method approximates the above energy by replacing the crack set Γ with a phase field φ ∈ [0, 1], where φ = 1 almost everywhere and converges to φ ≈ 0 at Γ. We can write the approximate free energy as: where and where we introduce the phase-field length scale ξ. g(φ), w(φ) are monotonically increasing and decreasing functions of φ respectively where g(1) = w(0) = 1-g(0) = 1-w(1) = 1, and w(φ) dφ is a scaling constant. Throughout this manuscript we will use the formulation developed by Karma, Kessler and Levine (KKL) We should also note that we can write (4) equivalently as where E c0 = G c /4C φ ξ is interpreted in the KKL model as a critical energy density (stress) above which the φ = 0 state becomes energetically favored and κ = G c ξ/2C φ is the coefficient of the gradient square term that together with E c determines the size of the process zone and fracture energy. In a quasi-static (i.e., rate independent) setting where we assume that fracture and elasticity have much smaller time-scales than loading (and other variables), we can pose the problem of fracture as a minimization problem. We define the problem of fracture as: where is the set of displacement that satisfies the boundary conditions (i.e., the admissible displacements) and The energy minimization problem assumes that the system evolves in such a manner as to minimize the free energy where We can then write the governing equations for u and φ as Euler-Lagrange equations of (2): where ∂F ∂x (x) is the Gâteaux derivative of free energy F with respect to x in x direction. It is also possible to pose the problem of fracture as a gradient flow toward the local minimum energy basins while assuming a rate independent elasticity as (8) (i.e., ignoring the elastic kinetic effects). In this setting we write the evolution equation of the phase field φ in the standard Ginzburg-Landau form where δF ξ δφ is the Fréchet derivative of free energy F ξ with respect to φ. Integrating both sides, (11) can be equivalently written as where τ φ is the time scale associated with the evolution of the phase field φ. Not surprisingly, we can recover the quasi-static Euler-Lagrange equation ( Since the classical phase-field method essentially approximates the Griffith problem, it does not allow for fracture propagation at sub-critical loads i.e., G < G c (K I < K IC ). Since fatigue fracture, by definition, happens at sub-critical loads, it cannot be modeled with classical phase-field formulations. Although there is an abundance of literature on the physical mechanisms of fatigue fracture initiation and propagation, here we aim to model fatigue on a phenomenological level as a dissipative process that lowers the effective near-tip fracture toughness. This allows sub-critical cracks to propagate under cyclic loading without changing the monotonic fracture toughness. The two models introduced subsequently are based on this observation. In the first model we achieve sub-critical propagation by lowering neartip fracture toughness by reducing the critical energy density E c around the crack tip. By lowering E c near the crack tip, in essence, we lower the energy barrier for propagation of the fracture phase-field. We rewrite the surface energy where E c (t = 0) = E c0 and E c (x) evolves according to where χ c is a scaling factor which controls the evolution of the critical energy, and E c min ≥ 0 signifies the lowest energetic barrier against fracture propagation. We have set E c min = 0 for all the simulations presented in this article. In addition, we define the Heaviside step function: Using the above formulation, one can immediately see that the critical energy density remains constant under a constant load but decreases when the load is increasing in time. The stress divergence at the crack tip, which is cut off on a scale ξ in the phase-field model, naturally decreases E c near the tip thereby allowing for fatigue propagation. However, as a first step in describing fatigue crack growth of brittle materials, we keep the degradation process localized to the process zone by introducing the multiplicative factor w(φ) in This allows the critical energy to only decrease in tensile stresses, thereby suppressing the propagation of compressive fatigue cracks. Although the above formulation limits the propagation of compressive fatigue cracks, it does not limit inter-penetration of the created fatigue fracture faces under compressive loads. It is straightforward to extend this formulation to account for non-interpenetration by additively splitting the elastic energy potential into volumetric and deviatoric parts To elucidate how this model allows for sub-critical propagation, we should note that in the elliptic approximations of brittle fracture, the fracture toughness can be calculated as As a result, by decreasing the critical energy density in front of the crack, the near-tip fracture toughness (non-uniformly) decreases allowing for propagation of the fracture. We should note, however, that the energy release rate for the crack to propagate (at process zone scale ξ) in the resulting nonuniform E c field is non-trivial. Therefore, obtaining a closed-form solution for the equivalent near-tip fracture toughness may not be possible. Reducing the critical energy density E c in our formulation is very similar to the lowering of cohesive stiffness in It is straightforward to calculate the energy dissipation with respect to time for which ensures the dissipative nature of the quasi-static algorithm taking into account that ( Therefore, the proposed algorithm is dissipative. It is also possible to reduce the spatial fracture toughness defining a variable fracture toughness ratio γ in (4). where γ(x) evolves as The minimum relative fracture toughness γ min > 0 is introduced (in the same spirit as E c min (13)) as the lowest relative fracture toughness achievable. It should be noted that (if γ min = 0) the limit γ → 0 of ( Similar to the first model, it is worth emphasizing that unlike the classical phase-field formulation with uniform fracture toughness, the resulting fracture toughness near the crack tip defined by ( Similar to section 3.1.1 taking the derivative of the approximate free energy F ξ with respect to time and taking in account the quasi-static governing equations ( once again noticing that ∂γ/∂t ≤ 0 as imposed by the phenomenological degradation law The same procedure can be duplicated for the gradient dynamics: 4. Numerical implementation In all sections that follow, we define dimensionless spatial coordinates using one of the sample dimensions x = x/ξ and displacements by ū = u/h 0 where we define h 0 = G c ξ/E = K IC √ ξ/E. We can write the dimensionless free energy form of (2) as: where Cijkl = C ijkl /E, and fi = f i ξ/G c0 E. Furthermore, for the dynamic phase-field evolution In this article, the spatial discretization is done using the Galerkin finite element method. The critical energy field E c and the fracture toughness ratio parameter γ are discretized as discontinuous constants across each element (i.e., DG-0), and components of u and φ are discretized using Lagrange basis functions. Our minimization strategy for ( As presented in algorithm 1, the variables of the fatigue models E c or γ are only updated outside the alternate minimization loop after the alternate minimization algorithm converges at each time step i.e., or The resulting problems are often very large and require the use of a parallel programming paradigm and the complex numerical tools therein. Our implementation Algorithm 1 the alternate minimization algorithm. 1: Set φ 0 = 1. 2: Let δ altmin be a given tolerance parameters. 3: for n = 0 to N do 4: end while 10: u n ←u j 11: φ n ←φ j Update E c or γ from The algorithm 2 for dynamic evolution is much simpler and only ensures elastic equilibrium at each time step. We have implemented an implicit forward Euler time stepping algorithm for φ where at each time step we solve: using the bounded reduced space Newton minimization scheme implemented in PETSc Algorithm 2 the dynamic algorithm. 1: Set φ 0 = 1. 2: for n = 0 to N do 3: Update φ n by solving implicit time integration Update E c or γ from ( The first validation on any continuum fatigue model is to assess its ability to simulate the Paris law. This law states that the increase in the length of a fatigue crack per unit cycle relates to the range of applied stress intensity factors as a power-law i.e., da/dN ∼ (∆K) n where a is the crack length and N is the number of cycles. For this purpose, we set up a simple problem illustrated in Fig. The energy release rate from the tip of a straight crack in the geometry shown in Fig. Fig. Using the dynamic formulation In the next set of simulations, we examine the problem of crack interactions for two offset cracks approaching each other under tensile loading. The naturally occurring En-passant configuration We performed two fatigue simulations corresponding to each model, where δ(t) oscillates as before in a sawtooth fashion between 0 and δ max in period T . Here we set δ max = 14 G c ξ/E which corresponds to K I /K IC 0.7. We also set the proportionality factors for both simulations to χ c = 1. Since our models reduce to their quasi-static counterparts at E c = E c0 or γ = 1, they capture the transition between the fatigue fracture and the quasi-static regime naturally. Both simulations show that the crack initially propagates at the sub critical load level but then destabilizes once G(δ max ) ≥ G c and propagates abruptly (depicted in Fig. In the first three-dimensional set of simulations, we model the coalescence of two 3-D penny-shaped cracks. Two penny-shaped cracks with radius R c are initialized at distance b in an L 3 cube where we apply displacement boundary conditions u = (0, 0, δ(t)) at (x, y, ±L). A similar problem was originally investigated by Legrand et al. In the last set of numerical simulations, we model the propagation of a 3-D penny shaped crack. A tilted penny-shaped crack with radius R c is initialized in the middle of an L 3 cube with its normal n c = (cos(θ c ), cos(θ c ), sin(θ c )). The loading u = (0, 0, δ(t)) is applied at (x, y, ±L). A similar problem was originally simulated by Gravouil et al. Table In all previous sections, the fatigue degradation was limited to the process zone around the crack tip. However, in K-dominant fatigue of ductile materials, the crack-tip plastic zone has a scale larger than the fracture process zone but much smaller than the specimen dimensions. Furthermore, ductile fracture is driven by void nucleation, growth, and coalescence mediated by the plasticity. Locally, voids reduce the load-bearing portion of the crack plane similar to a damage variable in the continuum description. Indeed, such modifications have been suggested and implemented in the celebrated Gurson-Tvergaard-Needleman (GTN ) Here we suggest a simple extension of the previously developed fracture toughness model to account for degradation on a scale larger than the fracture process zone. We modify the evolution equation for γ (20) to allow for fatigue degradation of fracture toughness to take place at any point where the tensile elastic energy potential is greater than a critical stress W + > σ c i.e., Fig. Fig. By extending this approach, we have developed a ductile fatigue model where the degradation of the fracture toughness is controlled by the accumulated plastic strain e p eq , which is achieved by replacing ( This model reproduces non-trivial features of ductile fatigue such as crack closure. Both the model and results will be presented elsewhere. We introduced two phase-field models of fatigue crack growth. In our models, the material degrades near the crack tip as a result of cyclic loading which allows for sub-critical (i.e., G < G c ) propagation of cracks. Crucially, this class of models preserves the fracture toughness as a material property globally and only affects the near-tip properties on the process zone scale. In other words, if the crack is loaded beyond G c (K IC0 ), it propagates at a constant (non-cyclical) load. This allows us to perform uniform simulations which seamlessly switch between monotonic G > G c and fatigue G < G c crack propagations (see, for example, figure 11 in section 5.2). The most intriguing finding of this article is the emergence of the Paris law. We showed (using numerical simulations) that the Paris power-law emerges naturally from our formulation under simple mode-I loading section 5.1 in both quasi-static simulations and in simulations where the phasefield φ follows Ginzburg-Landau dynamics. In the quasi-static simulations, we recovered the Paris law with high exponents typical of fatigue crack growth