Chiral sensitive techniques have been used to probe the fundamental symmetries of the universe, study biomolecular structures, and even develop safe drugs. As chiral signals are inherently weak and often suppressed by large backgrounds, different techniques have been proposed to overcome the limitations of traditionally used chiral polarimetry. Here, we propose an angle-resolved chiral surface plasmon resonance (CHISPR) scheme that can detect the absolute chirality (handedness and magnitude) of a chiral sample and is sensitive to both the real and imaginary part of a chiral sample's refractive index. We present analytical results and numerical simulations of CHISPR measurements, predicting signals in the mdeg range for chiral samples of <100 nm thickness at visible wavelengths. Moreover, we present a theoretical analysis that clarifies how our far-field measurements elucidate the underlying physics. This CHISPR protocol does not require elaborate fabrication and has the advantage of being directly implementable on existing surface plasmon resonance instrumentation. Chirality is a fundamental property of life with farreaching implications among all disciplines of science. Chiral sensitive techniques have enabled the study of fundamental symmetries of the universe 1 , determination of biomolecular structures The polarimetric techniques of optical rotatory dispersion (ORD) and circular dichroism (CD) are among the most widely used research tools in modern science for chiral sensing Considering the importance of chiral sensing, it is vital to develop alternative schemes that overcome the above-mentioned limitations of path-length enhancement and/or chiral-field enhancement techniques. In this article we show that surface plasmon resonance (SPR) allows for an absolute measurement of chirality (handedness and magnitude) of a chiral system. SPR has become an important technology in the areas of biochemistry, biology, and medical sciences because of its realtime, label-free, and noninvasive nature (see Refs. In particular, using analytical calculations and numerical simulations we show how the presence of a chiral substance on top of a metal results in angular shifts in SPR measurements, with which we are able to identify the sign and quantify the magnitude of the sample's chirality. Furthermore, we demonstrate how an appropriate polarimetric analysis of the outgoing reflected beam enables the absolute measurement of signals from thin chiral layers with mdeg signals at visible wavelengths. Finally, we discuss our results using a theoretical description based on the concept of optical chirality flux The refractive index n + (n -) for a right-(left-) circularly polarized (RCP/LCP) wave traversing a chiral substance is given by n ± = n c ± κ, where n c is the average refractive index of the chiral substance, and κ is the substance's chirality parameter To overcome the above-mentioned limitations, we present here an angle-resolved SPR measurement scheme that allows for the absolute measurement of chirality, particularly for the case of thin (sub-wavelength) samples. We consider a SPR setup in the Kretschmann configuration Surface plasmon polariton (SPP) waves are surface electromagnetic excitations confined to and propagating along a metal-dielectric or metal-air interface. To excite the SPP wave, a TM (p)-polarized wave is required (components E x , H y , E z ; Fig. where k 0 is the free-space wavenumber In Fig. In Fig. In Fig. To fully understand the mechanism behind the chiraldependent SPR-reflectance angular split, we examine how the near-field properties of the SPP wave are associated with the properties of the reflected wave in the far-field. We start by analyzing the SPP wave along its propagation direction (x) into +/-components, i.e. and A is any of the electromagnetic field quantities E, H, B, D; then, we calculate the electric and magnetic energy densities w ± e = (1/4)E ± SPP (D ± SPP ) * and w ± m = (1/4)B ± SPP (H ± SPP ) * , respectively, which we integrate to find the total energy stored in each of the two (+/-) components, namely (Fig. We consider now measurement configurations based on differential signals which are immune to signal fluctuations and drifts. Specifically, we consider two relevant quantities associated with the reflected (outgoing) RCP/LCP waves: the amplitude and phase differential reflectance (DR), namely ρ DR and φ DR , respectively. We define the DR signals as, In Fig. In the previous sections we consider only real-valued chirality parameter κ. This is the case when one per- forms measurements at optical frequencies far detuned from any molecular resonances, and, as such, absorptionwhich is proportional to Im(κ) -is negligible In Fig. In Fig. The association of the near-field features of the SPP wave with the far-field properties of the reflected wave, that we demonstrated using Poynting's theorem for conservation of energy, is closely related to another conservation law, that of optical chirality density where χ e and χ m are the electric and magnetic optical chirality densities, respectively, and F is the corresponding chirality flux: For κ = 0 the total chirality energy X, which is the integral of the total chirality density χ = χ e + χ m across the SPP volume, is unequally stored between the +/-SPP components, i.e. X + = X -, where X ± = V (χ ± e + χ ± m ) d 3 x. In Fig. where F inc is the incident chirality flux magnitude (see Supporting Information for the definition of F inc ). In Fig. Plasmonic fields at metal-dielectric interfaces involve field-components with vanishing chirality density and chirality flow that is orthogonal to the propagation direction In conclusion, we show a surface plasmon-aided scheme for probing thin (sub-wavelength) chiral films. Our proposed setup allows for combined measurements to unambiguously identify the sign and magnitude of both real and imaginary parts of the chirality parameter κ. These findings can be of great interest in chiral-biosensing applications, considering that an angle-resolved CHISPR sensing scheme is a surface-sensitive measurement and differs from conventional chiral-sensing techniques based on transmission measurements. In addition, among the advantages of our scheme are the simplicity of the setup and measurements, as it can be implemented with slight modifications of existing SPR measurement instruments, and has also the potential for miniaturization and portable design To analytically study our proposed system, we solve Maxwell's equations ∇ × E = iωB and ∇ × H = -iωD with the appropriate boundary conditions for a chiral layer placed on top of a metal layer, both of which have finite width along the z-direction and are infinite on the xy-plane (Figure Analyzing the incident wave in +/-components we calculate the magnitudes of the power flux S ± inc and chiral flux F ± inc for each component. Because the incident wave is linearly polarized (p-wave), we find that these quantities are equally distributed between the +/-components, i.e. S + inc = S - inc ≡ S inc /2 and F + inc = F - inc ≡ F inc /2, where S inc and F inc are the magnitudes of the total incident power and chiral flux, respectively. In fact, because the incident wave is linearly polarized, the total chirality flux is zero, i.e. F inc = F + inc + F - inc = 0. However, because the individual fluxes have nonzero magnitude (and equal; they correspond to circularly polarized waves of equal amplitude), we define the incident flux magnitude as Next, we can associate the quantities related to the incident and reflected +/-components as, and hence or simply F ± /F inc = R ± as we use in the main manuscript (see Fig. i.e. the differential chirality flux δF is equal to ρ DR , as we also demonstrate in Fig. In Fig. Our study, which has been focused on operation at 633 nm, provides general conclusions which are applicable to any operation wavelength that supports pronounced SPRs. However, a change of the operation wavelength will induce changes in the metal permittivity and, thus, the SPR dispersion, which may significantly change the SPR reflectance. Therefore, in order to maintain the optimum coupling of the incident wave to the SPP wave, the thickness of the metal layer must be modified accordingly. To demonstrate the effect of the coupling strength on the measurement sensitivity, we examine the ∆θ/∆κ dependence for three different SPR optical wavelengths (633 nm, 980 nm and 1300 nm; typical optical wavelengths used in commercial SPR instruments 