We present polarization-independent optical shutters with a sub-millisecond switching time. The approach utilizes dual-frequency nematics doped with a dichroic dye. Two nematic cells with orthogonal alignment are driven simultaneously by a low-frequency or highfrequency electric field to switch the shutter either into a transparent or a light-absorbing state. The switching speed is accelerated via special short pulses of high amplitude voltage. The approach can be used in a variety of electro-optical devices. Anisotropic dielectric and optical properties of nematic liquid crystals (NLCs) enable a large number of electro-optical applications One of the effective approaches to accelerate the process is to use the so-called dual-frequency nematic liquid crystal (DFLC) in which 0 ’üź ’üä’ĆŠ at field frequencies below some cross-over frequency c f and 0 ’üź ’üä’Ć╝ above c f ’ü▒’ü░ ’ĆĮ , or homeotropic, 0 ’ü▒ ’ĆĮ , alignment. In this work, we advance the previous dual-frequency approach to construct polarizationindependent sub-millisecond shutters. Shuttering is caused by the guest-host effect We used homeotropic (alignment layer of polyimide SE1211, Merck) and planar (alignment layer of polyimide PI2555, HD MicroSystems) cells comprised of two glass plates with transparent indium tin oxide (ITO) electrodes of an active area ’é░ . DP002-026 shows a crossover frequency that is significantly lower than that of DP002-016, Fig. To test the electro-optic performance, the cells were probed with a normally incident He-Ne laser beam (632 nm). The alternating current (AC) voltage was generated by a waveform generator (Stanford Research Systems, Model DS345) and an amplifier (Krohn-hite Corporation, Model 7602). We first characterize the performance of a single cell Fig. In order to speed up the electro-optic switching, we designed a specific voltage waveform, Figs. The contrast ratio of the device, / exp(3 ) iso T T cSd’üĪ ’ü× ’ĆĮ can be enhanced by increasing the dye concentration c. Of course, in some cases an increase of c might lead to a decrease of S , but, as shown, for example, in Ref. One of the potentially detrimental features of DFLC-based devices is dielectric heating. According to Refs. ’üź ’éó ’é╗ and 0.03 ’üź ’éó’éó ’é╗ at 60 kHz in the planar state at 28 C ’é░ . With the heat transfer coefficient of the still air being -2 -1 16 Wm K h ’ĆĮ We demonstrate polarization-independent fast electro-optical switching of a two-cell shutter based on a dual-frequency nematic doped with a dichroic dye. The demonstrated electro-optic effect may be used in switchers, eyewear, and color filters. The response time is less than 0.3 ms for both transparent-dark and dark-transparent transitions. The power consumption and dielectric heating effects are not significant. The proposed optical scheme of the shutter can be implemented in other geometries. For example, the two homeotropic cells can be replaced by two planar cells with the director fields that are mutually perpendicular. In this geometry, the field-free state is dark. A low frequency field would realign the director in both cell homeotropically and the device would become transparent. was chosen as a dye dopant, see Table1.