Colloidal approaches allow for the synthesis of Au nanoclusters (NCs) with atomic precision and sizes ranging from a few to hundreds of atoms. In most of the cases, these processes involve a common strategy of thiol etching of initially polydisperse Au nanoparticles into atomically precise NCs, resulting in the release of Au-thiolate complexes as byproducts. To the best of our knowledge, neither the removal of these byproducts nor the mass spectra in the relevant mass region were shown in previous studies. A thorough analysis of inorganic byproducts in the synthesis of Au25 NCs reveals that published protocols lead to Au25 NCs in vanishingly small quantities compared to their byproducts. Three purification methods are presented to separate byproducts from the desired Au25 NCs which are proposed to be applicable to other promising Au NC systems. Additionally, critical factors for a successful synthesis of Au25 NCs are identified and discussed including the role of residual water. An important finding is that the etching duration is very critical and must be monitored by UV-Vis spectroscopy resulting in synthetic yields as high as 40%. Among metals, Au particles surrounded by an organic monolayer (ligands) is the most studied system which is not surprising considering that their first colloidal synthesis dates back to 1857. This work thoroughly analyzes the inorganic byproducts in the Au25 NC synthesis and reports the discovery of a previously unknown Au complex. This was achieved by high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS) covering the low m/z range and an established HPLC method, which is suggested to be applicable to a preparative separation of the above mentioned charged NCs. A hitherto unparalleled analysis by means of MS combined with UV-Vis spectroscopy was applied suggesting that all so far published protocols are mainly leading to [Au2TPP2PET] + complexes and Au25 NCs only in vanishingly small quantities. Finally, two methods for the separation of Au25 NCs from its byproducts are presented. In addition, potentially important key factors for a successful synthesis of Au25 NCs are discussed, including an optimized reaction time, the role of residual water and the relationship between these two factors. Au25 NCs with the formula [Au25(PPh3)10(PET)5X2] 2+ (X= Cl or Br) were synthesized as follows. HAuCl4 • 3H2O (0.100 g, dissolved in 3 mL of Millipore H2O) was added into a 8 mL toluene solution of tetraoctylammonium bromide (TOAB, 0.145 g) and stirred vigorously (400 rpm) at room temperature for 15 min. Indicating the complete phase transfer of the gold compound from aqueous to toluene phase, the aqueous phase became colorless and clear and was removed by a pipette. The following steps appeared to be important for a water-free transfer of the gold compound: First, the organic phase was carefully transferred to a different glass ware with several glass pipettes, which were exchanged upon appearance of water-droplets sticking to the glass. The organic phase subsequently was poured into the 3-neck flask leaving further water-droplets behind. Subsequently, Triphenylphosphine (PPh3, 0.180 g) was added into the flask under stirring (400 rpm). Within few to tens of seconds, the solution became cloudy white. If this happens delayed water residues are present in the suspension. After 15 min freshly dissolved sodium borhydride (NaBH4, 0.026 g, dissolved by ultrasonication in 5 mL of EtOH) was injected rapidly to reduce Au I (PPH3)X (starting material) to Au NPs. After 2 hours, the dispersion was dried by rotary evaporation at 50°C, resulting in a dry black solid. White solid residues in the rotary evaporator flask indicate a delayed formation of the starting material (discussed in the results). The black solid was mixed with 20 mL dichlormethane (DCM), vortexed and centrifuged at 16000 rcf for 3 min. The resulting black supernatant was then heated to 40°C under reflux. Phenylethanthiol (PET, 300 uL) was added to the black dispersion, which was stirred at 400 rpm. When the UV-Vis optical spectrum has evolved as shown in Fig. The following chemicals were used as received. Triphenylphosphin (99%), ethanol (99.98%) and toluene (99.85%), were purchased from Acros Organics. Methanol (99,8%) and n-hexane (96%) were purchased from VWR. Gold(III) chloride trihydrate (99,995%) and tetraoctylammonium bromide (98%) were obtained from Alfa Aesar. Dichlormethane (DCM, 99,5%) was obtained from Grüssing. Water was purified using a Millipore-Q System (18.2 MΩ cm). UV/Vis extinction spectra were obtained with a Cary 50 spectrophotometer. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were obtained using Philips CM 300. High-resolution TEM images were obtained using a JEOL JEM 2200 FS. All the TEM samples were prepared by dropping 10 mL of diluted methanol suspension onto carboncoated TEM grids followed by solvent evaporation under ambient conditions. 5 μL of the sample (optical density 1 in ACN), diluted further 1:5 using dH2O / Acetonitrile (CAN, HPLC grade) 50/50 v/v, were injected via direct infusion into an ESI-Q-TOF mass spectrometer (maXis, Bruker Daltonik) coupled to an UHPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific). As an eluent ddH2O + 0.1% formic acid (FA, HPLC grade) / ACN + 0.1 % FA 50/50 v/v was used with a flow rate of 200 μL/min. MS-spectra were recorded in positive ion mode with a mass range of 800-5000 Da and a spectra rate of 1 Hz. The capillary voltage was set to 4500 V, the source temperature to 200 °C, the nebulizer pressure to 3.0 bar and the drying gas to 8.0 L/min. 5 μL of the same sample were injected into an UHPLC system (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled to an ESI-Q-TOF mass spectrometer (maXis, Bruker Daltonik). For separation the compounds were loaded onto a reversed phase separation column (Extend C18, 1.8 μM, 2.1 x 50 mm, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA) and a linear gradient with ddH2O + 0.1 % FA (buffer A) and ACN + 0.1 % FA (buffer B) as mobile phase and a flow rate of 300 μL/min was applied. In the beginning the concentration of buffer B was set to 50 % and was increased to 95 % within 30 minutes, kept constant for two minutes, was decreased to 50 % within 3 minutes and finally kept constant for five minutes. MS spectra were recorded in positive ion mode with a mass range of 800-5000 Da and a spectra rate of 1 Hz. The capillary voltage was set to 4500 V, the source temperature to 200 °C, the nebulizer pressure to 3.0 bar and the drying gas flow to 8.0 L/min. On the basis of known procedures Plotted in Figure We propose residual water accidently transferred during the phase transfer of the Au compound from water to the organic phase to be responsible for that. As an increased amount of water was observed to prevent or delay the white clouding upon TPP addition and thus AuTPPX formation (starting material), it is obvious that residual water impacts the NaBH4 (reduction agent) mediated reduction step and thus the particle size distribution. Therefore, a detailed description is provided in the experimental section on how to successfully carry out a quasi water-free phase transfer. After the reaction ended the suspension was purified through DCM/hexane redissolution/precipitation for multiple times and extracted with methanol (abbreviated as DCM/Hex/MeOH), resulting in an optical spectrum of the "purified" Au25 NC with sharp, molecule-like optical transitions at 415 and 670 nm, shown in black in Fig. The present method is designed to be lossless and convenient in two ways: First, purification typically employed before thiol-etching is instead performed afterwards, ensuring a larger fraction of Aun-TPP NPs to be loss-free and available for the conversion to Au25 NCs. Second, an adjustment of the Au:thiol molar ratio through thermo gravimetric analysis (including drying and combustion of 5-10 mg NPs) can be bypassed, and the suggested thiol volume can be considered as constant. Combining an optimized reaction time derived from the optical spectrum, proper handling of water residues, and finally a loss-free transfer of polydisperse Au NPs by omitting purification in between of synthesis steps, the synthetic yield of "purified" Au25 NCs has been raised to 35 mg NCs per 100 mg chloroauric acid (40% in respect to elemental Au). NCs in solvents of varying polarities, from methanol to toluene, makes their separation from residual organic synthesis byproducts challenging. This topic is not covered sufficiently in previous reports, which lack 31 P or 1 H NMR spectra. Since organic byproducts were thoroughly removed as evidenced by the NMR analysis, a deeper insight into colloidal impurities of inorganic nature was necessary. Their presence can be clearly recognized from the UV-Vis optical spectra. Comparing the UV-Vis optical spectra of Au25 NC suspensions prepared by different groups a remarkable difference is evident (Fig. Consequently, plasmonic absorption or scattering by large Au NPs cause the increased extinction and broaden the 415 nm optical feature of the Au25 NC. Removal of these by the established DCM/Hex/MeOH purification sequence and especially proper reaction control, including an optimized reaction time, were identified in the present work to be crucial for obtaining a Au25 NC suspension free of large NPs and an extinction spectrum as shown in black in Fig. As apparent from the blue curve in Fig. To this day, mass spectra of products from thiol etching synthesis as applied for Au25 and for many other NCs are usually not shown below m/z 1200, although the formation of byproducts including few gold-atoms containing complexes is known giving rise to signals in that mass range. A 2011 report from the Jin group shed light on the dark: The Au2 complex with the formula [Au2TPP2PET] + was crystallized from a Au25 NC suspension. High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) proved to be a useful tool for a preparative separation of Au NCs covered with different ligands and of varying size. Since a gold-complex with a mass of 1409 has not yet been reported, matrix assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI)-MS was applied to analyze the peak at m/z 1409 in more detail. A MALDI-MS spectrum in the range of m/z 500-5040 of the Au25 NC sample is shown in Fig. Having identified the residual inorganic byproducts including the Au2 and Au3 complexes, we proceeded to remove them. In addition to the chromatographic separation, two practical methods are presented to obtain Au25 NCs satisfying different application purposes. The first method is based on a known procedure and involves the crystallization of the Au25 NCs whose microscope image is shown in Fig. The second method is based on a classical selective precipitation method. Starting with the "purified" Au25 NC suspension with an UV-Vis optical spectrum shown in Fig. The present work demonstrates the necessity of monitoring the Au nanoparticle etching process by UV-VIS spectroscopy, and the importance of proper purification and selective precipitation to obtain ultra-pure Au25 NCs. The above spectra show that despite the classically applied and herein advanced DCM/Hex/MeOH purification techniques, Au25 NCs prepared by both, the present and previous methods mainly contain the Au2 complex. The key component was a thorough MS analysis, including a discussion of the mass region below m/z 1200, which was not covered in previous reports. An HPLC method was established, which serves as a starting point for a preparative chromatographic separation leading to ultra-pure Au25 NC fractions. The preparative HPLC and selective precipitation methods established here, are believed to be directly applicable to the purification of other Au NCs. Similar byproducts might occur in the synthesis of highly fluorescent AgxAu25-x, single atom-doped Au24Pd, Au25 NCs' big brother Au37, and many other mix-ligand stabilized charged Au NCs. Due to the size focusing mechanism, the formation of these small gold-containing byproducts is unavoidable. Fig. 