We investigate the effect of a single heat treatment cycle on the potential energy states and mechanical properties of metallic glasses using molecular dynamics simulations. We consider the three-dimensional binary mixture, which was initially cooled with a computationally slow rate from the liquid state to the solid phase at a temperature well below the glass transition. It was found that a cycle of heating and cooling can relocate the glass to either rejuvenated or relaxed states, depending on the maximum temperature and the loading period. Thus, the lowest potential energy is attained after a cycle with the maximum temperature slightly below the glass transition temperature and the effective cooling rate slower than the initial annealing rate. In contrast, the degree of rejuvenation increases when the maximum temperature becomes greater than the glass transition temperature and the loading period is sufficiently small. It was further shown that the variation of the potential energy is inversely related to the dependence of the elastic modulus and the yield stress as functions of the maximum loading temperature. In addition, the heat treatment process causes subtle changes in the shape of the radial distribution function of small atoms. These results are important for optimization of thermal and mechanical processing of metallic glasses with predetermined properties. The development of novel fabrication techniques for amorphous materials, including metallic glasses and high entropy alloys, is important for various industrial and biomedical applications In the last few years, a number of studies have investigated the aging and rejuvenation processes in amorphous materials subjected to a heat treatment cycle using molecular dynamics simulations and experimental measurements In this paper, we investigate how processing conditions influence the potential energy states, structure, and mechanical properties of amorphous materials subjected to a single heat treatment cycle. We consider a well-annealed binary mixture, which is linearly heated to a maximum temperature in the neighborhood of the glass transition temperature and cooled back to the glassy state. The simulations are performed in a wide range of cycling periods and thermal amplitudes. It will be shown that thermal cycling below the glass transition relocates the system into states with lower potential energy, while rejuvenated states can be accessed at sufficiently high heating/cooling rates if the thermal amplitude is above the glass transition temperature. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The molecular dynamics simulation model and the thermal treatment protocol are described in the next section. The variation of the potential energy during thermal cycling and the resulted changes in the mechanical properties as well as the structural analysis are presented in section III. The brief summary is given in the last section. In the present work, we employed the binary mixture (80:20) model introduced by Kob and Andersen (KA), which is similar to the parametrization proposed by Weber and Stillinger to study the amorphous metal alloy Ni 80 P 20 with the interaction parameters: ε AA = 1.0, ε AB = 1.5, ε BB = 0.5, σ AA = 1.0, σ AB = 0.8, σ BB = 0.88, and m A = m B The binary mixture was first thoroughly equilibrated in the liquid state at the temperature T LJ = 1.0 ε/k B and zero pressure. In what follows, k B denotes the Boltzmann constant. The temperature was regulated via the Nosé-Hoover thermostat Upon cooling a glass-former from the liquid state to the solid phase, its structure remains amorphous but the molecular motion dramatically slows down In our study, the disordered solids were initially prepared by cooling with the rate of 10 -5 ε/k B τ to the temperature T LJ = 0.01 ε/k B at zero pressure. As an example, the dependence of volume as a function of temperature for one sample is presented in the inset to Fig. The intersection of linearly extrapolated low (glass phase) and high (liquid phase) temperature regions provides an estimate of the glass transition temperature of about 0.40 ε/k B . Correspondingly, the average glass density at this temperature is ρ ≈ 1.14 σ -3 . Note that the glass transition temperature at zero pressure is lower than the mode-coupling critical temperature T c = 0.435 ε/k B at the density ρ = 1.2 σ -3 , which was determined numerically by fitting the diffusion coefficient to the power-law function of temperature at constant volume The examples of temperature profiles measured in MD simulations during one cycle of heating and cooling are presented in Fig. the smallest period T = 5000 τ , while it ranges from 0.8 × 10 -6 ε/k B τ at T M LJ = 0.20 ε/k B to 2.8 × 10 -6 ε/k B τ at T M LJ = 0.70 ε/k B for the largest period T = 500 000 τ . In the following analysis, the change in the potential energy due to thermal cycling will be correlated with the relative difference between these rates and the initial cooling rate of 10 -5 ε/k B τ . The variation of the potential energy per atom during the heating and cooling cycle is presented in Figs. The data denoted by the black curves are the same, and, except for the lowest one, the curves are displaced vertically for clarity. The directions of the temperature variation in each case are indicated by the corresponding arrows. We also comment that extrapolation of U (T LJ ) from the glass and liquid regions provides an estimate of the glass transition temperature T g ≈ 0.35 ε/k B , which is lower than the value of 0.40 ε/k B obtained from the data V (T LJ ) shown in the inset to Fig. As shown in Fig. The same trends can be observed in Fig. Furthermore, when T M LJ > T g , the system enters the liquid phase and then cooled with the rates 2 T M LJ /T slower than 10 -5 ε/k B τ , and thus the potential energy after the thermal cycle is also reduced. This behavior is consistent with the simulation results of thermal processing of Cu-Zr amorphous alloys The summary of the data for the potential energy after the thermal cycle, U 1 /ε, is presented in Fig. It should also be commented that the possibility of attaining higher energy states upon cryogenic thermal cycling (well below T g ) was recently discussed by Shang et al. As illustrated in Fig. Although the atomic structure before and after the thermal loading remains amorphous, some subtle differences can be detected by examining the radial distribution function. In the previous MD study of the KA binary mixture, it was shown that one of the most sensitive measures of structural changes upon temperature variation is the distribution function of small atoms of type B The representative stress-strain curves after the thermal loading process are presented in Fig. In summary, the effect of thermal loading on mechanical and structural properties of binary glasses was examined using molecular dynamics simulations. The amorphous material was represented by the binary Lennard-Jones mixture, which was initially annealed with a computationally slow cooling rate from the liquid state to a temperature well below the glass transition point. It was shown that a single cycle of heating and cooling leads to either rejuvenated or relaxed states depending on the maximum temperature and loading period. More specifically, the higher energy states were obtained when the maximum temperature is above the glass transition and the loading period is relatively small, so that the effective heating/cooling rates are higher than the initial cooling rate. In contrast, thermal loading during longer periods resulted in lower energy states due to either aging below T g or slower cooling from the liquid state. The structural changes due to thermal loading are reflected in the height of the first two peaks in the radial distribution function of small atoms. Moreover, the dependence of the elastic modulus and the stress overshoot on the maximum loading temperature is inversely related to the change in the potential energy for a given loading period. Thus, the simulation results indicate that a significant decrease in the yield stress is obtained in binary glasses rapidly heated and cooled above the glass transition temperature at constant pressure conditions. 