We present an ab initio simulation of 90 • ferroelastic twins that were recently observed in methyl ammonium lead iodide The synthesis of a hybrid organic-inorganic halide pervoskite ('HOIP') solar cell was first reported in 2009 At a defect boundary, properties not present in the bulk may emerge at the interface itself, chiefly due to the local structural distortion. For instance, a bulk property may change orientation across the boundary and thus some components will locally vanish or be enhanced. Hence, physics that is ordinarily suppressed in the bulk may manifest at the wall. Theoretical studies on grain boundaries Recently, ferroelastic twins in MAPI were observed at room temperature and their structure has been determined Here, we report a density-functional theory simulation of the twins characterised in There are obvious technical challenges to account for the dynamic ordering of MA molecules in a zero Kelvin calculation. Hence we studied these walls in CsPbI 3 , the Cs atom having a similar effective size to the MA molecule The twins characterised by Rothmann et al. The twins were simulated with periodic boundary conditions in VASP 5.4.4 using the PBEsol exchangecorrelation functional We determined the formation energies of the twin boundaries to be 4.4 mJ m -2 and -1.2 mJ m -2 for the HT and HH walls respectively The wall thicknesses were extracted from the change in octahedral tilts across the wall. Figure We found both ferroelastic twins to be polar; a result that has not been discussed in their observation Furthermore, we note that ferroelastic boundaries are necessarily polar Although these walls are polar, this is only a necessary but not sufficient condition for ferroelectricity. To shed some light on this issue, we note that Schiaffino and Stengel have derived a Landau-like expansion of the potential energy landscape for the same wall geometries From the projected density of states we found the band gap at the walls and in bulk to be largely similar. However, in general this may be an additional effect at different types of domain walls, which will be a point of future investigation. In this article, we have presented an ab initio study of ferroelastic 90 • CsPbI 3 twins as a model for the same defects observed in MAPI. Both types of twins, HH and HT, were found to have a low formation energy, small thickness and a sizeable in-plane polarisation of ∼ 6 μC cm -2 despite separating non-polar domains. Potential avenues for enhancing photovoltaic performance via domain wall engineering have been discussed with a mechanism proposed for delaying recombination rates and enhancing charge carrier mobility. We hope to motivate further investigation into these structures and their role in the performance of hybrid organic-inorganic halide perovskite solar cells. We are grateful for the computational resources provided by the Imperial College Research Computing Service and the UK Materials and Molecular Modelling Hub, which is partially funded by EPSRC (EP/P020194/1). This work has been supported by the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training on Theory and Simulation of Materials (TSM-CDT, grant ref. EP/L015579/1). J. Í. thanks the support of the Luxembourg National Research Fund (Grant FNR/C15/MS/10458889 NEWALLS). Structural schematics in Fig. 