An intact CuO2 plane is widely believed to be a prerequisite for the high-Tc superconductivity in cuprate superconductors. However, an exception may exist in the superconducting Ba2CuO 3+δ materials where CuO chains play a more important role. From first-principles density functional theory calculations, we have studied the electronic and magnetic structures of Ba2CuO 3+δ . The stoichiometric Ba2CuO3 and Ba2CuO4 contain quasi-one-dimensional CuO chains and intact twodimensional CuO2 planes, respectively. In comparison with the nonmagnetic metal Ba2CuO4, Ba2CuO3 is found to be an antiferromagnetic (AFM) Mott insulator. It possesses a nearest-neighbor intra-chain antiferromagnetic (AFM) coupling and a weak inter-chain interaction, and its lowest unoccupied band and highest occupied band are contributed by Cu 3d b 2 -c 2 -orbital (or d x 2 -y 2 -orbital if we denote the bc-plane as the xy-plane) and O 2p-orbitals, respectively. Total energy calculations indicate that the oxygen vacancies in Ba2CuO 3+δ prefer to reside in the planar sites rather than the apical oxygens in the CuO chains, in agreement with the experimental observation. Furthermore, we find that the magnetic frustrations or spin fluctuations can be effectively induced by moderate charge doping. This suggests that the superconducting pairing in oxygen-enriched Ba2CuO 3+δ or oxygen-deficient Ba2CuO 4-δ is likely to be mainly driven by the AFM fluctuations within CuO chains. The interplay between superconductivity and dimensionality is an interesting issue in condensed matter physics. In the well-known cuprate superconductors More recently, high temperature superconductor Ba 2 CuO 4-δ /Ba 2 CuO 3+δ has been successfully synthesized under high pressure by Jin and coworkers In order to determine the pairing mechanism of electrons, it is crucial to know where the oxygen vacancies reside in the superconducting Ba 2 CuO 4-δ /Ba 2 CuO 3+δ compounds. If the oxygen vacancies mainly occupy the apical sites, the CuO 2 planes remain intact as the other cuprate superconductors. Experimental measurements of neutron powder diffraction In this paper, we address the above questions by calculating the electronic and magnetic structures of Ba 2 CuO 3+δ using first-principles density functional theory. Our study shows that the parent compound is Ba 2 CuO 3 , which is an AFM Mott insulator. In Sec. II, we first describe the method, and then discuss the numerical results for both stoichiometric Ba 2 CuO 3 /Ba 2 CuO 4 and oxygen doped materials. A summary is given in Sec. III. We performed the first-principles density functional theory calculations on the electronic and magnetic structures of undoped or doped Ba 2 CuO 3 or Ba 2 CuO 4 materials using the projector augmented wave (PAW) method Figures 1(a the nonmagnetic state. These magnetic ordered states, as partially shown in Fig. Figure Figures In oxygen-enriched Ba 2 CuO 3+δ , the extra oxygens doped to Ba 2 CuO 3 introduce hole doping, which is equivalent to shifting the Fermi energy down to the valence In high-T c cuprates, superconductivity emerges when charge carriers, either holes or electrons, are doped into the parent compounds. It is commonly believed that AFM spin fluctuations play a very important role in pairing electrons To know the electronic and magnetic structures of this material, it is important to know accurately where the oxygen vacancies are located. We investigated this problem using both the virtual crystal approximation approach and the supercell approach in the framework of density functional theory. In the virtual crystal approach, we considered three different kinds of distributions of oxygen vacancies: (1) the vacancies are all located in the Cu-O layers, (2) the vacancies are all located in the Ba-O layers, and (3) the vacancies are equally partitioned in both kinds of layers. For a nominal component Ba 2 CuO 3.2 , the relative energies of the second and third cases with respect to the first case are found to be +1.88, and +92.58 eV/cell, respectively. This suggests that the oxygen vacancies prefer to reside in the Cu-O layers. In the supercell approach, we calculated the energies for 26 possible structures of Ba 2 CuO 3.25 (Figs. 6 and 7) in a 2 × 2 × 1 supercell with 6 oxygen vacancies. By comparison, we find that the two configurations shown in Figs. The results obtained from both approaches indicate that the oxygen vacancies are located in the Cu-O layers rather than in the Ba-O layers. This is consistent with the experimental data of neutron powder diffraction To see how the magnetic order is changed by the doping in Ba 2 CuO 3+δ , we evaluated the energies of several different kinds of magnetic states. Since the inter-chain coupling is very weak, we ignore the difference of different magnetic ordered states along the a-axis and assume that the inter-chain coupling along the a-axis is ferromagnetic. Table The above discussion suggests that it is Ba 2 CuO 3 rather than Ba 2 CuO 4 that is the parent compound of superconducting Ba 2 CuO 3+δ materials 