The experimental observation of superconductivity in doped semimetals and semiconductors, where the Fermi energy is comparable to or smaller than the characteristic phonon frequencies, is not captured by the conventional theory. In this paper, we propose a mechanism for superconductivity in ultralow-density three-dimensional Dirac materials based on the proximity to a ferroelectric quantum critical point. We derive a low-energy theory that takes into account both the strong Coulomb interaction and the direct coupling between the electrons and the soft phonon modes. We show that the Coulomb repulsion is strongly screened by the lattice polarization near the critical point even in the case of vanishing carrier density. Using a renormalization group analysis, we demonstrate that the effective electron-electron interaction is dominantly mediated by the transverse phonon mode. We find that the system generically flows towards strong electron-phonon coupling. Hence, we propose a new mechanism to simultaneously produce an attractive interaction and suppress strong Coulomb repulsion, which does not require retardation. For comparison, we perform same analysis for covalent crystals, where lattice polarization is negligible. We obtain qualitatively similar results, though the screening of the Coulomb repulsion is much weaker. We then apply our results to study superconductivity in the low-density limit. We find strong enhancement of the transition temperature upon approaching the quantum critical point. Finally, we also discuss scenarios to realize a topological p-wave superconducting state in covalent crystals close to the critical point. A key step in the formation of a superconductor is the pairing between electrons. In spite of the strong Coulomb repulsion in free space, at low energy electrons experience an effective attraction in the presence of a lattice. Thus, superconductivity essentially relies on a mechanism that simultaneously reduces the Coulomb repulsion and generates a strong attractive interaction. In simple (elemental) metals, such an attraction originates from the interchange of longitudinal phonons, which couple to the electronic density. To allow for this attraction to overcome the Coulomb repulsion, however, it is essential that the crystal vibrations are much slower than electronic motion. In terms of energy scales, this requirement implies that the Fermi energy is much larger than the Debye frequency. In the intermediate frequency regime, between these two scales, the Coulomb repulsion is logarithmically suppressed, while the phonon interaction is unaffected From this perspective, systems of low carrier concentration, such as doped semimetals and semiconductors, are not expected to exhibit superconductivity. First, they have a low Fermi energy, which is comparable to, or even smaller than, the typical Debye frequency, and, thus, does not allow for the dynamical screening of the repulsion. Moreover, the superconducting transition temperature is exponentially sensitive to the density of states, which is typically two orders of magnitude smaller in doped semimetals and semiconductors compared to standard metals. Thus, naively, attainable transition temperatures require an unphysically large interaction strength. Surprisingly, however, superconductivity in doped semimetals and semiconductors is ubiquitous. It was first discovered in SrTiO 3 A variety of theoretical frameworks have been proposed to discuss superconductivity in the limit of low density, including polar phonons It is interesting to notice that SrTiO 3 , PbTe, and SnTe naturally reside close to a paraelectric (PE)-ferroelectric (FE) phase transition To explain the origin of the common belief concerning weak coupling between electrons and soft FE modes in low-density ionic crystals, we briefly review some basic facts regarding the FE QCP. The PE-FE transition is essentially a structural transition where the order parameter is a vector (i.e., a lattice distortion), which spontaneously breaks inversion and rotation symmetries in the ordered state. As an example, we consider the diatomic ionic crystal in Fig. Despite the above discussion, the direct coupling of gapless electrons to soft transverse phonon (ferroelectric) modes is possible in multiorbital systems Thus, the attraction mediated by TO modes generically overcomes the Coulomb repulsion close to a FE QCP. Interestingly, this result is valid even at vanishing electronic density, when the effects of Coulomb repulsion are expected to be strong. Therefore, our theory is distinct from the standard Tolmachev-Anderson-Morel mechanism For completeness and comparison, we perform similar analysis for covalent (non-ionic) crystals, where both LO and TO modes are soft at the critical point. In this case, negligible lattice polarization does not allow for a spontaneous dipolar moment of the crystal, so a "ferroelectric" phase is simply characterized by broken inversion symmetry. Because of the lack of lattice polarization, the screening of the Coulomb repulsion is only due to interband transitions; consequently, it is much weaker than in ionic crystals. Namely, it is logarithmic, similar to the case without soft phonons Beside the fundamental theoretical importance, our study of superconductivity from ferroelectric quantum critical fluctuations is also motivated by a realistic system: the ionic alloy Pb 1-z Sn z Te, which undergoes a FE phase transition at z = z F E ≈ 0.25 The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We first summarize our main results while providing intuitive pictures in Sec. II. In Sec. III, we present a complete low-energy theory for Dirac materials near a FE QCP. In Sec. IV, we use the RG approach to demonstrate that the Coulomb repulsion is strongly screened by lattice polarization, while the coupling between electrons and soft transverse phonons is significantly enhanced. We find qualitatively similar results for covalent crystals, though the screening of Coulomb repulsion in this case is much weaker because of negligible lattice polarization. Finally, in Sec. V, we analyze the possible superconducting instabilities from the interaction mediated by the critical phonon (ferroelectric) mode. We find strong enhancement of the transition temperature T c due to the enhancement of the electron-phonon coupling close to the critical point. Additionally, we discuss scenarios for pwave superconductivity originating from the interplay between phonon-mediated attraction and Coulomb repulsion in covalent crystals. We finish with a short summary and discussion in Sec. VI. Before moving on to the main part of the paper, where we carefully analyze the FE QCP in a Dirac system using the RG technique, we first present our main results at a non-technical level. We aim to qualitatively explain how our findings deal with the long standing challenge of understanding superconductivity in low-density systems. As explained in the introduction, the observation of superconductivity in extremely dilute metals poses two questions which are the main focus of this paper: (1) How is the Coulomb repulsion screened in a system with relatively small Fermi energy (the so-called antiadiabatic limit)? (2) What is the source for strong attraction that can overcome the small density of states in these systems? To answer these questions, we focus on a concrete model consisting of three essential ingredients, which are all mutually coupled (see Fig. The key new element that plays a crucial role in our study is the direct coupling λ between electrons and optical phonons (especially the TO modes). The coupling is allowed in materials with strong spin-orbit coupling such as Dirac semimetals. The intuitive picture behind this coupling is the following: When the unit cell distorts due to a FE optical phonon, inversion symmetry is locally broken. In the presence of spin-orbit coupling, this process induces a Rashba effect modifying the electronic dispersion, thus coupling electrons to phonons. Interestingly, the first question raised above, screening of the Coulomb repulsion in the antiadiabatic limit, is naturally dealt with in this model. In the case of ionic crystals, the polar phonons provide the screening. The important prerequisite, however, is the proximity of the system to a FE QCP. Indeed, according to the Lyddane-Sachs-Teller relation To deal with the second question about the source of the sufficiently strong attraction between electrons, we recall the seminal result by Gurevich et al. ment of β. This enhancement, in turn, leads to a sufficient increase in the superconducting transition temperature T c , see Eqs. ( As a final step, we calculate the superconducting instabilities with the renormalized parameters. We work within the weak-coupling approximation, and assume small but finite Fermi surface with the radius k F . We find that the strongest superconducting instability is in the s-wave channel, but the vector-type p-wave also exhibits weaker instability towards the Cooper pairing. For these two channels, we compute the corresponding transition temperatures, see Eqs. ( The above discussion is relevant for ionic crystals. For completeness, we also consider the case of covalent crystals, where the atoms in Fig. We now turn to the main part of the paper. We first consider the low-energy effective field theory of a Dirac semimetal near the ferroelectric transition. The Euclidean (imaginary time) action is given by the sum where the first three terms describe the dynamics of the fermions ψ, the optical phonon field u, and the Coulomb field φ, respectively, while the latter three describe their interactions. The Coulomb field φ should be considered as a Hubbard-Stratonovich decomposition of the instantaneous Coulomb interaction. Now we specify these terms in detail. The electron term -The electron quadratic term (motivated by the model of the PbTe crystal where ψ n is a four-component Dirac spinor, n = 1, . . . , N denotes different fermionic flavors (number of Dirac nodes), summation over j = x, y, z is implied (∂ 0 stands for derivative in imaginary time), and ψn ≡ ψ † n γ 0 . Parameters v F , m, and ε F stand for electron velocity, Dirac mass, and Fermi energy, respectively. We use Hermitian gamma matrices {γ , where σ i are usual Pauli matrices. Notice that here we have assumed an isotropic dispersion by taking the same velocity v F in all directions. The anisotropic case does not modify the main qualitative results of this paper, and therefore we comment on it in Appendix D. For generality, we have assumed a nonzero mass term m and a finite Fermi energy ε F . However, we will neglect them in our RG analysis, assuming that they are much smaller than other relevant energy scales. We note two important discrete symmetries of Eq. ( Here c L and c T are the longitudinal and transverse phonon velocities, respectively, ω T is the phonon mass, which is the tuning parameter to the transition, and V is the lowest-order symmetry allowed anharmonic correction to the phonon energy (where we have neglected additional anisotropic terms allowed by the cubic symmetry The Coulomb term -The third quadratic term describes the Coulomb potential: where ε ∞ is the bare dielectric constant, which accounts for the contribution of core electrons. This contribution is due to the transitions between the high-energy atomic configurations, and does not include the contributions from the lattice dynamics or electronic interband transitions close to the Dirac point. We now consider the couplings between the fields introduced in Eqs. ( where ρ e = n ψn γ 0 ψ n is the electronic density. Phonon-Coulomb coupling -The coupling of the ferroelectric phonon modes to the Coulomb potential follows from Eq. ( where Q is the ionic charge on "blue" sites (charge on "red" sites equals -Q). For the purpose of further analysis, it is convenient to absorb factor ρ 0 by redefining Qρ 0 → Q. Notice that the form of the coupling (6) implies that only the longitudinal phonon mode couples to the Coulomb field. We also point out that after integrating Eq. ( The microscopic origin of this coupling is a combination of the interorbital hybridization induced by the lattice distortion u and spin-orbit coupling. This effect is similar to the Rashba effect, which arises when inversion is broken in a system with spin-orbit coupling. The analogy is made by noting that the optical phonon distortion is essentially an inversion breaking field. It is also worth noting that the form of the coupling Eq. ( We now use RG to analyze the theory introduced in the previous section. Summing up Eqs. ( The coefficients Z ψ and Z u account for the renormalization of the dynamical terms. We apply the standard momentum-shell RG scheme It should be mentioned that the choice of dynamical and field exponents is somewhat arbitrary here since it does not affect the flow of dimensionless coupling constants Near the noninteracting fixed point introduced above, Q is relevant and, at the tree level, obeys the following RG equation: Thus, in the case of ionic crystals, Q grows rapidly to strong coupling. Therefore, we should first derive the effective low-energy theory with large coupling Q (of the order of UV cutoff) and then proceed to the RG analysis of the resulting theory. We can integrate out the Coulomb field φ, which generates the following terms The first term is the standard Coulomb repulsion between electrons. The second term can be viewed as a phonon mass generated in the longitudinal sector (note that it is independent of the magnitude of the momentum). This mass generation is the well-known LO-TO splitting in ionic crystals The generated mass term for the longitudinal phonon mode equals ω L ≡ 4πQ 2 /ε ∞ + ω 2 T . While the transverse mode becomes massless near the FE transition, ω T → 0, we see that the longitudinal mode remains massive, since Q ω T . Consequently, the LO mode can be further integrated out. This procedure generates the standard dynamically screened Coulomb interaction between electrons where is the dynamical dielectric constant, which manifestly satisfies the Lyddane-Sachs-Teller relation Close to the critical point, we have ω T → 0, which implies that the dielectric constant scales as ) and diverges at low energies and momenta. (In the above estimate, we assumed that Q already reached the RG scale at which Q ∼ ω L ∼ c L Λ 0 , where Λ 0 is the UV cutoff, implying that the ω 2 + c 2 L q 2 term can be neglected compared to ω 2 L .) Thus, the effective Coulomb interaction between electrons becomes highly irrelevant and flows quickly to zero. It means that the Coulomb interaction is effectively screened by the longitudinal phonon mode. Eventually, the FE critical point is controlled by the following effective field theory where is the projector to the plane transverse to q. The couplings V and λ here are weakly renormalized after integrating out the longitudinal mode. Before continuing, we would like to make a remark. We have presented a low-energy effective theory with the coupling between soft polar phonons and charged fermions given by Eq. ( Now we analyze the effective field theory for ionic crystals The most important result that can be extracted from these equations is that the electron-phonon coupling β flows to the strong-coupling regime, see Fig. Our RG equations were derived under the assumptions of the zero Dirac fermion mass and zero Fermi energy, while the one-loop approximation is valid provided the coupling remains small. Given the flow to the strong coupling, it is important to understand what stops the RG flows. Here we estimate the scale at which β becomes of the order of 1, and defer the discussion of a finite Dirac mass/Fermi energy to Sec. V. In realistic materials, the Fermi velocity is much bigger than the phonon velocity, thus, one can set ζ T ≈ 0 in Eq. Here β 0 1 is the initial UV value of the coupling constant at the scale Λ 0 . Another natural scale that serves as a cutoff for our RG equations is set by the flow of the (dimensionless) mass of the transverse phonon mode r ≡ ω 2 T /c 2 T Λ 2 0 , which determines the critical region: where γ ≡ V /c 3 T Z u is the dimensionless phonon-phonon interaction. Assuming that β and γ are small compared to the UV value r 0 , the solution of this equation with the exponential accuracy reads as r ∼ r 0 e 2l . The critical regime is determined by the condition r 1, which corresponds to the RG scale l r ≈ (1/2) ln(1/|r 0 |), or, equivalently, momentum scale If Λ β > Λ r , the theory flows to the strong coupling regime before the phonon mode gets massive. Our RG equations are only applicable then down to Λ β . In the opposite case, Λ r > Λ β , the RG flow should be stopped at Λ r , where the transverse phonon mode becomes massive and can be integrated out. At this scale, the system leaves the critical regime, while the coupling between phonons and fermions still remains weak. The corresponding phase diagram is shown in Fig. sponds to the anharmonicity of the lattice oscillations: This equation, again, can be easily analyzed in the physical case ζ T ≈ 0. Then, since β is a marginally relevant parameter, γ eventually also flows to strong coupling. It is straightforward to show, however, that this flow does not introduce any new cutoff, as γ can reach order 1 no sooner than at Λ β given by Eq. ( We see that one of the physical properties of the ferroelectric critical point in Dirac materials is the reduction of the velocities under RG for both the transverse phonon modes and the Dirac fermions. Furthermore, as is shown in Fig. Now we perform similar RG analysis for covalent crystals, exemplified by elemental bismuth. The "ferroelectric" phase in these materials is characterized by broken inversion symmetry but not by a spontaneous dipolar moment of the lattice, because the optical phonon distortion u generates a negligible amount of polarization in covalent crystals. While the main qualitative results, such as the flow to strong coupling, in this case are the same as for ionic crystals, certain important differences should be discussed. In particular, the absence of lattice polarization implies that the effective theory for covalent crystals is given by Eq. ( where we defined Since both the longitudinal and the transverse phonon modes become massless at the transition in covalent crystals, they should be treated on equal footing. Consequently, one could in principle consider two (not independent) dimensionless couplings β = λ 2 /4πv F c 2 T Z ψ and β = λ 2 /4πv F c 2 L Z ψ , which quantify the electron-electron interaction strength mediated by the transverse phonons and the longitudinal phonons, respectively. It is straightforward to show, however, that, in the physical limit 1, β is marginally irrelevant, while β flows to strong coupling. Indeed, in this limit, first two equations of Eq. ( while analogous equation for β would read as We note that in this limit, the renormalization of the fine structure constant α is identical to that in standard QED in (3+1) dimensions The flow of the phonon velocities can also be easily studied in the limit ζ T ∼ ζ L 1. Analogously to ionic crystals, ζ T flows to zero in this regime. The flow of ζ L , on the other hand, is sensitive to the number of flavors N and to the initial conditions, as well as to the scale that stops RG. For instance, at sufficiently large N , ζ L is increased under RG. Finally, the flows of the phonon-phonon coupling γ and the phonon mass r are qualitatively similar to the case of ionic crystals, so we do not consider them in detail here. In the previous section, we have analyzed the RG flow of the electron-phonon coupling near a ferroelectric quantum critical point. We found that, generically, the critical point is unstable and flows to strong electron-phonon coupling, while the Coulomb interaction flows to weak coupling. As a result, we anticipate that the effective electron-electron attraction mediated by the ferroelectric phonon modes will become dominant over the Coulomb repulsion. Hence, the natural next step in our work is to apply this result to study superconductivity. We emphasize that in our scenario, both for ionic and covalent crystals, the enhancement of the attractive interaction over the Coulomb repulsion does not require finite electron density, in contrast to the Anderson-Morel theory. Nonetheless, this does not imply that the superconducting transition temperature does not depend on density. At least at weak coupling, β 1, a finite density of states is essential to obtain a finite T c . Therefore, we will now relax our previous assumption about the Fermi energy exactly at the Dirac point and assume a nonzero Fermi momentum k F . As before, we separately consider the cases of ionic and covalent crystals. We also focus on the paraelectric side of the transition, i.e., consider systems possessing both time-reversal and inversion symmetries in the normal state. As we have shown in Sec. IV, one can define two scales Λ β and Λ r given by Eqs. ( The additional scale we have introduced, k F , can, in principle, also put the flow to a halt when the running scale Λ(l) = Λ 0 exp(-l) becomes of the order of k F . Thus, depending on the ratio between k F and Λ r , one may again consider two cases. The first case, k F Λ r , is close to the standard Anderson-Morel scenario with the phonon-associated scale (ω T /c T )| l=0 being smaller than k F , and we do not consider it here in detail. Since we are interested in understanding superconductivity at very low density, we focus on the opposite limit Λ r k F . In this case, the screening of the Coulomb repulsion by longitudinal phonons occurs well above the Fermi scale, as discussed below Eq. ( To obtain an effective low-energy interaction, we allow the system to flow according to the RG equations derived in Sec. IV A until it reaches the scale Λ r . We then use Eq. ( where the effective interaction constant is obtained from Eq. ( Now we analyze the superconducting instabilities due to interaction T . In the presence of spin-orbit coupling, however, components c 1,2 are not spin eigenstates anymore, but rather eigenstates in some band basis. The choice of this basis is not unique. For concreteness, we choose the so-called manifestly covariant Bloch basis (MCBB), in which [c 1 (k), c 2 (k)] T transforms as an ordinary SU (2) spin-1/2 where η = ±1 corresponds to the conduction/valence bands, respectively, and we defined k± = (k x ± ik y )/k. The mapping onto the MCBB then simply implies the transformation , and can schematically be written as It is straightforward to show then that the Dirac bilinear γ j , which couples to a soft phonon mode, projects onto where lmj is the Levi-Civita tensor, σ j here are Pauli matrices acting in the MCBB, and we defined kj ≡ k j /k. The effective interaction TABLE To demonstrate the superconducting instabilities, we now decompose interaction (30) into pairing channels, analogously to how it has been done in Ref. where, again, βγ is the Levi-Civita symbol. In systems with strong spin-orbit coupling, spin S and orbital angular momentum L are not good quantum numbers. Instead, in systems with O(3) symmetry considered here, all possible orders are characterized by the total angular momentum J = L + S. As was shown in Refs. Next, we restrict the effective interaction (30) to the Cooper channel with the zero total momentum by keeping terms with k = -k only. Focusing on the states near the Fermi surface, |k| ≈ |k | ≈ |k + q| ≈ |k -q| ≈ k F , it is straightforward to decompose Eq. ( where coefficients a T n are listed in Table Up to order J = 1, only two channels are attractive and lead to a superconducting instability: the scalar F0 with a T 0 = 1 and the vector F j 2 with a T 2 = 1/2. We thus conclude that pairing in the s-wave channel is the most dominant superconducting instability. The transition temperature T c (for a given n) can be estimated from Eq. ( In case of the most attractive s-wave channel, it takes form where ) is the density of states at the Fermi energy per one spin projection per one Dirac node, with all quantities entering it taken at the RG scale l r . We emphasize that the upper cutoff in Eq. ( The parameters k F , c T 0 , and ω T 0 in this equation are the original (UV) values of the Fermi momentum, phonon velocity, and phonon mass, respectively, while β * is renormalized according to Eq. ( In particular, k F is related to the total electron density n 0 and the number of Dirac nodes N as k F = (3π 2 n 0 /N ) 1/3 . We see that the proximity to the ferroelectric critical point leads to a significant enhancement of T c . To emphasize this point, we rewrite Eq. ( where T 0 β 0 is the estimate for a transition temperature that we would obtain without taking into account the critical nature of the ferroelectric fluctuations. We see that, even within the weakcoupling approximation β 0 ln(Λ 0 /Λ r ) 1, we obtain huge enhancement of the transition temperature by a factor of (1/r 0 ) δ due to the renormalization of the coupling β. This result is to some extent similar to the enhancement of T c by the critical nematic fluctuations obtained in Ref. We see from Eq. ( Finally, we estimate the temperature that would correspond to a transition into the p-wave superconducting state T cp : ) An additional factor of 3/2 in the exponent appears due to the averaging over the directions of vector k in Eq. Our analysis of superconductivity in covalent crystals is similar to the ionic case. There are, however, two important differences. First, the longitudinal phonon mode also becomes soft at a ferroelectric transition, and, consequently, there will be an additional contribution to the effective electron-electron interaction mediated by a longitudinal mode. Second, the Coulomb repulsion is not screened by the lattice polarization, but only by the interband transitions. Consequently, as we showed in Sec. IV B, the correspondent coupling constants β and α are marginally irrelevant, see Eqs. The effective electron-electron interaction due to longitudinal phonons projected onto the Fermi level has the same form as Eq. ( where β * is given by (see Eq. ( and, again, we used the notation k ≡ k/k. The decomposition into the pairing channels has form similar to Eq. ( and coefficients a L n are listed in Table To demonstrate how the Coulomb repulsion may result in the p-wave superconductivity, we generalize our analysis for the case of a finite Dirac mass m in Eq. ( In case of a finite mass, the eigenvectors in the MCBB where we only consider states at the Fermi surface, |k| = k F , and defined The effect of a finite mass on the phonon-mediated part of the interaction is rather simple: It results in the extra prefactor v 2 F k 2 F /ε 2 F in Eqs. ( and analogously for all coefficients a L n in Eq. ( F . The decomposition of the Coulomb repulsion is more subtle. Because of its long-range nature, the momentum dependence of the interaction must also be taken into account. Taking the simple Thomas-Fermi approximation and projecting onto the MCBB, we find: where q 2 T F = 8πN α * νv F is the square of the Thomas-Fermi wavevector, and α * is given by Again, all quantities entering q T F here are taken at the RG scale l r . Focusing on the states at the Fermi surface only, we decompose the Coulomb interaction (42) into the pairing channels: where the ellipsis stands for the terms with J > 1 which we neglect here. The expression for functions f n (x) are rather cumbersome and presented in Appendix E. Summing up contributions from the transverse and longitudinal phonon modes, Eqs. ( where coefficients a T n and a L n are presented in Table In general, functions f n (x) have rather complicated form. However, to demonstrate how the p-wave superconductivity may appear, it is sufficient to consider the limit of a very low density, Assuming further that α * is not too small, we find It is clear from the above expression that, as long as α * ε F v F k F , the s-wave channel is much more suppressed by the Coulomb repulsion than the p-wave channel, f 0 f 1,2 . We further assume that the coupling constants β * and β * are renormalized significantly enough, such that β * ∼ 1 and β * ≈ 0. It means that the system is on the verge of entering the strong-coupling regime, while the contribution from the interaction mediated by the longitudinal phonons can be neglected. Then, the ratio between the phonon-mediated attraction and the Coulomb repulsion in the s-wave channel can be rudely estimated as We see that, because of the small factor v F k F /ε F 1, the Coulomb repulsion significantly exceeds the attraction due to phonons, thus completely suppressing superconductivity in this channel. On the other hand, the analogous estimate for the vector-type p-wave pairing channel F i 2 , which, according to Table where we explicitly restored the argument l r . We see that, unlike the s-wave, the above expression does not have the smallness v F k F /ε F . Consequently, assuming that α * , β * ∼ 1, the ratio (48) can be of the order of 1 provided the smallness k F (l r )/Λ 0 = k F /Λ r ∼ k F c T 0 /ω T 0 is compensated by a large numerical prefactor and a large number of Dirac cones N . The prerequisites for the p-wave superconductivity in the described above scenario impose a lot of constraints on the parameters entering the problem. It is important to note that the spin-orbit effects are suppressed in the limit v F (the dispersion becomes effectively Schrödinger-like), which results in the small prefactor v 2 F k 2 F /ε 2 F in the effective interactions We have studied the ferroelectric quantum critical point in three-dimensional low-density Dirac materials. We derived a general low-energy effective field theory that includes the interaction between soft phonon modes and electrons, as well as Coulomb repulsion. We showed that the dominant interaction between electrons is mediated by the transverse phonon mode, while the Coulomb repulsion is screened by the lattice. Using RG analysis, we demonstrated that the effective low-energy theory flows to a regime with strong electron-phonon coupling. For comparison, we performed similar analysis for covalent crystals, where the "ferroelectric" transition implies the breaking of inversion symmetry of the lattice without generating an electrical polarization. While the main results in this case are qualitatively the same, the screening of the Coulomb repulsion is much weaker in covalent crystals because of the lack of lattice polarization. We further demonstrated that the proximity to the FE critical point significantly enhances superconductivity. Finally, we showed how the interplay between phonon-mediated attraction and Coulomb repulsion in covalent crystals can, in principle, lead to p-wave superconductivity. It is interesting that the problem of a Dirac semimetal undergoing a ferroelectric transition generically flows to strong coupling even in the absence of a finite Fermi surface. This problem can be addressed using the determinental quantum Monte Carlo method, since it does not suffer from a sign problem. It will be informative to study the fate of the system in the strong coupling limit; for example, whether the superconducting transition survives, or it is destroyed by strong critical fluctuations. We also expect that the strong-coupling regime close to the critical point will have experimental consequences. For example, high-accuracy measurements of the phonon dispersion may reveal a 2k F Kohn anomaly. Furthermore, strong coupling will significantly enhance electron scattering, leading to a strong temperature-dependent resistivity. Considering our results in a broader context, we expect this mechanism to be relevant to all low-density superconductors that possess a near crossing of conduction and valence bands. As explained in the introduction, this feature applies to almost all low-density superconductors, including bismuth, YPtBi, PbTe, SnTe, Sr x Bi 2 Se 3 , Ge and Sr 3-x SnO. Of particular interest is the quadratic-band-touching semimetal YPtBi, where a similar RG analysis can lead to nontrivial fixed points. Finally, we suggest that the mechanism considered in this work may be relevant to the high-T c low-density superconductor FeSe, which also possesses a Dirac-like dispersion close to the M -points in the Brillouin zone. Note that the one-loop ∼ e 3 vertex correction vanishes in case of the instantaneous Coulomb interaction. Phonon interaction vertex correction-Finally, the four-phonon vertex is renormalized by the phonon bubble diagrams and by the fermion box diagram. Over all, we find that the correction is given by Appendix B: RG equations for ionic crystals (Q = 0) As explained in Section IV A, in the ionic case the, dipolar interactions between lattice distortions generate a big mass ω L for longitudinal phonons, which effectively screen the Coulomb repulsion between electrons. As a result, the Coulomb interaction and longitudinal phonons become irrelevant for our renormalization group study. Thus, the RG equations for the ionic case can be easily derived from the calculations in Appendix A by setting e = 0 and c L → ∞. This procedure leads to the following RG equations where λ z is the coupling to a distortion along the line and λ is the coupling transverse to it. The RG procedure described in Sec. IV can still be performed analytically, although the expressions become rather lengthy. We also have two additional dimensionless parameters v z /v F and λ z /λ that flow under RG. The crucial point is that the main result of this paper, the flow of β towards strong coupling, remains unchanged. To demonstrate this point, we plot the β-function for β in the anisotropic case normalized by the β-function for isotropic case, Eq. ( 