By measuring point-contact Andreev reflection (PCAR) spectra in the newly discovered chromium-based quasi-one-dimensional superconductor RbCr3As3, we find clear evidence of two superconducting components, i.e., one having a gap value of about 1.8 meV and another with a gap value of about 5 meV. Since the current injection may have components in both the direction parallel and perpendicular to the [( In materials containing 3d transition-metal elements, many new superconductors have been discovered and some of them show the unconventional superconductivity. The latter is argued to have a close relationship with the strong correlation effect of electrons in the 3d orbitals. For the compounds containing 3d transition metal chromium, superconductivity was first observed in the binary CrAs under pressure with a transition temperature T c ≈ 2 K Clearly, the newly discovered Cr-based superconductors provide a new platform to research on the superconductivity related to the pairing of 3d electrons. The band structure calculations of A 2 Cr 3 As 3 reveal three sets of Fermi surfaces (FSs) which are mainly contributed by 3d orbitals of chromium. The FSs consist of two flat ones from quasi-1D α and β-bands as well as a threedimensional (3D) one from 3D γ-band Up to now many experimental results suggest unconventional superconductivity in A 2 Cr 3 As 3 . The very large upper critical field H c2 exceeding the Pauli limit may suggest a strong and unconventional pairing mechanism The ACr 3 As 3 family has half amount of the alkali metal atoms comparing to the A 2 Cr 3 As 3 family, and the space groups for these two families are different Andreev reflection and single-particle tunneling measurements are very useful and combinatorial to detect the superconducting gap. In this work, we will present a detailed study of the superconducting gap structure on the RbCr 3 As 3 single crystals by using the point-contact Andreev reflection (PCAR) and scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/STS) measurements. The results show the existence of two superconducting components. The large gap has the value of about 5 meV, and shows only on the Andreev reflection spectra; while the smaller one with the value of about 1.8 meV can be observed both on the Andreev reflection and the STS measurements. We suggest that the smaller gap is highly anisotropic or even nodal based on the fittings to the STS data. The RbCr 3 As 3 single crystals were grown by the deintercalation process of Rb + ions from Rb 2 Cr 3 As 3 precursors The needle-like single crystals are loosely assembled to form a bundle, and there is large separation between these needles; hence a direct measurement of the crosssectional size of a bundle-like sample induces a very large error for determining the resistivity. In order to make a more elegant resistivity measurement, we separate a needle-like single crystal from a bundle of samples. The electrical resistivity was measured in a physical property measurement system (PPMS-9, Quantum Design) by using the standard four-probe method, and the current is applied along the c-axis of the sample. The widths and the thicknesses of the samples are detected by scanning electron microscope (SEM, Phenom ProX), and the typical values are from 3 to 7 μm for these samples. Figure The samples for PCAR or STS measurements are also divided from a bundle of single crystals, and the typical sizes of selected samples are 300-500 μm in length and about several micrometers in width. For the PCAR measurements, the point contact was constructed by sticking a thin gold wire with the diameter of 16 μm to the sample by using a tiny bit of silver paste (DuPont, 4929N), and a typical configuration is shown in the inset of Fig. The STS measurements were carried out in an ultrahigh vacuum, low-temperature and high-magnetic field scanning tunneling microscope (USM-1300, Unisoku Co., Ltd.). We made the STS tip by a separate RbCr 3 As 3 single crystal in the following steps. We first found a very thin wire of the sample by tweezers, and then cut off one end to get a relatively fresh terminal for the STS tip. Afterwards, we used the silver paste to glue most part of the sample on a Pt/Ir tip, and made the newly-cut prominent end face towards a flat Au(111) single-crystal flake sample (purity 99.999%). The single-particle tunneling spectra were recorded between the needle-like sample tip and the Au single crystal in an ultra-high vacuum chamber with a base pressure of about 1 × 10 -10 torr. The direction of injecting current is mainly along the [(Cr 3 As 3 ) -] ∞ -chains or c-axis of the sample for the STS measurements. The setpoint condition for the spectrum measurements is I set = 50 pA and V set = 10 mV, and the ac modulation is 0.5 mV with the frequency of 871.773 Hz. Figure The differential conductance at zero-bias is about 1.45 times larger than the value of the high-energy normalstate background for the normalized spectrum at 3 K, which suggests that the barrier height of the junction is small and the contact is closer to the Andreev reflection (normal metal/superconductor, NS) limit instead of the tunneling (normal metal/insulator/superconductor, NIS) limit. In order to get in-depth understanding of superconducting gaps from the PCAR spectra, we fit the data with the Blonder-Tinkham-Klapwijk (BTK) theory where f (E, T ) is the Fermi distribution function, and A(E) and B(E) represent the contributions from the Andreev reflection and normal reflection, respectively. Then the PCAR spectra can be described by the superconducting gap ∆, the junction barrier height Z, the broadening factor Γ, and temperature T Here w 1 is the weight for the smaller gap, and G 1 and G 2 are the normalized differential conductances originated from different bands with smaller and larger superconducting gaps, respectively. The BTK fitting results by different kinds of superconducting gaps are shown in Fig. BTK theory can only describe the spectra measured on the contacts in the ballistic regime, and we thus check the status of the contact junction. The residual residual resistivity ρ(8 K) ≈ 259 μΩ•cm in RbCr 3 As 3 . If we take a simplified model of a spherical Fermi surface with average Fermi momentum k F = 0.5π/a 0 We have two more arguments to address the reason that the point-contact junction is not in the thermal regime. Firstly, the differential conductivity increases with increasing of the bias voltage in high bias-voltage range as shown in Fig. From the reasons mentioned above, we conclude that the contact is not in the thermal region, and we can get the correct gap information from the measured PCAR spectra. The above-mentioned Andreev reflection results show two-superconducting-gap feature clearly. However, we can not judge whether the smaller gap is nodal or nodeless from the PCAR data and fitting results presented above. We then do the further measurements by STS at temperature as low as 400 mK. The needle-like sample, which was attached the end of the Pt/Ir tip, was used as the tip for the STS measurements. The tunneling spectra were taken between the sample and a flat gold flake as illustrated by the schematic figure in the inset of Fig. The STS data show the clear existence of the superconducting gap with the gap value from 1.46 to 1.97 meV which is consistent with the smaller gap values from the PCAR measurements. However, the normalized zerobias conductance ranging from about 0.24 to 0.6 makes it difficult to determine the precise gap function of this gap. The finite zero-bias conductance may be attributed to the impurity scattering effect for a nodal superconductor. Of course the finite zero-bias conductance can also be induced by the imperfection of the tip and a large scattering effect is inevitable. Although the origin for the zero-bias conductance is unclear yet, we confidently conclude that the gap anisotropy is necessary for the fitting procedure. In order to determine the coupling strength, we need to evaluate the gap ratio 2∆/k B T c . For the anisotropic or nodal gap, it is better to use the average gap value to calculate the gap ratio. Thus we use the formula ∆ 2 = 1 2π 2π 0 ∆ 2 (θ)dθ to calculate the average gap ∆. All the obtained average gap values are plotted in Fig. From the PCAR data, the weight of the larger gap w 2 is about (25 ± 5)% from the fitting procedure, but this weight seems to be negligible for the STS spectra. The possible reason for this result may be related to the different configurations for two kinds of measurements. As shown in Fig. In summary, we observe clear two-gap feature from PCAR measurements in RbCr 3 As 3 . The gap values yielded from the fitting to the PCAR spectra are about 1.8 and 5 meV. The larger gap may be nodeless. In the STS measurement by using the needle-like sample RbCr 3 As 3 as the tip, we see however only one gap with the value comparable with that of the smaller gap yielded from the PCAR measurements. The smaller gap may be highly anisotropic or even with gap node(s) inferred from STS measurements and related fitting. The absence of the larger gap in the STS measurements may be explained as that the injecting current is mainly along the k z direction. The large ratio of 2∆/k B T c suggests the unconventional superconductivity in this material.