The superconducting behavior of the topological semimetal CaSn 3 was investigated by means of magnetotransport and muon spectroscopy (μSR) measurements, both providing strong evidence of nematic behavior. Magnetotransport detects an anisotropic upper critical field, characterized by a twofold symmetry about C 4 axis, thus breaking the rotational symmetry of the underlying cubic lattice. Transverse-field μSR data support such picture, with the muon depolarization rate depending strongly on the magnetic field direction, here applied along the [110] or [001] crystal directions. In the former case, the absence of any additional muon depolarization suggests an unconventional vortex lattice. In the latter case, a vortex lattice encompassing a sample volume of at least 52% indicates the bulk nature of CaSn 3 superconductivity. The resulting superfluid density in the ( Topological superconductors (TSCs), hosting Majorana fermions on their boundary, have attracted considerable attention due to their potential use in quantum computing Thanks to the presence of a strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC), the doped Bi-based topological insulator system M x Bi 2 Se 3 (M = Cu, Sr, Nb) is among the most extensively studied TSC candidate materials Recent experimental observations, however, support the unconventional pairing state associated with topological superconductivity. Several bulk probes, including nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) group O h [Fig. Here, we report on a detailed study of the superconducting state of the topological semimetal CaSn 3 . The measured upper critical fields H c2 show a remarkable twofold anisotropy around a C 4 axis (in a crystal structure with point group O h ). Such twofold anisotropy in the SC state cannot be attributed to an anisotropic effective mass, nor to flux-flow depinning due to the Lorentz force. Together with the peculiar temperature dependence of H c2 , the observation of spontaneous rotational symmetry breaking in the superconducting state for CaSn 3 clearly evidences the realization of nematic superconductivity. Muon-spin relaxation and rotation (μSR) measurements indicate a nodeless superconducting pairing state without time-reversal-symmetry breaking. Moreover, μSR measurements in magnetic fields applied along two mutually orthogonal crystal directions evidence very different electron behaviors, thus supporting nematic superconductivity in CaSn 3 . Along with a previous study, which confirms an odd number of TRIM enclosed by the Fermi surfaces of CaSn 3 , our results sug-gest that CaSn 3 is a promising nematic superconductor candidate. Single crystals of CaSn 3 were grown using Sn self flux. The starting materials with a ratio of Ca:Sn = 1:9 were placed in an alumina crucible and sealed in a quartz tube. The quartz ampoule was heated up to 800 • C, kept for 24 hours, and cooled slowly down to 300 • C at a rate of 2 • C/h, where the excess of molten Sn was decanted by centrifugation. Powder x-ray diffraction (XRD) results, shown in Fig. The μSR measurements were performed at the Dolly spectrometer (πE1 beamline) of the Swiss Muon Source at the Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland. Experiments down to 0.27 K were carried out by using a 3 He cryostat. A mosaic of CaSn 3 single crystals was glued on a specially manufactured Ag sample holder. The full experimental details are reported in App. A. The incident muon momentum was parallel to the crystal [110] direction with the external magnetic field H applied parallel (μ 0 H = 0) or orthogonal (μ 0 H ⊥ = 0) to the [110] direction. The obtained results confirm that no degradation occurred to the investigated samples (see App. B). Upon lowering the temperature, the resistivity of CaSn 3 shows a metallic behavior, followed by a sharp superconducting transition at T c = 4.15 K, close to the previously reported value (Figs. Despite a previous study We performed detailed angle-dependent magnetoresistance measurements at different magnetic fields on a set of CaSn 3 single crystals. Figure [001] and the applied magnetic field H. Since the AuCu 3 -type cubic structure with the point group O h has a four-fold rotational symmetry about the 〈100〉-axes, i.e., the C 4 axes, we expect a four-fold modulation of the physical quantities, including here the upper critical field. However, the experimental data at μ 0 H = 0.4 T clearly show only a twofold anisotropy. It is worth noting that no distinct anisotropy of ρ(θ ) is observed in the normal state at T = 3.34 K, instead, it manifests itself only below T c (0.4 T). For instance, while being resistive at θ = 0 indicating that H c2 at θ = ±90 • is notably higher than that at θ = 0 • . The spontaneous rotational symmetry breaking is even more evident in the polar plot of ρ(θ ) shown in Fig. First of all, in the framework of the anisotropic Ginzburg-Landau (GL) model, the angular behavior of H c2 reflects the anisotropy of the effective mass. In this case, the angular dependence of the upper critical field is described by: where the anisotropy ratio Γ is given by Γ = H c2 (90 Here m 001 and m 010 are the effective masses for the energy dispersion along the [001] and [010] directions, respectively. The extracted Γ from a fit to the measured angular variation of H c2 (θ ) is 1.17, yielding an unusually large mass FIG. anisotropy of Γ 2 = m 001 /m 010 ∼ 1.36 (Fig. Last but not least, the unusual H c2 angular behavior could, in principle, originate from the lowering of the crystallographic symmetry due to a low-temperature structural phase transition. However, we did not observe any discernible anomaly -normally associated with such phase transitions -either in the temperature dependence of resistivity (Fig. Once the GL anisotropic model and the flux-flow scenario are excluded, we can attribute the unexpected rotational symmetry breaking in the superconducting state of CaSn 3 to an unconventional pairing symmetry. Indeed, a very similar spontaneous rotational symmetry breaking in the superconducting state, or nematic superconductivity, was previously observed in M x Bi 2 Se 3 (a putative TSC) via field-angle-resolved resistivity In CaSn 3 , in addition to the nematic behavior, the peculiar temperature dependence of H c2 supports the realization of unconventional superconducting pairing. Regardless of the applied-field configuration, H I or H ⊥ I, the H c2 of CaSn 3 extracted from the midpoints of resistive transitions (Figs. , where α is 0.69 in the dirty limit and 0.73 in the clean-limit superconductors (Fig. [010] ⊥ I) correspond to α ∼ 0.85, independent of θ , substantially exceeding the orbital limit for clean superconductors α = 0.73 (Fig. ). The good agreement between Finally, it is important to note that upon rotating the magnetic field in the C 4 plane perpendicular to the applied current (φ rotation, from [100] to [010]), we observe no traces of twofold anisotropy: H c2 (φ = 0 • ) [100] fully overlaps with H c2 (φ = 90 • ) [010], as shown in Fig. We performed two kind of experiments, (i) zero-field muon spectroscopy (ZF-μSR) and (ii) transverse-field muon spectroscopy (TF-μSR) measurements. As to the former, we searched for the presence of possible tiny local magnetic fields, typical of, e.g., superconductors with spin-triplet pairing, as observed in Sr 2 RuO 4 We performed TF-μSR measurements following both standard field-cooling (FC) and nonstandard zero-field cooling (ZFC) protocols. The latter was used to evaluate the superconducting volume fraction. To this aim, after cooling down to 0.27 K in ZFC mode, we applied a magnetic field μ 0 H ⊥ = 14 mT along the [001] direction, orthogonal to the incident muon spin S μ (see App. A). The ZFC protocol produces rather inhomogeneous local magnetic fields at the implanted muon sites, reflecting an artificially disordered vortex lattice in the SC state. In turn, the disordered vortex lattice causes a much higher muon-spin depolarization rate (Fig. Here, f sc = 1 -f tail is the volume fraction of those muons probing the vortex state and, hence, it represents the superconducting fraction. f tail is the fraction of muons implanted in the silver sample-holder (and in the non superconducting part of the sample), γ μ /2π = 135.53 MHz/T is the muon gyromagnetic ratio, B μ and B tail are the magnetic fields probed by muons implanted in the sample and in the silver plate, φ is the initial phase. σ n and σ sc are the Gaussian depolarization rates in the normal and superconducting state, respectively. σ n is due to the static nuclear dipolar fields and it is negligibly small in this compound. Note that, in our case, σ n cannot be distinguished from the Lorentzian relaxation rate in silver. Therefore, it was fixed to zero and an eventual nuclear dipolar contribution was accounted for by the relaxation rate of muons implanted in the silver sample holder, Λ. Such parameter was obtained by fitting the data at 5 K. The resulting value, Λ = 0.005(2) μs -1 , was kept fixed in all the subsequent fit iterations. At the same time, the amplitude of the long-time tail of the ZFC TF-μSR at 0.27 K (Fig. with Φ 0 the magnetic flux quantum. Since the magnetic field is applied along the [001] direction, Eq. ( The normalized superfluid density n s (T )/n s (T min ) of CaSn 3 is shown in Fig. where ∆(0) is the energy gap at zero temperature, while its temperature dependence is assumed to be ∆(T )/∆(0) = tanh 1.82[1.018(T c /T -1)] 0.51 To verify if the breakdown of rotational symmetry in CaSn 3 , observed via transport measurements through the twofold anisotropy of H c2 , is reflected also in its magnetic properties, we performed TF-μSR measurements by applying the magnetic field of μ 0 H = 30 mT in the [110] direction. Such field value is clearly in the H c1 < H < H c2 range, as shown by our H c2 measurements and by data from Ref. Angle-resolved magnetotransport measurements in CaSn 3 show that its H c2 exhibits a twofold symmetry about a C 4 axis, an anisotropic behavior that breaks the rotational symmetry of the underlying crystal lattice. We ascribe this twofold anisotropy to a nematic director oriented along a crystallographic axis, as e.g., First, it is particularly relevant to mention the highly unusual mixed state of Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 , as evidenced by STM measurements Secondly, we find a mismatch between the carrier densities in the superconducting-n s and in the normal state n n of CaSn 3 . Our recent de Haas-van Alphen (dHvA) measurements provide an effective mass m * = 0.18m e and a carrier density n n = 9.3 × 10 20 cm -3 for the predominant hole band located at the Γ point Finally, we briefly comment on the possible superconducting order parameter realized in CaSn 3 . By using group-theory classifications, we can determine possible pairing symmetries, which induce a spontaneous rotational-symmetry breaking in the superconducting state of CaSn 3 . By discarding unlikely pairing states higher than the f -wave, we consider the irreducible representations of the O h group. Then, as shown in Table I (see also Ref. In conclusion, we investigated the magnetotransport and magnetic properties of the superconducting topological semimetal CaSn 3 . We observe an unusual twofold symmetry of H c2 about a fourfold symmetric axis and an anomalous temperature dependence of the upper critical field, both suggestive of unconventional pairing. μSR measurements confirm the breaking of the rotational symmetry also with respect to magnetic properties, indicative of the realization of nematic superconductivity. Since ZF-μSR evidences a preserved timereversal symmetry, while TF-μSR reveals a fully-gapped superconducting state, we can restrict a possible superconducting order parameter in CaSn 3 to the d-vector d(k) = 2ẑk z -x k x -ŷ k y . Overall, our results suggest that the cubic CaSn 3 system fulfills one of the proposed criteria for topological superconductivity. A theoretical study addressing in full details the superconducting state emerging in CaSn 3 is planned for the next future. peaks, one at zero field (the superconducting fraction) and one at the thermodynamic critical field corresponding to the current temperature (the normal domains). However, as shown in Fig. h . Gap function ψ(k)/d-vector d(k)