This paper extends the deep material network (DMN) proposed by Modern material systems with properly designed microstructures offer new material engineering avenues for producing advantageous mechanical properties and functionalities in various applications. In aerospace and automotive industries, carbon fiber reinforced polymer (CFRP) composites have become attractive alternatives of metal materials due to their high strength/weight ratio induced by the interplay between carbon fibers and epoxy matrix The multiscale nature of heterogeneous materials poses limitations on single-scale empirical models, which lose the sight of microstructural interactions. They tend to fail in attempting to capture nonlinear or anisotropic responses, and may require burdensome calibration to find the model parameters. As a result, homogenization based on the concept of representative volume element (RVE) In the past decade, a plethora of data-driven material modeling methods have been proposed based on existing machine learning techniques. Depending on the type of training data in the offline stage, we classify these methods mainly into macroscopic and microscopic approaches. In macroscopic approaches, the stressstrain relations, or strain energy density functions, are directly fitted by regression methods, like deep neural network (DNN) We recently proposed a novel data-driven material modeling method called "deep material network" (DMN) This paper adds an important piece to the DMN framework to treat general 3-dimensional (3D) problems with both material and geometric nonlinearities. The global framework of DMN, including the offline and online stages, is introduced in Section 2. Theories of the 3D mechanistic building block are derived in Section 3. We apply the DMN to three representative multiscale material systems in Section 4, including the particle-reinforced rubber composite, polycrystalline materials and CFRP composites. Moreover, a three-scale homogenization procedure of CFRP material system is accomplished by simple concatenation of microscale and mesoscale material networks. We provide the computational cost of DMN in the offline and online stages in Section 5, and further discuss its efficiency comparing to DNS and reference FE models. Concluding remarks are given in Section 6. The global framework of deep material network is presented in Figure Mechanistic machine learning. Once the training dataset is collected, it can be evaluated by machine learning algorithms to train the parameters in DMN. As shown in Figure Microstructural database. The trained DMN discovers a reduced topological representation of the original full-field RVE with fewer DOFs. Based on the mechanistic building block with embedded physics, it can be extrapolated to unknown materials and loading paths outside the original linear elastic sampling space, without violating any physical law in the homogenization. By virtue of its unique capability of extrapolation, DMN creates a so-called "microstructural database", which has the potential to drive high-fidelity concurrent multiscale simulations. Its intrinsically parameterized structure also provides a mechanistic understanding of structure-property relations and enables material design across length scales. Output: We propose to use a collection of connected mechanistic building blocks to represent the RVE model. As shown in Figure Physics of building blocks Other than the binary-tree network structure, another key ingredient of DMN is the use of mechanistic building blocks. The rule of a building block is similar to the one of "neurons" in artificial neural network, however, the transformation functions in the building block are derived based on the analytical solutions of mechanistic structures with physical meanings. Generally speaking, each building block contains one homogenization operation and one rotation operation. As will be shown in Section 3, the building block is proposed as a 3D two-layer structure, which is probably the simplest form of a heterogeneous composite. The material phases interact through the interface between the two layers. The effect of phase fraction is captured by the homogenization operation, which is related to the fitting parameter z. To increase the flexibility of the DMN representation, the rotation operation. controlled by the fitting parameters (α, β, γ), is introduced to vary the global orientation of the block. Our hypothesis is that the original 3D RVE can be represented by patterns of the two-layer structures with unknown phase fractions and block orientations. At layer i, the k-th building block is denoted as B k i . We use C to represent a stiffness matrix before the rotation operation, and the one after rotation is denoted by C. Mechanical data flow. Inputs and outputs of current DMN models are all mechanical data, such as stiffness matrix and residual stress. In particular, a material network in the offline stage takes the stiffness matrices of microscale phases as the inputs and output the overall RVE stiffness matrix Crve . Illustrations of how the stiffness matrices propagate from the input layer to the output layer are depicted in Figure At the end of forward propagation, the output of DMN is obtained as Crve = C1 1 . (2. 2) The framework can be generalized to single-phase or multi-phase materials. For a RVE with one single material phase, like the polycrystalline RVE that will be investigated in Section 4.2, the whole framework of DMN does not need to be altered, except that all the bottom-layer nodes in the network receive the same stiffness matrix C p1 . Extensions to RVE problems with more than two material phases are also possible, such as redesigning the network structure to let each node take more child nodes, or introducing advanced schemes of assigning multiple material phases to the bottom layer without changing binary-tree structure. Nevertheless, we will focus on single-phase and two-phase RVEs in this paper. In addition, to consider both material and geometric nonlinearities in the online stage, we also need to add the residual stress to the mechanical data flow, as will be discussed in Section 2.4. Geometric data flow. As shown in Figure where a is the ReLU activation function and z is called the "activation". It should be noted that once a unit is deactivated (z j < 0), the unit will never be activated again during the training process due to its vanishing gradient (a (z j ) = 0). This feature is helpful for automatically simplifying the material network and increasing the training speed. Without losing the physical meaning of w, weights of two child nodes are summed up and passed to their parent node. From Layer i + 1 to i, we have By performing the summation recursively, any weight w k i can be expressed as a summation of weights of its descendant nodes at the bottom layer N , a(z j ). (2.5) The activations z j determine all the weights in the network, hence, they are chosen as the independent fitting parameters in DMN. Additionally, the partial derivative of w k i with respect to z j can be written as where the operator rounds a number to the next larger integer. Let us zoom into the building block B k i appeared in the offline stage. As illustrated in Figure Fitting parameters z j=1,2,...,2 N -1 , α k=1,2,...,2 i-1 i=1,...,N , β k=1,2,...,2 i-1 i=1,2,...,N , γ k=1,2,...,2 i-1 i=1,2,...,N ). (2.7) Similarly, the overall function of DMN for a single-phase RVE becomes , γ k=1,2,...,2 i-1 i=1,2,...,N ). ( For a network with depth N , there are totally (7 × 2 N -1 -3) fitting parameters for a 3D problem. However, the actual number of active fitting parameters will be diminished on the fly during the training process due to nodal deactivation and model compression. Cost function. A cost function based on the mean square error (MSE) and a regularization term for a two-phase RVE, (2.10) or for a single-phase RVE. (2.11) Here s is the index of sample (or data point), and N s is the total number of training samples. In Eq. (2.10) and (2.11) , the error function is normalized by the squared norm of Cdns s to remove the scaling effect. The operator ||...|| denotes the Frobenius matrix norm. The regularization term, scaled by a positive hyper-parameter λ, is introduced to make the optimization problem well-posed. Although λ will not alter the optimum fitting parameters, in practice, it should be set appropriately to expedite the gradient descent algorithm in the training process. Design of experiments As mentioned in Section 2.1, the training and test datasets can be generated through high-fidelity DNS of an RVE (e.g. FEM and FFT-based methods). Since the input and output stiffness matrices for DMN can also be measured from experiments, it is also promising to incorporate both numerical and experimental data in the training dataset following the same format. When generating the input data, the components in the compliance matrices D p1 and D p2 are first sampled through design of experiments, and then inverted to give the stiffness matrices. In general, an anisotropic compliance matrix should be used in order to uniquely determine the material orientation for the bottom-layer nodes. However, we consider both material phases to be orthotropically elastic to reduce the dimension of the sampling space and ease the data generation process. Since the material models used in the online stage have orthotropic symmetry, the non-uniqueness of orientations will not affect the predicted results. In Mandel notation, the components in D p1 and D p2 are (2.12) To initiate material anisotropy, the tension moduli of phase i are first randomly assigned as where U stands for uniform distribution. The moduli of each material phase will be rescaled to create overall phase contrasts, and the rescaling factor Ēpi are sampled as Note that the rescaling factor of phase 1 is kept as constant to remove the scaling effect of RVE. We can then update the tension moduli of each phase After the tension moduli are determined, the shear moduli are sampled as To guarantee the compliance matrices are positive definite, the Poisson's ratios are sampled as DoE based on the Monte Carlo sampling is performed to explore the input space. For each material system, we generate 500 DNS samples. The first 400 samples are selected as the training dataset, and the remaining 100 samples become the test dataset. The size of the test set is selected to be large enough so that the distribution of test error is sampled adequately. Ideally, It is always better to increase the size of the training set for covering more possible cases, however, this will put more loads on the data generation process using DNS. In our study, the number of training samples is determined when the average test error (of a trained model) asymptotes sufficiently close to the average training error As an example, we demonstrate the distributions of training and test samples for the particle-reinforced RVE in Figure (2.17) Similar to 2D DMN (2.18) However, due to the use of orthotropic material in the offline training data, the similarity condition between two arbitrary rotation matrices R 1 and R 2 at the bottom layer is relaxed: All the eigenvalues ) where tol is the tolerance and R(λ i ) denotes the real part of λ i . If two subtrees are found similar to each other, they will be merged to one single branch. Each time before the similarity search and subtree merging, the whole material network will be reordered based on the nodal weights. To save the training time, the model compression operations are performed every 10 epochs in our study. The online stage is intended to extrapolate the trained DMN to unknown material and loading spaces. Each active node in the bottom layer is treated as an independent material point, with its own loading path and internal variables (if any). For a general finite-strain problem, we will choose the deformation gradient F and the first Piola-Kirchhoff stress P as the strain and stress measures (see Section 3.2 for more details). With both material and geometric nonlinearities taken into account, the mechanical data now contains two parts: The tangent stiffness matrix A and the residual stress δP. As presented in Figure At the start of each iteration, the increment of deformation gradient ∆F j N is prescribed on each active node in the bottom layer N , and the values of Āj N and δ Pj N are obtained by evaluating the local constitutive law. Then the data of stiffness matrix and residual stress are feed forward to the top layer through the homogenization and rotation functions at each building block. The overall Ārve and δ Prve of the RVE are obtained as the results of one forward homogenization process. Given the macroscopic loading condition, we can then compute the overall increments of deformation gradient ∆ Frve and stress ∆ Prve . In the dehomogenization process, the increments of deformation gradients and stress are feed backward from the top layer to the bottom layer, using the stress-strain relations at each building block. Finally, we return to the bottom layer with the new increment of deformation ∆F j(new) N at each active node. The convergence condition is evaluated by checking the relative difference between ∆F j N and ∆F j(new) N . If convergence is not yet achieved, ∆F j N will be updated by ∆F and used for the next iteration. Upon convergence, the internal variables at each active node in the bottom layer will be updated, and the analysis moves on to the next loading step. An important feature of DMN is that the total number of operations in one Newton's iteration is proportional to the number of active nodes in the bottom layer, and we will study the computational cost of DMN for various 3D RVE problems in Section 5. Another interesting feature of DMN is that different networks can be easily concatenated to simulate a material system with more than two scales, and the new integrated network can be solved in the online stage without altering the algorithms. In Section 4.3, as an example, we will demonstrate a three-scale nonlinear homogenization of CFRP system by attaching networks of the microscale unidirectional fiber composite to the bottom-layer nodes in a network of the mesoscale woven composite. The theory of 3D building block is first discussed under small-strain assumption, which is mainly used in the offline training stage. The stress and strain measures are the Cauchy stress σ and the infinitesimal strain ε , and they are related by a fourth-order stiffness tensor C . The overall stress-strain relation of the building block can be expressed as σ = C : ε . For a building block with two materials 1 and 2, we have Here a bar is placed above each individual stiffness tensor (e.g. C 1 ) to denote that it is from the averaging of a previous building block in the network. With the weights w 1 and w 2 given, the volume fractions f 1 and f 2 can be computed by In Mandel notation, the stress and strain can be written as where the subscripts 3, 4 and 5 denote the shear directions, and the corresponding stiffness matrix C has 21 independent components. Similar to the building block in 2D and 2) rotation of the whole two-layer structure given by r C , Homogenization function h C . The analytical form of homogenization function h C is derived based on the interfacial equilibrium conditions and the kinematic constraints First, assume an arbitrary overall strain after homogenization Rewrite the kinematic constraints in Eq. (3.8), and apply the averaging equation for strain Utilizing the constitutive law for each material and substituting Eq. (3.10) and (3.11) into the equilibrium condition in Eq. (3.7) yield the following equation for the strain components of material 1, where After solving the linear system, the unknown strain components ε 1 3 , ε 1 4 and ε 1 5 in material 1 can be expressed as a function of the overall strain, Combining Eq. (3.10) and Rewrite the averaging equation of the stress based on the definition of s 1 : Finally, the homogenized stiffness matrix before the rotation operation is obtained: Rotation function r C . Here we use the Tait-Bryan angles (α, β, γ) to parameterize the 3D rotation. Any rotation can be achieved by composing three element rotations, in other words, a rotation matrix R can be decomposed as a product of three element rotation matrices, The expressions of elementary rotation matrices are given in Appendix A. The rotation function r C takes the following form: In practice, the 3D rotation is decomposed into 3 rotation steps, characterized by α, β and γ, More details on computing the gradients for training are provided in Appendix B. In this section, we extend the solutions of two-layer building block from linear elasticity to problems with both material and geometric nonlinearities, as to appear in the online extrapolation stage. Note that the same procedure can be degenerated to problems with only material nonlinearity (e.g. small-strain plasticity) or geometric nonlinearity (e.g. hyperelasticity), so that we will only focus on the general situation. For finite-strain problem, the deformation gradient F and first Piola-Kirchhoff stress P are chosen as the strain and stress measures, respectively. Here, we defined the tangent elasticity tensor A in the rate form as The first elasticity tensor has major symmetry, A ijkl = A klij , but does not have minor symmetries. As a result, Voigt notation can not be applied in this case, instead, we vectorize the deformation gradient and first Piola-Kirchhoff stress in 3D based on all the 9 components in each tensor: Under the above notations, the stiffness matrix A is defined as Due to major symmetry, A is symmetric, and it has 45 independent components. For a general loading step, the stress-strain relation takes the following form, where ∆P and ∆F are the increments of stress and deformation gradient. Due to the existence of nonlinearity, the residual first Piola-Kirchoff stress δP needs to be included in the relation. In the two-layer building block, the constitutive laws of materials 1 and 2 are Again, we place the bar notations above the stiffness matrix and residual stress of each material (e.g. Ā1 , δ P1 ) to keep the fact that these quantities should come from the averaging of previous building blocks in the network. As illustrated in Figure and 2) rotation of the homogenized two-layer structure given by the functions R A and R P , Ā = R A (A, α, β, γ) , δ P = R P (δP, α, β, γ) . (3.28) The intermediate constitutive law right after homogenization can be written as and the overall constitutive law after rotation is Homogenization functions H A and H P . Similar to the linear elastic case discussed in Section 3.1, analytical forms of the homogenization functions H A and H P can be derived based on the equilibrium conditions and the kinematic constraints In the derivation of the stiffness tensor, we first consider the situation with no residual stress and solve for the unknown components of the increment of deformation gradient ∆F 1 of material 1 in the 3, 4, 6 directions. Then the strain concentration tensor S 1 of material 1, defined by ∆F 1 = S 1 ∆F, is found to be where definitions of f 1 and f 2 are given in Eq. (3.3). The homogenization function H A of the stiffness matrix A is derived to be To derive the homogenization function H P for the residual stress δP, we first set the average strain after the homogenization ∆F in Eq. (3.29) to zero: ∆F = 0, so that ∆P = δP. (3.36) With the kinematic constraints defined in Eq. (3.32) and the averaging conditions, we have Substituting the above equations to the equilibrium condition defined in Eq. (3.31) yields After solving for ∆F 1 in material 1, the homogenized residual stress is given by the average stress increment ∆P in the structure, Therefore, the homogenization function H P is derived to be Rotation functions R A and R P . The rotation matrices are also required to be modified under finitestrain notation in Eq. (3.41) The expressions of finite-strain element rotation matrices X f , Y f and Z f are given in Appendix A. With the definition of the rotation matrix R f , the rotation functions can be expressed as and In this paper, we explore the 3D architectures of DMN for three typical multiscale material systems which are popular in both academic research and industrial applications: 1) Particle-reinforced rubber composite with Mullins effect in Section 4.1; 2) polycrystalline materials in Section 4.2; 3) carbon-fiber reinforced polymer (CFRP) composites in Section 4.3. In particular, three scales are considered in the CFRP example, where the corresponding two RVEs are the microscale unidirectional fiber (UD) composite and the mesoscale woven composite. We will first show the DMN training results based upon orthotropic linear elasticity. Then we will extrapolate the trained networks to nonlinear materials, including Mooney-Rivlin hyperelasticity with Mullins effect, isotropic von Mises plasticity and rate-dependent crystal plasticity. In the SGD algorithm, the mini-batch size is chosen to be 20, and there are 20 learning steps in each epoch (for 400 training samples). For all the cases, the coefficient λ is set to 0.001, so that the regularization term will not affect the training at early stage with large MSE, but it will eventually limit the magnitudes of activations when the overall cost J becomes smaller. Here we use N a to denote the number of active nodes in the bottom layer, so that N a ≤ 2 N -1 . Relative errors are computed at the end of training to evaluate the accuracy of DMN. For a sample s, its error e s is defined as The average error of a whole dataset with S samples is The average errors of training and test datasets are denoted by ētr and ēte , respectively. By default, finitestrain formulation with geometric nonlinearity is adopted in the online stages of all the RVEs. The first RVE example is a two-phase particle-reinforced polymer composite. The geometry of the RVE is presented in Figure Histories of average training and test errors are plotted in Figure Treemaps of DMN at the end of training are provided in Figure We start from a Mooney-Rivlin hyperelastic rubber model. To model the rubber as an unconstrained material, a hydrostatic work term scaled by the bulk modulus K is included in the strain energy functional which is function of the relative volume J In order to prevent volumetric work from contributing to the hydrostatic work, the first and second invariants are modified, where I 1 , I 2 , I 3 are the invariants of right Cauchy-Green tensor C = F T F . The independent parameters in the hyperelastic material model are chosen as C 10 , C 01 and Poisson's ratio ν. The shear and bulk moduli can be computed by Mullins effect, a kind of stress softening phenomena, is considered in the matrix rubber material. As the rubber material is loaded, the breakage of links between rubber chains happens at different deformation levels, thereby leading to continuous damage in the macroscale. Note that the Mullins effect will cause dispersed softening in the RVE, rather than localized damage or even discrete cracks. For RVE problems with localizations, the current homogenization scheme based on the first-order Hill-Mandel condition is questionable and needs to be revised where W d is the current value of the deviatoric strain energy density, and W max d is the peak deviatoric strain energy density reached up to this point in time. The damage factor is defined as where erf() denotes the Gauss error function, and η, a, b are the empirical material constants related to the Mullins effect. In addition, the particle phase is modeled as a Neo-Hookean material which is 100 times harder than the matrix phase in terms of C 10 . All the material parameters are provided in Table Another application of the 3D DMN is to evaluate the effective properties of polycrystalline materials, such as Ni-based super-alloy. We used the software package DREAM.3D The polycrystalline RVE can be treated as a single-phase material. In other words, all the grains shares the same material model, but with different orientations. Hence, the DMN in the offline stage takes only one input C p1 as shown in Eq. (2.8), while other parts of the training process remain the same as before. Figure Errors of the RVE with random ODF at the end of training are also provided in Table (a) Random ODF. As the weights in the network do not change much, the main training effort is devoted to optimizing the angles in each building block. Therefore, it is also interesting to check whether our DMN can learn the distribution of angles or ODF purely from the mechanical data of stiffness matrices. In this work, we follow the Bunge convention of Euler angles (φ 1 , Φ, φ 2 ) Finding the ODF for the RVE with textured ODF can be more challenging, and the pole figures for this case are listed Figure In the online stage, we evaluate the trained DMN on a finite-strain rate-dependent crystal plasticity model where the plastic part F p maps points in the reference configuration onto an intermediate one which is then mapped to the current one through the elastic part F e . The effect of dislocation motion is modeled by relating the plastic velocity gradient Lp in the intermediate configuration to simple shear deformation γ (α) : where N slip is the number of slip systems. For a crystal slip systems (α) in the intermediate configuration, γ(α) is a shear rate, s(α) is the slip direction, and ñ(α) is the slip plane normal. The relationship between Lp and F p is given by We choose to formulate the constitutive laws of elasto-plasticity based on the Green strain E e and Second Piola-Kirchhoff stress S e , which are related by: where the elastic stiffness tensor C is defined in the intermediate configuration. The plastic shear rate in each slip system given by a phenomenological power law where τ (α) is the resolved shear stress, a (α) is a back-stress that describes kinematic hardening, γ0 is a reference shear rate, τ (α) 0 is a reference shear stress that accounts for isotropic hardening, and the exponent m determines the material strain rate sensitivity. The shear stress τ (α) is resolved onto the slip directions with: where σ, s (α) and n (α) are the Cauchy stress, slip direction and slip plane normal in the current configuration, respectively. Moreover, the evolution equation of the reference shear stress τ (α) 0 is defined as where H is a direct hardening coefficient and R is a dynamic recovery coefficient and q αβ is the latent hardening ratio given by: where χ is a latent hardening parameter. The back-stress a (α) in Eq. (4.12) evolves based on the following expression, where h and r are direct and dynamic hardening factors respectively. The set of nonlinear equations from Eq. (4.8) to Eq. (4.16) need to be solved numerically in the crystal plasticity model. In this work, we defined the model for a FCC metal (e.g. Ni-based super-alloy) with 12 slip planes. In the elastic regime, the material behaves isotropically. All the crystal plasticity parameters are given in Table To show the rate-dependency in the crystal plastic model, two strain rates were considered: ε = 1.0×10 -4 and ε = 1.0. The polycrystalline RVEs with random and textured ODFs are simulated by both DNS and DMN under uniaxial loading up to F 11 = 1.2, and the results are compared in Figure The last material system that we have investigated using DMN is the carbon fiber reinforced polymer (CFRP) composite. A typical example of CFRP system is illustrated in Figure The UD RVE is discretized by 69048 nodes and 63720 8-node hexahedron finite elements, and the volume fraction of the fiber phase is vf 1 = 29.5%. Additionally, the woven RVE has 43226 nodes and 28475 10-node Average error (a) UD composite. tetrahedron finite elements, and the volume fraction of its yarn phase is vf 1 = 41.4%. The uniaxial responses of online material models for the carbon fiber and epoxy matrix are presented in Figure In the offline stage, the microscale UD RVE and the mesoscale woven RVE are trained separately to find their own DMN representations. Histories of the average training and test errors of UD and woven DMN are given in Figure Finding the optimum DMN that well represents the woven RVE appears to be a more challenging task. The lowest training error we achieved is 2.19% with N = 8, and the training process tends to be saturated in the end. This is somehow expected since the morphology of woven microstructure is more complex than the other cases. For example, it has penetrating phases along two different directions, as well as the entanglement of yarns. The current level of accuracy achieved by DMN is satisfactory in many practical applications, however, further reduction of errors may require more advanced learning techniques. Table Ideally, a full three-scale homogenization should be performed by linking every material point in the mesoscale woven RVE with a microscale UD RVE model. However, this is not feasible with the DNS models described above due to the high computational cost. On the other hand, solving the woven RVE implicitly also requires the full information of the overall stiffness tensor of the UD RVE, while the standard FEM solver only provides the values of stress and strain. Therefore, the DNS models of UD and woven RVEs are performed separately, and the obtained two-scale DNS homogenization results will be used to validate our DMN models. For the UD composite, the fiber phase is considered as an orthotropic elastic material with high strength in the fiber direction. The matrix phase is modeled as an elasto-plastic epoxy material with an exponential hardening law. Its yield stress σ Y is determined by the hardening law as a function of the effective plastic strain εpl , which is a monotonically increasing internal state variable of the plastic material during the deformation. An exponential hardening law is assumed, where a 3 is the ultimate yield stress for large effective plastic strain, (a 3a 2 ) represents the yield strength and a 1 is a dimensionless hardening constant. An isotropic J2 yield surface is further assumed, where σ is the von Mises equivalent stress. We choose to formulate the plastic law based on the Green-Lagrange strain and second Piola-Kirchhoff stress. Uniaxial responses of the fiber and epoxy materials are shown in Figure Table Carbon fiber The stress-strain curves predicted by DNS and DMN for the UD composite are presented in Figure The stress-strain curves predicted by DNS and DMN for the woven composite are presented in Figure For the out-of-plane tension in 33 direction, the overall responses still show little hardening effect due to the yarn confinements in 11 and 22 directions. By looking at Figure The in-plane uniaxial tension and shear results predicted by the two-scale and three-scale woven DMNs are compared in Figure Last but not least, we shall discuss the computational cost of DMN in both online and offline stages. The computational time of generating the dataset and training the network with various depths for the particle-reinforced composite (see Section 4.1) are listed in Table The DMN training times for N = 4, 6 and 8 are 5.4, 16.7 and 43.0 h, respectively. The time cost per epoch decreases as the number of active nodes in the bottom layer is reduced by the model compression algorithm. Here we take the network with N = 8 as an example. The first 1000 epochs at the beginning of the training took 3.7 h, while the last 1000 epochs only cost 1.9 h. Our current parallelization algorithm is realized by distributing the training samples between various processors, or called "data level parallelism". It has a good scalability as long as the number of processors is smaller than the mini-batch size in the SGD algorithm. Future improvements will include vectorizing the operations in the building block and parallelizing the computation at the model level, which will allow us to accelerate the training procedure of large-scale DMNs using more processing units (e.g. GPU). The computational times of DNS and the online DMNs for the hyperelastic particle-reinforced RVE are given in Figure It is more objective to evaluate the efficiency of DMN by comparing with a FEM model with similar accuracy. For the simulation of hyperelastic particle-reinforced composite, the linear FE model took 2420 s on one CPU. As shown in Section 4.1, its average test error on 100 random samples (2.30%) is close to that of the DMN with N = 6 (1.38%), which only took 2.6 s on one CPU for the same number of loading steps. At the similar level of accuracy, the DMN is around 930 times faster than the linear FE model. For the two-scale homogenization of woven composite, the linear FE model is comparable to the DMN with N = 7 in terms of the average test errors, 6.12% vs. 3.48%, while their computational times are 212 s vs. 0.65 s. Due to the complexity of woven microstructure, it is difficult to further coarsen the linear FE mesh with 5252 nodes. However, the material network with N = 7 for woven composite has only 16 active nodes in the bottom layer, which may correspond to a 4 × 2 × 2 FE mesh. Note that the current DMN framework is implemented as Python libraries, and it is possible to improve the efficiency through lower-level programming. A new framework of deep material network (DMN) for modeling general 3D heterogeneous materials with both material and geometric nonlinearities is developed. Theories of the 3D two-layer building block are derived based on the homogenization equations and interfacial conditions. We show a complete machine learning procedure for training the DMN by first generating offline elastic datasets using DNS, and then optimizing the network fitting parameters with stochastic gradient descent and model compression algorithms. The 3D architectures of DMN are explored for three representative multiscale materials systems, including particle-reinforced hyperelastic rubber composite with Mullins effect, polycrystalline materials with finite-strain rate-dependent crystal plasticity, and elasto-plastic CFRP systems formed by UD and woven composites. For all the examples, we demonstrate the effectiveness of DMN on representing complex RVE microstructures and its accuracy of predicting highly nonlinear behaviors in the online stage. One unique feature of DMN is that it can discover the hidden geometric information, such as phase volume fraction and orientation distributions, from pure mechanical data. While DNS is limited to two-scale homogenization due to its high computational cost, we also show a three-scale DMN of the CFRP system through the concatenation of UD and woven networks, which captures more physics across multiple length scales. The proposed DMN and its machine learning procedure open new possibilities in the design and concurrent simulation of multiscale material systems. The idea of embedding physics into machine-learning models shows promise for the future of data-driven multiscale mechanics and physics. The derivative of ( Ĉ345 ) -1 with respect to an arbitrary variable x (e.g. volume fraction or components in the stiffness matrix) will be necessary for computing the gradient of the strain concentration tensor s 1 in the homogenization function h C : Moreover, the derivatives of volume fraction f 1 with respect to the weights w 1 and w 2 are Training results of the particle-reinforced composite. Average training error ētr , average test error ētr , maximum test error and predicted volume fraction vf 1 are provided for each DMN. Test errors of the linear FEM model are also shown. Treemaps of DMN at the end of training are plotted in Figure The hardening parameters in the published version were found to be incorrect. The parameters corresponding to the numerical examples are updated.