Since the days of Hertz, radio transmitters have evolved from rudimentary circuits emitting around 50 MHz to modern ubiquitous Wi-Fi devices operating at gigahertz radio bands. As wireless data traffic continues to increase there is a need for new communication technologies capable of high-frequency operation for highspeed data transfer. Here we give a proof of concept of a new compact radio frequency transmitter based on a semiconductor laser frequency comb. In this laser, the beating among the coherent modes oscillating inside the cavity generates a radio frequency current, which couples to the electrodes of the device. We show that redesigning the top contact of the laser allows one to exploit the internal oscillatory current to drive an integrated dipole antenna, which radiates into free space. In addition, direct modulation of the laser current permits encoding a signal in the radiated radio frequency carrier. Working in the opposite direction, the antenna can receive an external radio frequency signal, couple it to the active region and injection lock the laser. These results pave the way to new applications and functionality in optical frequency combs, such as wireless radio communication and wireless synchronization to a reference source. Optical fields can be used to synthesize low-phase-noise microwaves by means of different techniques, such as optical frequency division In light of this phenomenon the laser can be viewed from a new perspective, namely as an ensemble of two radio frequency generators with opposite phase. Usually the top electrode of these lasers consists of an electrically continuous metal contact connecting the two generators and thus preventing the device from radiating. In this work we demonstrate that by adapting the geometry of a) These authors contributed equally to this work. b) capasso@seas.harvard.edu the top contact layer of a QCL allows us to feed a dipole antenna integrated on the chip, enabling emission of radio waves into free space. The beatnote frequency itself can be tuned by modulating the laser current, thus the laser acquires a new functionality, turning into a radio transmitter capable of wireless communication at a carrier frequency of 5.5 GHz, given by the comb repetition rate. Thanks to their fast gain recovery dynamics The laser radio transmitter (LRT) is illustrated in Fig. To characterize the emission pattern of the system we carry out far-field measurements of the QCL microwave radiation. A schematic of the experimental set-up is shown in Fig. From the measured microwave radiation, taking into account the directivity of the emitter and receiver antenna, and using an equivalent circuit model of the LRT, we can estimate the microwave power available at the source. The QCL active region can be modeled as a radio frequency generator with low output impedance. The bonding pads on the sides of the waveguide behave as capacitors in parallel to the generator. A full model of the impedance of the pads and of the other elements in the equivalent circuit is described in Supplementary Sec. 3. The antenna is connected to the QCL via wirebonds, whose inductive behavior at microwave frequencies is also taken into account in the model. Finally, the antenna constitutes the load connected at the other end of the circuit. The impedance mismatch loss (mostly caused by the presence of the capacitive pads) is estimated to be -22 dB, which means that the power actually radiated by the antenna is 22 dB lower than the available power at the QCL. Using this fact and knowing that the total received power is -80 dBm, it is possible to compute the wireless link power budget with the Friis formula (Supplementary Sec. 3). The total radiated power is found to be -58 dBm, meaning that the available power at the QCL is estimated to be -36 dBm. Based on numerical simulations of the QCL radio frequency generation, the available power is expected to increase by several orders of magnitude when operating the laser in the harmonic comb regime, due to the higher optical power per mode and lower number of beat harmonics that are generated in this state (Supplementary Sec. 4). On the other hand, the source impedance mismatch due to the pad admittance can be corrected using a buried heterostructure geometry with a Fe-doped InP insulating layer Next, we provide a proof-of-concept of wireless communication using the laser radio transmitter. The experimental set-up is schematized in Fig. Due to the presence of the antenna, the laser is also sensitive to wireless radio frequency signals. Here we show that the laser beat note can be wirelessly injection locked to an external microwave reference. A schematic of the set-up is shown in Fig. QCL radio frequency sources benefit from good impedance-matching with extraction elements such as antennas and waveguides, thanks to the low impedance of their active region. This is a clear advantage with respect to existing terahertz photomixers, which suffer from high impedance in the order of tens of kiloohm, thus losing several orders of magnitude in power efficiency. Thanks to the frequency comb nature of the light beating inside the cavity, this new radio frequency source can generate tones of high spectral purity, leading to a very narrow (kHz or sub-kHz) linewidth. Another attractive feature of the LRT is that the carrier frequency may be controlled by the laser current, allowing in principle to phase-lock it to a reference microwave source using frequency division and thus stabilize it with high accuracy. Ultimately, the system introduced here will benefit from unprecedented compactness, as compared to existing composite terahertz wireless communication systems This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (Grants No. ECCS-1614631, 1541959, DGE1144152), Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering (Air Force Contract FA8721-05-C-0002 and/or FA8702-15D-0001), Swiss National Science Foundation (177836), Austrian Science Fund (P28914N27). We thank D. Kazakov for discussions that motivated this demonstration and for a careful reading of the manuscript, and A. Amirzhan for useful discussions. The quantum cascade laser has a layer structure consisting of GaInAs/AlInAs lattice matched to InP; it emits at 9.0 μm and is described in more details in Ref. 1. The 12 μm wide QCL waveguide was fabricated by reactive ion etching, followed by SiN passivation using plasmaenhanced chemical vapor deposition, sputtered Ti/Au contact deposition using a lift-off, substrate thinning to 150 μm, bottom-side Ti/Au contact deposition and cleaving to a 8 mm long device. The device was soldered episide up with indium on a copper plate. The half-wave dipole antenna is designed for f B = 5.5 GHz and consists of two gold metal stripes (each being 6.5 mm long and 2 mm wide) with a 1 mm gap, lying onto a 3D-printed polyactide substrate (3 mm thick, ε r = 2.7). Each arm of the antenna is connected on one side to one of the two QCL top pads using wirebonds and, on the other side, to the negative connector of the current source via an inductor to minimize RF leakage (Figure Far field mapping has been performed by mounting a commercial directive horn antenna (RF Elements SH-CC 5-30) on the same optical table with the QCL transmitter, at a distance of ∼0.9 m (16 λ B ) from the QCL assembly. The antenna has a maximum gain of 18.5 dBi, a) These authors contributed equally to this work. b) capasso@seas.harvard.edu negligible return loss at 5.5 GHz and two separate ports for vertical and horizontal polarization, and it was aimed at the QCL transmitter. The latter is mounted on a motorized rotary stage, that allows mapping the far field in the horizontal plane. The optical table and other reflective surfaces nearby are covered with microwave absorbers (SFC-4 from Cuming Microwave) with less than 30 dB of reflectivity at 5.5 GHz. The output of the antenna (50 Ω) is connected to a low noise preamplifier (19 dB of gain) and then to a spectrum analyzer (Agilent E4448A). Stage and data acquisition are controlled by a computer. The voltage signal generated by an audio player is used to modulate the laser current using the external analog modulation input of the current source (Wavelength Electronics QCL LAB 2000, analog current transfer function: 0.4 A/V). The volume of the audio player is chosen to set the maximum peak-to-peak output voltage to a value (0.2 V) such that the maximum frequency deviation of the modulated QCL beat note lies within the demodulation bandwidth of the software defined radio (RTL-SDR: R820T tuner frequency capability 25 MHz-1750 MHz; RTL2832U demodulator bandwidth 200 kHz). A wideband FM (WFM) demodulation scheme is used. With reference to Fig. The master signal is generated by a local oscillator (Hittite HMC-T2240) feeding a horn antenna (RF Elements SH-CC 5-30). To monitor the changes in the QCL beat note induced by the external oscillator signal a coaxial RF probe (Quater A-20338, bandwidth DC-18 GHz, tip diameter ∼100 μm) is placed in the near field of the dipole antenna integrated on the QCL chip (approximately 2 mm away from the edge of one of the two arms). This arrangement is non-invasive (in the sense that the probe is not in electrical contact with the dipole antenna) The microwave radiation pattern emitted from the LRT exhibits a central peak with two side lobes (see Fig. The cross section and top view of the laser radio transmitter (LRT) demonstrated in this work is shown in Fig. PUA of the layer per unit area as where t is the thickness of the layer and σ is the bulk conductivity of the material, which can be expressed as the product of the elementary charge q e , the carrier density n and the mobility μ. For the SiN layer, R -1 PUA is simply taken to be 0 since no charge transport occurs. Importantly, at the microwave frequency considered in this work (5.5 GHz) we neglect any effect due to the carrier inertia (plasmons) which is motivated by the fact that the frequency is well below the plasma collision frequency (an assumption that has to be revisited for terahertz frequencies). The mobility is assumed to be 9000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 for GaInAs 2 and 5000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 for InP Secondly, we calculate the capacitance per unit area C PUA of each layer as a parallel plates capacitor, namely: The total layer admittance is then found by taking the parallel of the real conductance and capacitance per unit area, that is: The impedance of each layer is the reciprocal of the total admittance: where A is the area of the pad or trench. When several layers are stacked, the total impedance of the stack is the sum of the impedances of each layer. Finally, the parallel of the impedances of the trenches and contact pads gives, for each half of the QCL, the total pad impedance Ẑpad = 0.0065 -0.4762i Ω. The active region of the QCL section is the source of the RF power in the system. This region is therefore represented by an RF generator including an internal impedance. In principle, both Norton equivalent circuit (based on a current generator) and Thevenin equivalent circuit (based on a voltage generator) can be used to model the source as they are interchangeable -here the Thevenin one is used. The impedance of this generator is measured directly from the derivative of the IV curve of the device. In fact, since the section with the active region is the only one that can transport DC current (due to the presence of the SiN layer in the other sections), the measured impedance at DC can only be due to the active region. The measured value is 1.3 Ω for the entire device, which is given by the parallel of the two halves of the QCL. Hence, each half of the QCL has an impedance of ẐQCL =2.6 Ω. The layers forming the QCL active region are present also below the contact pad, but their RF impedance is much different in the contact pad area, since no DC current is flowing through them. The impedance can be estimated using the fact that the measured low current DC impedance of the QCL active region is 493 Ω. Scaling this number (that applies to the 12 μm region of the QCL) to the pad area, 27 Ω that is used in the model as the layer impedance Z for these layers. Fig. When no gap in the QCL is present, the generators are shorted, meaning that very little power is radiated out of the structure (in principle none if the inductance and resistance of the top gold layer and bottom copper layer is ignored). When the gap is opened, the two parts of the circuit are now separated, and energy can be extracted using each side as an electrode of a new generator. Because the two generators have opposite phases, from the RF point of view they are in series, and thus they can be combined in a single generator with doubled voltages and impedances (Fig. The QCL has an available RF power (i.e. the maximum power that can be extracted from the generator if perfect impedance matching is realized) that can be found using the following formula: By solving the circuit and finding the actual power P ant entering the antenna, it is possible to determine the ratio P ant /P av independently from the voltage of the generator. The calculated ratio is in our case -22 dB and it indicates the mismatch loss between the generator and the antenna. The mismatch can be easily reduced to -9 dB if a buried QCL geometry is used (Fig. Because the receiving antenna is impedance-matched with the spectrum analyzer, by knowing the received power (P Rx = -80 dBm, cf. Fig. G Tx and G Rx are the gains of the transmitting and receiving antennas respectively, while the term in the parenthesis is the free-space loss. Knowing that G Rx = 18.5 dBi and estimating G Tx = 6 dBi we obtain that the available RF power in the QCL in the experimental operating conditions is -36 dBm. From this power value we can also back-calculate the voltage of the generator using Eq. 5, obtaining V QCL = 2.3 mV. In this section we study the optical-to-radio frequency conversion of a QCL by means of space-and time-domain numerical simulations. The model we use is described in Ref. 7. The occurrence of a dynamic population inversion gratings in numerical simulations of QCLs operating as frequency combs was alreadys shown in Ref. 4. Here we focus in particular on the difference in terms of ra- dio frequency generation between two QCL regimes: the fundamental comb and harmonic comb. We choose laser parameters and operating conditions representative of the mid-infrared QCL device studied experimentally in this work. Specifically, we take from bandstructure simulations of the device a gain recovery time T 1 = 0.6 ps, a dephasing time T 2 = 0.12 ps and a dipole moment d = 2.04 nm. The simulated device has a Fabry-Perot geometry with a 8 mm long cavity, a 12 μm wide waveguide, and is operated at a current density of 1.23×J th (J th being the current density threshold of the device). To achieve the fundamental comb regime, where the intermodal spacing is 1 free spectral range (FSR) of the laser, the electron diffusion coefficient is set to 0. On the other hand, to attain harmonic comb operation, where the intermodal spacing is a higher harmonic of the laser FSR, a weak optical seed is injected inside the cavity of the laser operating in the single mode regime. By proper tuning of the seed frequency in the vicinity of a Fabry-Perot cavity mode, a parametric process can be triggered leading to the formation of a harmonic state. The simulated optical spectra obtained by the laser operating in the fundamental and harmonic comb regimes are shown in Fig. From the simulated current density gratings we can calculate the available radio frequency power at the QCL source as where w wg and L are the waveguide width and cavity length of the laser, and R QCL = 1.3 Ω is the impedance of the QCL taken to be the same of the experimental device studied in this work. From Eq. 7 and using the simulated current density gratings we obtain that the available power at the lowest order beat note of the harmonic state is 37 dB stronger than that of the fundamental comb. These insights show the strong potential of the harmonic comb for LRTs operating in the sub-THz range. V. SPECTRA OF THE TRANSMITTED AND RECEIVED AUDIO TRACKS Fig. The signal obtained upon reception represents with fidelity the original signal except for the frequency region below 10 Hz, where additional noise is observed due to slow thermal jittering of the QCL beat note, and the frequency region around 10 kHz, due to the level of the noise floor at reception lying around -105 dB. Using an audio editing software (Audacity) the received signal is then amplified and the noise in the 10 kHz range is suppressed using a noise reduction algorithm. The SNR of the signal transmitted with the QCL could be improved by increasing the deviation bandwidth of the beat note frequency modulation (cf. Fig. 