We present the results of our comprehensive investigation on the antiferromagnetic heavy-fermion superconductor Ce3PtIn11 carried out by means of electrical transport, heat capacity and ac magnetic susceptibility measurements, performed on single-crystalline specimens down to 50 mK in external magnetic fields up to 9 T. Our experimental results elucidate a complex magnetic field -temperature phase diagram which contains both first-and second-order field-induced magnetic transitions and highlights the emergence of field stabilized phases. Remarkably, a prominent metamagnetic transition was found to occur at low temperatures and strong magnetic fields. In turn, the results obtained in the superconducting phase of Ce3PtIn11 corroborate an unconventional nature of Cooper pairs formed by heavy quasiparticles. The compound is an almost unique example of a heavy fermion system in which superconductivity may coexist microscopically with magnetically ordered state. Investigation of anomalous physical properties at quantum critical point (QCP) in heavy fermion (HF) systems has been at the forefront of contemporary condensed matter research as it may enlighten the fascinating physics involved with these unusual observations at this precarious point of instability Investigation of novel Ce based compounds hosting multiple inequivalent Ce sites has received considerable attention from the scientific research community in recent times, as they showcase diverse unusual ground state properties at low temperatures. Different local environment of Ce ions leads to different hybridization strengths, which spark the possibility of having distinctly different ground states for each individual inequivalent Ce ion. For instance, separate AFM orderings of two Ce sublattices has been reported in Ce 5 Ni 6 In 11 The compound Ce 3 PtIn 11 belongs to the homologous series of phases Ce n T m In 3n+2m (T stands for d-electron transition metal), which encompasses a large variety of intriguing materials including CeCoIn 5 The spectacular low-temperature properties of Ce 3 PtIn 11 motivated us to study the effect of applied magnetic field on the complex AFM ordering and the superconducting state. In particular, our research was aimed to explore field effect on the two AFM transitions and construct a relevant magnetic phase diagram. Electrical transport and thermodynamic measurements were performed on single crystalline specimens at temperatures down to 50 mK. Here, we report the results of our investigations on Ce 3 PtIn 11 , which conjointly indicate a complex H -T phase diagram and unconventional SC state coexisting with the AFM ordering. We carried our a comprehensive investigation to determine the precise crystal structure of Ce 3 PtIn 11 using an anisotropic model. Even though the crystal structure of this compound was reported previously 3.3065(9) In(3)-In(3) 1 3.32177(15) 1 -y,x,z; 2 -x+1,-y,-z+1 In order to have an in-depth understanding of the complex AFM ordering in Ce 3 PtIn 11 , we performed heat capacity measurements, C(T ), in different magnetic fields applied along the crystallographic c direction in the tetragonal unit cell. Fig. The heat capacity of antiferromagnetic Kondo lattices in the ordered state is often modeled by the formula where the first term signifies the contribution from the heavy quasi-particles and the second term represents AFM magnons contribution with ∆ SW being the gap in the spin wave spectrum. The approach assumes a spin wave dispersion relation of the form ω = ∆ 2 SW + Dk 2 , where D is the spin wave stiffness. The coefficient c in Eq. 1 is related to D as c ∼ D -3 As can be inferred from Fig. The temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity, ρ(T ), of Ce 3 PtIn 11 , measured with the current flowing within the basal ab plane of the tetragonal unit cell of the compound, is presented in Fig. Successively, a distinct drop in ρ(T ) is seen at 2.1 K caused by the reduction in the spin-disorder scattering due to the AFM ordering below T N1 . Another sharp resistivity drop down to zero occurs at T c = 0.23 K, and signals the onset of the superconducting state. As displayed in Fig. where the second term accounts for Fermi liquid contribution, and the third term represents scattering of conduction electrons on AFM spin-wave excitations with an energy gap ∆ SW in the magnon spectrum (here, phonon contribution was neglected because of very low temperature range considered). The coefficient b in this expression is related to the spin-wave stiffness D as b ∼ D -3 2 In order to gain further insight on the field-dependent critical behavior observed in the specific heat data, the transverse magnetoresistance (MR = ρ(μ0H)-ρ(0) ρ(0) ) of Ce 3 PtIn 11 was measured with electric current flowing within the crystallographic ab plane and external magnetic field applied along the four-fold axis. The results obtained in the AFM state are shown in Fig. Fig. Fig. Fig. yielding μ 0 H c2 (0) ≈ 1.1 T which is much larger than the Pauli-Cologston-Chandrasekhar limiting field μ 0 H P = 1.86T c = 0.43 T. Now from the formula where φ 0 = h/2e is the flux quantum, one can estimate Ginzburg-Landau (GL) coherence length in Ce 3 PtIn 11 to be ξ GL = 88 Å. The key characteristics of the superconducting state in Ce 3 PtIn 11 are gathered in Table In summary, the results of our detailed investigation of AFM ordering and superconducting phase in singlecrystalline Ce 3 PtIn 11 elucidate a likely coexistence of AFM and superconductivity in this compound. The specific heat and electrical transport data collected in various applied magnetic fields conjointly establish a complex magnetic phase diagram with several distinct field stabilized magnetic phases. It sparks the possibility of finding competing order parameters near the critical field in this compound. This observation is quite remarkable considering the uniqueness of such phase diagram in the existing literature. Furthermore, the magnetotransport data collected at low temperatures revealed a metamagnetic transition followed by a linear field dependence. This feature implies an unusual kind of cyclotron motion. The electrical resistivity and ac magnetic susceptibility data obtained in the superconducting state in Ce 3 PtIn 11 indicated unconventional superconductivity with the key parameters similar to those reported for well-established heavy-fermion superconductors. Thus, Ce 3 PtIn 11 turns out to be one of the rare examples of HF systems where superconductivity coexists with bulk magnetic order. Further detailed investigations involving microscopic techniques such as muon spin rotation, neutron diffraction and photoemission spectroscopy are called for in order to address the unusual and unique features witnessed in Ce 3 PtIn 11 . Single crystals of Ce 3 PtIn 11 were grown using In flux, as outlined by Kratochv ílová et al. The electrical resistivity was measured over the temperature interval 0.4 to 300 K and in magnetic fields up to 9 T using a standard ac four-probe technique implemented in a Quantum Design PPMS platform. In order to probe the superconducting state, a Cryogenic Ltd. 3 He-4 He dilution refrigerator was employed to carry out electrical resistivity measurements down to 50 mK in applied fields up to 1.2 T. Furthermore, the ac magnetic susceptibility was measured in the same dilution fridge. Heat capacity measurements were performed in the range 0.35-20 K in fields up to 9 T using relaxation method and the PPMS equipment. 