Microwave photonic technologies The synthesis, distribution and processing of radio and microwave signals is ubiquitous in our information society for radars, wireless networks, and satellite communications. With the looming bandwidth bottleneck in telecommunications So far, soliton microcombs of repetition rates in the microwave X-and K-band (f rep < 20 GHz) have been demonstrated only on low-index material platforms such as silica and bulk polished crystalline microresonators Principle and sample description: The principle of nanophotonic microwave synthesis based on integrated soliton microcombs is depicted in Fig. where ω μ /2π is the frequency of the μ-th resonance relative to the pump resonance ω 0 /2π, D 1 /2π corresponds to the FSR, D 2 /2π is the GVD and D 3 /2π is the third-order dispersion) and resonance linewidth in the fundamental transverse electric (TE 00 ) mode. For each resonance, the loaded linewidth κ/2π = (κ 0 + κ ex )/2π, intrinsic loss κ 0 /2π, and coupling strength κ ex /2π are extracted from each resonance fit. The resonance analysis method is described in Ref. The phase noise measurements with different cavitypump detunings are performed with stabilized transmitted power, as shown in Fig. To further stabilize the soliton-based microwave carrier, we actively stabilize the cavity-pump detuning using an offset sideband Pound-Drever-Hall (PDH) lock Soliton injection-locking: A variety of microwave photonic applications require long-term stability of microwave signals, represented as low phase noise at low offset frequency. In our work, the low soliton repetition rate achieved allows soliton injection-locking to an external microwave source We have demonstrated low-noise nanophotonic microwave synthesizers based on soliton microcombs that operate in the key microwave K-and X-band, with pump power levels compatible with integrated Sibased lasers DUV stepper lithography: The advantages of DUV stepper lithography over electron beam lithography (EBL), besides the higher yield and lower cost, are: 1. The stitching errors on the wafer are 4 or 5 times smaller than the ones on the reticle used in the industrial standard 4 or 5 demagnification lens systems; 2. The reticle writing using standard photolithography (∼ 1 hour) is much faster than the wafer writing using EBL (> 10 hours), thus the fieldto-field (or stripe-to-stripe) time delay is significantly shorter with DUV than with EBL, leading to smaller stitching errors caused by the beam drift; 3. The field (or stripe) size of photolithography for reticle writing is much larger than the field size of EBL for wafer writing, leading to fewer stitching errors; 4. Multipass for reticle writing can be easily adapted with reasonable cost increases. Consequently, DUV stepper lithography can provide superior lithography quality, and has been used in recently demonstrated integrated Brillouin laser Coupling scheme: The microresonator is coupled to a multimode bus waveguide of the same cross-section for high coupling ideality Quiet point measurement: At the quiet point with the detuning δω/2π ∼ 439 MHz, the Raman self-frequency-shift Thus the dependence of the repetition rate frep on the detuning δω could be mitigated over a broader bandwidth based on a more reliable effect (via D 3 ) than mode crossings. The comparison of the laser phase noise (obtained by beating it against an ultra-stable laser) and the phase noise of soliton repetition rate, enables the estimation of the optical to microwave phase transduction (PM2PM). In particular, the Toptica CTL diode laser features a typical noise bump around 3 kHz. Under usual condition, i.e. out of "quiet point" regime, we measured a PM2PM coefficient of -55 dB, as shown in Fig. The conversion of laser relative intensity noise (RIN) to the phase noise of soliton repetition rate is experimentally measured. A calibrated pure power-modulation of the pump laser was applied using a 0 th -order AOM at frequencies ranging from 10 3 to 10 5 Hz. The resulting phase modulation strength of the soliton repetition rate is measured by integrating the corresponding peak of the phase noise power spectrum density (PSD). The result of the AM2PM transfer function measurement is shown in From this measurement, it appears that the AM2PM conversion mostly follows a 1/f 2 slope (red line in Fig. We estimate a conversion coefficient of α = 79 Hz/mW to match our measurements (the power is defined as the input power in the lensed fiber, before coupled into the chip). From the previous conversion estimations, we can analyse the origins of the main noise limitations of the soliton repetition rate in our measurements. In the case with Toptica diode laser, as shown in Fig. The fundamental thermal fluctuations within the optical mode volume of the microresonators lead to the thermo-refractive fluctuations of the resonator FSR Based on the estimated noise for a 20-GHz-FSR microresonator, the estimated impact of TRN is shown in Fig. 