The anomalous Hall effect (AHE) is a well-known fundamental property of ferromagnetic metals, commonly associated with the presence of a net magnetization. Recently, an AHE has been discovered in non-collinear antiferromagnetic (AFM) metals. Driven by non-vanishing Berry curvature of AFM materials with certain magnetic space group symmetry, anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC) is very sensitive to the specific type of magnetic ordering. Here, we investigate the appearance of AHC in antiperovskite GaNMn3 as a representative of broader materials family ANMn3 (A is a main group element), where different types of non-collinear magnetic ordering can emerge. Using symmetry analyses and first-principles density-functional theory calculations, we show that with almost identical band structure, the nearly degenerate non-collinear AFM Γ5g and Γ4g phases of GaNMn3 have zero and finite AHC, respectively. In a non-collinear ferrimagnetic M-1 phase, GaNMn3 exhibits a large AHC due to the presence of a sizable net magnetic moment. In the non-collinear antiperovskite magnets, transitions between different magnetic phases, exhibiting different AHC states, can be produced by doping, strain, or spin transfer torque, which makes these materials promising for novel spintronic applications. It is known that the anomalous Hall effect (AHE) emerges in metals with broken time-reversal symmetry (TRS) and strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC) It appeared, however, that the AHE can be observed in certain types of non-collinear antiferromagnets, such as Mn3X alloys (X = Ga, Ge, Ir, etc.) Importantly, specifics of magnetic ordering in non-collinear AFM materials associated with different magnetic space group symmetries have a strong impact on the AHE Antiperovskite materials are potential candidates for the control of the AHE by tunable non-collinear magnetism. Antiperovskites have a perovskite structure, where cation and anion positions are interchanged (Fig. In this paper, we consider gallium manganese nitride GaNMn3 as a representative antiperovskite material to investigate the magnetic phase dependent AHC of the whole ANMn3 family. The high temperature paramagnetic phase of GaNMn3 has a cubic crystal structure with the space group Pm3 ̅ m. The Γ5g phase emerges below room temperature (Fig. Using symmetry analyses and first-principles densityfunctional theory (DFT) calculations, we explore the AHE of the three non-collinear magnetic phases of GaNMn3. We show that with nearly identical band structure, the nearly degenerate AFM Γ5g and Γ4g phases have zero and finite AHC, respectively. In a non-collinear ferrimagnetic M-1 phase, GaNMn3 exhibits a large AHC due to the presence of a sizeable net magnetization. With a possibility to control the appearance of these magnetic phases by external stimulus, the predicted variation of the AHC between different magnetic phases in the same material point to a new approach of designing the AHE-based functional devices for spintronic applications. Within the linear response theory, the intrinsic AHC is expressed as the integral of the total Berry curvature (Ωαβ) over the Brillouin zone of the crystal where where ψ n,k ⃗ is the Bloch function and v is the velocity operator. Space group symmetry of a material determines the presence or absence of a finite AHC. For example, since Ω n γ (k ⃗ ) is odd with respect to time reversal symmetry, i.e. Ω n γ (-k ⃗ ) = -Ω n γ (k ⃗ ), the total Berry curvature Ω αβ and hence the AHC are zero for nonmagnetic materials. Similarly, if there is symmetry operation O ̂ transforming k ⃗ to k ⃗ ′ (i.e., k ⃗ ′ = O ̂k ⃗ ), such as two-fold rotation or mirror reflection, for which O ̂Ωn (k ⃗ ′) = -Ω n (k ⃗ ) , the AHC vanishes This odd property of the Berry curvature in GaNMn3 under the mirror symmetry transformations is broken in the Γ4g phase. In this phase, the Mn magnetic moments form a lattice of "vertices" in the (111) plane (Fig. Magnetic space group symmetry determines the shape of the AHC tensor. While in the Γ5g phase, all the nine components of the AHC tensor are zero, in the Γ4g phase, corresponding to the magnetic space group R3 ̅ m′, the AHC tensor is non-zero. Table In the non-collinear ferrimagnetic M-1 phase (Fig. Next, we perform first-principles DFT calculations to obtain the AHC of the three non-collinear magnetic phases of GaNMn3. The DFT calculations are performed using a plane-wave pseudopotential method with the fully-relativistic ultrasoft pseudopotentials The AHC is calculated using the PAOFLOW code The symmetry determined geometries of the AHC tensor are obtained using the FINDSYM code and the linear response symmetry code Our DFT calculations show that the lattice constant of GaNMn3 is 3.869 Å, which is close to the experimental and previously calculated values Since Γ5g and Γ4g have similar magnetic structures, we first investigate the AHE in these two phases of GaNMn3. Figure In order to demonstrate the odd nature of the Berry curvature under the mirror symmetry M 1 ̅10 , we plot in Figure Figure Figure For example, at E = EF -0.04 eV, the calculated value of σ xy is as large as 685 Ω -1 cm -1 which is comparable to the AHC in Fe (σ xy ~700 Ω -1 cm -1 Our results demonstrate that in the family of antiperovskite compounds, as represented by GaNMn3, the AHC is strongly dependent on the specific magnetic configuration. A significant change in the AHC can be produced by transitions between different magnetic phases. Such transitions can be driven by an external stimulus, provided that the energies of the different noncollinear magnetic phases are engineered to be nearly degenerate. In experiment, the Γ5g phase is found in the ANMn3 compounds with A = Zn, Ga, and the Γ4g phase is found for A = Ni, Ag, Sn In this work, we have studied the intrinsic AHC in different noncollinear magnetic phases of GaNMn3, as a representative of a broader materials family of antiperovskite compounds ANMn3 (A is a main group element). Based on the symmetry analysis and first-principles DFT calculations, we showed that the nearly degenerate non-collinear AFM Γ5g and Γ4g phases of GaNMn3 have zero and finite AHC, respectively. This difference was explained by the different magnetic space group symmetry of these phases. We also predicted that GaNMn3, in the noncollinear ferrimagnetic M-1 phase, exhibits large AHC which is comparable to the AHC in elemental ferromagnets, such as iron. We argued that by doping and strain it is possible to engineer the ANMn3 compounds where the energy difference between these magnetic phases could be small, so that an external stimulus, such as the dynamic strain or the spin transfer torque could produce switchable magnetic phase transitions. Our work demonstrates that the antiperovskite family of non-collinear magnetic materials is a good platform to realize the multiple AHE states in a single compound, which is promising for novel spintronic applications. 