In the paper, the processes occurring during low-temperature growth of non-hydrogenated amorphous Si and polycrystalline Si films on multilayer Si 3 N 4 /SiO 2 /c-Si substrates from molecular beams under conditions of ultrahigh vacuum are studied in detail. Diffusion of hydrogen atoms from a dielectric layer into the growing film is shown to accompany the growth of a silicon film on a Si 3 N 4 layer deposited by CVD or on a SiO 2 layer obtained by thermal oxidation of a silicon wafer. The process of hydrogen migration from the dielectric substrates into the silicon film is studied using FTIR spectroscopy. The reduction of IR absorption at the bands related to the N-H bonds vibrations and the increase of IR absorption at the bands relating to the Si-N bonds vibrations in IR spectra demonstrate that hydrogen atoms leave Si 3 N 4 layer during Si deposition from a molecular beam. The absorption band assigned to the valence vibrations of the Si-H bond at ∼ 2100 cm -1 emerging in IR spectra obtained at samples deposited both on Si 3 N 4 and SiO 2 layers indicates the accumulation of hydrogen atoms in silicon films. The difference in chemical potentials of hydrogen atoms in the dielectric layer and the silicon film explains the transfer of hydrogen atoms from the Si 3 N 4 or SiO 2 layer into the growing silicon film. Presently, MEMS technology is a rapidly developing branch of science, one of the promising areas of which is the production of IR sensors based on amorphous (α-Si) or polycrystalline (poly-Si) silicon films formed on Si 3 N 4 /SiO 2 dielectric layers In this paper, the processes occurring during low-temperature growth from molecular beams under conditions of ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) of non-hydrogenated α-Si and poly-Si films on a multilayer Si 3 N 4 /SiO 2 /c-Si substrate are studied in detail. The Si 3 N 4 layer is the source of hydrogen atoms in our experiment. Previously, the diffusion of hydrogen atoms into α-Si and poly-Si layers from an external source was studied, e.g., in the works Experimental samples were prepared by depositing Si layers on different substrates. There were three types of substrates used in the experiments: Type N, Type O and Type S. Type N substrates, Si 3 N 4 /SiO 2 /Si(100), were produced as follows. First, finished on both sides 450 μm thick (100)-oriented Czochralski grown (CZ) boron doped silicon wafers (p-type, ̺ = 12 Ω cm) were cleaned using the RCA process On Type O substrates, SiO 2 /Si(111), only 700 nm thick SiO 2 film was formed by thermal oxidation of CZ Si(111):P (n-type, ̺ = 100 Ω cm) wafers. Type S substrates were p-type CZ Si(100):B wafers, ̺ = 12 Ω cm. Silicon films were deposited on the substrates from molecular beams (MB) in the ultra-high vacuum EVA 32 (Riber) molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE) chamber using a solid source with Si evaporation by an electron beam from a high resistivity float zone ingot. The MBE chamber was evacuated down to about 10 -11 Torr before the processes. The pressure did not exceed 5 × 10 -9 Torr during Si deposition. The deposition rate and coverage were measured using the Inficon XTC751-001-G1 (Leybold-Heraeus) film thickness monitor equipped with the graduated in advance quartz sensors installed in the MBE chamber. Si deposition rate was ∼ 0.3 Å/s; the film growth temperature was varied form 30 to 650°C in different processes for samples produced on Type N and Type O substrates. The thickness of the Si layer was 200 nm. Before depositing of silicon nitride or silicon, the substrates of all types were cleaned using an identical process that we routinely apply for obtaining clean Si surfaces Type S substrates were additionally deoxidized in the MBE chamber at the temperature of 800°C at a flux of Si atoms. The Si deposition rate during the deoxidation process was < 0.1 Å/s; the measured Si coverage was about 30 Å The growth of Si films on Type S substrates was conducted in two stages. First, a 100 nm thick Si layer was deposited at 650°C on the wafer surface purified of silicon oxide; then, after sample cooling to the room temperature at the rate of ∼ 0.4 °C/s, a 200 nm thick Si layer was deposited at this temperature. Samples were heated from the rear side using tantalum radiators in both preliminary annealing and MBE chambers. The temperature was monitored with chromel-alumel and tungsten-rhenium thermocouples of the heaters in the preliminary annealing and MBE chambers, respectively. The thermocouples were mounted in vacuum near the rear side of the samples. They were in situ graduated beforehand against the IMPAC IS12-Si infrared pyrometer (LumaSense Technologies) that measured the sample temperature through MBE chamber windows (for T > 300°C; the graduation curves were extrapolated to the room temperature for T < 300°C). The composition of residual atmosphere in the MBE camber was monitored using the RGA-200 residual gas analyzer (Stanford Research Systems) before and during the deposition process. Fourier transform IR (FTIR) transmission and reflection spectra of the samples were explored using a vacuum IFS-66v/S spectrometer (Bruker). The spectral resolution was 10 cm -1 that enabled both an adequate recording of all spectral features and filtering away of the high-frequency components related to light interference in silicon wafers. An opaque golden mirror was used as reference sample during recording of reflectance spectra. The instrument was evacuated to the residual air pressure of 2 mbar during spectra recording that enabled a considerable reduction of spectral interferences associated with carbon dioxide and water vapor. Direct analysis of the obtained spectra was hampered by interference of probe radiation in thin layers of materials on silicon wafers. In analyzing the spectra, the transmission spectrum and the reflection spectrum of each sample were summed. Such procedure of spectra processing has enabled the reduction of amplitude of baseline variations arisen due to the interference. As a result, it has become possible to observe and analyze relatively weak absorption bands. Additionally, the peak wavenumbers and relative intensities of spectral components were analyzed using the deconvolution procedure. We used Gaussian functions for fitting. Spectra to be compared were normalized to the intensity of the strongest band assigned to the vibrations of the Si-O bond. Both in-situ structural investigations of the surface of the growing Si layer using RHEED and ex-situ examinations of the deposited Si layer using high resolution trans-mission electron microscopy have shown that an amorphous silicon layer forms on Type N substrates at the temperature range from 30 to 420°C Figure Comparison of spectral peaks plotted in Figure The peaks associated with the N-H bond are seen to virtually match for the samples produced at the temperatures of 300, 450 and 650°C; for the samples produced at the temperatures of 30 and 160°C these peaks also coincide but go some higher than those from the higher temperature group. Only the peak recorded at Type N substrate goes separately being the most intense. On the contrary, the peak related to the vibrations of the Si-N bond is much less intense in the spectrum obtained at Type N substrates than those recorded at samples with deposited Si films regardless their processing temperature; and the latter are identical within the standard errors of their parameters. This observation shows that the additional Si-N bonds begin emerging in the silicon nitride layer as soon as the Si film starts forming, even at the temperature close to the room temperature. This process may be caused both by hydrogen diffusion from the interface of Si nitride and Si into the growing Si film and by Si accumulation at the interface. Breaking rate of the N-H bonds initially low at low temperatures likely becomes higher at elevated temperatures. Figure The strong wide band with a maximum at 460 cm -1 is formed by the superposition of several absorption bands related to the vibrations of the Si-O bond with the maximums at about 400, 425, 440, 460 and 510 cm -1 (Figure The absorption band at ∼ 500 cm -1 was not observed in the samples grown at 30°C on Type O and Type S substrates. As it is seen from the above data of our investigation of silicon layers grown on different substrates at different deposition temperatures using different deposition methods, the main changes are observed at the bands assigned to the vibrations of the N-H, Si-H and Si-N bonds. All the Si layer deposition processes used in this work were carried out at the temperatures lower than the deposition temperatures of the Si 3 N 4 and SiO 2 layers. The preliminary UHV thermal treatment at 600°C did not change the absorption spectra of the original substrates. Previously, in CVD-deposited Si 3 N 4 films, the reduction of the hydrogen atoms content was observed only after annealing at the temperatures that exceeded their deposition temperature We have found that the reduction of IR absorption at the lines related to the valence vibrations of the N-H bond at ∼ 3300 cm -1 and the increase in the intensity of the Si-N bond valence vibrations at ∼ 875 cm -1 is observed regardless of the method of depositing the Si layer on a Type N substrate at the growth temperature in the range from 30 to 650°C. Additionally, the absorption band intensity of the Si-N bond vibration at ∼ 500 cm -1 decreases. These changes in the absorption spectra are highly likely result from the reduction of the hydrogen content in the Si 3 N 4 layer: hydrogen atoms diffuse into the growing amorphous or polycrystalline Si layer. They either remain in the growing Si film or desorb from it depending on the deposition temperature. If the latter is 30 or 160°C that is below the hydrogen desorption temperature The observed decrease of intensity of the absorption band peaked at ∼ 500 cm -1 may also be related to the reduction of hydrogen atoms concentration in the Si 3 N 4 layer. For instance, in Ref. Let us consider a possible mechanism for the diffusion of hydrogen atoms from the Si 3 N 4 or SiO 2 dielectric layer into the growing Si layer. This process has an important feature: it occurs even at room temperature of Si deposition. Diffusion at such a low temperature obviously is not of an activation nature. The diffusion activation energy of hydrogen atoms, e.g., in layers of amorphous Si is about 1.5 eV The probability of desorption of hydrogen atoms from the growth surface of the Si layer will also increase. As a result, at low growth temperatures, we observe the bands corresponding to the Si-H bonds in the absorption spectra, and as the temperature is raised, hydrogen atoms start to diffuse through the Si layer onto its surface and desorb It should be noted also that if we take into the account a mechanical stress usually present in the studied layered structures, especially in the Si layer, we should conclude that the stress decreasing the atomic bond breaking barrier in the Si-Si bonds Concluding the article we emphasize its main inference: the growth of a silicon film on a Si 3 N 4 layer deposited using CVD or on a SiO 2 layer formed using thermal oxidation of a silicon substrate is accompanied by the diffusion of hydrogen atoms from the dielectric layer into the growing film. In a wide temperature range, the intensity of the IR absorption bands related to the vibrations of the N-H bonds reduces whereas the intensity of the IR absorption bands connected with the Si-N bonds vibrations increases that demonstrates the escape of hydrogen atoms from a Si 3 N 4 layer. At Si deposition temperatures lower than the temperature of hydrogen atoms desorption from the Si surface, the absorption band assigned to the valence vibrations of the Si-H bond peaked at ∼ 2100 cm -1 emerges in IR spectra obtained at samples deposited both on Si 3 N 4 and SiO 2 dielectric layers that demonstrates the accumulation of hydrogen atoms in silicon films. The experimental results may be explained using a model of hydrogen atoms diffusion proposed in Ref. 