Heat transfer between a silver nanoparticle and surrounding water has been studied using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. The thermal conductance (Kapitza conductance) at the interface between a nanoparticle and surrounding water has been calculated using four different approaches: transient with/without temperature gradient (internal thermal resistance) in the nanoparticle, steady-state non-equilibrium and finally equilibrium simulations. The results of steady-state non-equilibrium and equilibrium are in agreement but differ from the transient approach results. MD simulations results also reveal that in the quenching process of a hot silver nanoparticle, heat dissipates into the solvent over a length-scale of ~ 2nm and over a timescale of less than 5ps. By introducing a continuum solid-like model and considering a heat conduction mechanism in water, it is observed that the results of the temperature distribution for water shells around the nanoparticle agree well with MD results. It is also found that the local water thermal conductivity around the nanoparticle is greater by about 50 percent than that of bulk water. These results have important implications for understanding heat transfer mechanisms in nanofluids systems and also for cancer photothermal therapy, wherein an accurate local description of heat transfer in an aqueous environment is crucial. Today, investigating heat transfer in the vicinity of colloidal nanoparticles, i.e nanoparticles surrounded by water, is of great importance for various applications Additionally, in biological systems, the required time and the quenching condition of heated proteins is essential in order to keep their proper function, and this raises some interesting questions regarding the measurement and calculation of interfacial heat transfer between protein and water In the studies of interfacial heat transfer between a nanoparticle as a solid and water as a fluid, a discontinuity (jump) between the temperatures of two bodies has been observed. This temperature discontinuity plays a significant role in thermal resistance between the particle and water at the nanoscale. The temperature jump has been observed by Kapitza at first in 1941 in the study of heat transfer between a metal and liquid Helium involving both experiments as well as computational simulations at the atomic-scale. Although performing experiments at these small length scales is challenging, some worthwhile works have been recently conducted such as the measurement of Kapitza resistance between silicon and superfluid helium by Ramiere et al. One of the well-known standard methods for investigating the Kapitza resistance or the inverse of that, the interfacial thermal conductance, are molecular dynamics simulations. Note that there are four main different MD simulations techniques that allow us to calculating the interfacial thermal conductance (i), (ii): Transient non-equilibrium molecular dynamics (TNEMD) methods for obtaining interfacial thermal conductance with/without considering a temperature gradient (internal thermal resistance) in a nanoparticle, (iii): Steady-state non-equilibrium method (SNEMD) and finally, (iv): Equilibrium (EMD) method. Regarding the advantages and disadvantages of each of these methods, TNEMD methods are inspired by experimental measurements of interfacial thermal conductance. But as in these latter methods, the nanoparticle temperature changes with time, and hence determining an exact value of temperature for which the interfacial thermal conductance is measured, is quite challenging. In the SNEMD method, nonlinear temperature effects from hot and cold thermostat regions can cause artificial effects in the simulation. On the other hand, in the EMD method an equilibrium temperature is considered for the whole system thus removing any spurious effect related to the use of two thermostats. There have been several theoretical studies aimed at studying heat transfer at interfaces, and we briefly review some of these works. Lervik et al. studied interfacial thermal conductance between an alkane nanodroplet and water based on TNEMD with/without considering internal thermal resistance in the nanoparticle. They revealed that the interfacial thermal conductance increases with decreased particle diameter They showed that the most effective factor on Kapitza resistance is the strength of liquid-solid atomic bonding. As expected, they illustrated that Kapitza resistance decreases with roughness and wetting Hu and Sun by performing SNEMD simulations, investigated the effect of nanopatterning the interface on the value of the Kapitza resistance between water and gold during boiling. They observed that water boiling has no great effect on the interfacial Kapitza resistance Wu et al. using EMD approach and ultrafast transient absorption experiments observed the mechanism of thermal transport across surfactant layers of gold nano-rods in aqueous solution According to their results, the coating polymer caused an increase in the interfacial thermal conductance With respect to the above mentioned studies, all of the four MD approaches have been widely used for calculating the interfacial thermal conductance in different physical situations. So far, and despite their wide use, no comparison has been made among all these methods in a specific case in order to compare and contrast the predictions of each method. The purpose of this article is threefold: First, in this work, we compare TNEMD, SNEMD and EMD methods for calculating the Kapitza resistance at the interface of a silver nanoparticle and water. Second, in the aim of investigating the temperature of different water shells around the nanoparticle when it cools down, the length and timescales associated with heat dissipation are determined. Finally, in an attempt to explore the relevant heat transport mechanisms, a finite element method is used to solve the heat conduction equation for the nanoparticle and its surrounding water and the results are compared to molecular dynamics results. Our model system consists of a silver nanoparticle immersed in water. Water has been modeled using the empirical potential TIP4P/2005 Table Package In this approach, the temperature of the nanoparticle is initially maintained at 400 K, while the water temperature is maintained at 300 K by using Nose-Hoover thermostats for 50 ps. Then, by switching off the nanoparticle thermostat while maintaining the water thermostat, the equilibration of the nanoparticle temperature is recorded over the course of the simulation. Considering the small size of the silver nanoparticle and the large statistical fluctuations of the temperature, the MD results are averaged over 400 independent trajectories each corresponding to a simulation time of 25 ps. This simulation set up is analogous in spirit to experiments that use laser pulses for heating of a nanoparticle In this model, the temperature distribution within the nanoparticle is assumed to be uniform during the cooling process, this model being known as the lumped capacitance model. Hence, the energy balance equation is written for the nanoparticle as follows: where T 2/ , c / , m and A are the temperature, specific heat capacity, mass and surface area of the nanoparticle, respectively. G denotes the interfacial thermal conductance between surrounding water and the nanoparticle. T i is the initial temperature of the nanoparticle and T W is considered to be the surrounding water temperature which is assumed to be constant as a consequence of the use of the applied thermostat. By solving Eq.6, we have: where τ is the nanoparticle relaxation time. Figure According to the lumped model in the previous section, it has been shown that the temperature gradient or the internal thermal resistance in the nanoparticle is small enough to be neglected. In order to reinforce this observation, we consider another model. In some studies T 2/ (r, t = 0) = T > (10) where α 2/ is the nanoparticle thermal diffusivity that is equal to . The boundary condition in Eq.10, shows the equality of heat conduction in the nanoparticle and interfacial thermal transport at the surface of nanoparticle which has a critical role in this model. From the analytical solution of equations 8 to 11, the nanoparticle temperature can be obtained as follows The Bi number in Eq.13 is a dimensionless parameter that indicates the ratio of transferred heat between water and the nanoparticle and heat conduction within the nanoparticle. By fitting MD simulations results to Eq.12, the value of the interfacial thermal conductance is calculated as 5.74×10 8 W/m 2 K. In addition, the Bi number and the silver nanoparticle thermal conductivity are found to be 2.68 and 0.18 W/mK, respectively. The resulting value of thermal conductivity for the silver nanoparticle is low in comparison to what has been recently reported for phonon thermal conductivity of bulk silver (4 W/mK (2 nm to 62 nm In this approach, the nanoparticle and the water molecules around the simulation box boundaries are steadily maintained at a temperature of 395 K using a hot thermostat and 300 K using a cold thermostat, respectively, as shown in Figure where, dE/dt, A and ΔT are the heat flux, surface area of the nanoparticle and the temperature drop between the nanoparticle and the closest water shell around it, respectively. Figure shows the accumulative energy added to the nanoparticle and subtracted from the water versus simulation time. The equality between the slopes of these energy diagrams shows the conservation of energy in our system. It is noticeable that the temperature profile in In this approach, the interfacial thermal conductance is obtained based on fluctuations of the temperature difference between the nanoparticle and surrounding water (at cut-off distance of the nanoparticle and water atomic interactions). Rajabpour and Volz have shown that the interfacial thermal conductance (or the inverse of that, Kapitza resistance RK) in the linear response regime can be calculated from the following equation where kB is the Boltzmann constant, ⟨ ⟩ denotes the phase ensemble average and ∆T(t) is the instantaneous temperature difference between the nanoparticle and the first water shell around the nanoparticle with thickness of 1 nm (corresponding to the cut-off distance of LJ potential for silver-water atomic interactions). A is the surface area of the nanoparticle. The temperatures of the nanoparticle and that of water are recorded during one million time steps in order to calculate the auto-correlation function ⟨∆T(t)∆T(0)⟩. Figure The resulting interfacial thermal conductance based on this approach is equal to G = 4.6×10 8 W/m 2 K. In this model, it is not necessary to apply a temperature difference to the system in comparison to other approaches which is an advantage of EMD method as the interfacial thermal conductance value can be determined from equilibrium fluctuations. In addition, there is no need to calculate the complicated expression of the microscopic heat flux formula in this approach, considering the fact that in Eq.16, only the computation of the temperature difference between the two bodies across the interface is required. The results of the different MD techniques to calculate the interfacial thermal conductance with the corresponding statistical uncertainties are summarized in Table Now that we have discussed and compared the different possible methods to extract the value of the Kapitza resistance, we analyze in detail the local temperature profile in water. In the TNEMD technique presented in section 3.1, the water temperature was maintained at 300 K using a cold thermostat during the cooling process of the heated nanoparticle. The assumption of a uniform temperature profile for the whole surrounding water is questionable. Stoll et al. using an ultra-probe experiment showed the existence of a temperature gradient taking place in the surrounding water shells. In this section, for determining the amount of temperature increase in the surrounding water around the nanoparticle during the cooling process, the water thermostat is switched off and the local temperature field in water shells around the nanoparticle, are recorded. This allows us to understand the mechanism of dissipation of nanoparticle energy into the solvent in order to ascertain the spatial and temporal scales associated with the cooling process. The initial temperature of the nanoparticle was set to 400K, while the initial water temperature for further water shells is on the order of temperature fluctuations and can be thus neglected. These small increases in temperatures of surrounding water shells may be understood based on the high heat capacity of water that acts like a natural temperature damper (small temperature response to the incoming heat). The peak time of the temperature for the different water shells are shown in Figure In the previous section, we observed a small increase in water temperature, which persists up to a distance about 2nm away from the nanoparticle. In order to understand this, a simple continuum heat equation model is considered to understand an effective mechanism that describes heat transport within surrounding water well. It is well established from numerous other studies that both hydrophobic and hydrophilic interfaces introduce structuring in the water in close vicinity to them . T > is the initial temperature of the nanoparticle that equals to 400 K. T 9O is the temperature of water far from the nanoparticle which is assumed to be 300 K based on MD results which show that water shells at a distance greater than r =2 nm, have temperatures approximately around 300 K. In order to solve the coupled equations of 17 and 18, the thermo-physical properties of the nanoparticle and the surrounding water around it are needed. To this aim, we assume that the nanoparticle shares the characteristics of bulk silver. Therefore, the high thermal conductivity of silver result in Eq.18 resulting like a lumped model. The specific heat capacity and thermal conductivity of bulk water are assumed to be 4.2 kJ/kgK and 0.8 W/mK, respectively, obtained from an MD simulation based on TIP4P/2005 The density of water shells is directly obtained from molecular dynamics simulation as shown in Figure It is evident that there is a qualitative agreement between temperature distribution of water shells around the nanoparticle from MD simulations and FEM results. This can confirm that the continuum solid-like heat diffusion model captures the important physics associated with the length and time-scale associated with the evolution of the water temperature in close vicinity of the nanoparticle, despite the nanoscale structural changes in water induced by the presence of the nanoparticle. One of the assumptions of the previous analysis was that the thermal conductivity of water at the interface is the same as that of the bulk. In order to assess the sensitivity of our analysis to the choice of the water thermal conductivity, the difference between MD and FEM results for the temperature of the first water shell in various thermal conductivities is computed as follows: where N is the number of recorded data in the quenching process. As shown in Figure Hence, it can be revealed that the thermal conductivity of first water shell around the nanoparticle is likely higher than thermal conductivity of bulk water by about 50%. Qualitatively, this result is not surprising, as the first water shell due to its enhanced structuring should be a better thermal conductor as bulk liquid water. However, the qualitative features of the dissipation mechanism are also well predicted using the bulk thermal conductivity of water. In this paper, the thermal transport mechanisms between a nanoparticle and surrounding water was investigated using molecular dynamics simulations and compared with continuum modeling. At first, the interfacial thermal conductance based on four different MD approaches was calculated. The results from all of four approaches were within the same order of magnitude. SNEMD and EMD approaches showed good agreement (under 10% difference) with each other while transient techniques displayed slightly greater difference (about 25%) with SNEMD and EMD values. MD results also reveal that in the cooling process of a hot silver nanoparticle, the heat dissipates into the solvent over a length-scale of ~ 2nm and over a timescale of less than 5ps. By introducing a continuum solid-like model and considering a heat conduction mechanism in water, it is observed that the results of the temperature distribution for water shells around the nanoparticle agree with the MD results. Moreover, with introducing a solid-like continuum model and comparing the results with the MD simulations, it is shown that the dominant mechanism in heat transfer in water near the nanoparticle on these timescales involves only conduction and not convection. It is also revealed that the local thermal conductivity of water shell adjacent to the nanoparticle is higher than that of bulk water by about 50%. Our results have important implications in the understanding and development of engineering devices relevant for heat transport as well as in medical applications for thermal therapy cancer treatment methods. In the future, it will be interesting to examine how the heat dissipation mechanism is sensitive to both the chemical details of the interface being considered as well as the type of solvent.