We present the complex harmonic magnetic susceptibilities χ n = χ′ n -iχ′′ n (n = 1, 3) of the FeSe 0.5 Te 0.5 polycrystalline superconducting sample. The ac magnetic susceptibility is measured as a function of various external perturbations such as temperature T, the ac magnetic field amplitude H ac , frequency υ, and the magnitude of dc bias field H dc . The inphase (χ′ n ) and out of phase (χ′′ n ) components of the fundamental and third harmonics of ac susceptibility are found to vary as a function of the ac drive field. Particularly, the curves shift to lower temperatures with increasing H ac . Contrary to ac magnetic field H ac , no noticeable change has been observed within the range of the applied dc magnetic field of H dc = 0 Oe to 20 Oe. At a fixed ac field, H ac = 0.5 Oe both parts of the third harmonics show the frequency dependence. The imaginary part of third harmonics, χ′′ 3 shows two peaks as a function of frequency, one negative in magnitude and another is positive. The negative peak shifts towards the lower temperature and positive peak are shifted towards the higher temperature as we increase the frequency. To better understand the ac magnetic response under the influence of various perturbations, we have analyzed the polar plots (Cole-Cole) of the complex ac susceptibility for both the harmonics. Our analysis suggests that the studied sample is in a vortex glass state, characterized by a collective flux creep within Bean's model and the Kim-Anderson model is ruled out. The discovery of superconductivity at moderately high transition temperature (T c = 26 K) in the LaFeAsO 1-x F x (x ̴ 0.11) layered compound triggered considerable amount of research activities to look for higher transition temperatures in this class of new materials; being popularly known as Iron-based superconductors In all the five different families of Fe-based superconducting materials, the binary FeCh-11 type (Ch = S, Se, and Te) system is structurally the simplest (anti-PbO type, space group P4/nmm), one as being composed of only two elements and hence is considered to be the key to hold some of the fascinating physics of unconventional superconductivity in these materials. The FeSe 1-δ in off-stoichiometry form shows superconducting transition at ~ 8 K in ambient environment Recently, the transition temperature is raised up to 110 K in FeSe monolayer on the STO substrate Over the decade, the binary FeSe system has been extensively studied by means of structural, electronic, morphological properties The complex magnetic susceptibility is a very sensitive technique to investigate the dynamical magnetic properties of the vortex state and the non-linear processes in flux pinning transport Nevertheless, the critical state model fails to explain some points related to the behaviour of higher harmonics under various perturbations. In this case, it is necessary to consider the influence of linear; thermally assisted flux flow (TAFF), flux flow (FF) and nonlinear; flux creep (FC) dynamical dissipative regimes and the properties of different vortex lattice phases In this paper, we report a comprehensive study of the complex magnetic susceptibility of the FeSe 0.5 Te 0.5 polycrystalline superconducting sample. The fundamental and third harmonics of the ac complex susceptibility has been studied as a function of the temperature T (2 ≤ T ≤ 15 K), the ac magnetic field amplitude H ac (0.2 Oe ≤ H ac ≤ 5 Oe), frequency υ (333 Hz ≤ υ ≤ 9999 Hz), and the magnitude of a superimposed dc field H dc (0 Oe ≤ H dc ≤ 20 Oe) to understand the vortex dynamics and granularity effects of the superconducting and mixed state. The peak position of the imaginary part of complex ac susceptibility shifted towards to lower temperatures with increasing the applied ac magnetic field. The superconducting transition temperature determined by dc magnetic field does not have much influence of the ac -dc magnetic field and frequency. Our detailed ac susceptibility results in terms of the variation of various harmonics with applied bias ac field and variation in frequency indicate that studied Fe chalcogenide superconductor follows the vortex glass state within Bean's model and the Kim-Anderson model is ruled out. The polycrystalline FeSe 0.5 Te 0.5 sample is synthesized by standard solid-state reaction route using high purity 3N Fe, Se and Te in their elemental form. The precursors were weighed in their stoichiometric ratio and then ground thoroughly using mortal pestle in a controlled atmosphere. The mixed material pressed into a pellet and encapsulated in an evacuated (10 -3 Torr) quartz tube and then heated at 750 o C for 12 hours. After that, the furnace is allowed to cool down to room temperature slowly. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) are taken on Rigaku diffractometer with Cu-K α (λ = 1.54 Å) to check the phase purity of the sample. The crystal structure is refined by the Rietveld method using open source FullProf program. No other extra peaks of any parasitic phases are observed in the fitted data, so the sample is considered as homogeneous and pure in phase. The details of the sample preparation and the magnetic and transport properties are reported somewhere The ac-susceptibility measurements were carried out using a Quantum Design AC Measurement System (ACMS) option for the Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS). The sample in the form of a rectangular slab was mounted on the experimental setup and measured its magnetic response under an applied alternating ac and dc magnetic fields. The measurement has been carried out at the various frequencies (υ = 333 to 9999 Hz), and the amplitude (0.0 to 5 Oe) of the ac applied a magnetic field. Fitted and observed room temperature powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) patterns of studied FeSe 0.5 Te 0.5 sample are shown in Fig. Generally, high T c superconductors show two different peaks in the imaginary part of complex susceptibility, which are accounted for the inter-and intra-granular transitions. In the currently studied sample, we do not observe any separate peak at lowest applied ac field also The Cole-Cole plots, χ′′ 1 (χ′ 1 ) for fundamental and third harmonics obtained from The temperature dependence of the fundamental and third harmonic of ac complex magnetic susceptibility at representative frequencies for studied FeSe 0.5 Te 0.5 sample is shown in figure This behaviour is different from the general character high-T c superconductors where interand intra-grain peaks can be observed separately. Figure We also performed a similar analysis on the 3 rd harmonics of the ac magnetic susceptibility for studied FeSe 0.5 Te 0.5 sample. Figure The out of phase component (χ′′ 3 ) peak shows a reduction in peak height and shifts toward the higher temperature as we increase the frequency. The imaginary component is also strongly influenced by varying frequency. Initially, a small positive peak (maximum) near to transition temperature is found which is further followed by a subsequent deeper negative peak (minimum) at a lower temperature. The positive peak diminishes with increasing frequency and completely disappears at the highest frequency (9999 Hz), together with a constant increase in depth of the following minimum. The obtained curve is different from the Bean critical state geometry Figure The Cole-Cole plots of third-harmonic as a function of frequency are shown in figure Where E a is the activation energy for the relaxation process, ω 0 is the characteristic frequency of the clusters, and T 0 is the Vogel-Fulcher temperature, which is the measure of inter-cluster interaction strength. The phenomenological Vogel-Fulcher (VF) law takes accounts of the interaction of magnetic clusters. In no interaction scenarios, i.e., T 0 = 0, the Vogel-Fulcher equation is transformed to the Arrhenius equation The Vogel-Fulcher law fit to the experimental data of the FeSe 0.5 Te 0.5 sample is shown in figure To gain more insight of the vortex dynamics of the studied FeSe 0.5 Te 0.5 sample, we have also measured the first and third harmonics at the different dc biased magnetic field, H dc = 5 Oe, 10 Oe, and 20 Oe (shown in figure In conclusion, the fundamental and third harmonics of the complex magnetic susceptibility has been studied for FeSe 0.5 Te 0.5 superconducting polycrystalline samples as functions of the temperature T, at various amplitudes, H ac , and frequency, υ of ac magnetic field, and the magnitude of dc bias field H dc . The studied sample shows strong inter-granular coupling. Our analysis suggests that sample is in a vortex glass state, characterized by a collective flux creep. To better understand the ac magnetic response under the influence of various perturbations we have analyzed the polar plot (Cole-Cole) of the complex ac susceptibility for both the harmonics. T f (K) Oe 10 Oe 20 Oe (b)