Linear carbon chains (LCCs) have been shown to grow inside double-walled carbon nanotubes (DWCNTs) but isolating them from this hosting material represents one of the most challenging tasks towards applications. Herein we report the extraction and separation of LCCs inside single-wall carbon nanotubes (LCCs@SWCNTs) extracted from a double walled host LCCs@DWCNTs by applying a combined tip-ultrasonic and density gradient ultracentrifugation (DGU) process. High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), optical absorption, and Raman spectroscopy show that not only short LCCs but clearly long LCCs (LLCCs) can be extracted and separated from the host. Moreover, the LLCCs can even be condensed by DGU. The Raman spectral frequency of LCCs remains almost unchanged regardless of the presence of the outer tube of the DWCNTs. This suggests that the major importance of the outer tubes is making the whole synthesis viable. We have also been able to observe the interaction between the LCCs and the inner tubes of DWCNTs, playing a major role in modifying the optical properties of LCCs. Our extraction method suggests the possibility towards the complete isolation of LCCs from CNTs. Linear carbon chains (LCCs) draw increasing attention because of their properties such as superior stiffness among the known materials and a direct electronic band gap, CNTs have proven to be excellent nanoreactors inside which hollow core, structures like atomic wires The environmental effects on the LCCs are mainly ruled by the inner tubes of DWCNTs rather than the outer ones, making the modification of optical properties one of the most interesting outcomes of this extraction. The LCCs@inner tubes (LCCs@INCNTs) were extracted by tip-ultrasonication, and then DGU was applied to separate the extracted LCCs@INCNTs from the empty outer tubes as well as other remaining DWCNTs. As seen in Figure Generally, the INCNTs are very long and usually formed into large bundles as shown in Fig. The DWCNTs and LCCs@DWCNTs were processed by the tip-ultrasonication with exactly the same parameters and then performing the DGU simultaneously. As shown in Fig. The length distribution of LCCs was carefully checked by contour Raman spectroscopy. Two separated regions in Fig. Detailed analysis of the ratio among long/intermediate/short LCCs in the separated samples is shown in Fig. Compared to the pristine solid LCCs@DWCNTs, We have demonstrated the feasibility to extract LCCs@SWCNTs from LCCs@DWCNTs: Both short and long LCCs can be extracted, confirmed by powerful contour optical absorption and Raman spectroscopy. The DGU not only can separate the extracted LCCs@SWCNTs and the LCCs@DWCNTs, but also can concentrate the LCCs@SWCNTs. Although the strong tip-ultrasonication destroys most of the LCCs, decreasing the power of ultrasonication can decrease the damage ratio by about 50 times. Also, we confirmed that the interaction between the LCCs and the inner tubes affects the optical properties of the LCCs, whereas the outer tube does not. This interaction should be considered and overcome when extracting the LCCs completely out of the SWCNTs. The DWCNTs were synthesized by high-vacuum chemical vapor deposition and used as templates for synthesis of LLCCs by high temperature annealing at high vacuum. Finally, the separated solution was collected from the top to bottom layer by layer (each for 0.7 mL). The separated solution was measured under ambient conditions using a triple monochromator Raman spectrometer (Dilor XY with a liquid-nitrogen cooled Si CCD) excited by 568 and 584 nm lasers (R6G dye laser). The measurements were taken in macro-mode with 5 mm of laser spot and 4 mW of power. The spectral resolution is about 2 cm -1 . If not otherwise specified, all Raman spectra were normalized to the G + -band. The optical absorption was preformed by using a UV-VIS-NIR spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-3600). For ease of comparison, the spectra were normalized to their optical density at 900 nm. One drop of the No.5 solution consisting of LCCs@SWCNTs was put on the grid and rinsed throughly by hot water as well as ethanol on a filter with vacuum pump to remove the IO and other surfactants. To avoid excessive damage from the electron irradiation, aberrationcorrected TEM (FEI Titan 80-300) with Cs-corrector was performed at 80 KV acceleration voltage with a modified filament extraction voltage for information limit enhancement (gun lens 3 and extention voltage 2000). Images were recorded on a slow-scan CCD camera type Gatan Ultrascsan XP 1000 (FEI Titan). Experimentally applied electron-fluxes ranged from 3×10 6 to 5×10 6 e -/nm 2 /s. TEM specimens were heated in air at 150 • C for 7 min shortly before insertion into the TEM column. All imaging experiments were carried out at room temperature.