We propose a new approach to study the long time dynamics of the wave kinetic equation in the statistical description of acoustic turbulence. The approach is based on rewriting the discrete version of the wave kinetic equation in the form of a chemical reaction network, then employing techniques used to study the Global Attractor Conjecture to investigate the long time dynamics of the newly obtained chemical system. We show that the solution of the chemical system converges to an equilibrium exponentially in time. In addition, a resonance broadening modification of the acoustic wave kinetic equation is also studied with the same technique. For the near-resonance equation, if the resonance broadening frequency is larger than a threshold, the solution of the system goes to infinity as time evolves. Describing the behavior of a spatially homogeneous field of random, weakly interacting dispersive waves, the theory of wave turbulence has been very successful in explaining the processes of spectral energy transfer in several areas of modern science, such as oceanography, plasmas, planetary waves, acoustic turbulence etc. The derivation of kinetic equations to describe how weakly interacting waves share their energies in anharmonic crystal lattices in solid state physics go back to Peierls, in the early 30's In where waves, the dispersion relation ω p = ω(p) is given by the phonon dispersion law: In this paper, besides the exact resonance equation ( where (5) Indeed, equation ( In general, the 3-wave kinetic equation plays an important role in the theory of weak turbulence, and has been rigorously studied in It is the goal of our work to make the connection between equations (1), (4) and chemical reaction systems. Understanding the qualitative behavior of deterministically modeled chemical reaction systems has been a subject of great interests during the past four decades In this paper, we discover, for the first time, the connection between the wave kinetic equation (1) and chemical reaction networks. We prove that the discrete version of (1) can be associated with a chemical reaction network which takes the form and will be described in detail in Section 2.3. As a consequence, techniques that have been used to study the Global Attractor Conjecture in chemical reaction network theory can be applied to study the long time behavior of the wave kinetic equation (1). We prove that as time evolves, the solution of the discrete version of (1) converges to a steady state exponentially in time. The Dirac-delta functions in However, in related systems, it is shown that exact resonances with ω p = ω p 1 + ω p 2 do not capture some important physical effects where Λ is the resonance broadening frequency. By extending the chemical reaction network approach used to study the discrete versions of (1) and (4), we prove that: • There exists a positive constant Λ 0 such that when 0 Λ < Λ 0 , the solution of the discrete version of (4) converges to an unique equilibrium exponential having the form |p| -1 in time, similar to the exact resonance case, which is the same as the equilibrium solution of the exact resonance case. Note that when Λ = 0 the equation ( • There exists a positive constant Λ 1 such that when Λ Λ 1 , the solution of the discrete version of (4) exits any compact set as t tends to infinity. Besides the 3-wave kinetic equation, the rigorous study of 4-wave kinetic equation is a very important subject (see The plan of our paper is the following: • In section 2, we show that the discrete version of equation ( We prove that depending on the resonance broadening frequency Λ, the solution of the discrete version of the equation may converge to the equilibrium exponentially or go to infinity as time evolves. A reaction network approach to the exact resonance equation 2.1. The dynamical system associated with the exact resonance equation. Let us consider the discrete version of (1), which is described below. Let L R denote the lattice of integer points The discrete version of the quantum Boltzmann equation ( for all p 1 in L R , where ω(p) is defined in (3). Decoupling the exact resonance equation. Observe that when p 1 = 0, V p 1 ,p 2 ,p 3 is also 0, and therefore, ḟ0 = 0, Taking into account the fact ω(p) = c|p|, note that if p 1 , p 2 , p 3 ∈ L R are different from 0, and for in the second sum of (8)), then p 1 , p 2 , p 3 must be collinear and on the same side of the origin. Therefore, we infer that there exists a vector P and Since L R is bounded, it follows that k 1 , k 2 , k 3 belong to a finite set of integer indices I = {1, . . . , I}. Arguing similarly for the first sum in (8), we deduce that ( Note that the system of equations If we denote , with an abuse of notation, we obtain the following new system for the ray The conservation of energy then follows or equivalently These conservation relations also follow easily from the rewriting of equations 2.3. The chemical reaction network associated with the exact resonance equation. For X ∈ R n >0 and α ∈ R n 0 , we denote by X α the monomial Π n i=1 X α i i . Definition 1. Consider a chemical reaction of the form where V is a positive parameter, called reaction rate constant. Then the mass-action dynamical system generated by this reaction is where in which X i is the concentration of the chemical species A i . For the case of a network that contains several reactions for 1 j m, its associated mass-action dynamical system is given by In this section, we will show that the system (11) has the form ( If we denote by F k the concentration of the species X k , we will show that, for appropriate choices of the reaction rate constants in ( In order to describe the connection between the mass-action system given by reactions of the form ( and for the reaction ( For example, consider the reaction For the reaction Therefore the rate of change of the species By exchanging the roles of A k 2 and A k 3 in . Therefore, the total rate of change of A k 1 due to the reactions in ( Case 2: We choose the reaction rate constant of 2A Consider the first reaction The rate of change of the species For the second reaction As a result, the rate of change of A k 1 due to the reactions ( In order to compute the total rate of change of A k 1 , we need the combination of ( which, by ( - which can be written as Equation A Lyapunov function inspired by the associated reaction network. The observation above is very interesting because it shows a very strong connection between our system To illustrate this idea in a very simple way, we select in the system above three values Then this simplified "sub-system" can be rewritten as which can be developed into (30) Consider the change of variables We then get (31) By following the approach in which, when translated back into the F k coordinates has a very simple form: In the next section, we will see that this construction does indeed give rise to a global strict Lyapunov function for our (full) dynamical system of interest. 2.5. Convergence to equilibrium. Theorem 2. For any positive initial condition, the solution of the discrete wave turbulence equation (8) converges to an equilibrium state f * = (f * p ) p∈L R . For each ray {kP 0 } k 1 there exists a positive constant ρ(P 0 ) such that if p = kP 0 then . Moreover, the solution f (t) of (8) converges to f * exponentially fast, in the following sense: there exist positive constants Proof. By using the decoupling and the change of variables discussed in the previous sections, for each ray {kP 0 } k 1 , we can reduce the study of f to F , which satisfies Step 1: The Lyapunov function. We define the function and we will show that L is a Lyapunov function for By defining in which the number 1 stands for the k-th coordinate, we then have In this case the vector β -α in for all k = k 1 + k 2 . Equation ( we deduce that ρ is unique, i.e., is the only equilibrium point that satisfies the same conservation relation as the initial condition. Step 2: Differential inclusions and persistence. Since the Lyapunov function L is infinite on the boundary, we conclude that the system is persistent. Therefore, by using the existence of the globally defined strict Lyapunov function L, and the LaSalle invariance principle, it follows that all trajectories converge to the unique positive equilibrium F * that we discussed in Step 1. Step 3: Exponential rate of convergence. Despite the fact that the system ( with reaction rate functions different from mass action kinetics. In other words, by converting the irreversible system ( Let us start with our change of variable, which takes the following form We will now study G k instead of F k . To do this, we convert the system (28) into Ġk 1 Suppose that G represents the column vector (G 1 , . . . , G I ) T . Let us also denote by A k , with an abuse of notation, the vector , in which the only element that different from 0 is the k-th one. As discussed about, we convert F k into G k . This technique allows us to changes the irreversible system ( Otherwise, if k 1 = k 2 , we write Using these reaction rate functions, the system (38) could be converted into Equivalently, we can also write the following equation for the new reversible system where y ↔ y belongs to the set of reversible reactions with Since we have converted ( Next, we will follow the techniques introduced in since V y↔y (G * ) y -V y↔y (G * ) y = 0 in which the inner product * is defined as Now, we compute the Jacobian of R at the equilibrium point G * , where the second equality is due to the fact that since G * is an equilibrium we have that S(G * ) = 0. Since   is a diagonal matrix and J := Jac(S(G * )) is negative definite, then D 1/2 JD 1/2 is also negative definite with respect to this inner product. Since it follows that D 1/2 JD 1/2 and DJ have the same eigenvectors, so DJ is negative definite. In other words, Jac(R(G * )) is negative definite. The exponential rate of convergence . then follows from the fact that the Jacobian above is negative definite. This leads to the conclusion of the theorem. Remark 3. In the proof above we could have used the Lyapunov function and all the computations remain the same. A reaction network approach to the near resonance equation 3.1. The dynamical system associated to the near resonance equation. Similar as in Section 2, let us consider the discrete version of (4), which is described below. Let L R denote the lattice of integer points The discrete version of the near-resonance equation ( for all p 1 in L R . Since L R contains a finite number of grid points, then there exists a positive number Λ * satisfying Λ * = min See Figure of the discrete wave turbulence equation Moreover, the solution f (t) of (46) converges to f * exponentially fast, in the following sense: there exist positive constants The reason for (49) to hold is that when Λ < Λ * , the resonance broadening equation becomes the exact resonance one. • If 2Λ * Λ, where Λ * is defined in (48): For any positive initial condition, the solution of the discrete wave turbulence equation (46) exits any compact set K ⊂ (0, ∞) |L R | as t tends to infinity, and moreover we have lim inf Proof. Step 1: The Lyapunov function. We define the function and we will show that L is a Lyapunov function for Note that the above inequality is strict unless for all p 1 = p 2 + p 3 and Step 2: The two cases of Λ. Define Z p = 1 Fp . The equilibrium set of (51) satisfies the following system of linear equations. for all p 1 = p 2 + p 3 and ||p 2 | + |p 3 | -|p 1 || Λ. We will show that the system (53) has no solution by contradiction. The system for all p 1 = p 2 + p 3 and ||p 2 | + |p 3 | -|p 1 || = 0. For each ray p, we denote by e p the closet point of L R to the origin on this ray. Suppose that p is chosen such that |e p | = Λ * . Let us consider all of the points of L R , which is a set of the form {e p , 2e q , 3e q , • • • , Je q }. On this set, the exact resonance equation ( and has a unique solution where λ is a positive constant. By a similar argument, let us consider the ray -e p ; then -e p is also the closest point of L R to the origin on this ray. Thus, we know where λ is a positive constant, for all q on the ray of -e p . This leads to a contradiction. Since the system (53) has no solution, for any compact set K ⊂ (0, ∞) |L R | , there exists ∆ K > 0 such that ḟ • ∇L = = - Therefore f exits any compact set K ⊂ (0, ∞) |L R | as t tends to infinity. In particular, consider the compact sets of the form x p ε 0 and ||x|| M }. Note that the set {x ∈ (0, ∞) is a level set of the Lyapunov function L(f ) (see also Remark 5 below). Consider now a solution f (t) of equation ( and all the computations remain the same. The explicit expression for the Kolmogorov-type spectrum of acoustic turbulence of equation ( An open question is if this is also a spectrum of the discrete system. In our work, we prove that |p| -1 is a global attractor for the discrete system. In a future work, we will try to compare these two solutions. We suspect that it may be not possible to find a Lyapunov function for |p| -3/2 despite the fact that it is possible to find a Lyapunov function for |p| -1 , as shown above. Moreover, we will also plan to study the behavior of the system when Λ * Λ 2Λ * .