Developing efficient anode materials with low electrode voltage, high specific capacity and superior rate capability is urgently required on the road to commercially viable sodium-ion batteries (SIBs). Aiming at finding a new SIB anode material, we investigate the electrochemical properties of Na x TiO 2 compounds with unprecedented penta-oxygen-coordinated trigonal bipyramid (TB) structures by using the first-principles calculations. Identifying the four different TB phases, we perform the optimization of their crystal structures and calculate their energetics such as sodium binding energy, formation energy, electrode potential and activation energy for Na ion migration. The computations reveal that TB-I phase can be the best choice among the four TB phases for the SIB anode material due to relatively low volume change under 4% upon Na insertion, low electrode voltage under 1.0 V with a possibility of realizing the highest specific capacity of ∼335 mA h g -1 from fully sodiation at x = 1, and reasonably low activation barriers under 0.35 eV at the Na content from x = 0.125 to x = 0.5. Through the analysis of electronic density of states and charge density difference upon sodiation, we find that the Na x TiO 2 compounds in TB phases change from electron insulating to electron conducting material due to the electron transfer from Na atom to Ti ion, offering the Ti 4+ /Ti 3+ redox couple for SIB operation. Along with the depletion of fossil fuels and serious concerns on global warming, ever growing energy demand in human life and industry highlights an importance of exploiting sustainable and natural clean energy sources such as solar and wind power The intercalation type materials can easily suppress such problems over cyclic stability and safety issues due to their "rocking-chair" mechanism and thus further researches to find better Na-intercalation compounds based on non-carbon materials are still in progress. Inter alia TiO 2 polymorph can intercalate Na + cation reversibly and thus can be used as potential anode materials for SIBs In this work, we propose that TiO 2 crystals with TB structures are highly promising anode material for SIBs based on the first-principles DFT calculations. Our calculation reveals that this unique microporous crystal structure can afford the exceptionally high reversiblie capacity of ∼335 mA h g -1 utilizing one Na ion intercalation into every TiO 2 formula unit. Moreover, its electrode voltage appears to be as low as ∼0.56 V, indicating the increased energy density when used as anode material, and the result on ion migration also supports the applicability of this compound as SIB anode material. Titania has rich polymorph from traditional bulky phases of rutile, anatase and brookite to layered porous phases such as ramsdellite-and hollandite-like structures. These titania phases can be characterized to be composed of TiO 6 octahedra as their building block. As newly suggested by Ma et al. The pseudopotential plane-wave method within the DFT framework was used to carry out the first-principles calculations, as implemented in Quantum ESPRESSO (QE) package (version 6.2) The migration paths and the corresponding activation energies for sodium ion migrations were determined by using the climbing image nudged elastic band (NEB) method We first checked a reliability of the selected PBEsol XC functional with the crystalline lattice constants of the precedent rutile, anatase, hollandite and ramsdellite TiO 2 phases determined by structural optimizations in comparison with those by PBE calculation and experiment. Table We then investigated the relative stabilities of the TiO 2 polymorph by comparing their calculated DFT total energies per formula unit after structural optimizations for anatase, rutile, ramsdellite, hollandite, and TB-I, -II, -III and -IV phases. Figure Figure In order to estimate the cycling stability of electrode materials during insertion/extraction of Na ions, we investigated the crystalline structures of Na-inserted TiO 2 compounds Na x TiO 2 in TB phases, and calculated the formation energies of these compounds and the binding energies of Na ion. As mentioned above, our supercells for TB phases include 8 formula units and thus the number of inserted Na ions could be from 0 to 8, allowing the Na content x = 0.0, 0.125, 0.25, 0.375, 0.5, 0.625, 0.75, 0.875, and 1.0 in Na x TiO 2 . In Table where E Na x TiO 2 and E TiO 2 are the total energies per formula unit of Na x TiO 2 and TiO 2 compounds, respectively, and E Na gas is the total energy of Na in gas phase (i.e., isolated Na atom). The sodium binding energies were calculated to be negative in the four different TB phases, giving an implication of exothermic process for Na insertion, and they decrease in magnitude as increasing the Na content x in overall (see Figure During the charge/discharge process, electrodes in general experience a multi-step phase transition, induced by inserting the guest ions, and the relative phase stability of the intermediate compound with a certain ratio x of inserted ion can be estimated by the formation energy. The formation energy of Na-inserted TiO 2 compound, Na x TiO 2 , from the two end compounds, i.e., pristine TiO 2 and fully sodiated NaTiO 2 , can be calculated using their corresponding total energies as follows, The calculated formation energies of Na x TiO 2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) compounds in the four different TB phases are shown in Figure In order to get more detailed insight of cyclic stability, we considered the change tendency of lattice constants and the relative volume expansion rate (r vol ) as increasing the Na content x. The change tendencies of lattice constants and volume were observed to be quite different according to the phase. In TB-I phase, the lattice constant a gradually decreases from 11.96 to 10.76 Å as increasing x, while b and c increase from 3.77 and 8.89 Å to 3.96 and 9.74 Å, resulting in the gradual increase of r vol from 0.58 to 3.48% (see Table We then estimated the electrochemical performance of Na x TiO 2 compounds in the TB phases by calculating the electrode potential and the activation energy for sodium ion migration. To compute the step intercalation electrode potential vs. Na/Na + within the DFT framework, we considered the following general cell reaction, (x jx i )Na + + (x jx i )e -+ Na x i TiO 2 → Na x j TiO 2 where x j and x i are the adjacent Na contents, which can be identified in the convex hull plot of formation energy, and e is the elementary charge. Then, the step discharge voltage can be calculated by taking the DFT total energy difference in between the adjacent Na-inserted TiO 2 compounds, by using the following equation where E is the DFT total energy of the corresponding compound. Figure In order to assess the rate capability of TB compounds, which is one of the important factors for evaluating the suitability of electrode materials, we calculated the activation energies for Na ion migrations by using the NEB method. Here, we considered two different limit conditions of Na concentraion, i.e., Na-poor (x = 0.125) and Na-rich (x = 0.875) conditions. Figure Finally, we calculated the electronic structures of the Naintercalated TiO 2 compounds in TB phases to get an insightful understanding of electron transfer and chemical bond. From the viewpoint of battery operation, the electrode materials should be both electron and ion conductors, because the electrons traveled through the external circuit merge with the Na + ions in the electrode passing through it. Based on the above consequence that TB-I phase has the most superior electrochemical properties among the four TB phases, we only considered the TB-I phase in this subsection by calculating the projected density of states (PDOS) and electronic charge density differences. Figure The electron transfer upon sodiation of TiO 2 can be shown more intuitively by plotting the electronic charge density difference, defined as In this work we provide an insightful understanding of electrochemical properties of sodiated TiO 2 compounds in pentaoxygen-coordinated trigonal bipyramid phases, aiming at finding the potentiality of effective anode material of sodium-ion battery. Identifying the four different crystalline structures as TB-I, -II, -III, and -IV phases, these structures were found to have comparable relative stabilities with the precedent TiO 2 phases by comparing the DFT total energies calculated with the PBEsol XC functional. Various supercells were constructed to make models of sodiated Na x TiO 2 compounds in these TB phases, including 8 TiO 2 formula units and up to 8 Na atoms, with the Na content from x = 0 to x = 1 with an interval of 0.125, and their crystalline structures and energetics were investigated by using the PBEsol calculations. The calculated sodium binding energies indicate the strong binding between Na and the host, and the exothermic reaction of Na insertion into TiO 2 in TB phases. Upon sodiation, TB-I and -IV phases were found to be expanded with the relative volume expansion rate of under 4%, while TB-II and -III phases to be shrunk and expanded within the range of ±10%. We also identified the intermediate structures lying on the convex hull lines by calculating the formation energies, and estimated the electrode voltage by using these structures, revealing that TB-I, -III, and -IV phases exhibit the low first step voltages around 1.0 V with specific capacity of ∼335 mA h g -1 but TB-II phase cannot be fully sodiated due to negative voltage from x = 0.5. Activation barriers for Na ion migrations were determined, indicating that the TB-I phase has the lowest activation barriers of under 0.35 eV at the Na content from x = 0.125 to x = 0.5. Through the analysis of PDOS and charge density difference upon sodiation, moreover, TB-I phase changes from electron insulating to electron conducting material due to the electron transfer from Na atom to Ti ion. Based on these findings, TB-I among the four TB phases can be concluded to be the best choice for SIB anode material with reasonably low electrode voltage, high specific capacity and superior rate capability. We want to emphasize that the high specific capacity of ∼335 mA h g -1 in particular is possible only by taking advantage of microporous and, at the same time, stable structural framework of unprecedented TB phases, which has never been achieved with other titania phases or any other materials based on rocking-chair mechanism. We use the PAW pseudopotentials Na.pbesol-spn-kjpaw psl.1.0.0.UPF, Ti.pbesol-spn-kjpaw psl.1.0.0.UPF and O.pbesol-nl-kjpaw psl.1.0.0.UPF from http://pslibrary.quantum-espresso.org.