We use a structure analysis technique that quantifies cluster geometries using machine learning to identify a bicapped square antiprism (BSAP) as the nearest-neighbor cluster involved in the glass transition in Pd82Si18, a prototype metal-metalloid metallic glass. BSAPs have slow dynamics and grow significantly in concentration during cooling, like icosahedra in other systems. These results are evidence that some preferred structures universally contribute to the glass transition and show that analysis of interatomic geometry can find important structures not revealed by topology. Topological descriptors have had great success as abstract descriptions of the structure of disordered materials. Topological descriptors are often derived from a connectivity graph with atoms as vertices and atomic bonds as edges. The connectivity graph preserves the topology of the structure but abandons the atomic coordinates. Various topological descriptors are derived from the connectivity graph, which differ in the structural length scale they describe. For example, common neighbor analysis (CNA), which is highly localized, produces a triplet of integers that describes the topology of two atoms and their joint neighboring atoms VI analysis is perhaps the most common abstraction of metallic glass atomic structure. It is derived from the Voronoi tessellation of a material's structure, which describes the structure as the set of 3D polyhedra surrounding every atom and consisting of the space closer to that atom than any other atom. The tessellation is a complete geometrical representation of a structure with a one-toone correspondence to the atomic positions. The representation becomes topological when the polyhedra are abstracted into a set of integers <n3, n4, n5, n6, ...> that report the number of faces of the polyhedra with ni edges. The VI representation of metallic glass structure has significant explanatory power in some systems. For example, in metal-metal MGs, atoms with icosahedral topology such as <0 0 12 0> were shown to correlate with properties including glass-forming ability [4-7], dynamic heterogeneities VI analysis is less useful for metal-metalloid glasses. The dominant topology from VI analysis is the tricapped trigonal prisms, but their population does not change significantly with temperature, nor are they reported to exhibit slow dynamics Here we employ a recently developed structure analysis technique called motif extraction Motif extraction We applied motif extraction to a Pd82Si18 MG with 9826 atoms quenched using molecular dynamics (MD) in an NPT ensemble from the liquid state at 1800 K to 0 K at 5x10 10 K/s in LAMMPS Figure Figure Neither the change in topology associated with the change in CN nor the change in topology at constant CN identifies the clusters associated with dynamic arrest at Tg. Figure Figure Motif extraction reveals a strong correlation of structure with the glass transition. Out of the 27 unique motifs identified, 10A Z and 10B are of particular interest (shown in Figure Although we have focused on BSAP clusters in Pd82Si18 here, there are icosahedral clusters in Pd82Si18 and BSAP clusters in Zr50Cu45Al5 Overall, these results support the hypothesis that there are preferred nearest-neighbor atomic clusters that exist in the liquid state and both grow in concentration and slow in dynamics more quickly than other structures as the liquid is cooled through the glass transition Finally, these results demonstrate the utility of a structural abstraction involving geometry, as opposed to topology, in identifying structure-property correlations. Whether the BSAP structure is connected to other properties like plastic deformation the same way icosahedra are remains to be seen, but the properties of a material are fundamentally controlled by interatomic energies, and these energies are strongly determined by relative atom positions, i.e. geometry. Because topological analysis techniques discard information about the relative atom positions, the information contained in topological descriptions of structure is less directly linked to the atomic energies. Therefore, while motif extraction and VI analysis provide complementary information, we believe (and our evidence shows) that motif extraction provides a structural description that is more closely connected to materials' properties. In conclusion, we have identified a close-packed, local structure motif, the bicapped square antiprism, in Pd82Si18, a model metal-metalloid glass-forming alloy, that plays a significant role in the glass transition. This motif is among the slowest moving local structures in the supercooled liquid, and it increases in concentration significantly through the glass transition. This motif was identified using motif extraction, a machine learning method for extracting the geometry of characteristic structure from disordered atomic models. The BSAP motif has the same VI (<0 2 8 0>) as another local structure with the opposite behavior, which masks the structure-property relationship from topological measures like VI. These results support the general conclusion that across metallic liquids, preferred nearest-neighbor atom clusters exist which play an outsized role in dynamic arrest during the glass transition. 