We report on the fabrication of an all-glass vapor cell with a thickness varying linearly between (exactly) 0 and ∼ 1 μm. The cell is made in Borofloat glass that allows super polish roughness, a full optical bonding assembling and easy filling with alkali vapors. We detail the challenging manufacture steps and present experimental spectra resulting from off-axis fluorescence and transmission spectroscopy of the Cesium D1 line. The very small surface roughness of 1Å rms is promising to investigate the atom-surface interaction or to minimize parasite stray light. Miniaturization of devices based on atomic vapor has set the stage for the development of various compact light-matter interfaces In this article, we report on the fabrication of a gluefree all-glass nano-cell with a thickness varying linearly between (exactly) 0 and ∼ 1 μm, and with a surface roughness of 1Å rms. Filled with Cesium (Cs), the cell was initially built for the interrogation of small atomic vapor layers of alkali and investigate the hypothetical existence of an atom-surface bound state that would de- pend on the surface corrugation The cell was fabricated at Laboratoire Charles Fabry of Institut d'Optique (Palaiseau, France) and filled with a cesium vapor at the Laboratoire GEPI of Observatoire de Paris (Paris, France). It is made of four parts that are assembled by optical contact bonding leading to a monolithic ensemble (see Fig. The thin wedge of plate (B) is realized by polishing iterations and controls of the wedge thickness and flatness between two polishing steps. This is done interferometrically, using a He-Ne laser and a Fizeau interferometer. The wedge is realized such that 4 fringes appear in the interferogram, parallel to the y axis (see Fig. To realize surfaces with very low roughness such as those inside the thin wedge, we first grind them finely using alumina abrasives and a brass grinding wheel. The surfaces are then manually polished on a pitched wheel using an aqueous solution of rare earth oxide abrasives with fine particle size (< 1 μm). The final polish is performed with an increasingly diluted solution, leading to a super-polish with surface roughness of 1Å rms or less. Figure All parts of the cell are cleaned with alcohol prior to final assembly by optical contact bonding (no glue is used). This is done at room temperature by pressing lightly onto the parts to be bonded until white light color fringes disappear and are replaced by a uniform dark fringe where the two parts are in contact. The only requirements are the absence of dust and the complementarity of the two surfaces to be bonded : in our case, we found that a flatness difference of 30 nm rms or less was sufficient to achieve a stress-resistant optical bonding. Once the cell is assembled we connected it to a turbomolecular pumping stage via a Pyrex loading manifold, and baked the cell-manifold assembly at 350 -400 • C for 4 days whilst pumping. Cesium was then transferred, using a low temperature flame, from a cesium ampoule with breakable seal to the cell reservoir. We now provide more information about our in situ measurement of the wedge thickness. We access the local absolute thickness L(x, y) using the interferometric technique described in Ref. with F = 4r 2 /(1 -r 2 ) 2 = (2F/π) 2 (F is the finesse of the wedge etalon), r = (n g -n)/(n g + n), the reflectivity (in field amplitude) of the glass-to-vapor interface, n g the glass refractive index, n, the refractive index of the vapor, and φ(x) = 4πL(x)/λ, the cumulative phase over one round-trip of the laser inside the wedge. Here, we assume that the wedge thickness varies linearly with x for x > x 0 and the only free parameter of the fit is therefore the wedge angle, α(y) = L(x, y)/(x -x 0 ). Also, we perform this interferometric mapping of the thickness at very low vapor pressure and with laser light far detuned from the atomic resonances. The vapor index n can therefore be assimilated to unity. Figure Finally we present examples of spectroscopic data obtained with the cell described above.The cell was enclosed in an oven with small apertures to let a laser beam propagate through the wedge and to collect the fluorescence light at 90 • from the laser beam. With this set-up we acquired absorption and fluorescence spectra shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have built a new generation of nanocells that presents many advantages. The cell parts are made of Borofloat glass that allows a very good polishing and therefore a very small surface roughness. It also allows to connect all parts of the cell with optical bonding resulting in a monolithic cell that makes no use of any glue. It therefore avoids any degasing issues for future spectroscopic studies. For the surfaces in contact with the atoms in the nano-wedge, a super-polish is obtained and the surface roughness is less than 1Å rms. The wedge has been realized and characterized using interferometric techniques and the thickness of the cell ranges from exactly zero (optical contact) to 900 nm. Few-nanometer thick atomic vapors have never been probed due to the way nano-cells were closed prior to this work. The type of cells presented here opens up access for the exploration of new mesoscopic systems. The spectra measured using these cells are promising for future investigation of atomsurface interactions. Our fabrication technique allows in principle to cover the cell surfaces with a dielectric layer to increase the reflectivity and hence the dipole-dipole collective effects. The fabrication is theoretically not restricted to glass and testing it with other materials could provide more data on unknown atom-surface potentials. Finally, such cells could be used as in Ref. V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS