We study topological vortex phases in iron-based superconductors. Besides the previously known vortex end Majorana zero modes (MZMs) phase stemming from the existence of a three dimensional (3D) strong topological insulator state, we show that there is another topologically nontrivial phase as iron-based superconductors can be doped superconducting 3D weak topological insulators (WTIs). The vortex bound states in a superconducting 3D WTI exhibit two different types of quantum states, a robust nodal superconducting phase with pairs of bulk MZMs and a full-gap topologically nontrivial superconducting phase which has single vortex end MZM in a certain range of doping level. Moreover, we predict and summarize various topological phases in iron-based superconductors, and find that carrier doping and interlayer coupling can drive systems to have phase transitions between these different topological phases. Introduction.-For the possible application in quantum computation, the search for Majorana zero modes (MZMs) has been one of the most intriguing topics in condensed matter physics 1D p-wave spinless SCs and 2D p + ip-wave SCs are examples of TSCs Recently, the topological properties in iron-based SCs predicted theoretically In this paper, we show that there are two additional VPTs in iron-based SCs as superconducting 3D WTI. First, for the VPTs in a superconducting 3D WTI with both time reversal symmetry (TRS) and inversion symmetry (IS), we derive the following essential results. Depending on crystalline symmetries and orbitals contributing to the band inversions, the superconducting 3D WTI with a single quantum vortex line can be classified into two cases: (1) if the band inversions occur on a C n (n > 2) rotational axis and the angular momenta of the orbitals contributing to the band inversions are not equivalent, the superconducting vortex line has a robust nodal phase with pairs of bulk MZMs; otherwise (2) the vortex line is fully gapped and there exist vortex end MZMs in a certain range of doping level. In both cases, the topological phase transition can take place by tuning chemical potentials or Fermi levels. The range of the chemical potential corresponding to the topologically nontrivial phase is proportional to the band dispersion along the weak coupling direction. We also extend our conclusions to a class of normal insulators (NIs). Second, we show that the above theory can be applied to classify the topological vortex phases and understand recent experimental results on iron-based SCs. Both band inversions at the Γ and M points in the band strucure of iron-based SCs can generate topological VPTs. For example, the nodal superconducting vortex line phase can be realized by further electron doping in FeSe/Te and LiFeAs We consider a general spinful system with intrinsic s-wave spin-singlet superconductivity. The superconducting Hamiltonian in the basis where we have only preserved the indices for the spin and Nambu spaces. Here, ∆ is the superconducting order parameter and takes the form ∆ 0 iσ 2 in the spin space, μ is the chemical potential, and H 0 (k) is the normal state Hamiltonian. If a single quantum vortex goes through the system along the z-direction, the superconducting order parameter ∆(r) in the real space is transformed into ∆(r)e iθ , where r = x 2 + y 2 and θ is the polar angle We first analyze the topological phase of such a superconducting vortex line by assuming that it is a full-gap system. For a full-gap class D system, it has a Z 2 topological classification. The topological invariance is defined as where sgn() is the signum and P f () is the Pfaffian of a antisymmetric matrix For a superconducting WTI, if the vortex line is along the weak coupling direction, assuming that the system is full-gap, we can conclude that the superconducting vortex line is topologically trivial if the chemical potential is in the insulating gap of the normal state, and that the vortex line is nontrivial if the chemical potential is between μ c (0) and μ c (π). In the latter case, there are vortex end MZMs even though there exist no topologically nontrivial surface states. To be specific, we consider a lattice model in which Σ ij = τ i σ j , and the parameters are taken as {t, t 3 , t , t 3 } = {1.0, 0.5, 1.0, 1.0}. Here, τ i and σ i (i = 0, 1, 2, 3) are Pauli matrices representing the orbital and spin degrees of freedom. This model respects the TRS and the full symmetry of the D 4h point group. The related symmetry group generators are given by the following matrices: and T = iΣ 02 K, where K is the complex conjugate operation. Obviously, the basis of the above model contains two Kramers' doublets with opposite parity, and each Kramers' doublet have angular momentum ± 1 2 . In the calculations, we set m = 1.2 to derive a WTI. With these parameters, H (1) 0 has two band inversions at the Γ point and Z point, and it has no topologically nontrivial surface states on the (001) surface while there are two Dirac cones on the (100) surface. Assuming on-site intra-orbital pairing, we analyze the topological VPTs in the WTI depicted by H (1) 0 numerically. In the calculations, we take a simple form of ∆(r): ∆(r) = ∆ 0 Θ(r -R), where Θ(r) is the step function and R is the vortex size. By diagonalizing the Hamiltonian, we obtain the energy spectrum in the superconducting vortex line. It turns out that the vortex line is indeed fully gapped. If we tune the chemical potential continuously, the energy spectrum of the system becomes gapless at μ c 1 = 1.14 (μ c 2 = 0.716) at k z = 0 (k z = π), shown in Fig. (LDOS) near the vortex core on the (001) surface where a and σ label orbital and spin respectively, n is the quasi particle spectrum index. Fig. It is worth to mention that, the topological VPTs in the superconducting WTI can also be determined by the Berry phase framework in Ref. Apparently, the range of the topologically nontrivial phase is proportional to t 3 , namely the coupling strength along the weak coupling direction. It should be emphasized that, if the condition of the superconductivity and the Fermi surfaces are complicated, the Berry phase criterion in Ref. From the above analysis, we can achieve topologically nontrivial full-gap vortex line phase in the superconducting WTIs. However, do all the WTIs have similar results? The answer is negative. In fact, the system may not be full-gap Here, H (2) 0 respects the same symmetries as H (1) 0 in Eq.3, and the only difference between them is that, one of the Kramers' doublets in the basis is changed into one with the same parity but a different angular momentum quantum number, ± 3 2 . Correspondingly, the matrix form of the symmetry group generators transforms into C 4z = (Σ 30 +iΣ 03 )/ √ 2 and C 2x = Σ 31 , while both the IS and TRS remain unchanged. We take all the parameters in H (2) 0 the same as those in H (1) 0 , which leads to that the two Hamiltonians have similar topological property. However, as we shall show below, the topological property of the vortex line in the superconducting state of 0 . In addition to the topological VPTs at k z = 0 and k z = π, which occur at exactly the same critical chemical potential μ c 1 and μ c 2 as in the case of H (1) 0 , for any given k z , there is also a chemical potential μ so that the vortex line in the superconducting WTIs described by H (2) 0 becomes gapless. In Fig. From the above results, we can find that the WTIs can be classified into two classes according to the topological property of their superconducting vortex line. The WTIs described by H (1) 0 and H (2) 0 can be viewed as the generalization of the 3D STIs and TDSs respectively. To be specific, the two Hamiltonians both describe 2D TIs if we omit the coupling in the z-direction. With the coupling terms in the z-direction turned on, especially the t 3 term, both of the two Hamiltonians describe 3D WTIs with band inversions at the Γ point and Z point when t 3 is small. As t 3 becomes larger, the WTIs have larger band dispersion in the k z -direction and the insulating gap closes at the Z point at some critical t 3 = t c . Finally, the WTIs in H (1) 0 and H (2) 0 evolve into STIs and TDSs with a band inversion at the Γ point respectively with t 3 tuned to be larger. As a result, it can be inferred that the superconducting vortex line for the WTIs in H (1) 0 and H (2) 0 must have similar topological properties with the STI Based on the above analysis and our previous work in Ref. [41], the topologically nontrivial vortex line state is closely related to the topological property of the normal state, which is determined by the band inversions in the Brillouin zone (BZ). In the 3DWTI case, there are two band inversions which occur at different k-points in the BZ. However, there is another possibility that the two band inversions occur at the same k-point in the BZ, the so-called double-band inversion. In the normal state, such a double-band inversion can not change the Z 2 topological invariant of the system. However, it can lead to some topologically nontrivial crystalline state, such as the topological mirror insulator state in the antiperovskites A 3 SnO where ), τ ± = τ x ± iτ y , and the parameters are set to be {ν 1 , ν 2 , M 1 , M 2 , B 1 , B 2 } = {0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 1.5, 1.0, 1.0}. The above Hamiltonian can be regarded as two copies of 2D TIs when λ = 0, and H hy is the hybridization between the two TIs respecting both the TRS and IS. The TRS and IS take the matrix form T = KiΣ 02 γ 0 and I = Σ 30 γ 3 respectively, where γ i (i = 1, 2, 3) are the Pauli matrices defined in the space constructed by H 01 and H 02 . Obviously, when λ = 0, there will be two Dirac cones on the edge, as shown in Fig. 2 . With the parameters above, μ c 1 and μ c 2 are determined to be 0.50 and 0.89, shown in Fig. Take the coupling in the z-direction into consideration, for instance adding t 3 cos k z into m i (k), we can achieve a topological phase diagram for the superconducting vortex line for the systems with double-band inversions similar to that in H DB 0 , shown in Fig. (2) 0 , the system has a 1D robust nodal superconducting phase. Now we apply the above theory to iron-based SCs. We first focus on the band inversion at the zone center. We take LiO-HFeSe as an example, and calculate its band structure with the experimental lattice parameters for (Li 0.8 Fe 0.2 )OHFeSe The above electronic band structure is qualitively common acrossing all families of iron-based SCs. There are only quantitative differences between different SCs. The major quantiative parameters that can affect the topological properties include the interlayer coupling along c-axis, the relative on-site energy difference between the A 2u and E g bands, the SOC strength and the chemical potential (Fermi energy or carrier density). Depending on these four energy scales, we sketch three typical band structures in Fig. In Fig. Besides the above WTI phase, Ref. in which H X and H Y describe the bands at the X and Y point (defined in the one-Fe unit cell) respectively, and H inter is the inter-pocket hybridization term. The 2D "WTI" phase in Ref. For the doped LiOHFeSe, (Li 1-x Fe x )OHFeSe, besides our above discussion, we also find that the interlayer coupling for the A 2u band increases as x increases. Therefore, in principle, there is a critical value, x = x c , at which a topological phase transition from 3DWTI to 3DTDS can take place. In summary, we study the topological VPTs in iron-based SCs. Besides the previously known phases, we show that there are topoloigcal vortex phases associated with the existence of 3DWTI. The phases can be classified into two classes: if the band inversions occur on a C n (n > 2) rotational axis, and the angular momentums of the orbitals contributing to the band inversions are not equivalent, the superconducting WTI plus a quantum vortex line has a robust 1D nodal superconducting phase with bulk MZMs; otherwise, the superconducting vortex line is full-gap and there can be vortex end MZMs for certain range of doping level. In both cases, the range of the topologically nontrivial phase is proportional to the band dispersion along the weak coupling direction. All these phases can be realized in different families of iron-based SCs by carreir doping and modifying interlayer couplings. It should be emphasized that, the nodal superconducting vortex line state can only be distinguished from the full-gap one at rather low temperature, since the Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon excitations in a vortex line generally has a tiny gap proportional to ∆ 2 /E f From our study, it is clear that the VPTs are sensitive to the chemical potential in superconducting 3D STI and is even more sensitive in a superconducting 3DWTI. This sensitivity suggests that the disorder can have a strong effect on the VPT. Furthermore, as iron-based SCs are layered structures, the interlayer coupling is weak in general. Considering that the bands in iron-based SCs are known to be renormalized by electron-electron correlations strongly, we can argue that even FeSe/Te can be close to a 3DWTI. This may explain why MZMs only appear in some vortices 