We present measurements of ferromagnetic-resonance -driven spin pumping and inverse spin-Hall effect in NbN/Y3Fe5O12 (YIG) bilayers. A clear enhancement of the (effective) Gilbert damping constant of the thin-film YIG was observed due to the presence of the NbN spin sink. By varying the NbN thickness and employing spin-diffusion theory, we have estimated the room temperature values of the spin diffusion length and the spin Hall angle in NbN to be 14 nm and -1.1×10 -2 , respectively. Furthermore, we have determined the spin-mixing conductance of the NbN/YIG interface to be 10 nm -2 . The experimental quantification of these spin transport parameters is an important step towards the development of superconducting spintronic devices involving NbN thin films. The extraction of key functional materials parameters associated with electron transport is important for the development of new solid-state device schemes as well as testing prototypes. In the field of spintronics, the spin Hall angle (θSH) represents the strength of spin-Hall effect (SHE) The use of FM insulators such as Y3Fe5O12 (YIG) to conduct spin pumping experiments has the advantage because these effects are negated. In addition, YIG has a low bulk Gilbert damping constant (α ≃ 6.7 × 10 -5 ) and a high Curie temperature (TC = 560 K), enabling efficient spin pumping at room temperature (RT) In this paper, we report spin pumping in thin-film YIG/NbN bilayers with the aim of extracting multiple spin transport parameters of NbN thin films in the normal state. NbN is a key material for superconducting (SC) spintronics Quasiparticle spin transport has also been investigated by spin pumping and by monitoring the spin Seebeck effect Epitaxial YIG thin films are grown on (111)-oriented GGG single crystal substrates by pulse laser deposition (PLD) in an ultra-high vacuum chamber (UHV) with a base pressure better than 5×10 -7 mbar. Prior to film growth, the GGG substrate are ultrasonically cleaned by matches the bulk value FMR is performed using a broadband coplanar waveguide (CPW) and ac-field modulation technique as illustrated in Fig. was measured using a MW power detector for different frequencies typically ranging from 2-12GHz as depicted in Fig. . Here, α0 is the Gilbert damping constant for tNbN= 0 nm and the second term represents the damping enhancement by spin pumping into NbN; g L is the free electron Landé factor which is assumed equal to 2, g r ↑↓ is the effective real-part spin-mixing conductance across the NbN/YIG interface; ρ NbN is the resistivity of NbN which was measured for each sample [see inset of Fig. , and e is the electron charge. A best fit of the data in Fig. We now discuss the ISHE voltage (VISHE) measurements. In Figs. is to include the thickness dependence of ρ NbN allowing to fit the data points based on bare NbN as well as those of the YIG/NbN bi-layers. In addition, this analysis can display the asymptotic behaviour of the data/fit-curves towards the long thickness limit. The in-plane symmetry re-confirms that spin rectification effects are not a dominant mechanism in our measurements since in this case a higher order sin 2θ component is expected in the voltage symmetry Following this approach and by using l sd =14 nm as extracted from the thickness dependence of damping modulation, we calculated τ s = 3.6-5.9 ps which is a fair agreement between the two different τ s extraction methods. In the following section, the θ SH of NbN is determined from the thickness dependence of V ISHE * as shown in Fig. where j s = ( . Here we assume that YIG is a perfect insulator; μ 0 h rf is the amplitude of MW magnetic field (56 μT for 100 mW); w y is defined by the width of MW transmission line. For the data fitting procedure we use θ SH and l sd as free parameters, where the best fitting was achieved for 1.1 ×10 -2 and 14 nm, respectively. We also confirmed the sign of θ SH to be negative by comparing YIG/NbN data with a YIG/Pt control sample where Pt is known to have a positive θ SH As a final remark, we also performed FMR measurements as a function of temperature to determining the low-temperature spin-pumping properties of NbN through the SC Tc. However, a significant increase of magnetic damping was observed as the temperature was lowered (this behaviour is summarised in Appendix C). This enhanced damping complicated the investigation of VISHE across the SC Tc. We determined the spin transport parameters of polycrystalline NbN thin-films by the spin pumping technique using epitaxial YIG thin-films at RT. We observe a modification of the YIG (H-H res ) 2 +∆H 2 + A asy ∆H(H-H res ) where V0 is a background voltage. The first term gives the symmetric lineshape and the second term produces the anti-symmetric one. For FMR measurements based on ac magnetic-field modulation, where an additional pair of coils on electromagnets provide small ac magnetic field, Pac has the following relationship with Pdc. where, hac is the amplitude of ac magnetic field modulation. With these two equations, we can calculate P ac as: This equation was used to fit the ac field modulated signals, both Vp and VISHE, in our study. The first term gives now the anti-symmetric lineshape and the second term produces the distorted symmetric one. Figure We consider a slab of magnet containing a chain of distributed magnetic moments m as shown in Fig where μ 0 is the permeability of free space. We assume that the length of the chain is infinitely long, which is a valid assumption by taking in consideration that the film thickness is much shorter than the sample lateral dimensions. By integrating the contribution of the individual moments, we calculate the total magnetic field B total as: Using this B total expression within this quasi-2D picture, we can calculate the magnetic flux Φ at point P. By definition, Φ = ∫∫ B total ds , where the integration surface is defined by the thickness t NbN and the width w of the NbN film. This reads: For the definition of the integration region, we assume that the chain of the magnetic moments is located at the centre of the YIG film. After estimating the magnetic flux, we can calculate the radiative dissipation power P as: Here Z NbN is the impedance of the NbN film and for simplification we assume that the real part (resistance) dominates, meaning that Z NbN ≈ R NbN = ρ NbN (d/wt NbN ). Using the total nonequilibrium magnon energy generated during the experiments as ħωNV (here, N is the number of the non-equilibrium magnons and V is the volume of YIG), we can express the rate of energy dissipation being: As this model is a simplified one, we only discuss α eddy qualitatively. In particular, we can extract the NbN thickness dependence of α eddy by using this expression and find that it is proportional to . We plot the dependence in Fig. Moreover, in the work by Flovik et al. Since we also inserted an insulating tape between our samples and the waveguide, we believe that the radiative damping is minor in our experiments. Furthermore, Qaid et al. It is widely reported that YIG thin-films tend to show significant temperature dependent magnetic damping Our own extensive FMR measurements of bare YIG on GGG (of comparable thicknesses) Here we describe the low-temperature characterisations of our YIG/NbN samples. * rogdakis7@gmail.com † h.kurebayashi@ucl.ac.uk FIG. 