We present a study of a graphene-based Josephson junction with dedicated side gates carved from the same sheet of graphene as the junction itself. These side gates are highly efficient, and allow us to modulate carrier density along either edge of the junction in a wide range. In particular, in magnetic fields in the 1 -2 Tesla range, we are able to populate the next Landau level, resulting in Hall plateaus with conductance that differs from the bulk filling factor. When counter-propagating quantum Hall edge states are introduced along either edge, we observe supercurrent localized along that edge of the junction. Here we study these supercurrents as a function of magnetic field and carrier density. The interplay of spin-helical states and superconductivity is predicted to enable access to non-Abelian excitations such as Majorana zero modes (MZM) Heterostructures of graphene and hexagonal boron nitride with one-dimensional superconducting contacts In particular, the nature of the superconducting coupling to the edge states could depend e.g. on the vacuum edges of the graphene mesa, the drift velocity of the QH edge states, or the presence of incompressible strips. Yet, the electrostatic potential along the mesa edge is typically poorly controlled; it is known to be influenced by charge accumulation effects Our samples are made from graphene encapsulated in hexagonal boron nitride (BN), which protects devices from processing contamination and can yield ballistic transport over micron scales As a magnetic field B is applied perpendicular to the sample, the junction enters the quantum Hall regime. By 1.8 T, the quantum Hall effect is very well developed and we stay at that field in Figures The regions of quantized conductance have a diamond shape, whose boundaries in the back gate direction are flat (horizontal), which means that they are not affected by the side gates. The inclined side boundaries of the red diamonds indicate that they depend both on the side gates and the back gate. These boundaries are interpreted as a line of constant carrier density along the edges of the device, n side ∝ (V SG1,2 -αV BG ) = const where α ∼ 2 is a constant determined by the relative gate efficiencies. The overall shape of the map in Figure Finally, the centers of diamond-shaped plateaus in Figure More insight into the device's phenomenology is gained by applying the side gates independently. Figure The observed influence of the side gates on the quantum Hall conductances is similar to the impact of local out-of-plane gates Figure Next, the red line of Figure So far, the measurements have been performed with an applied DC bias current I of 10 nA to suppress any supercurrent. We now switch I to zero and explore the emerg-ing superconducting features, maintaining the small AC current of 50 pA used to measure the differential resistance. Figure Figure Furthermore, the supercurrent does not vary for small changes in magnetic field (Figure The dependence of the supercurrent on magnetic field completely changes when both side gates are applied, creating supercurrents along the two edges of the sample. Figure We explore the supercurrent interference pattern in the QH regime as a function of gate voltages in Figure A similar change in the interference pattern is observed when a side gate is applied (Figure Finally, an additional interference pattern is revealed in Figure We have shown that native graphene side gates are remarkably efficient in controlling edge state propagation in the quantum Hall regime. They enable full control of the local filling factors along the sample edges, allowing us to fill the next Landau level, change carrier polarity, or keep the density flat close to the edge. Further, we have observed supercurrents carried by the QH edge states induced by the side gates. These supercurrents flow independently on each edge of the device and could be controlled independently by the corresponding gates. Our experiment opens a promising route for coupling superconductors with QH edge states for the purpose of inducing non-Abelian excitations. The sample was made with mechanically exfoliated flakes of graphene and hexagonal boron nitride. It was assembled using a standard stamping technique Measurements were performed in a Leiden Cryogenics dilution refrigerator at a temperature of ∼ 100 mK. The sample was electronically isolated in the refrigerator via resistive coax lines and low-temperature RC filters. Differential resistance measurements were carried out using an AC excitation current of 50pA. Magnetic fields for quantum Hall measurements were applied perpendicular to the sample plane. The datasets supporting the figures and conclusions of the current study are available from the corresponding author upon request. / boron nitride heterostructure. A.S. and M.T.W. fabricated the device. A.S., F.A., and G.F. wrote the manuscript. Supplementary material: Full control of quantum Hall supercurrent in a side gated graphene Josephson junction In support of the data presented the main paper, here we include additional measurements and types of differential resistance maps. Figure The main text focuses on data taken when the bulk of the sample is tuned to the ν = 2 plateau. In this section, we include complementary data taken at the ν = 6 plateau in the bulk, at B = 1 T. In Figure In this section we present measurements similar to those in the main paper, but taken on a different device (J2). The dimensions of J2 are similar to J1, and the junction region is also separated from the two side gates by ∼ 60 nm -wide trenches. However, here the contacts are not spaced from the trenches by 100 nm regions of graphene, as was done in J1. This second device was fabricated on the same chip as the main device. In fact, SG2 is shared by both junctions (Figure The data presented were taken at B = 1 T with V BG = 1.85 V in the center of the ν = -2 plateau. Side gateside gate maps of differential resistance are presented in Figure Like our main junction J1, this device shows regions of supercurrent in the I DC = 0 nA bias map (Figure In order to simulate the carrier density profile induced by the side gate in the quantum Hall regime, we determined the geometric local capacitance between the graphene sheet and both the back gate and side gates. We solve the Laplace equation for the electrostatic potential with Dirichlet boundary conditions at the back gate, side gates, and the graphene sheet. Both local capacitances are spatially varying and are stronger at the graphene edge as a result of electric field focusing. The back gate and the intrinsic doping n 0 of the graphene sheet (determined experimentally by the location of the Dirac peak in a gate sweep of the device) were then used to determine the bulk carrier density in the graphene and subsequently the chemical potential. Applying a positive voltage on the side gate tends to raise the graphene potential near the edge. At zero temperature the local graphene potential V g (x) can be obtained by solving: Here, we defined the density of states as a sum of Gaussians centered at the Landau level energies E n with a Landau level degeneracy N : where τ parametrizes the breadth of the Landau levels. The local carrier density is then: The vanishing of the carrier density at the edge was artificially obtained by linearly bringing the density to zero at the edge over a length scale l. The length scale of the convergence was chosen to be on the order of the magnetic length (∼ 20nm) and justified post hoc through comparison of the simulated and experimental gate maps. This behavior is of course a simplification and further theoretical work will be needed to understand the evolution of the carrier density in the few nanometers near the edge. Figure Finally, to reproduce the differential resistance map shown in Figure FIG. 