The ability to actively regulate heat flow at the nanoscale could be a game changer for applications in thermal management and energy harvesting. Such a breakthrough could also enable the control of heat flow using thermal circuits, in a manner analogous to electronic circuits. Here we demonstrate switchable thermal transistors with an order of magnitude thermal on/off ratio, based on reversible electrochemical lithium intercalation in MoS 2 thin films. We use spatially-resolved time-domain thermoreflectance to map the lithium ion distribution during device operation, and atomic force microscopy to show that the lithiated state correlates with increased thickness and surface roughness. First principles calculations reveal that the thermal conductance modulation is due to phonon scattering by lithium rattler modes, c-axis strain, and stacking disorder. This study lays the foundation for electrochemically-driven nanoscale thermal regulators, and establishes thermal metrology as a useful probe of spatio-temporal intercalant dynamics in nanomaterials. A chieving dynamic control of heat flow at the nanoscale represents an outstanding challenge in engineering energy transport. A thermal transistor, a device whose thermal conductance can be modulated in real-time using an external stimulus, has the potential for transformative applications in dynamic thermal management Here we demonstrate reversible thermal conductance modulation in a fully dense medium by a factor of nearly 10×, on time scales of minutes, across a material that is only 10 nm thick. The thermal transistors are based on nanoscale MoS 2 films actuated by reversible electrochemical intercalation of Li ions, with the onstate corresponding to the pristine MoS 2 and the off-state corresponding to the Li-intercalated MoS 2 . Thermal conductance measurements are performed in situ using time-domain thermoreflectance (TDTR) while the device (which operates like a MoS 2 nanobattery) undergoes reversible electrochemical cycling. Using operando TDTR microscopy, we also probe the spatial distribution of Li ions inside MoS 2 at different stages of intercalation within an electrochemical cycle. Correlating atomic force microscopy (AFM) with thermal measurements reveals a strong impact of Li on microstructure in terms of c-axis lattice expansion, and significant mesoscopic disorder. Ab initio density functional theory (DFT) and non-equilibrium molecular dynamics (NEMD) calculations sort out the relative contributions of the different factors leading to the thermal conductance modulation. Device preparation. Figure Operando thermal conductance microscopy. It is generally known that electrochemical intercalation in single particles can result in an inhomogeneous Li ion distribution. A few recent studies have used in situ optical and spectroscopic techniques to visualize this inhomogeneity at the nanoscale To probe this spatial distribution, we use a modification of the traditional TDTR technique Dynamic thermal conductance modulation. Real-time modulation of thermal conductance is achieved by charging and discharging the cell at constant current (i.e., in the galvanostatic mode), while simultaneously measuring G at a single point on the device, shown in Fig. Figure When we plot thermal conductance vs. the average Li composition determined in this approximate manner (Fig. Ex situ measurements on chemically intercalated MoS 2 . In addition to operando studies, we also study the impact of chemical lithiation on thermal conductance of MoS 2 through ex situ measurements. Layered, crystalline MoS 2 films were exfoliated onto SiO 2 (90 nm) on p-type Si substrates. The samples were transferred into an Ar-filled glove box, and immersed in a 1.6 M n-Butyllithium in hexane solution (Fisher Scientific) for 2 h at 295 K. They were gently washed with anhydrous hexane to remove organic residues, and allowed to dry. The samples were sealed inside an airtight pouch and transferred to an e-beam evaporator for blanket deposition of the 81 nm thick Al transducer for TDTR measurements. These samples are thicker than Figure Theoretical modeling. To understand how Li ions affect the cross-plane thermal conductance of our MoS 2 thermal transistors, we perform first principles density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) We suggest that the relatively large lattice expansion measured in our samples could be due to an incomplete 2H-1T transition, which engenders a mixture of 2H and 1T phases and creates stacking disorder. Previous reports in literature have found evidence of such phase mixtures in lithiated MoS 2 Phonon dispersions along the Γ-A direction (Fig. To quantify the impact of Li intercalation on the thermal conductance of thin-film MoS 2 , we use NEMD. A 10 nm thick film is sandwiched between thermal reservoirs (see Fig. A detailed mechanism thus emerges, as indicated in Fig. We note that an additional source of thermal conductivity suppression is mesoscopic disorder; the high degree of surface roughness measured by AFM in the chemically lithiated samples provides some evidence of this (Fig. Finally, we note that since we measure the total thermal conductance of the devices, it is difficult to experimentally decouple the effect of Li on the thermal conductance of the Al/MoS 2 and MoS 2 /SiO 2 interfaces. Our ex situ studies indicate that a significant fraction of exfoliated films that are initially adhered to the substrate become detached when lithiated, suggesting that Li weakens the adhesion between MoS 2 and SiO 2 , and thus may reduce the MoS 2 /SiO 2 interfacial conductance. This is consistent with prior calculations of the adhesion energy between graphene and SiO 2 with adsorbed interlayers In summary, we have demonstrated an electrochemically driven thermal transistor using Li intercalation in thin MoS 2 films. We show large reversible switching of 8-10× in a 10 nm thick MoS 2 device, with an operational time scale of minutes. Using operando scanning thermal conductance microscopy, we reveal inhomogeneities in the distribution of Li within a single MoS 2 device, and probe how it evolves over an electrochemical cycle. Correlative AFM imaging provides a direct link between the spatial distribution of Li through its impact on surface topography, and cross-plane thermal transport. Ab initio and NEMD calculations reveal that Li guest atoms act as rattlers within the host MoS 2 lattice. The simulations suggest that a combination of multiple factors is likely to lead to such a significant modulation of thermal conductance, including enhanced phonon scattering from Li rattler modes, phonon softening due to lithiation-induced c-axis strain, stacking disorder (2H-1T phase mixtures), and mesoscopic disorder. These results are of crucial significance to the thermal engineering of Li ion batteries, where heat dissipation is a critical issue In addition, as an operando technique, we contend that thermal conductance microscopy can provide useful information about changes in the local microstructure of nanomaterials that are undergoing reactions. Our approach leverages the strong sensitivity of phonon scattering rates to local defect density and strain, and represents a fundamentally different mechanism for microscopy of dynamically evolving materials. Furthermore, as an optical technique, it is complementary to existing electron or Xray based techniques, which can often require specialized sample preparation. In the context of active thermal management, our thermal transistor results represent an important advance with their nearly one order of magnitude switching ratio. For example, in power electronics where thermal cycling can lead to catastrophic failure due to thermal expansion, the inclusion of a thermal transistor between the device and heat sink can greatly suppress temperature oscillations and improve reliability. Our calculations suggest that to first order, a thermal transistor with 10× on/off ratio can reduce the temperature swing in a device by 10×, and increase its lifetime by almost 3000×. This is related to a modulation of the device's cooling time constant, τ ~Cthermal /G, by switching G to a lower value in the off-state. The temperature swing, ΔT, is proportional to [1exp(t off /τ)] ~toff /τ, where t off is the time during which the device is off. Reducing the temperature swing can have a significant effect on device reliability as the relationship between ΔT and the number of cycles to failure N f is strongly non-linear We note that for electrochemical thermal transistors to reach deployment in technological applications, several challenges remain to be overcome. First, it will be important to understand the impact of device thickness on the thermal on/off ratio, and therefore decouple the effect of intrinsic (volumetric) vs. interface thermal switching. From a practical standpoint, in our experiments we found it challenging to perform electrochemical measurements on films thicker than tens of nanometers, likely due to lithiation-induced volume changes and consequent electrode detachment. Furthermore, to ensure robust switching under different operating conditions, it will be necessary to implement a fully solid-state version of this device. This could potentially be achieved using solid polymer electrolytes which have seen widespread adoption in Li ion batteries Besides active thermal management and heat routing, our results also have direct implications for energy harvesting. For example, a pyroelectric device placed in contact with a thermal transistor can be used to harvest electrical energy from a passive, time-invariant heat source. This would be achieved by externally modulating the transistor's thermal conductance to generate temporal variations in the pyroelectric material's temperature. Additionally, intercalated layered materials also hold immense promise for thermoelectric applications. Previous studies have shown that Li intercalation enhances the in-plane electrical conductivity of MoS 2 and other layered materials by as much as two orders of magnitude Fabrication of operando electrochemical platform. Crystalline, layered MoS 2 films were mechanically exfoliated onto SiO 2 (90 nm) on p-type Si substrates. Optical microscopy was used to select an appropriate device, and AFM was used to measure its thickness and confirm uniformity. An 80 nm thick Al layer was selectively patterned on top of the MoS 2 using electron-beam (e-beam) lithography and e-beam evaporation, while leaving the edges exposed to allow Li ions to intercalate. A 50 nm thick Cu electrode was e-beam evaporated through a shadow mask, patterned approximately 1 cm away from the MoS 2 device. The sample was transferred into an Ar-filled glove box, where a small Li metal pellet was placed onto the Cu electrode. A glass cover slip (around 0.2 mm thick) was placed on top of the MoS 2 device and Li metal, and sealed on three sides using epoxy. The pocket was filled with electrolyte (1.0 M LiPF 6 in EC/DEC, 1:1 w/w) and the fourth side was sealed with epoxy to prevent oxidation. Care was taken to minimize bubble formation in the electrolyte, which could disrupt the optical measurements. Wire bonds were used to make electrical contact to the terminals of the potentiostat (Gamry Instruments Reference 600) for electrochemical measurements. This was done while taking precautions to prevent electrostatic discharge, which was one of the major factors affecting device yield. Time-domain thermoreflectance. Cross-plane thermal transport in MoS 2 thin films was measured using TDTR, an optical pump-probe technique. Details of this technique and our setup are provided elsewhere Real-time operando measurements were performed by fixing the probe delay time at +100 ps and collecting the TDTR ratio signal. The temporal resolution is limited by the time-constant of the lock-in amplifier (100 ms), which is significantly faster than intercalation time scales in our device (minutes). For the single-spot time-dependent measurements shown in Fig. Spatial thermal conductance imaging using TDTR was performed by mounting the sample on a motorized stage (Melles Griot Nanomotion II), which has a resolution of 10 nm and a bidirectional repeatability of 100 nm. After holding the MoS 2 device at a constant V WE (relative to Li + /Li) for about 10 min, the sample was raster scanned in the plane normal to the laser beam while recording V in and V out at a fixed delay time of +100 ps, with a step size of 500 nm and dwell time of 300 ms per pixel (see Fig. In the operando measurements, we observed that optical propagation through the liquid electrolyte causes an asymmetry in the V out signal as a function of distance z on either side of the focal plane. This causes the TDTR ratio signal to be asymmetric as well, which could introduce an error in the measurements if the sample is not at the correct z plane. We posit that this occurs due to a thermo-optic modulation of the refractive index of a thin layer of liquid due to heat conducted away from the Al transducer. This effect (which occurs at relatively long time scales due to the low thermal conductivity of the electrolyte) likely leads to a modification of the effective thermoreflectance coefficient of the metal by a scaling factor, affecting the V out signal component. To correct for this, we scale the TDTR ratio data by a small factor (1.05), calibrating such that the thermal conductance of the device in the unlithiated state under liquid be equal to that of the pristine device measured prior to liquid encapsulation (Supplementary Fig. Ab initio and molecular dynamics calculations. The first principles DFT calculations were performed in local density approximation (LDA) of the exchange and correlation functional From the physical properties computed by DFT (lattice parameters, phonon dispersion relations, speed of sound) we fitted the parameters of a two-body empirical potential for NEMD calculations. The functional form of the potential consists of a combination of Lennard-Jones (LJ) interactions and electrostatics: . Partial charges (Q) and LJ parameters (σ and ε) are provided in Supplementary Table NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2018) 9:4510 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06760-7 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications