In this article, we explore a new set of circuits, that incorporate both single-flux-quantum and quantized chargebased complementary quantum logic circuits. Circuits that convert single-flux quantum voltage pulses to quantized charge pulses and vice versa are introduced that lead to circuits that simplify logic and integration operations of individual flux and charge based logic circuits. These include fan-out circuits that enable single flux input to several charge outputs and control gate circuit with charge input controlling flux output. The operation of these circuits is demonstrated in simulations using WRSPICE. An XOR gate implementation is presented as an example to illustrate the operation of these circuits. The developed complementary quantum logic circuits show promise for higher power efficiency and simpler design in the form of fewer junctions for a given logic implementation, leading to the possibility of higher integration density. D IGITAL computing based on superconducting circuits is re-gaining interest for high-performance and energy efficient computation due to potential for high clock rates and low energy operation Quantum phase-slip phenomenon has been identified as an exact dual to Josephson tunneling based on charge-flux duality In this paper, we introduce complementary quantum logic (CQL) circuits that accommodate both charge-based logic circuits using QPSJs Complementary quantum logic circuits comprise of both the SFQ pulses encoded in a superconducting loop formed by two JJs and an inductor, as well as the quantized charge pulses encoded on a charge island formed by two QPSJs and a capacitor, as their basic building blocks. The following circuits employ these blocks and the corresponding signals generated, in achieving various operations that are essential in a digital logic family. The cells corresponding to SFQ loop and charge island can be used in a single circuit to realize flux to charge conversion. The resulting circuit is shown in Fig. The reciprocal circuit of flux to charge conversion circuit shown in Fig. Simulation results of the control circuit shown in Fig. The signal flow to the output of the conversion circuits can be controlled using a signal input through a QPSJ similar to control/buffer circuit from Fan-out circuit schematic is useful to drive several gates with charge/flux input connected to a flux/charge outputs. Conversion from flux to charge and vice versa enables using a single input to drive several outputs without decrease in the pulse amplitudes. Furthermore, it is possible to split the input to either charge or flux output in the same circuit. These two operations are demonstrated in the circuits below. 1) SFQ input splitter to multiple quantized charge outputs: The circuit shown in Fig. 2) SFQ input splitter to SFQ and charge quantum output splitter: The circuit shown in Fig. A two input XOR gate can be implemented using two flux to charge conversion circuits combined with control gates in parallel. Four inputs are applied to the SFQ cells at junctions J1 and J3, and at the junctions Q1 and Q4. The input 1 at junction J1 and the input at Q4 are high at the same time, and the input 2 at J3 and the input at Q1 are high at the same time. This is illustrated in the circuit shown in Fig. CQL circuits provide an a new way to perform digital logic operations in superconducting electronics that are predominantly based on JJs alone, by utilizing QPSJs, with some potential advantages. The charge islands formed by QPSJs can generate quantized charge pulses that are similar to SFQ pulses, but the switching energy of QPSJs to generate a current pulse is estimated to be order of 1-5 zJ. This is considerably smaller than that of currently available JJ technologies which dissipate energy in the order of several aJ. Using JJs and QPSJs together enables convenient fan-out to multiple outputs without a loss of output signal amplitude, in addition to requiring fewer junctions to implement a logic operation compared to JJ-based circuits. Although CQL circuits may provide significant advantages, challenges exist in practical realization of these circuits, pertaining to the material and design of QPSJs for controlled generation of quantum-phase slips in nanowires, along with a possible need for lower operating temperatures (perhaps below 1 K). Other potential issues exist such as interference of charge noise with the charge on islands. The extent of these issues and possible solutions may only be evident after sufficient investigation through experiments. A new family of circuits is introduced that combines the SFQ operation of JJs and quantized charge operation of QPSJ based circuits to perform digital logic. These circuits provide an alternative way to perform logic operations that may significantly simplify the design when compared to JJbased logic families, therefore may improve flexibility when these circuits are scaled to peta and exa-scale computers. Flux to charge conversion circuits and vice versa are presented that can be interfacing circuits between JJ and QPSJ based logic circuits. Logic operations such as an inverter and fan-out to multiple outputs are demonstrated as examples to illustrate the applications of these logic circuits. However, substantial developments in technology are required for physical realization of single QPSJs that exhibit these properties, as well as in testing the circuits discussed in this paper.