We report measurements of the energy gap of granular aluminum films by THz spectroscopy. We find that as the grains progressively decouple, the coupling ratio 2∆(0)/kBTc increases above the BCS weak coupling ratio 3.53, and reaches values consistent with an approach to BCS-BEC crossover for the high resistivity samples, expected from the short coherence length. The Mattis-Bardeen theory describes remarkably well the behavior of σ1,s/σ1,n for all samples up to very high normal state resistivities. In granular superconductors, electrons are confined inside nano-scale metallic grains due to inter-grain oxide barriers, which reduces the value of the coherence length. When the barrier thickness is increased, the coherence volume can decrease up to a point where the number of Cooper pairs that it contains is of order unity. Thereby, a cross-over from a BCS regime where the number of pairs per coherence volume is very large to a BEC condensation where it is of order unity is expected. However, a detailed comparison with experiments was so far difficult because of a lack of theoretical studies of the BCS to BEC crossover regime. But recently, detailed theoretical predictions regarding the evolution of the strong coupling ratio around this crossover have become available We find that up to that transition the optical gap edge remains well defined and that, contrary to the behavior of disordered NbN films According to the recent work of Pisani et al. In view of their possible applications as high kinetic inductance elements in quantum circuits (QC), there has been recently renewed interest in the properties of strongly disordered superconductors in the vicinity of the metal to insulator (M/I) transition. The optical properties of disordered NbN films have been the focus of particular attention The behavior of granular Al is more favorable for QC applications. We propose that the difference in behavior between NbN and granular Al films stems from the different nature of the metal to insulator transition, being of the Anderson type in the former Granular aluminum thin films were prepared by thermal evaporation of clean al pallets in a controlled O 2 pressure, where the base pressure of the vacuum chamber is ∼ 1×10 -7 Torr. The films were deposited onto liquid nitrogen cooled substrates (10 × 10 × 2 mm 3 MgO or 10 × 10 × 1 mm 3 LSAT, which result in similar fabry-perot pattern in the optical spectra). Films with various degree of grain coupling were obtained by varying the O 2 partial pressure in the range of 2 -5 × 10 -5 Torr while keeping the deposition rate about 5 ± 1 A/s, similar to previous work The optical spectroscopy measurements were done by utilizing a quasi-optical Mach-Zehnder interferometer which allows us to obtain the complex transmission t = |t| e iφt Fig. To allow an easy comparison with the behavior of NbN films The normal state conductivity σ 1,n as measured at 4.2 K is frequency independent up to 17 cm -1 , see Fig. In the superconducting state a good fit to the MB theory In figures 6, 5 and 2 the frequency ν is given in units of cm -1 which is related to ω by ω = 2πcν, where c is the speed of light in cm/sec. We analyze the optical data similarly to the method used by Pracht et al. where ˆ (ω) = 1 (ω)+i 2 (ω) which can be expressed as complex conductivity σ(ω) by the relation Once t is measured, we need to disentangle the substrate contribution in order to extract the complex conductivity of the film. The MgO and LSAT dielectric substrates are known to be completely transparent (means s 2 = 0) in the THz frequency range Once we obtain σ(ω, T ) we fit it to the Mattis-Bardeen (MB) formulas The normal state conductivity is determined as σ 1 (ω) at 4.2 K, we then fit σ 1 /σ n with ∆ as the sole fitting parameter. For some of the samples the behavior of σ 1 (ω) at subgap frequencies ω < 2∆/ slightly deviates from MB and therefore are being excluded from the fit. We then fit ∆(T ) to the standard BCS gap equation First of all we compare our results to tunneling data. The value of the optical gap as determined from fitting the conductivity data to the MB theory is close to the value of the tunneling gap reported by Abeles and Hanak Second of all, we compare our results with those obtained by Cheng et al. on disordered NbN films These points deserve a detailed discussion. Regarding the first one, the increase of the coupling ratio seen in granular Al with resistivity may have two different origins. The first one would be a stronger coupling to soft phonons often cited as the possible reason for the higher T c of granular films We favor this second interpretation. The idea is that in the granular case confinement results in strong coupling in the sense that the coherence length can become so short that there are only a few pairs in a coherence volume, which is what happens at a BCS to BEC cross-over. When the coupling ratio reaches the value of 4.51, as is the case for our highest resistivity sample, (k F a F ) -1 -0.70,or k F ξ pair 2.28 according to Pistolesi et al. Concerning the second point, one can understand the difference in behavior between granular Al and disordered NbN films as resulting from their different disorder length scales, being respectively the grain size in granular Al and the lattice parameter or inter-atomic distance in NbN. In a 3D system the metal to insulator transition occurs when the conductivity g measured at the relevant length scale crosses a critical value g c . Here g is the universal conductance 2e 2 h divided by the relevant length scale d. Since the grain size in granular Al is about one order of magnitude larger than the interatomic distance in NbN, it follows that the value of the critical conductivity in the former is expected to be about one order of magnitude smaller than in the latter. However this argument does not explain the qualitative difference between the behav-iors of the optical conductivities of granular Al and NbN seen in Fig. We may add that the coherence length in NbN is always much larger than the disorder length scale, so that the system never approaches the BCS to BEC cross-over and therefore never develops the strong coupling effect predicted by Pisani et al. Optical spectroscopy reveals that a sharp gap edge persists in granular Aluminum films as the metallic grains are being decoupled towards the Metal to Insulator transition. Remarkably, at the same time the coupling ratio 2∆(0)/k B T c increases, reaching in the most resistive sample a value consistent with an approach to the unitary limit. The critical temperature is not strongly reduced by the grain decoupling. This behavior is consistent with a Mott transition driven by the electrostatic charging energy of the grains. This behavior is in contrast with that observed previously in atomically disordered NbN film, where the coupling ratio reduces when disorder is increased, the critical temperature goes down strongly and the sharp gap edge vanishes, a behavior consistent with an Anderson transition 