The central target of spintronics research is to achieve flexible control of highly efficient and spin-polarized electronic currents. Based on first-principles calculations and k•p models, we demonstrate that Cu 2 S/MnSe heterostructures are a novel type of Chern insulators with half-metallic chiral edge states and a very high Fermi velocity (0.87 × 10 6 m s -1 ). The full spin-polarization of the edge states is found to be robust against the tuning of the chemical potential. Unlike the mechanisms reported previously, this heterostructure has quadratic bands with a normal band order, that is, the p/d-like band is below the s-like band. Charge transfer between the Cu 2 S moiety and the substrate results in variation in the occupied bands, which together with spin-orbit coupling, triggers the appearance of the topological state in the system. These results imply that numerous ordinary semiconductors with normal band order may convert into Chern insulators with half-metallic chiral edge states through this mechanism, providing a strategy to find a rich variety of materials for dissipationless, 100% spin-polarized and high-speed spintronic devices. Microelectronic developments have given rise to an urgent need for new information storage and transport technologies and materials with very low energy consumption and high response speeds. Over the past two decades, great progress has been made in this regard in the following two areas. The first is based on the approach of spintronics by employing the spin degree of freedom of electrons that usually involves low power consumption. Typically, materials such as magnetic materials, half metals and spin-gapless semiconductors have been proposed for spintronics. Proposals to produce the Chern insulators generally exploit Dirac electrons In this paper, we report a novel type of Chern insulators with halfmetallic (100% spin-polarized) chiral edge states in the β-Cu 2 S films grown on MnSe(111) surfaces. The thin film of β-Cu 2 S is an ordinary non-Dirac-type semiconductor with a normal band order, as shown in Figure The constructed heterostructure of the β-Cu 2 S monolayer on MnSe(111) surfaces is displayed in Figures The geometric optimization and electronic structure calculations of the Cu 2 S monolayer grown on the MnSe substrate are performed with the projector augmented wave method based on ab initio density-functional theory. We now explore the topological electronic structures of the Cu 2 S/MnSe heterostructure shown in Figures These results prove that the Cu 2 S/MnSe heterostructure is a novel Chern insulator with exotic half-metallic chiral edge states. Because of these edge states, the Cu 2 S/MnSe heterostructure has great potential for the fabrication of a dissipationless, 100% spin-polarized, and highspeed spintronic devices and is superior to the Chern insulators with no spin polarization or partially spin-polarized edge states. To understand the origin of the Chern insulators, the band evolution of the heterostructure with different contact distances is explored. Since the influence of the MnSe substrate on the Cu 2 S sample can be tuned by changing the distance (d) between the bottom Cu plane and the topmost Mn plane (Figure Upon decreasing the tensile strain from 180% to 20%, the Cu bands hybridize strongly with the Mn bands around the E F , as illustrated in Figure It is important to emphasize that the chemical bonding and charge transfer at the interface of the sample and the substrate result in band deformation (Figures To deeply understand the topological mechanism, an effective Hamiltonian was then constructed in terms of the k•p model for low-energy physics and based on the invariant theory. and ↑(↓) for the spin-up (-down) state. The Hamiltonian takes the form: 31 In the absence of SOC and magnetism, the system contains timereversal symmetry (T), mirror symmetry (M l ) along the l-axis ) direction, and threefold rotation (C 3 ) along the c-axis. Owing to the T symmetry, f(k) should be an even function of k. By taking the C 3 symmetry into consideration, one can obtain where k 7 1⁄4 k x 7ik y because the angular momentum of the d x 2y 2 and d xy orbitals equals 2. Thus, by inspecting the two constraints of T and C 3 , we see that f(k) must take the form of The FM exchange term as H M 1⁄4 Ms z #1 (σ z is the Pauli matrix) can be added to the Hamiltonian (Equation ( For the atomic SOC effect, H so = λ so L⋅S is diagonal in the selected basis. Thus, the k•p model under {|d +,2↑ ⟩, |d -,2↑ ⟩} around the Γ point can be constructed up to the second order of k according to: To explore the topology and pseudospin texture, we neglect the constant term M⊗1, which does not modify the eigenstates of the system. Thus, the Hamiltonian H is rewritten as: Hamiltonian is shown in Supplementary Figure derived from O k ð Þ 1⁄4 ðd=d 3 Þ⋅ð∂d=∂kÞ. Figures , xy (the blue squares) at the Г point (Figure Based on the achieved half-metallic nontrivial edge states, the dissipationless, 100% spin-polarized, and high-speed electronic transport can be realized in a single device, as shown in Figure In summary, we proposed a novel Chern insulator with unique half-metallic chiral edge states in the β-Cu 2 S/MnSe heterostructures. This type of Chern insulator is achieved in non-Dirac electrons with a normal band order, implying that many ordinary semiconductors may become Chern insulators via this mechanism. The interface charge transfer is found to be important for giving rise to the topological behavior. The robust nontrivial edge state is found to be 100% spinpolarized and to have a very high Fermi velocity (0.87 × 10 6 m s -1 ), close to that of graphene. The k•p model shows that the topology in the system originates from the exotic two-meron structure of the pesudospin texture. These results indicate that the β-Cu 2 S/MnSe heterostructure has great potential to be fabricated into an advanced dissipationless, 100% spin polarized, and high-speed spintronic device. Our work also creates a rational path to design novel Chern insulators with very special half-metallic chiral edge states.