A deep neural network was developed for the purpose of predicting thermal conductivity with a case study performed on neutron irradiated nuclear fuel. Traditional thermal conductivity modeling approaches rely on existing theoretical frameworks that describe known, relevant phenomena that govern the microstructural evolution processes during neutron irradiation (such as recrystallization, and pore size, distribution and morphology). Current empirical modeling approaches, however, do not represent all irradiation test data well. Here, we develop a machine learning approach to thermal conductivity modeling that does not require a priori knowledge of a specific material microstructure and system of interest. Our approach allows researchers to probe dependency of thermal conductivity on a variety of reactor operating and material conditions. The purpose of building such a model is to allow for improved predictive capabilities linking structure-propertyprocessing-performance relationships in the system of interest (here, irradiated nuclear fuel), which could lead to improved experimental test planning and characterization. The uranium-molybdenum system is the fuel system studied in this work, and historic irradiation test data is leveraged for model development. Our model achieved a mean absolute percent error of approx- The ability to predict thermal conductivity is a significant challenge for a wide range of material systems used in various applications. One application in which thermal conductivity is a material property of particular importance is in nuclear reactors materials, and more specifically, nuclear fuels. Predictive understanding of nuclear fuel thermal conductivity is an essential component to qualifying a fuel system for use in reactor systems worldwide. Thermal conductivity is an important material property that impacts fuel operational temperature, and can be influenced by a variety of factors, including fuel design (dispersion versus monolithic), composition of fuel material (major alloying and impurity elements), porosity, fission products, and grain size Metallic uranium (U) fuel systems are under investigation to meet IAEA requirements for LEU, while also having sufficient 235 U density to meet reactor performance needs. Uranium alloyed with molybdenum (Mo) is one fuel concept under consideration, and is the focus of the work presented here. The U-Mo system offers high U densities, particularly in the monolithic plate design with 15.6 g/cm 3 versus 8.9 g/cm 3 for the dispersion design Thermophysical properties as a function of irradiation conditions must be well characterized to qualify the LEU-Mo fuel system for use in reactors and radioisotope production facilities. Thermal conductivity is one thermophysical property that is of particular importance to the fuel qualification process because it is known to impact fuel element performance and reactor safety margins Several parameters are hypothesized to impact thermal conductivity, including Mo concentration, presence of fission gas bubbles (both inter-and intra-granular), grain size, grain size distribution, grain geometry (aspect ratio), recrystallization, porosity, transformation of γ-U to α-U, interaction between an interdiffusion barrier and the U-Mo fuel, and burn-up (fuel utilization) While several microstructural features, manufacturing processes, and reactor operating parameters are hypothesized to impact thermal conductivity of U-Mo during neutron irradiation, the relative impact or significance of these features, processes, and parameters is currently unknown. At present, predictive capabilities related to linking in-pile thermal conductivity behavior to material condition, processing, or reactor operating conditions are limited. Thus, to improve such predictive capabilities, we investigated the applicability of state-of-the-art machine learning methods to assist with understanding patterns in available data sets that may not be obvious or accessible given currently used analysis and modeling tools Thermal conductivity of nuclear fuel heterogeneous microstructures has been modeled previously using analytical, empirical In Reference In addition to empirical modeling, computational modeling approaches have been used to predict thermal conductivity of nuclear fuel independent of experimental data. Such methods include COMSOL multiphysics simulations, finite element methods, and phase field modeling Machine learning refers to the process of a computer learning trends in data without human intervention through an iterative training process, and adjusting decisions or actions based on the learning/training process when new data is encountered. Deep learning is a subset of the broader subject area of machine learning, and includes methods such as neural networks. The "deep" in deep learning refers to the construction of multiple layers of mathematical elements called neurons, which are capable of learning data representations from changing inputs via a process called training. Deep learning has allowed for improved models that are capable of learning patterns in data with multiple levels of abstraction Machine learning methods including, but not limited to, deep learning have recently been applied to more challenges in molecular and materials science fields The merger of artificial intelligence with materials science allows for evolution and progression of the research process from a traditional structureproperty prediction approach to one that is data-driven. Such a shift can allow for acceleration of research in the field of materials science through the development of a more autonomous design process and methodology that is more objective, reliable, and less dependent on researcher bias and chance discovery In the field of nuclear materials science, machine learning methods have previously been applied to a wide range of challenging engineering problems including development of time-temperature transformation diagrams of U-Mo-X type alloys A new frontier in machine learning is the ability to analyze smaller data sets. Recent advances have led to developments that allow human-level performance in one-shot learning problems The ever decreasing cost of computing resources has made machine learning, in particular deep learning, possible to apply across many domains. The advent of deep learning frameworks such as TensorFlow Here, a data-driven, machine learning approach was employed to determine if such methods could help researchers uncover patterns in data not readily accessible given existing analysis methods. Inherent human bias is introduced in traditional characterization of thermophysical property data of irradiated nuclear fuels. Thus, there is a strong need to develop a model that can accurately predict thermal conductivity from EOL parameters for use in future analysis of irradiation test data that does not heavily rely on domain knowledge and human bias. The data analysis methods investigated here can ultimately help reduce time and cost associated with post irradiation examination of several fuel segments, help inform more targeted experimental work, and accelerate material property prediction and ultimately the fuel qualification process. The work presented here aims to challenge the current paradigm in materials science where material property models are based on fitting equations of a known form to sparse experimental data or by simulations in which fundamental equations are explicitly solved. Furthermore, bias is introduced into existing data analysis approaches due to influence of researcher education and background Experimental materials, methods, and nuclear analysis that generated data used in this work are detailed in References A total of seven data sets were used in model development (1 data set per fuel segment, with three segments from AFIP-2, two segments from AFIP-6MkII, and one segment each from AFIP-3 and AFIP-6). Input data and associated uncertainty values were determined based on irradiation test data and nuclear analysis performed using the Monte Carlo N-Particle (MCNP) code. Each AFIP fuel plate examined in this work consisted of a U-Mo fuel foil with a zirconium (Zr) layer on each side, clad in aluminum alloy 6061 (AA6061). The purpose of the Zr interlayer was to act as a diffusion barrier that is designed to minimize the interaction between the U-Mo fuel and AA6061 cladding, thereby improving chemical and mechanical stability of the fuel plate. U-10Mo was manufactured by melting and casting HEU, DU, and Mo materials with appropriate proportions to obtain the desired 10 wt% Mo alloying addition and desired 235 U enrichment. The U-10Mo casting was then formed into foils via cold rolling. The Zr interlayer was bonded to the fuel foil via hot co-rolling and cladding was applied either with Friction Bonding or Hot Isostatic Pressing. Friction Bonding was used for fabrication of AFIP-2 fuel plates, and Hot Isostatic Pressing was used for AFIP-3, and AFIP-6, and AFIP-6 Mark II (AFIP-6MkII) fuel plates After irradiation, segments were taken from each fuel plate and analyzed. All post-irradiation examination (PIE) in the form of thermal property measurements of fuel segments was performed at the Radiochemical Processing Laboratory (RPL) located at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL). PIE test methods used to generate a portion of the data analyzed in this work are summarized in References It is noted here that 235 U enrichment at BOL listed in Table The learning problem investigated here is as follows: given data from irradiation testing and nuclear analysis for a particular U-Mo fuel segment, what is the best estimate of thermal conductivity of a fuel segment not in the original data set? Additionally, the question of what EOL parameters most significantly impact thermal conductivity was probed. The general approach used in this work involves data pre-processing, data generation, model training, testing, and validation. The machine learning approach described here is the cumulative process of using an original data set to generate synthetic data (based on statistics of the original data set), computing feature vectors, cross-validation, and testing. The end result from model development is the model taking data it has not previously seen, and predicting thermal conductivity as a function of EOL parameters. The numerical representation of data is accomplished with domain knowledge, and here, the numerical representation serves as the proxy for the actual material system (irradiated U-Mo fuel). The numerical representation of irradiation test data is referred to as the feature vector. In order to develop a machine learning model (here, a neural network), additional data was generated based on statistics from original data sets. Synthetic data generation was also performed here in order to avoid overfitting of the machine learning model. The idea behind data generation is to perform statistical analysis on the existing data set, to define a multidi-mensional random process that will generate data with the same statistical characteristics as the original data. Synthetic data generated was independent of the machine learning model and is statistically similar to the original data set. A neural network, specifically a multilayer perceptron (MLP), was developed to predict thermal conductivity given an input vector containing the following information: U and Mo concentrations, both at BOL and EOL (C M o,b , C U,B , C M o,e , C U,e , respectively), 235 U depletion (d) and measured depletion (d m ), fission density (ρ f ) and measured fission density (ρ f,m ), fission power (P f ), surface heat flux (q ), neutron flux (Φ), and average ATR loop temperature (T ). These input values were supplemented by generation of additional data points using a residual chosen from a Gaussian distribution with the size of the uncertainty in each input. It is noted here that while this data generation process increases the amount of input data points in number, it does not appreciably increase the coverage of the input data over the multidimensional feature hyperspace. MLPs can be used for complex data analysis in several engineering fields Absolute scaling of inputs was used with the MLP due to disparate scales of input values, for example 10 21 fissions/cm 3 for fission density versus 10 2 W/cm 2 for surface heat flux. The input layer was followed by 7 repeated fully connected layers of 128 neurons each, with exponential linear unit activation and followed by batch normalization to reduce covariate shift during training Equations for MSE and MAPE are provided in Equations 1 and 2 for reference, where n is the number of data instances, y t is the actual value (here, experimentally determined thermal conductivity), and ŷt is the predicted value. The model was trained on 80% of input data (with 20% left for testing; i.e., a 80/20 train/test split was used), where input data was generated by the previously described data generator. Model validation and sensitivity analysis are two methods of assessing model performance completed as part of this work. Cross-validation is a method employed to assess accuracy of a regression model's predictions A key component to investigating applicability of machine learning for thermal conductivity prediction was to understand the developed model's logic. MLP networks are commonly considered black boxes with regard to the logic used between the input and the output of the model. MLP networks are seen as such because an enormous number of connections are generated (for example, 12×128 7 ×301 ≈ 2×10 18 connections in our model). Due to the large number of connections, it is difficult to understand how to correlate inputs to outputs, and how each input parameter and associated value impacts predictions. While it is extremely difficult to obtain semantically meaningful information from each individual connection, it is possible to gain insight into the gradients that yielded optimal MLP training. A sensitivity analysis was performed to gain insights into how MLP network training was optimized. A sensitivity analysis is one method to assess model performance, and determines how changes in input parameters and data impact model predictions. This type of analysis can allow for probing relationships between model inputs and outputs A univariate sensitivity analysis was performed in this work to understand how predicted thermal conductivity will change if input data is varied. The sensitivity study was completed by holding all input variables constant except for one, which was varied from its possible minimum to maximum, and monitoring the change in output variable (thermal conductivity). The MLP was implemented using a MaxAbsScaler, which normalizes the input values such that the maximum possible value after scaling is unity. Because there are no possible negative inputs, the input range was [0, 1]. For the univariate sensitivity analysis, an input vector was constructed and filled with the value 1 /2. Then, for a single variable, a value was assigned between zero and unity. This was repeated 100 times for each input variable. For each iteration the output vector, k was saved. For each variable and at each temperature (over the range of 0 to 300 °C) the magnitude of that variable's impact on the model output was estimated by finding the variance in thermal conductivity difference, defined by: where σ 2 i is the variance in predicted output due to variable i at each temperature, and Y is the accumulated matrix of predictions ( Y i ) for that variable. This algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1. For interpretation of results (subsequently discussed in Section 4.2, variance of predicted thermal conductivity was calculated over the temperature range of 0 to 350°C when each input variable was varied from its possible minimum to maximum, according to: Algorithm 1 Pseudocode for univariate sensitivity analysis. The vec decorator represents a vector of values and the Predict step indicates use of the pre-trained MLP to generate an output for φ = 0 to 1 do 4: Accumulate Y i in Y 7: All experimentation was carried out with Python version 2.7. The deep learning Python library, Keras (version 1.2) with TensorFlow backend (version 1.0.1) was used for access to neural network algorithms. Keras uses the following dependencies, and thus were also used in our experimentation: numpy, scipy, pyyaml, HDF5 and h5py. All computations were performed using a CPU (no GPU was used). The Keras Sequential framework was selected for use in this work; all associated parameters are provided in Table Additionally, the scikit-learn Python package was used for access to preprocessing and model selection modules. Within the pre-processing module, StandardScaler was used to standardize data used for training, testing and validation. Use of this data scaling method transformed data to zero mean and unit variance. In the model selection module, the splitter function train_test_split was used to split data into training and testing subsets. As stated, the train/test split used here was 80/20 after first separating a validation segment that would not be shown to the model until after training and testing. Results from MLP model training and testing, sensitivity analysis, and thermal conductivity predictions are presented and discussed in this section. y t defined in Equation 2 § Early stopping criteria with patience of 10 epochs and min_delta of 0.01, averaged around 350 epochs † † SM A -simple moving average described in Equation Model performance in training and testing was assessed by examining training history, shown in Figure , or in other words, if the MSE did not change by more than 0.005 for 10 consecutive epochs. In Figure Univariate sensitivity analysis provides insight into how sensitive a model is when input values are changed over a given range. In our system of interest (neutron irradiated U-Mo fuel), a univariate sensitivity analysis was performed to understand which model input variables impact predicted thermal conductivity most significantly. Results from this analysis are shown in the form of a bar chart in Figure Sensitivity analysis results shown in Figure For the input parameters that most significantly impacted thermal conductivity predictions, a plot of thermal conductivity variance over the temperature range of 0 to 350°C was generated to visually examine trends over the entire temperature range. Figure Applicability of the developed MLP network for modeling irradiated U-Mo fuel thermal conductivity is easily visualized by plotting predicted thermal conductivity versus experimentally determined values from PIE. All plots of predicted versus experimental data for fuel segments analyzed in this work are provided in Figures It was noticed that the raw output of the neural network included a noise component as indicated by oscillation of thermal conductivity values around a smoothly varying mean. This trend is likely due to the added uncertainty in the prediction targets. Recall that each set of prediction targets were augmented by adding the uncertainty, as follows: where N is the normal distribution with given mean and standard deviation, respectively, and σ is the uncertainty in Y . Since the calculation of the loss function includes that uncertainty when predicting the MSE, the network "learns" that addition of a noise component will decrease the overall mean squared error. The authors acknowledge that this is a non-physical noise component in the model, and have thus plotted (as solid lines on Figures 6 -9) an additional prediction, which was defined by taking the simple moving average of each vector y, such that: where N is the number of measurements to average, and υ is the set of all υ i where N 2 ≤ i ≤ M -N 2 where M is the number of measurements in y. After calculation of the simple moving average υ, a metric for the final prediction was defined as: The results in Figures The leave-one-out validation scheme used for model training produced results shown in Figure As seen in Figures The largest limitation in developing a MLP network to predict irradiated U-Mo fuel thermal conductivity is the sparse raw data available for model training. Machine learning models learn trends in data sets, therefore more data instances (in this case, data collected from a greater number of fuel segments) would be helpful so that pattern recognition by the model is improved. Due to the expensive and time-consuming nature of irradiation tests performed in ATR, only a few data sets were available for use in this work. Only certain parameters can be quantified from the irradiation tests performed because these tests were not instrumented. Data from each fuel segment was therefore limited to characterization before and after neutron irradiation in ATR. A MLP network was developed to predict thermal conductivity of irradiated nuclear fuel that does not require a priori knowledge of the material system or microstructural features of interest (e.g. grain size, porosity, and fission gas bubble distribution). We performed a case study using historic irradiation test and PIE data for the U-Mo system. Our approach allows for researchers to probe how thermal conductivity changes as a function of various irradiation test parameters, including major alloying element concentrations, depletion, fission density, fission power, surface heat flux, neutron flux, and temperature. Our model generalizes well to never before seen data, and results indicate that deep learning methods (specifically MLP networks) can be developed to predict thermal conductivity of nuclear fuels from limited, historic irradiation test data. Results from a univariate sensitivity analysis indicate that concentration of major alloying element (Mo) at EOL, neutron flux, and ATR loop temperature impact predicted thermal conductivity most significantly. The main limitation of the model developed here is the amount of input data used for training. The work presented here contributes to the evolving paradigm in materials science, in which machine learning methods are enabling improved understanding of structure-property-processingperformance relationships. We believe our approach can be applied to other data analysis problems in the realm of materials science, as machine learning methods are developed for smaller data sets, which are typical in this field. In this work, model bias was added by applying a moving average to the raw output of the MLP network. However, smoothness of the predicted thermal conductivity as a function of temperature could be achieved using other methods. One such method is including a measure of smoothness in the loss function through use of a "penalizer". A schematic loss function then would be the following: where λ is a free parameter to scale the size of the penalty and κ is some measure of smoothness of the predicted function. This general method could be used not only to ensure smoothness of thermal conductivity versus temperature curves, but to add arbitrary additional bias derived from domain knowledge. Further, the sensitivity analysis described here only analyzes linear contributions of each input parameter to the predicted thermal conductivity. Additionally, the nonlinear relationships between input parameters and predicted thermal conductivity should be comprehensively explored. The Shapley regression value describes feature importance, taking into account all features and their inclusion in the model Testing multiple machine learning algorithms is suggested as future work but was not completed as part of this initial investigation. It is possible that different algorithms could yield improved results, however one type of machine learning model (a MLP network, through use of the Keras Sequential framework using fully connected -called Dense -layers) was selected based on this model's success in other relevant work 