Poly(para-phenylene) has been recognized as one important family of conducting polymers upon doping with donors or acceptors. This system possesses a chain-like structure with infinite benzene rings linked with the single C-C bond. Oligophenyls as models of poly(para-phenylene) with short chains in the para position were found to exhibit superconductivity at transition temperatures ranging from 3 K to 123 K upon dopant. Structural studies have revealed that there exist the orderdisorder transitions in many p-oligophenyls with almost doubled lattice constants in the b and c directions at low temperatures, seemingly supporting the formation of the charge-density-wave order. Such a transition is of relevance to the understanding of the emergence of novel quantum functionality where unconventional polaronic interactions are relevant for the new emerging theory of superconductivity in this system. However, the accurate temperatures for the order-disorder transitions amongst these p-oligophenyls are still needed to be determined. The chain length effects on the order-disorder transitions in this system remain unknown. Here we report the systematic investigation of the evolution of vibrational properties of the crystalline p-oligophenyls over a wide temperature range. The order-disorder transition is identified by three indicators, the lowest energy peak together with the intensity ratios between the 1280 cm -1 and 1220 cm -1 modes and between the two modes at around 1600 cm -1 . A phase diagram of the order-disorder transition temperature as well as the melting curve for p-oligophenyls is thus established. The former is found to increase with the chain length and saturates at around 350 K for poly(para-phenylene). Benzene and its derivatives are always attractive materials because of the novel and excellent physical and chemical properties benefited from the delocalized cyclic continuous π bond between the carbon atoms. Among the benzene derivatives, poly(para-phenylene) (PPP) materials draw extensive attentions. These materials all have the structure with a certain number of phenyl rings connecting at the para positions. The short poligophenyls (POPs) are named with the prefixes of bi-, ter-, quater-, quinque-, and sexi-, before the phenyl for the two to six phenyl rings compounds, respectively. Early studies revealed that these materials all show insulating or semiconducting behavior in the normal state, whereas their conductivities increase by several orders of magnitude due to the formations of the polarons and bipolarons after alkali or alkali earth metals doping. The herringbone type structure also generates two adverse forces, Here, we present the Raman spectra of benzene, pquinquephenyl, and p-sexiphenyl with the temperature range from 5 K to the temperature above the ambient condition. The temperature effects on the vibrational properties of the modes ranging from the lattice vibrations to the high-energy C-H vibrations, especially the lowest energy peak and the modes at around 1220, 1280, and 1600 cm -1 , are studied in detail. The results are then compared with previous works focused on the biphenyl, p-terphenyl, p-quaterphenyl. In the experiments all the high-purity samples were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent and Alfa Aesarare. They were all sealed in quartz tubes with high transmittances for Raman-scattering experiments in a glove box with the moisture and oxygen levels less than 0.1 ppm. The tubes were stuck on the heater by using the glue with high thermal conductivity to reduce the error of the internal temperature. Then the heater was put in a cryogenic vacuum chamber for cooling down to low temperature. Due to the different melting points, the benzene was measured from 5 K to 300 K, the pquinquephenyl was measured from 5 K to 350 K, the psexiphenyl was measured from 5 K to 360 K. The applied wavelength of the exciting laser was 660 nm. The power was less than 1 mW before a ×20 objective to avoid possible damage of samples. The integration time is 20 s. A 1024-pixel Charge Coupled Device designed by Princeton was used to recorded the Raman spectra. Figure • No distinguishable peaks can be observed in the lattice motion range of the liquid benzene, whereas some peaks appear in the high energy range. This indicates that the latter peaks are associated with the vibrations among the inner atoms of the benzene ring. In addition, there are some new peaks appeared in the spectra of POPs, such as the peaks located at around 800 cm -1 ,1220 cm -1 , 1280 cm -1 , 1500 cm -1 , and so on. These peaks should result from the interaction of the phenyl rings. • Near all the modes show drastic splits at 10 K, especially the librational motions. The anomalous splits were confirmed by the previous Raman scattering measurements and explained resulting from the drastic decreases of the peak widths below the structure transition temperatures. • The modes around 1220 and 1280 cm -1 are associated with the C-H in-plane bending modes and the interring C-C stretching modes, they stem from the interaction of the neighboring rings, thus they disappear in the spectra of benzene. The 1220 cm -1 mode gradually decreases the intensity with decreasing chain length and it absolutely vanishes in P2P, whereas the 1280 cm -1 have less changes. This scenario agrees with the previous work which concludes that the former mode is more sensitive to the chain length and planarity than the latter. The modes ar around 1600 cm -1 are associated with the C-C stretching modes, and the intensities of these modes increase with increasing phenyl numbers. They all exhibit severe splits at low temperatures. • The backgrounds of all the materials are nearly straight at ambient condition, whereas they raise as a broad hill. In addition, peaks located at around 500 cm -1 with the width more than 100 cm -1 appear at low temperatures in the six materials. They have been excluded from the external dirty signals. These anomalous phenomena should result from the increase of the fluorescence effect. Raman spectra of benzene, biphenyl, p-terphenyl, p-quaterphenyl, p-quinquephenyl and p-sexiphenyl measured at different temperatures. All the spectra are displaced vertically for clarification. gradual increase of the lattice parameters, the interaction forces among molecules decrease as the chain length is increased. Among the lattice modes, the lowest frequency mode draws a lot of attentions. It can be a good indicator of the chain length at normal state due to the regular tendency of the frequency as the dependence of the molecular chain length. Here, we fit the lowest frequency peaks of each material by a Lorentz function, and the temperature dependent frequencies and FWHMs are shown in Fig. R a m a n s h i f t ( c m -1 ) stands at low temperatures even though all the lowest energy peaks of the POPs blueshift with decreasing temperature (see Fig. The C-H in-plane bending modes and the interring C-C stretching modes located at around 1220 and 1280 cm -1 are common indicators to identify the molecular conjugations at ambient condition (chain length and planarity). The intensity ratios of the POPs are presented in Fig. The temperature evolutionary intensity maps of modes at around 1600 cm -1 of benzene and POPs are presented in Fig. Temperature dependent intensity maps of the benzene, biphenyl, p-terphenyl, p-quaterphenyl, p-quinquephenyl and p-sexiphenyl. Raman spectra at 5 K and 300 K of each POPs are depicted for clarification. The transition temperatures are pointed out by the horizontal dashed lines. peratures except the P2P, the frequencies, widths and intensities of these two modes of P2P all exhibit unusual tendencies below 45 K. This should result from the typical "displacive" type transition which is distinct from the "order-disorder" type transition of other POPs. The intensity ratio of these two modes are also always used to estimate the molecular conjugation. In the end, a corresponding phase diagram of the melting point and structural transition temperature is plotted in Fig. In conclusion, Raman scattering spectra of benzene, p-quinquephenyl, and p-sexiphenyl at different temperatures were performed. The vibrational properties of those materials were comprehensively analyzed, and the results were compared with the previous works focused on the biphenyl, p-terphenyl, and p-quaterphenyl. All these three indicators of the molecular conjugation, including the lowest energy peak and the intensity ratios between the 1280 cm -1 and 1220 cm -1 modes and between the two modes at around 1600 cm -1 , were examined at low temperature condition. The frequency of the lowest energy peak remains the declining tendency with increasing chain length. Meanwhile, all the p-oligophenyls exhibit drastic drops on the peak widths of the lowest energy peaks, and thus can be used to estimate the molecular conjugation at low temperatures. The other two indicators also have anomalous changes at around the structural transition temperatures, and are also applicable in the low temperature condition. However, the drastic splits of those modes make the calculations of the intensity ratios more difficult. In addition, due to the gradual decrease of the inter-ring twist with increasing molecular chain length, the amplitudes of the anomalies gradually vanish. It is almost indistinguishable in the psexiphenyl and the longer polymers. In the end, a phase diagram of the melting point and the structural transition temperature was estabilished. They all increase with increasing chain length, and the extrapolated melting point and transition temperature for the polymer with infinite chain length are above 1000 K and 350 K, respectively.