Crystals and glasses exhibit fundamentally different heat conduction mechanisms: the periodicity of crystals allows for the excitation of propagating vibrational waves that carry heat, as first discussed by Peierls In 1929 Peierls Here, we show that a more general theory exists, encompassing the emergence and coexistence of all these excitations, and reducing to the BTE in the semi-classical limit of a simple crystal, or to the Allen-Feldman formulation in the case of a harmonic glass. We start by considering a crystal in the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, where we add perturbatively to a harmonic Hamiltonian 21 H har a collision term H col accounting for anharmonicity (1) Here U(q are the Fourier representations of the displacement and momentum operators u(R) bα and p(R) bα of atom b in unit cell R, with mass M b and in a lattice containing N c unit cells, and D(q) is the dynamical matrix of the crystal with eigenvalues ω 2 (q) s (s labels the 3•N at phonon branches, N at being the number of atoms in the unit cell). The usual commutation relations [a(q) bα , a † (q ) b α ]=δ q,q δ b,b δ α,α are satisfied, and in terms of these operators H har assumes the simple form: When a temperature gradient is imposed with couplings to external baths, the system's state -described by the density matrix ρ -undergoes an irreversible Markovian evolution described by the master equation 23 where the collision term ∂ρ(t) ∂t H col accounts for the transitions between the eigenstates of H har driven by the perturbation H col . Here we are interested in the vibrational energy, which is a one-body operator at the harmonic leading order. We can thus move to a formulation based on the one-body density matrix ρ 1 , which 2 is defined in terms of a trace over the Fock space For systems that are homogeneous in real space ρ 1 is diagonal: ρ 1 (q, q , t)=ρ 1 (q, q , t)δ q,q ; to study nonhomogeneous systems it becomes useful to introduce the Wigner distribution W , obtained by applying the Wigner-Weyl transformation to ρ 1 24 : It becomes apparent from equation ( where the gradients appearing in the anticommutator are contracted using the scalar product. The spatial gradient ∇ R acts on the variable R appearing in the exponential e 2iq •R , whose characteristic length scale is L∼|q | -1 |a i |. Over such mesoscopic scale L the discrete variable R can be considered as continuous and the gradient ∇ R well-defined. At this point, thanks to the locality in q of equation ( where the atomic and Cartesian indexes are replaced by the phonon branch index s. We define the diagonal matrix Ω(q) s,s =ω(q) s δ s,s and denote with ∂N(R,q,t) s,s ∂t H col the collision operator in the basis of the phonon modes. Equations ( This equation is the first main result of this paper, and offers a more general phonon transport equation, where phonon wave packets are not only allowed to propagate particle-like in space but also to tunnel, wave-like, from one branch to another. We note that the left-hand side of equation ( To compute the thermal conductivity we focus on the steady-state regime and search for a solution of equation ( where V is the unit cell volume, NT (q is the equilibrium Bose-Einstein distribution, Γ(q) s =(VN c ) -1 A T (q, q) s,s δ s ,s is the phonon linewidth and A T (q, q ) s,s is the standard collision operator that accounts for anharmonicity and isotopic disorder (for the third-order anharmonicities considered here, see equation (13) of Ref. Once the solution N(R, q) s,s for both populations (s=s ) and coherences (s =s ) is known, one can compute the heat flux J α (R) and the thermal conductivity κ αβ from J α (R)=-κ αβ ∇T β (R). The second main result of this work follows, where the thermal conductivity is generalized to an expression including both the populations' and coherences' contributions: where κ αβ P is the standard Peierls contribution to the conductivity and the additional tensor, which we name κ αβ C , derives from the coherences' equation. The relevance of equation ( The perovskite CsPbBr 3 , which belongs to a family of materials promising for thermoelectric energy conversion The results are shown in figure (1) (we show here the SMA for κ xx ; this is almost identical to the full solution (see Methods)): at 300 K the populations term contributes just 30% of the total conductivity, while the coherences term provides an additional 70%, leading to much closer agreement with experiments 5 that becomes even more relevant in the high-temperature asymptotics. Conversely, at low temperature Peierls' term becomes dominant (at 50 K it provides 78% of the total conductivity). It can be seen that in the high temperature limit κ αβ P ∝ T -1 , as predicted by Peierls' theory Bulk thermal conductivity of CsPbBr3 as a function of temperature. "Exp(L)", "Exp(M)" and "Exp(S)" refer to experiments 5 on nanowires having respectively sections of 800×380 nm 2 , 320×390 nm 2 and 300×160 nm 2 : their broad agreement supports the hypothesis of negligible finite-size boundary scattering Vibrational properties and heat conduction mechanisms in CsPbBr3. a, The phonon spectrum of CsPbBr3 (gray lines) features low-energy flat branches, typical of rattling vibrations similar, confirming that all computational parameters are correctly accounted for. Figure In summary, we have derived from the Wigner phase space formulation of quantum mechanics a general transport equation ( We note in passing that a complementary approach to these transport equations is to compute the thermal conductivity via the Green-Kubo method Bosonic operators in the Cartesian basis. In order to describe heat transfer driven by a temperature gradient (i.e. a spatially-dependent lattice vibrational energy), we need to keep track of the vibrations' location in real space. This is possible using the Fourier transform of the bosonic operator defined in equation ( since, as we will show now, it is related to vibrations localized around the lattice site indexed by (R, b, α). The tensor G Rbα,(R+R )b α appearing in equation ( it is translation-invariant and decays to zero for R →∞ where In terms of the bosonic operators a † (R) bα , a(R) bα , the energy field (15) becomes: From the decay to zero of G Rbα,(R+R )b α for R →∞, it follows that the excitation created by a † (R) bα has an energy distribution E(R+R ) Rbα localized around the position R 34 : where we have used the translational invariance of the tensor G to simplify the last equation: . We have therefore demonstrated that the operator (13) creates vibrations localized around the lattice position R; hence, performing the Fourier transform of the operator (1) it is possible to keep track of the vibrations' locations in real space. In contrast, the more common phonon-eigenmodes basis, obtained by the transformation (discussed in equations (7,8) of the main text): does not allow such a real space-based description. In fact, the operator a(q) s does not have a direct correspondence with the location of vibrations in real space, due to the phase indeterminacy of the eigenstates E(q) s ,b α of the dynamical matrix D(q). This becomes apparent considering the following gauge transformation, allowed by the phase freedom on E(q) s ,b α at each q-point: where R ∆ is a direct lattice vector. Despite ã(q) s and a(q) s being equivalent for a description in Fourier space, their real space representations are shifted by R ∆ : It is worth mentioning that this mirrors the electronic case, where the phase indeterminacy of the Bloch orbitals is reflected in the non-uniqueness of the transformation into Wannier functions Decoupling of equation (9). We consider the steadystate regime, in which a small, slowly varying temperature gradient ∇T is established throughout the system. We look for a solution linear in the temperature gradient ∇T 14 on the distribution corresponding to the local equilibrium temperature 36 T (x): N(x, q) s,s = NT (q) s δ s,s +n T (x, q) s δ s,s + n (1) (q) s,s •∇T (x); where nT (x, q) s δ s,s accounts for the local equilibrium temperature: nT (x, q) s = d NT (q)s dT (T (x)-T ); the term n (1) (q) s,s •∇T (x) is, in general, non-diagonal in s, s and contains the information concerning the deviation of the full solution from the local equilibrium solution -it is assumed to be of the order of the temperature gradient, as in previous work which can be solved approximately (in the SMA Equation ( We stress that the simplicity of the equation for the coherences (23) implies that the computational cost for finding its solution is negligible compared to the one for solving exactly the populations' equation (22). In the kinetic regime Within the SMA approximation, the total thermal conductivity κ αβ is approximated by κ αβ SMA =κ αβ P,SMA +κ αβ C , which can be written in the following compact form: where we stress that the summation over s, s in equation (26) includes the diagonal terms s=s (in contrast, these terms are excluded from the summation in equation (12)). We highlight how the coherences' conductivity κ αβ C remains exact (i.e. as in equation ( As a final remark for this section, it is worth mentioning that the equations for κ xx P in the work of Fugallo et al. 14 are recovered by choosing the eigenstates of H har in the degenerate subspaces to be eigenstates of V x (q) and neglecting the term κ αβ C . The limit of a harmonic crystal with infinite unit cell: Allen-Feldman equation. Here we show that in the limit of a harmonic crystal with an infinite unit cell (i.e. in the case of a harmonic glass, whose Brillouin zone is reduced to the Γ-point), the term κ αβ C mathematically reduces to the Allen-Feldman expression for the thermal conductivity of harmonic glasses where i=1, . . ., 3•N tot at with N tot at the total number of atoms in the (ideally infinite) single unit cell of the glass and V t its (ideally infinite) volume. The mode specific heat C i (T ) is: where Ni = exp ω i /(k B T ) -1 -1 is the Bose-Einstein distribution and the mode diffusivity D i (T ) is: V β AA (q) s,s is the velocity operator defined by Auerbach and Allen V β AA (q) s,s = ω(q) s + ω(q) s 2 ω(q) s ω(q) s V β (q) s,s . The Dirac delta in equation ( where we have used V t =VN c . Taking first the limit Γ(q) s →η ∀ (s, q) and then η→0, we have that the coherences' term in equation ( where we have obtained the delta function as the limit of a Lorentzian for Γ(q) s →η→0. It follows that, defining κ A =κ αα dis /3 and in the case of a Brillouin zone reduced to the Γ-point, we recover the Allen-Feldman formula: ) where ω s =ω(q=0) s , Ns = N (q=0) s and V = V (q=0). Phonon linewidths distribution. Figure (3) shows the distribution of the phonon linewidths for CsPbBr 3 at different temperatures. The distribution spans a range of about 4 orders of magnitude (from about 10 -2 cm -1 to about 10 2 cm -1 ); consequently, couplings between vibrational eigenstates having very different frequencies are allowed, as shown in figure a1 [Å] a2 [Å] a3 [Å] Theory and Simulation of Materials (THEOS) and National Centre for Computational Design and Discovery of Novel Materials (MARVEL), École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Roma La Sapienza, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, I-00185 Roma, Italy. e-mail: francesco.mauri@uniroma1.it