We study the influence of the liquid-vapor surface on the crystallization kinetics of supercooled metal alloys. While a good glass former, Cu50Zr50, shows no evidence of surface enhancement of crystallization, Ni50Al50 exhibits an increased rate of crystallization due to heterogeneous nucleation at the free liquid surface. The difference in the compositional fluctuations at the interface is proposed as the explanation of the distinction between the two alloys. Specifically, we observe compositional ordering at the surface of Ni50Al50 while the Cu50Zr50 alloy only exhibits a diffuse adsorption of the Cu at the interface. We argue that the general difference in composition susceptibilities at planar surfaces represents an important factor in understanding the difference in the glass forming ability of the two alloys. The glass forming ability (GFA) of a molten alloy is established, in practice, by the stability of the melt with respect to heterogeneous nucleation. Walls, foreign particles and the liquid-vapour interface typically provide the kinetically dominant pathway to crystallization. While the first two sources of heterogeneous nucleation can be avoided by careful design, the liquid-vapour interface is generally unavoidable, an intrinsic potential source of crystallization nucleation sites and, consequently, a useful probe as to the chemical origin of glass forming ability in alloys. In this paper we shall report on molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of the influence of the liquid surface on the stability of two metal alloys: one a good glass former (Cu 50 Zr 50 ) and the other, a poor glass former, (Ni 50 Al 50 ). Previously There is a considerable literature on the role of the liquid-vapour surface as a site of heterogeneous crystal nucleation. Surface crystallization of supercooled water has been identified as the principal route for the formation of ice clouds 2 . Studies on the surface crystallization of molecular glass formers have demonstrated that the crystals can grow outward from the liquid 3 . In the case of surface crystallization of liquid metals 4 , much of the research has concentrated on the important influence of surface oxidation in the chemical generation of nucleation centres. In the absence of oxygen, surfaces offer a number of physical advantages for nucleation: i) a reduction in the surface free energy penalty 5 , ii) reduction of stress associated 6 and iii) composition fluctuations due to surface adsorption In the following we shall examine the kinetics of crystallization in simulations of thick films of supercooled liquids of NiAl and CuZr bounded by free surfaces and the associated compositional structure at these surfaces. The simulation of the liquid surface has been carried out as follows. First, a bulk cubic simulation cell containing 5488 atoms (2744 atoms of each species) was heated from 300 K up to 2300 K and then cooled to 1600 K (for NiAl) or 1400 K (for CuZr) at the speed of 100 K per 200 ps. The melting points of these two alloys were previously estimated by simulation 1 to be 1530 K and 1340 K, respectively. The free surfaces were then created by extending the simulation cell boundaries along one Cartesian direction for equilibrated liquid atomic configuration at 1600 K (for NiAl) and 1400 K (for CuZr) while leaving the particle positions unaltered to effectively create a vacuum layer about 30 Å thick. With periodic boundaries this procedure results in cleaving the liquid to create two surfaces. Time is measured from the creation of the surfaces. The NiAl liquid plus surface was then relaxed at 1600 K for 3 ns before quenched and relaxed at 900 K, a temperature close to the 'nose' of its time-temperaturetransformation curve. For NiAl, we also relaxed the bulk system at 900 K, after equilibrated at 1600 K for about 4 ns, for comparison with the liquid plus surface. Using the measured enthalpy of fusion, we estimate that a temperature of 700 K will produce a thermodynamic driving force for the CuZr crystallization equivalent to that experienced by the NiAl alloy at 900 K. The CuZr liquid plus surfaces was quenched to a range of temperatures between 650 K and 1100 K after being equilibrated at 1400 K for 10 ns. All the bulk simulations in this work were carried out at constant pressure (zero pressure) and temperature while all the simulations of the surface were carried out at constant volume (i.e liquid + vapor) and temperature. In addition to the above simulations, we also computed the surface potential energies of pure elements in face centered cubic and amorphous phases by comparing the energies of a slab and its bulk phase at zero temperature. For the surface energy of amorphous phase, a series of configurations were used to obtain the average value. LAMMPS 8 MD simulation software was used. The atomic interactions were modelled by the embedded atom method (EAM) potential proposed by Mishin et al. Crystallization can be conveniently monitored by recording the potential energy as a function to time. A decrease in the potential energy following an incubation interval over which the energy was stationary is characteristic of crystal nucleation. As presented in Fig. A sequence of snapshots of the evolution of order in the Ni 50 Al 50 slab reveal that crystallization is nucleated at the surface (see Fig. As is shown in Fig. Previous studies In Fig. Beyond an empirical signature of glass forming ability, it seems fruitful to ask whether the physical factors responsible for layering at a liquid surface are also those responsible for establishing the difference in glass forming ability in these alloys. In making this proposal, we are fully aware that homogeneous crystal nucleation has no explicit dependence on the nature of the liquid surface. Our reasoning in raising this proposition is as follows. i) Previously 1 , we established that the large difference in crystal growth rates between NiAl and CuZr was associated with the difference in chemical ordering at the liquid-crystal interface. The NiAl alloy exhibits an extended compositional layering at the interface while the CuZr liquid does not. ii) In the absence of striking differences in the average structural correlations of the two liquids, it is plausible to suggest that the important difference lies in their response to a perturbation. The liquidvapor interface can be viewed as such a perturbation, one whose connection with crystallization is that both represent extended density variations. Exactly what kind of perturbation does the liquid metal surface represent? Rice and coworkers 20 presented an explanation of a nonmonotonic density profile through the interface based on the many body effects associated with a metal-nonmetal transition through the liquid-vapor interface. Celestini et al In conclusion, we have demonstrated that the difference in the glass forming ability already established for the simulated alloys Ni 50 Al 50 and Cu 50 Zr 50 in the bulk liquid is retained when considering the influence of heterogeneous nucleation of the crystal at the liquid surface. We demonstrate that the NiAl alloy undergoes hetero-geneous nucleation as a result of the short wavelength chemical order induced at the surface. The CuZr surface exhibits no such chemical layering, despite the fact that Cu is selectively adsorbed at the surface. Kaban et al 