We show that the large orbital degeneracy inherent in Moiré heterostructures naturally gives rise to a 'high-Tc' like phase diagram with a chiral twist -wherein an exotic quantum anomalous Hall insulator phase is flanked by chiral d + id superconducting domes. Specifically, we analyze repulsively interacting fermions on hexagonal (triangular or honeycomb) lattices near Van Hove filling, with an SU(N f ) flavor degeneracy. This model is inspired by recent experiments on graphene Moiré heterostructures. At this point, a nested Fermi surface and divergent density of states give rise to strong (ln 2 ) instabilities to correlated phases, the competition between which can be controllably addressed through a combination of weak coupling parquet renormalization group and Landau-Ginzburg analysis. For N f = 2 (i.e. spin degeneracy only) it is known that chiral d + id superconductivity is the unambiguously leading weak coupling instability. Here we show that N f ≥ 4 leads to a richer (but still unambiguous and fully controllable) behavior, wherein at weak coupling the leading instability is to a fully gapped and chiral Chern insulator, characterized by a spontaneous breaking of time reversal symmetry and a quantized Hall response. Upon doping this phase gives way to a chiral d + id superconductor. We further consider deforming this minimal model by introducing an orbital splitting of the Van Hove singularities, and discuss the resulting RG flow and phase diagram. Our analysis thus bridges the minimal model and the practical Moiré band structures, thereby providing a transparent picture of how the correlated phases arise under various circumstances. Meanwhile, a similar analysis on the square lattice predicts a phase diagram where (for N f > 2) a nodal staggered flux phase with 'loop current' order gives way upon doping to a nodal d-wave superconductor. Chiral phases of quantum matter spontaneously break time reversal symmetry and exhibit a wealth of fascinating properties, including quantized Hall effects and optical activity, that make them uniquely interesting for both fundamental and technological reasons The study of correlated electrons has been a central theme of condensed matter research for decades. A central open problem in this field is understanding the phase diagram of the cuprate high-T c superconductors Here we adopt the weak coupling approach, in the hope that this may yield insight into moderate coupling phenomena. Fermiology is important in the weak coupling framework. In particular, the patches in the immediate vicinity of Van Hove singularities dominate the weak coupling instabilities. We assume the Van Hove singularities to occur at the zone boundary, as appropriate for hexagonal lattices doped to the M point. The Fermi surface is highly nested, giving rise to weak coupling instabilities in multiple channels, the energy scales for which are enhanced by the Van Hove singularities. The competition between various ordering tendencies is treated in an unbiased manner through a parquet renormalization group (RG) procedure. Whereas for N f = 2 (spin degeneracy only) the leading instability at Van Hove filling is known to be in a doubly degenerate d-wave superconducting channel Our work develops naturally from the parquet studies of correlated electrons. Such studies were first developed for nearest neighbor hopping models on square lattices Our minimal model analysis adopts the 'minimal' setup of Van Hove fermiology, with a particular focus on the patches in the immediate vicinity of Van Hove singularities. This setup is exact in the SU(N f ) symmetric minimal models. While the N f = 4 models have been adopted in previous phenomenological works on twisted bilayer graphene Various approaches have been utilized to resolve the moderate coupling problem in Moiré heterostructures. Our work differs from most other investigations (e.g. Refs. Of previous works that have taken a weak coupling approach, our analysis differs from Refs. We emphasize also that the Chern insulator predicted from loop current order in our work is qualitatively different from the various QAH phases discussed in graphene Moiré heterostructures We consider a system of N f fermions hopping in a flavor conserving manner on a two dimensional lattice near Van Hove filling. An SU(N f ) flavor degeneracy is assumed for the system. The Van Hove singularity (logarithmic divergence in the density of states) arises from N p saddle points, which are assumed to occur at the Brillouin zone boundary (i.e. at momenta M α = -M α ). In triangular and honeycomb lattices N p = 3, whereas in square lattices N p = 2. However, we develop the analysis for general N p . The low energy theory can be well approximated by a patch model consisting of N p patches at the saddle points with the dispersion energies ξ α 's in the approximate hyperbolic forms (See Appendix A). All N p inequivalent saddle points are assumed to be mutually nested with nesting momenta Q α 's [see Fig. The interactions in the low energy theory are assumed to be weakly repulsive, short-ranged, and SU(N f ) symmetric. Summarized by Fig. where the order of fermion flavors is σ, σ , σ , σ. Note that the Umklapp scattering g 3 is allowed since the nesting momenta satisfy 2Q = 0 up to reciprocal lattice vectors. (a) Our setup parallels the classic works on parquet renormalization group (RG) Here G kω = (iωξ k ) -1 represents the free fermionic propagator with Matsubara frequency ω. We focus on the static part of the susceptibilities and set the bosonic Matsubara frequency ν = 0. Different divergences are manifested in different channels where t represents higher neighbor hoppings (third neighbor or higher for honeycomb lattice, second neighbor or higher for square or triangular lattices). The prefactors manifest the characteristic density of states h pp , h ph ∼ ν 0 and are calculated for square and hexagonal lattices in Appendix B. Owing to the logarithmic divergences in susceptibilities, a parquet RG is necessary for the analysis of the low energy theory. The calculations are carried out following Ref. , , , where the maximum d max 1 = h ph /h pp characterizes the maximal nesting at Van Hove filling. A detailed analysis of maximal nesting on different lattices is demonstrated in Appendix B. For square lattice d max 1 = 1, indicating that the patches enjoy the perfect nesting of Fermi surface. However, the perfect nesting is not accessible to the patches on hexagonal lattices, and a lower maximum d max 1 = 1/2 is manifested accordingly. Notice that the equations for g 1 and g 3 depend on N f due to the involvement of interpatch internal fermion loops. The patch number N p is present in equations for g 3 and g 4 since the internal Umklapp scattering contributes. These equations reduce to the square lattice equations of Refs. 28, 33, and 34 when we set N p = 2, N f = 2, and to the hexagonal lattice equations of Ref. 26 when we set We analyze the RG equations with the setup of bare weak repulsions g 1 , g 2 , g 3 , g 4 ≥ 0 and finite nesting d 1 (y) > 0. Motivated by the Moiré heterostructures based on graphene and hexagonal boron nitride, the numbers N f = 4 and N p = 3 are chosen The fixed trajectory may be determined by making an ansatz of the interactions Substitution into the RG equations yields a set of algebraic equations, which may be straightforwardly solved. Discarding the solutions that cannot be accessed starting from repulsive interactions, and the solutions that are unstable to perturbations, we are left with a unique set of critical interactions G i 's. For single layer graphene While -G 4 decreases toward zero with increasing nesting, -G 1 increases and becomes the largest among all interactions at (inaccessible) perfect nesting d 1 = 1. These features indicate a switch between different fixed trajectories at certain nesting. A transition between different instabilities may also occur accordingly. To determine the leading instability as the system flows to strong coupling, we introduce the test vertices coupling to the particle-particle and particle-hole bilinears Under the RG flow, these test vertices receive corrections from the particle-particle and particle-hole susceptibilities. Different irreducible channels manifest different flows of test vertices. Based on the test vertex analysis, the instabilities can be inspected through the probe of susceptibilities. The susceptibility that diverges most rapidly under RG represents the leading instability. We focus on the channels receiving ln 2 divergent susceptibilities -test vertices in channels receiving only ln divergent susceptibilities do not grow strong before the problem flows to strong coupling The corrections to test vertices under RG are described by a set of differential equations. From the analysis in Appendix D, the superconducting (SC) and density wave (a) (DW) channels manifest the equations The interactions are linear combinations of the four inequivalent interactions Since the density waves are commensurate with the lattice, the real and imaginary components are decoupled under the RG flow. Along the fixed trajectories, the ansatz of interactions Eq. ( The exponent β I in each channel I is a linear combination of critical interactions A more concrete instability analysis is offered by the probe of susceptibilities in these channels where the ψ dependent terms are collected by δH ψ I (y). Consider the static part of correlation function where Z(y) denotes the partition function at scale y. An initial value χ I (0) = 0 is determined by the initial perturbing Hamiltonian Eq. ( Under the RG flow, the susceptibilities receive corrections illustrated by the diagram in Fig. With the solution of test vertices Eq. ( The susceptibility exponents are related to the exponents of test vertices An instability can emerge only when the corresponding susceptibility diverges α I < 0. The leading instability is determined by the most negative susceptibility exponent, since the corresponding susceptibility diverges the most. The susceptibility exponents in the two orbital hexagonal lattice model are presented in Fig. The fixed trajectory analysis is verified by probing the evolution of susceptibilities under RG. Setting the bare interactions g i = g 0 , the RG flow runs until the critical scale y c ∼ g -1 0 is reached. The susceptibilities evolve accordingly as presented in Fig. where the dimensionless coupling λ ∼ g 0 ν 0 depends on how the bare interactions g i 's and the nesting parameter d 1 (y) are modelled. The most divergent susceptibility determines the leading instability. While the d-wave superconductivity diverges the most in the low nesting Later analysis identifies the loop current phase as a gapped quantum anomalous Hall insulator (QAHI) We briefly discuss the results for larger flavor number N f > 4 C. How robust are these results? We have solved the minimal model problem in the asymptotic weak coupling limit, and obtained answers that are independent of the details of the bare couplings, as long as these are repulsive and sufficiently weak. A question to ask is whether these results are robust against various deviations from our setup and analysis. What if the bare interactions are not so weak? Our RG analysis is asymptotically exact in the limit of weak coupling, such that the problem has time to flow to the fixed trajectory before the strong coupling limit is reached. However, if the couplings are not so weak, then the strong coupling regime may already be entered before the fixed trajectory is reached. In this case the instability realized may differ from the predictions of the asymptotic weak coupling treatment. The results in such a 'moderate coupling' regime will depend on the choice of initial 'bare' couplings. We note however that starting from 'Hubbard' interactions g i = g 0 , the real FDW manifests the largest susceptibility at intermediate scales (Fig. The correlated phases at moderate coupling have also been examined by functional RG analyses. With Hubbard repulsions, the trigger of a d + id superconductivity near Van Hove filling is revealed What if the Van Hove singularities are shifted away from the zone boundary, e.g. because further neighbor hoppings are not that weak? Any displacement of the Van Hove singularities from the zone boundary introduces an additional energy scale into the RG. If the strong coupling regime is reached before we hit this scale, then our analysis should carry through unchanged. In contrast, if this scale exceeds the original cutoff scale for the RG, then a qualitatively different analysis analogous to Ref. 47 is called for. What if the Van Hove points are displaced by less than the original cutoff scale for the RG (such that our analysis is the correct one at short RG times), but nevertheless by enough that we hit the displacement scale before the problem reaches strong coupling? In this case, the results could change in a manner not captured by either our analysis or Ref. A detailed treatment of the case of Van Hove points displaced from the zone boundary is discussed in Sec. V. We caution that while our RG is asymptotically exact, our instability analysis has considered only the set of phases characterized by order parameters related to condensates of fermion bilinears. These phases manifest local site, bond, or loop current orders in real space. More exotic correlated phases, such as topologically ordered phases with no local order parameter, are beyond the scope of any such approach. We have identified the leading instabilities using parquet RG as an imaginary CDW (loop current) state at Van Hove filling, which gives way upon doping to a dwave superconducting state. However, the imaginary CDW channel is triply degenerate (order can develop along any of the three nesting momenta Q α 's), whereas the superconducting channel is doubly degenerate For the loop current channel, there are three available order parameters ∆ α = ψ † β ψ γ at nesting momenta In the loop current phase, a breakdown of translational symmetry occurs as in all the other density wave phases. The commensurate momenta 2Q = 0 implies an enlarged quadrupled unit cell and a reduced Brillouin zone with halved lengths [Fig. When the loop current orders develop, the noninteracting nodal structure is diminished. To analyze the resulting gap structure, the imaginary order parameters are relaxed from the patch model to the whole Brillouin zone then requires a d-wave structure of the order parameter In the d-wave superconducting channel, two degenerate patch orders ∆ 1 = (∆/ √ 6)(2, -1, -1) and ∆ 2 = (∆/ √ 2)(0, 1, -1) are present. Each component describes an intrapatch particle-particle condensate ∆ 1,2 α = ψ ασ ψ ασ 1,2 with certain flavor pairing σ > σ . The d-wave nature is recognized by relaxing the patch order to the whole Brillouin zone, where the gap functions ∆ 1,2 k = ψ -kσ ψ kσ 1,2 change signs four times around the Fermi surface. Previous work on single layer graphene Provided the large flavor number N f , the d + id super-conductivity has a large degeneracy among the N f p = N f (N f -1)/2 antisymmetric flavor pairings. The according competition leads to strong fluctuations and suppresses the superconducting order. Mermin-Wagner theorem indicates that the breakdown of continuous O(N f p ) symmetry only occurs at zero temperature where ρ s is the stiffness of flavor pairing fluctuations and ∆ is the ordering energy scale. Therefore, a d + id superconducting phase can still arise at finite temperature. Note that the critical temperature decreases with increasing flavor number, since the superconducting order is suppressed more severely when more degenerate flavor pairings are present. We have analyzed the hexagonal lattice minimal model with SU(N f ) flavor degeneracy. An asymptotically exact weak coupling analysis uncovers a chiral 'high-T c ' phase diagram near Van Hove filling. The minimal model setup and the asymptotically exact analysis suggest the potentially broad applicability and extention of our results. Motivated by recent experiments on graphene Moiré heterostructures For current graphene Moiré heterostructures, the low energy flat bands manifest a breakdown of orbital degeneracy The shift of Van Hove singularities generally affects the Fermi surface nesting. Define the nesting momenta between intraorbital interpatch Q + , interorbital interpatch Q -, and interorbital intrapatch Q pairs [Fig. Define the dimensionless RG time y = Π pp 0 /h pp and the nesting parameters , , which are similar to those with the same patch indices in the minimal model [Eq. ( The instabilities arise under the RG flow and manifest divergent susceptibilities. Unlike Ref. where each finite momentum channel DW a is defined by the nesting momentum Q a . These inter-and intraorbital channels evolve from the original superconducting and density wave channels under orbital splitting. The according orbital representations τ i 's lie in the (O 3 ) 2 = 0, 1 orbital quantum number sectors under U(1) o symmetry. Here O 3 is the third component of the orbital pseudospin. Note that the orbital and spin Pauli matrices τ i and σ i with τ 0 , σ 0 = 1 are defined for the representations. In the particle-particle branch, inter-and intraorbital pairings constitute zero and finite momentum channels, respectively. The interorbital pairings lead to the s, p, d, f -wave superconducting channels. Given the even momentum modes in the minimal model, here the even and odd modes occur from the attachment of orbital pairings τ 3,0 (iτ 2 ). For the intraorbital pairings with τ 1,2 (iτ 2 ), the pair density wave PDW does not develop due to the fixed point g 44 = 0. Meanwhile, the particlehole branch also manifests various inter-and intraorbital channels. The interorbital C/SDW - ± 's manifest the test vertices ∆ Q -τ ± (ψ † βτ ψ ατ ± ψ † ατ ψ βτ ), where τ = τ are the orbital indices. These channels evolve from the original interorbital FDWs with τ 1,2 representations. The spin singlet and triplet representations σ 0 , σ determine whether the states are CDW - ± or SDW - ± . For the intraor-bital sector, the test vertices ∆ Q + τ ± (ψ † βτ ψ ατ ±ψ † ατ ψ βτ ) define C/SDW + ± 's. These channels evolve from the original CDWs and intraorbital FDWs with τ 0,3 representations. SDW + ± develop from the intraorbital FDWs with σ representations. CDW + ± , on the other hand, arise from CDWs and intraorbital FDWs with σ 0 representation. The test vertex analysis conclude all potential instability channels near Van Hove filling. Note the inclusion of density wave channels beyond s-wave Analyzing the RG equations Eq. ( When g 22 wins, the interorbital flavor fluctuations guide the RG flow to the first fixed trajectory [Figs. A different fixed trajectory arises when g 24 diverges prior to g 22 [Fig. A phase diagram can be determined according to the RG analyses. The correlated phases depend on the doping, orbital splitting, and competition between interand intraorbital flavor fluctuations. When the orbital splitting is absent, the imaginary CDW dominates near Van hove filling. The d/p-wave superconductivities and SDW + ± take over under doping and orbital splitting. A caveat arises when comparing Fig. The leading instabilities manifest similar features to the corresponding channels in the minimal model. Subtle differences occur due to the incommensuration away from M α 's. Various potential configurations in the d/pwave superconducting channels have been discussed The density wave instabilities result from CDW and intraorbital FDW channels in the minimal model. For CDW + -, an interorbital minus sign ψ † ατ ψ βτ = -ψ † ατ ψ βτ * occurs between channels with τ 0 ± τ 3 rep-resentations. This implies a manifold with degenerate imaginary CDW (τ 0 σ 0 ) and real intraorbital spin singlet FDW (τ 3 σ 0 ) from the minimal model. The imaginary CDW has been identified as a QAHI with charge loop current. The real intraorbital spin singlet FDW, on the other hand, exhibits a half metal from the s-wave uniaxial 3Q orbital density wave (ODW) with τ 3 orbital modulation While we have focused on hexagonal lattices for our analysis, our RG equations also works for the square lattice systems if we set N p = 2. With spin degeneracy only N f = 2 this maps onto the problem studied by Refs. 28, 33, and 34, and exhibits a 'conventional high-T c ' phase diagram with an insulating antiferromagnetic phase flanked by nodal superconducting domes. Things become different when N f > 2. With the flavor number set as N f = 4, the susceptibility exponents are evaluated and presented in Fig. where the translational symmetry is preserved. A transition between the d-wave superconductivity and the staggered flux state is universal for square lattice with extra flavors N f > 2. In the doping phase diagram, a staggered flux state is observed near the Van Hove filling, while d-wave superconductivity takes over upon doping away. This transition can be regarded as the 'nodal' and 'nonchiral' version of the transition observed on hexagonal lattices. When the flavor number increases, the transition point moves toward low nesting regime, implying an expansion of the staggered flux state in the phase diagram. We have analyzed repulsively interacting fermions on hexagonal lattices near Van Hove filling with an SU(N f ) flavor degeneracy (N f ≥ 4), using a combination of parquet RG and Landau-Ginzburg analysis. We have determined that the leading instability at Van Hove filling is to a fully gapped chiral insulator exhibiting quantum anomalous Hall effect, which gives way upon doping to a chiral d + id superconducting phase. The phase diagram consists of an insulating phase flanked by superconducting domes, reminiscent of high-T c materials (which is also manifested in experiments Note that the Chern insulator we uncover in the minimal model is significantly different from those proposed in previous studies of graphene Moiré heterostructures It should be stressed that our model is extremely simplified and neglects many experimental details. It is also not clear whether the experiments in Refs. 8-12 are really well described by weak coupling. However, the simplicity of the model helps expose the essential physics, and reveals that hexagonal lattices with enhanced flavor degeneracy (which may arise naturally in Moiré heterostructures) should provide an ideal platform for realizing tunable chiral insulating and superconducting phases. Whether the correlated phases observed in present or future Moiré heterostructures are actually chiral should be straightforwardly testable in experiment. We acknowledge Sankar Das Sarma and Andrey V. Chubukov for valuable feedback on the manuscript. This research was sponsored by the Army Research Office and was accomplished under Grant No. W911NF-17-1-0482. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the Army Research Office or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation herein. Appendix A: Patch models On a two dimensional lattice, the dispersion energy exhibits saddle points at the Van Hove fillings. A patch model can be defined for the low energy theory, where the Fermi surface is approximated by the patches at the saddle points. Each patch is defined by a momentum cutoff with respect to an energy scale Λ. We introduce the patch models on the square and hexagonal lattices. Only nearest neighbor hoppings (with hopping constant t > 0) are included, which is rationalized by the large unit cell in the study of Moiré superlattice models. For the square lattice, the Brillouin zone is a square with corners (±π, ±π). At Van Hove filling, the Fermi surface is a smaller square defined by the inequivalent corners M 1 = (π, 0) and M 2 = (0, π) on the Brillouin zone boundary. These corners are the saddle points of dispersion energy where k represents the infinitesimal deviation from the saddle points. The class of hexagonal lattices includes triangular and honeycomb lattices with hexagonal Brillouin zones. For the triangular lattice, the corners of the Brillouin zone are (0, ±4π/3) and (±2π/ √ 3, ±2π/3). At Van Hove filling, the Fermi surface is a hexagon inscribed in the Brillouin zone. The inequivalent corner saddle points Similar features are manifested on the honeycomb lattice. However, Van Hove filling exists in both electron and hole doping regimes. We only focus on the hole doping regime, with the analyses for the electron doping regime being similar. The Brillouin zone is defined by the six corner Dirac points (0, ±4π/3 √ 3) and (±2π/3, ±2π/3 √ 3). At Van Hove filling, the hexagonal Fermi surface exhibits inequivalent corner saddle points M 1 = (-2π/3, 0) and M 2,3 = (π/3, ±π/ √ 3), with the dispersion energies = 1 indicates that the patches can gain access to the perfect nesting at Van Hove filling. An evaluation of the ln 2 divergence is useful for later analysis of hexagonal lattices. Rewrite the momentum integral in terms of the parameters a ) with the prefactor h = (8π 2 t) -1 manifesting the characteristic density of states. The integral domain defines the setup of square patches. After a reparametrization Λ is imposed for the a + integral. The regime below this cutoff is neglected since it only provides a ln divergence. Approximating the x integral by integrating over the whole real axis, the Cauchy integral formula provides A factor sgn(a + ) arises from the integral and cancels the sign of a + in the denominator. After the a + integral the Matsubara frequency summation reveals the ln 2 divergence of the susceptibility The prefactor h pp/ph = h is consistent with Ref. 34, giving the maximal nesting d max 1 = 1. We proceed to conduct the same calculations on hexagonal lattices. Our analysis focuses on the triangular lattice with dispersion energies Eq. (A2). The results are also applicable to the honeycomb lattice. We start by determining Π pp 0 at M 1 . With the reparametrization a ± = t/2(± √ 3k x + k y ), the integral Eq. (B3) is again obtained, but the prefactor is now h pp = h with h = (4 √ 3π 2 t) -1 . The integral domain defines a diamond patch centered at M 1 . A ln 2 divergence Eq. (B8) is derived as on square lattice. The calculations at the other saddle points M 2 and M 3 are also conducted. With the integral domain unchanged, the alignments of diamond patches with the saddle point structures become different. Despite such difference, the calculations again derive the same result. This feature indicates the universality of IR properties at Van Hove filling. As long as the whole saddle point structure is covered, a deformation of patch shape only leads to a change in the subleading terms. We turn to calculate Π ph . (B9) The reparametrization x = a + a -leads to and the IR cutoff |a + | ≥ |ω n |/ √ Λ is again imposed. Integrate x over the whole real axis tions can be determined as follows. Near the critical scale y ≈ y c , the RG equation for g 2 takes the form where the approximations d 1 ≈ d 1 (y c ) and x 3 ≈ x 3 (y c ) are adopted. The solution implies the critical scaling Eq. ( 3 )] characterize the divergence of g i 's in a quantitative way. Notice that the analysis presented here is equivalent to the direct adoption of critical scaling ansatz Eq. ( In the instability analysis, the test vertices coupled to various fermion bilinears are introduced The superconducting channels exhibit intrapatch particle-particle pairings ψ ασ ψ ασ between different flavors σ > σ . Accordingly, the test vertices are added as At the ln 2 order, the available corrections to the test vertices manifest the equation with a matrix representation ) The irreducible pairing channels are identified with the eigenstates of this equation. For the square and hexagonal lattices, a single s-wave and N p -1 degenerate dwave channels are uncovered. The effective interactions in Eq. ( (D4) The density wave channels can be evaluated with similar procedure We first analyze the density wave channels with uniform flavor pairings The eigenstates represent the real and imaginary FDW channels with symmetric flavor pairings. Each eigenvalue is identified with the interaction g r/iFDW = -(g 2 ± g 3 ). (D10) Note that we have introduced an extra minus sign for consistency with the definition of interaction in Eq. On the other hand, the singly degenerate eigenstate of M is recognized as the charge density wave (CDW). The correction matrix for CDW is determined by the singly degenerate eigenvalues in Eq. (D8) d dy (D11) Diagonalizing this equation, we arrive at the interactions in the real and imaginary CDW channels g r/iCDW = N f g 1 -g 2 ± (N f -1)g 3 . (D12) Again we have introduced an extra minus sign for consistency with the definition of interaction in Eq. ( The density wave channels with pairing between different flavors σ = σ are the FDW channels with antisymmetric flavor pairings. With the test vertices where α > β, we find the same correction equation as Eq. (D9). The same interaction Eq. (D10) as the FDW channels with symmetric flavor pairings is obtained. Appendix E: Landau-Ginzburg theory for loop current order The dominance of loop current order is observed near Van Hove filling. Here we derive the dominant loop current order through a Landau-Ginzburg analysis, where the minimization of free energy determines the leading state below the critical temperature T c . The analysis starts by projecting the low energy theory onto CDW channel. In this channel, the interactions g 1 , g 2 , g 3 contribute, while g 4 does not. With the Fierz identity, the quartic interactions are projected onto the channel of CDW bilinears ψ † α ψ β with α > β (E1) Decompose the interactions further into real and imaginary parts, with the bilinears defined as (ψ † α ψ β ) r/i = (ψ † α ψ β ± ψ † β ψ α )/2. The loop current channel is identified as the imaginary channel where the interaction g iCDW diverges in the negative direction under the RG flow. A Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation is performed so that the quartic interaction is decomposed by the bosonic auxiliary fields. The action takes the form E3) where the order parameter is defined as ∆ αβ = i ∆αβ with real ∆αβ . Impose the static condition ∆αβ (τ ) = ∆αβ . After a temporal Fourier transform ψ(τ ) = √ T n ψ n e -iωnτ , the mean field free energy reads Consider the hexagonal lattices N p = 3. Express the free energy in a matrix representation of patch basis where the inverse loop current propagator is defined Integrating out the fermion field, we obtain the free energy as a function of order parameter where ln det(-G -1 ) = Tr ln(-G -1 ) is utilized. When the temperature is just below the critical temperature T T c , the order parameter ∆ is infinitesimal. A Landau-Ginzburg analysis can be conducted in this regime. Define G 0 = G( ∆ = 0) and ∆ = (-G -1 ) -(-G -1 0 ). With the constant part ignored, an expansion up to quartic order of ∆ is obtained The quadratic order takes the form α(T -T c )| ∆| 2 with α > 0. As T < T c , the coefficient becomes negative, and the symmetry broken states arise. For the quartic order E9) the coefficients manifest the 'square diagrams' The calculations indicate Z 1 > 0, which guarantees the stability of Landau-Ginzburg theory at quartic order. Meanwhile, the second diagram is 0 < Z 2 < Z 1 . Since Z 2 -Z 1 < 0, the loop current order develops at all three nesting momenta simultaneously, known as a 3Q state.