The structural motifs of a Zr50Cu45Al5 metallic glass were learned from atomistic models using a new structure analysis method called motif extraction that employs point-pattern matching and machine learning clustering techniques. The motifs are the nearest-neighbor building blocks of the glass and reveal a well-defined hierarchy of structures as a function of coordination number. Some of the motifs are icosahedral or quasi-icosahedral in structure, while others take on the structure of the most close-packed geometries for each coordination number. These results set the stage for developing clearer structure-property connections in metallic glasses. Motif extraction can be applied to any disordered material to identify its structural motifs without the need for human input. Local structure in metallic glass (MG) is characterized by large coordination numbers, efficient packing The efficient cluster packing (ECP) model The most common approach to circumventing these problems of disorder and analyzing the structure of MGs from atomistic models is the use of topological analysis techniques such as Voronoi analysis VIs provide an abstract description of the SRO units in MG structure, and in Zr-Cu-based MGs SRO units with icosahedral VI <0 0 12 0> become more populous and kinetically slower Despite the successes of Voronoi analysis in Zr-Cu-based MGs, the binary yes/no and topological nature of categorization techniques has some drawbacks. VI provide a way to measure whether structures are the same, but no quantitative way to measure whether they are similar. As a result, there is a long and growing list of VIs in the literature that are called "quasi-icosahedral", meaning variously that they have a lot of five-edge faces, or that one can imagine moving one or two atoms a small distance to create a perfect icosahedron, or some other, even less well-defined criterion In Ref. A geometric similarity metric comparing two SRO units necessitates a solution to the rotational variance of the SRO units in a MG structure. Recently, we adapted a technique called point-pattern matching (PPM) In this work, we used PPM to quantify the similarity between all pairs of SRO units in a Zr50Cu45Al5 MG. These dissimilarity scores function as the equivalent of a distance metric between two points in multidimensional structural configuration space, which is the data needed for machine learning clustering algorithms to cluster similar sets of SRO units. In this way, we learn all of the important classes of SRO structures in the MG directly from the atom position data, without human intervention. In Zr50Cu45Al5, the algorithm identified thirty motifs, including an icosahedral motif and structures similar to other hypothesized SRO structures with different coordination numbers. After identification of the motifs, we discuss their structure, chemistry, and stability as a function of temperature. A Zr50Cu45Al5 liquid with 9826 atoms in a cubic box with periodic boundary conditions was equilibrated at 2000 K using molecular dynamics (MD) The CN distribution and partial pair distribution functions, g(r), are shown in Figure For comparison to the learned metallic glass motifs, we created models of the generalized Frank-Kasper polyhedra called "Z-clusters" The Z11 and Z13 structures proved especially difficult to create, likely because there is not an obvious close-packed polytetrahedral structure for these CNs. In fact, the most close-packed structure for these CNs may not be polytetrahedral. As a result, Z11 and Z13 are not perfectly polytetrahedral, although we believe them to be optimally close-packed given the radii constraints. Z13 is nearly polytetrahedral, except that the tetrahedra are slightly distorted. Z11 has one atom that disrupts the polytetrahedral structure but preserves the symmetry of the structure. Z11 and Z13 were created by quenching a LJ glass using the appropriate LJ potential, and the motif extraction technique (see below) was applied to SRO units with CN 11 and 13 and with VI <0 2 8 1> and <0 1 10 2>, respectively. The minimal disorder in the resulting motifs was further minimized using conjugate gradient minimization. The motif extraction method is illustrated in Figure where AA ii xx is the x-coordinate of atom ii in the SRO unit AA, etc., and nn is lower of the CN of AA or BB; where the function ∠(AA ii , AA jj ) calculates the angle between atom AA ii and atom AA jj through the center of the SRO unit, mm is the total number of bonds in AA, ii and jj are indices of neighboring atoms in AA, BB ii is the atom in BB that corresponds to atom AA ii in AA after alignment, and the summation runs over the indices of all pairs of neighbors in AA. LL ∡ is therefore a measure of the mean angular dissimilarity of AA and BB. The distribution of values of each of these metrics were normalized to have a mean and standard deviation of 1.0, then the geometric mean of these four normalized metrics, was computed. From the dissimilarity, one could also calculate a similarity metric as defined in D values from the pairs of SRO units with the same CN were used to form separate dissimilarity matrices, one for each CN. HDBSCAN The result of the recursive HDBSCAN algorithm is one or more clusters of SRO units with the same CN and similar geometry, as defined by the metric D. Each cluster of SRO units produced in this way was used to create a motif. First, all SRO units in the cluster were aligned into the same orientation by using PPM to align each SRO unit to the one SRO unit that was most geometrically representative of the group (defined as the SRO unit with the lowest mean dissimilarity score calculated over all SRO units in the same cluster). Once the SRO units were in the same orientation, the atom-to-atom mappings provided by PPM We call the structure that is produced by averaging the atom positions around each atomic site a motif. Each motif is representative of a subset of the SRO units in the original model. One motif is produced per cluster identified via the recursive HDBSCAN algorithm, and collectively these motifs form the basis for the SRO structure of the material. We emphasize that these motifs are learned from the model with no input or prior knowledge from the experimenter. In addition, it is worth noting that while this discussion has focused on SRO units in particular, in principle the motif extraction method can be applied to any sized structures. The motif extraction code is available on GitHub at https://github.com/paul-voyles/motifextraction. The motif extraction technique was performed on models at 600 K, 900 K, 1200 K, and 1500 K during the MD simulation after conjugate gradient minimization in order to test whether the motifs change with temperature and to generate a superset of motifs capable of describing the structure at all temperatures. A vast majority of SRO units had CNs ranging from 8-15 in this temperature range. Many motifs at different temperatures were similar-defined via PPM where "similar" motifs had a D value below a certain (temperature dependent) threshold-, so a subset of the total set of motifs at these four temperatures was chosen to represent the SRO structure of the material at all temperatures. Overall, we identified 30 unique motifs in Zr50Cu45Al5, shown in Figure Every SRO unit in each 50 K snapshot in the MD trajectory was aligned to each motif in Figure Figure where PP(mm, TT) is number of SRO units assigned to motif m at temperature T, PP(nn, TT) is the population of clusters with CN n at temperature T, MM(nn) is the number of motifs with CN n, and nm is the CN of motif m. Finally, the curves were vertically offset so that the mean value of the normalized populations at high temperature was approximately zero: The result of these normalizations allows for a more robust visual comparison of motifs across temperature and CN and highlights the important changes in the populations of the motifs as the material is cooled. Figure We quantified the chemical order of the 600 K inherent structure by observing the species of atoms at the center and in the shells of the SRO units. Figure In their seminal 1958 paper The thirty motifs' CNs, VIs, and dissimilarities to the Z-cluster with the same CN are shown in Table Figure Some motifs in Zr50Cu45Al5 have unique chemical order or correlate with phenomena such as the glass transition; we discuss those motifs in this section. SRO units with icosahedral and quasi-icosahedral VI are widely reported to play an important role in the structure and dynamics of Zr-Cu-Al MGs Motif 12B is the other motif with VI <0 0 12 0>, but it is significantly less geometrically icosahedral than motif 12A Z . Many SRO units with VI <0 2 8 2> are most similar to this motif, whereas almost all SRO units that are most similar to motif 12A Z have VI <0 0 12 0>. We therefore call motif 12B quasi-icosahedral. SRO units assigned to motif 12B tend to be Cu-or Al-centered and their shells are Al-poor relative to the base composition. The fraction of SRO units assigned to this motif increases as the material undergoes the glass transition, but not as dramatically as motif 12A Z ; however, many more SRO units are most like this motif than motif 12A Z , possibly because the structural constraints in the glass prevents these SRO units from being more perfectly icosahedral. Finally, motif 12B has the 2 nd lowest energy of motifs with CN 12, again highlighting the stability of (quasi-)icosahedral structures in Zr50Cu45Al5 MGs. Motif 12E is a CN 12 motif with VI <0 2 8 2>. SRO units most similar to it tend to be Zr-centered and their shells tend to be Al-rich. The fraction of SRO units assigned to this motif decreases through the glass transition, despite the fact that it is more stable than the other non-icosahedral motifs with CN 12. This motif represents many of the Zr-centered, 12-coordinated SRO units, and despite the VI <0 2 8 2> sometimes being considered quasi-icosahedral Motif 10A Z is the dominant motif with CN 10 and is similar to Z10. It has VI <0 2 8 0> and has bicapped square antiprism geometry. SRO units with CN 10 are nearly all Cu-centered, as is this motif, and it shows no significant chemical ordering in the shell. Most importantly, the fraction of SRO units assigned to this motif increases significantly with temperature, significantly more strongly than the quasi-icosahedral motif 12B, but not nearly as strongly as motif 12A Z . SRO units with VI <0 2 8 0> have been identified as important in various other studies Motif 11A Z is a CN 11 motif with VI <0 2 8 1>. The fraction of SRO units assigned to this motif increases with temperature and it is the only low-energy CN 11 motif. The other two motifs with CN 11 also have VI <0 2 8 1>, demonstrating again that the topological descriptors of VIs can be unable to differentiate between distinct geometric structures. As a whole, the motifs discussed here provide an abstraction of the structure of Zr50Cu45Al5 MG. Because the abstraction is based on geometry, it may be more understandable than the abstractions of SRO provided by analysis techniques such as Voronoi analysis or common neighbor analysis. Amongst the motifs, we find SRO structures that are both stable (Figure We now discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the motif extraction when compared to other techniques that identify structure in MGs. Approaches to identify prototypical features of MG structure fall into two categories: structures can be derived from hypothesized properties of atoms and their bonds, or structure analysis approaches can identify structural features from simulated atomic models. Examples of the former approach include the Frank-Kasper polyhedra and Zclusters as well as structures generated by the ECP model. These structures have in common various ways of defining and enforcing efficient packing and maximizing atomic number density. However, these approaches often lack chemical information beyond that of the shape or atoms (e.g. spherical) and their bond lengths. In addition, the structures that are created are based on known information about MG structure and therefore require significant understanding (or assumptions) of the material structure a priori. On the other hand, in the latter approach, the structural information contained in simulated models is difficult to interpret due to disorder. In the past, motifs have been identified from simulated models by hand by looking at hundreds of SRO units Data-driven approaches such as motif extraction offer important alternatives because they remove elements of human limitations. The cluster alignment method There are drawbacks to motif extraction that may make it unsuitable for certain applications. Motif extraction makes the implicit assumptions that there are a finite number of characteristic motifs that represent the structure and that the model being analyzed contains many SRO units that represent each motif, plus some disorder. The assumption of a small number of motifs will be violated if the disorder in the system is too large, so motif extraction will not be useful for models of a gas and may be not useful for models of colloids at low packing fraction. The assumption of many copies of each motif plus disorder could be violated if the number of atoms in the model is small. Motifs represented by only a few SRO units in a small model may be identified as noise in the HBDSCAN step and therefore not represented by a motif. Neither of these difficulties is present here or in other metallic glass models we have examined in various systems including Al-Sm and Pd-Si, in various model sizes ranging from a few thousand to tens of thousands of atoms, and in various model system methods including molecular dynamics and hybrid reverse Monte Carlo modeling An additional drawback of motif extraction-in contrast to categorization methods such as VI analysis-is that the process of assigning SRO units to motifs is potentially non-unique and thus somewhat arbitrary. Each SRO unit has a dissimilarity score with respect to each motif, and the vector of these dissimilarity scores can be interpreted as a probability of the structure of the SRO unit being "equal to" the structure of each motif. This means that assigning a SRO unit to a single motif oversimplifies the abstraction of the SRO unit's structure. Put another way, if we make a histogram of all the dissimilarity scores of all SRO units with a given CN aligned to one motif, there is no feature that inspires an obvious cutoff, D0, to assign all SRO units with a dissimilarity less than D0 to the motif. Here, we assigned each SRO unit to the motif to which it is most similar, which provided useful insights. We present a new structure analysis technique called motif extraction that leverages point pattern matching, a quantitative structure similarity metric, and machine learning clustering to learn 30 short-range order motifs that describe the structure of a Zr50Cu45Al5 metallic glass quenched via molecular dynamics. These motifs form the basis for the SRO structure in this MG and were learned directly from the atom position data in the simulated model, without human intervention. Of the 30 motifs identified, some motifs are icosahedral or quasi-icosahedral while others are structurally similar to hypothesized close-packed SRO structures (Z-clusters). The motifs that are structurally similar to the Z-clusters form a clear hierarchy of structural order as a function of coordination number, making the placement of an additional atom as the CN number is increased predictable. The icosahedral motif has strong Al chemical order and correlates strongly with the glass transition, and we identified a new motif in this system with CN 10, VI <0 2 8 0>, and bicapped square antiprism geometry that also correlates strongly with the glass transition. We also demonstrate that Voronoi index analysis does not distinguish between SRO units with quantifiably different geometries in some cases, and show that the motif extraction method is a complementary and, in some cases, more robust method to identify important geometric structures in disordered materials. Glass Forming Ability of Pd40Ni40P20, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 (2012) 175501. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.108.175501. 