We report first-principles calculations that clarify the formation energies and charge transition levels of native point defects and carbon clusters in the 4H polytype of silicon carbide (4H-SiC) under a carbon-rich condition. We applied a hybrid functional that reproduces the experimental bandgap of SiC well and offers reliable defect properties. For point defects, we investigated single vacancies, antisites, and interstitials of Si and C on relevant sites. For carbon clusters, we systematically introduced two additional C atoms into the perfect 4H-SiC lattice with and without removing Si atoms and performed structural optimization to identify stable defect configurations. We found that neutral Si antisites are energetically favorable among Si-point defects in a wide range of the Fermi level position around the intrinsic regime, whereas negatively-charged Si vacancies and a positively-charged Si interstitial on a site surrounded by three Si and three C atoms become favorable under nand p-type conditions, respectively. For C-point defects, neutral C antisites are favorable under intrinsic and n-type conditions, whereas positively-charged C vacancies become favorable under p-type conditions. We also found that a di-carbon antisite is more favorable than a C-split interstitial, which is the most stable form of single C interstitials. Silicon carbide (SiC) has attracted increasing attention as a suitable semiconductor material to realize low-loss and fast power devices, owing to its superior physical properties (e.g., wide bandgap, high critical electric field, high electron saturation velocity, and high thermal conductivity). As for theoretical studies of native point defects in SiC, systematical investigation of single vacancies (VC and VSi) Investigation of carbon clusters is also of high importance. With the thermal oxidation of SiC, some portion of carbon atoms is known to diffuse into the bulk SiC region All of the calculations in this study were performed using the projector augmented-wave (PAW) method We first optimized the structure of perfect 4H-SiC crystal by relaxing both the lattice constants and the internal atomic positions in the 8-atom primitive cell. During this calculation, 8×8×2 k-points were sampled and the geometry optimization was performed until the residual forces were reduced to less than 5 meV/Å. The calculated lattice constants were 3.07 Å and 10.05 Å for the aand c-axes, respectively, well consistent with the experimental values of 3.08 Å and 10.08 Å at RT As depicted in Fig. We investigated all the single vacancies and antisites at the inequivalent sites. For interstitials, we introduced either Si or C atom into site 1, 2, 3, or 4 in Fig. The formation energy Ef of defect D in charge state q (D q ) is calculated as where E[D q ] and Ep are the total energies of the supercell with and without defect D q , respectively. ni is the number of the removed (ni < 0) or added (ni > 0) i-type atom and μi is its chemical potential. ΔεF is the Fermi level with respect to the energy level of VBM, εVBM, in perfect 4H-SiC. Ec At this stage, all the antisite-antisite and interstitial-interstitial C-pairs were excluded. We then increased the number of k-points to 2×2×2 and performed geometry optimization for the remaining defects. In this study, we considered the C-rich limit, in which Si and C chemical potentials are given as respectively, where E(SiC) and E(Cdiamond) are the total energies of SiC and diamond per formula unit, respectively. Note that the calculated energy difference of diamond and graphite is only about 0.06 eV/atom in the HSE06 calculations. When the Si-rich condition is instead considered, where μSi and μC are determined as the change in the μSi and μC are only about 0.6 eV, owing to the small formation energy of SiC. Here, E(Sicrystal) is the total energy of crystal Si per formula unit. As we already mentioned in Sec. IIB, we applied the extended FNV scheme for the correction term Ec supercell together with the extended FNV corrections is quite sufficient to obtain well-converged formation energy for charged defects in 4H-SiC. Let us first discuss the calculation results for native point defects. Figures Here, we discuss the calculation results for the carbon clusters. As we mentioned in Sec. IIB, the antisite-antisite pairs and interstitial-interstitial pairs were excluded because of their higher formation energies. As a result of geometry optimization of antisite-interstitial pairs, we found that the di-carbon antisites ((C2)Si) are most stable carbon clusters among the investigated configurations. Figure 1.8 eV). Since we found that the di-carbon antisites ((C2)Si) are more favorable than single interstitials, we further investigated larger carbon clusters. In 3C-SiC, it was indicated that a tetra-interstitial ring ((Csp)4 in Ref. 25) owns sizable dissociation energy (5.7 eV), since all carbon atoms are sp 3 hybrids. We performed first-principles calculations using the HSE06 hybrid functional to clarify the formation energies and charge transition levels of the native point defects and carbon clusters in 4H-SiC. We found that neutral Si antisites are energetically favorable among Si-point defects in a wide range of the Fermi level position around the intrinsic regime, whereas negatively-charged Si vacancies and a positively-charged Si interstitial on a site surrounded by three Si and three C atoms become favorable under n-and p-type conditions, respectively. For C-point defects, neutral C antisites are favorable under intrinsic and n-type conditions, whereas positively-charged C vacancies become favorable under p-type conditions. By investigating carbon clusters, we found that the antisite-antisite pairs and interstitial-interstitial pairs are unstable, since their formation energies were higher than 5 eV irrespective of the position of the Fermi level. We also found that a di-carbon antisite is more favorable than a C-split interstitial, which is the most stable form of single C interstitials. The formation energy of a tetra-C-interstitial is higher than 13 eV and thus it is not thermodynamically favorable. tilted