Nanostructured Si is the most promising high-capacity anode material to substantially increase the energy density of Li-ion batteries. Among the remaining challenges is its low rate capability as compared to conventional materials. To understand better what controls the diffusion of Li in the amorphous Li-Si alloy, we use a novel machine-learning potential trained on more than 40,000 ab-initio calculations and nanosecond-scale molecular dynamics simulations, to visualize for the first time the delithiation of entire LiSi nanoparticles. Our results show that the Si host is not static but undergoes a dynamic rearrangement from isolated atoms, to chains, and clusters, with the Li diffusion strongly governed by this Si rearrangement. We find that the Li diffusivity is highest when Si segregates into clusters, so that Li diffusion proceeds via hopping between the Si clusters. The average size of Si clusters and the concentration range over which Si clustering occurs can thus function as design criteria for the development of rate-improved anodes based on modified Si. Lithium-ion batteries have enabled tremendous technological advances in consumer electronics and electric vehicles during the past decade The lithiation of crystalline Si (c-Si) and the rich phase diagram of the LiSi alloy have been thoroughly investigated both by experiment LiSi anodes, we employed advanced computational techniques to simulate the delithiation of entire LiSi nanoparticles on the atomic scale. Our simulations are based on a combination of first-principles calculations and long-time-scale molecular dynamics (MD) simulations using highly accurate machine-learning potentials that have been carefully validated. The results elucidate how the clustering of Si atoms affects the Li diffusivity and identify structural motifs that are beneficial for Li transport, thereby providing a guideline for the design of Si-based anodes with improved rate capability. To reach the length and time scales required for the simulation of Li transport through LiSi nanoparticles without sacrificing predictive accuracy, we developed a state-of-the-art artificial neural network (ANN) machine-learning potential For the generation of amorphous Li x Si bulk phases, a supercell of the c-Li 15 Si 4 structure with composition Li 480 Si 128 was computationally delithiated using a combination of the ANN potential and a genetic algorithm The formation energies of the resulting metastable amorphous structures, recomputed with DFT, are shown in Fig. To ensure the convergence of our simulations with particle size, we considered particles with different diameters between 2 and 8 nm and find that the structural motifs are converged for particle diameters between 6 to 8 nm (6,000-12,000 atoms). The following discussion is therefore based on the simulations of particles with diameters of around 8 nm corresponding to ∼12,000 atoms in their fully lithiated composition. In situ NMR measurements have previously revealed that the delithiation mechanism depends on the initial degree of lithiation At each delithiation step Li atoms were extracted from the particle surface, which was followed by a thermal equilibration over 4 ns at T = 500 K. To parallelize some of the computational effort, nanoparticle models of the next lower Li content were constructed based on the structure after 1 ns equilibration, as we generally found that sufficient Li atoms had migrated to the particle surface to allow for further delithiation. The potential energy during the MD simulations (Fig. This data was determined by computing histograms for the final 50 ps of the corresponding 4 ns MD trajectories using spherical bins with equal volume. As seen in Figure Once the Li content drops below 2.25, a more homogeneous delithiation is energetically favored, so that the Li content in nanoparticles with compositions Li 1.98 Si, Li 1.71 Si, and Li 1.44 Si decreases continuously from the particle center to the surface. We stress that until an overall composition of Li The computed room-temperature Li diffusivities and the corresponding activation energies shown in Table where Γ is the hopping rate between Si clusters, and λ is the mean distance between the Si clusters, and the geometry factor ρ depends on the spatial arrangement of the clusters. Hence, the diffusivity increases approximately quadratically with the mean cluster distance λ. The hopping rate Γ can be taken to be constant as it is determined by the probability of Li atoms to be trapped near a Si cluster and thus mainly depends on the Li-Si interaction strength. Assuming that the density of the LiSi alloy is independent of the arrangement of the Si atoms, the mean free distance between Si clusters in a close-packed structure is proportional to the average cluster diameter. This important finding explains why Si clustering is beneficial for Li diffusion, as it increases the mean free distance between Si atoms compared to homogeneously dispersed isolated Si atoms. Si clustering can thus function as a design criterion for the engineering of improved Si-based anodes, for example, as composite materials To demonstrate that doping can in fact improve the Si clustering in the LiSi alloy, we evaluated the DFT energy of doped model Si clusters. Using the Materials Project open database To determine in a first approximation whether the dopants would favor Si clustering, an initial structure of icosahedral 13-atom Si clusters surrounded by As seen in the figure, the core doping is favored by 21 out of 33 dopants, and the energy above the hull is generally below 10 meV/atom. The largest stabilization of the core-doped structure is observed for doping with Sc, Nb, Al, Ge, and Ce (red arrows in Fig. The optimized core-doped structures for those dopant species are shown in Fig. While this simple computational screening should just be considered a proof of concept, it demonstrates that doping will indeed affect the Si clustering behavior. Further investigation will be required to determine whether the doped phases are stable at operation conditions and to understand the effect of doping on the Li-Si interaction strength. would be equal to the Li-Li interaction causing Li to freely hop from cluster to cluster. Using newly developed neural network potentials we were able to simulate the complex diffusion of lithium in crystalline and amorphous silicon nanoparticles. We found as Li is extracted from a highly lithiated nanoparticle, Si segregates into clusters and chains affecting the Li transport. Li-rich domains lead to high Li mobility whereas an increasing coordination by Si slows down diffusion as Li mostly diffuses around Si clusters. Owing to this mechanism, the Li diffusivity in the clustered phase is with around 10 -11 cm 2 s -1 several orders of magnitude higher than the diffusivity in phases with isolated Si atoms. Increasing the cluster size or reducing the Li-Si surface interaction would all help in increasing the Li transport through silicon. This finding indicates that the low rate-capability of anodes based on amorphous Si is not inevitable but could in fact be avoided if the formation of Si clusters at higher lithium concentrations could be promoted. All MD simulations were carried out using the Tinker software Fig. For the diffusivity calculations, 5 ns long MD simulations of the bulk Li 480-x Si 128 structures (see above) at temperatures between 400 K and 1200 K were carried out. It was found that all bulk structures generally reached thermal equilibrium after no more than 200 ps, even compositions for which Si segregated during the simulation. To achieve sufficient statistical confidence, the diffusivity was evaluated for 18 MD trajectory parts over each 450 ps after a 200 ps equilibration phase that was discarded. Lithium diffusivities D were obtained by fitting the Einstein relation where t is the time, N is the number of Li atoms in the structure, and ∆r i is the displacement of atom i from its position at t = 0. The fits were performed using tools implemented in the pymatgen software package delithiation to Li 2.25-x Si compositions results in a more homogeneous clustering behavior with continuously increasing coordination number from the particle center to the surface.