In addition to the conventional contribution that is directly controlled by the single-particle energy spectrum, the superfluid phase stiffness of a two-component Fermi gas has a geometric contribution that is governed by the quantum metric of the honeycomb's band structure. Here, we take both contributions into account, and construct phase diagrams for the critical superfluid transition temperature as a function of the chemical potential, particle filling, onsite interaction and next-nearest-neighbor hopping. Our theoretical approach is based on a self-consistent solution of the BCS mean-field theory for the stationary Cooper pairs and the universal BKT relation for the phase fluctuations. Following the pioneering works by Peotta and Törmä on the origins of superfluidity in topologically nontrivial flat bands Motivated by these theoretical proposals as well as ongoing experimental efforts utilizing cold Fermions on various forms of honeycomb optical structures The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The theoretical framework is presented in Sec. II, where we first discuss the honeycomb's band structure and highlight the presence of Dirac cones in Sec. II A, then introduce the BCS mean-field theory and derive the order-parameter and number equations in Sec. II B, and then review the BKT relation and the SF stiffness in Sec. II C. Having a complete set of self-consistency equations for determining the critical SF transition temperature, we present its numerical analysis in Secs. III and IV, and conclude the paper with our final remarks in Sec. V. The honeycomb lattice is a two-dimensional crystal structure with a hexagonal Bravais lattice and a two-site basis. In this paper, we denote its lattice spacing by a, and choose a 1 = ( √ 3a, 0) and a 2 = ( √ 3a/2, 3a/2) as the primitive lattice vectors for its Bravais lattice as shown in Fig. Within the tight-binding approximation, the singleparticle Hamiltonian can be written as H σ = -i∈S,j∈S t Si,S j c † σSi c σS j , where the pseudo-spin σ ≡ {↑, ↓} denotes the two components of a Fermi gas, the index i ∈ S refers to a site i in the hexagonal sublattice S ≡ {A, B}, the hopping parameter t Si,S j characterizes the tunneling amplitude from site j to i, and the operator c † σSi (c σSi ) creates (annihilates) a σ particle on i ∈ S. In this paper, we set the nearest-neighbor (i.e., intersublattice) hopping parameter t as our energy scale, and vary the next-nearest-neighbor (i.e., intra-sublattice) one t accordingly. Using the Fourier expansion of the creation and annihilation operators in the reciprocal (k) space, e.g., is the number of sites in the hexagonal sublattice, a compact way to express this Hamiltonian is , where τ 0 is a unit matrix and τ = (τ x , τ y ) is a vector of Pauli matrices. Note that while the diagonal element of h k is due solely to the next-nearest-neighbor hoppings, the off-diagonal element ) is due solely to the nearest-neighbor ones. Thus, the single-particle energy eigenvalues are simply determined by ε sk = d 0 k + sd k , where s = ± denotes the upper/lower band and d k = |d k | reduces to t 3 -d 0 k /t . It can be shown that both energy bands exhibit a total of two Dirac cones that are equally distributed among the six corners of the first Brillouin zone. Since d 0 k → 3t and d k → 0 at the tips of the cones, the density N ε of singleparticle states vanishes at ε = 3t , i.e., where the upper and lower cones touch each other. This analysis suggests that the low-temperature behavior of a Fermi gas that is loaded on a two-dimensional honeycomb lattice is directly controlled by the presence of these Dirac cones in the band structure. For instance, the Fermi gas shows a semimetallic behavior that persists up to a critical interaction threshold depending on the temperature Our main goals in this work are twofold. We would like not only to construct the phase diagrams for the critical SF transition temperature of the attractive Hubbard model on a honeycomb lattice, but also to uncover the critical role played by the quantum geometry of the underlying band structure. These are achieved by adapting a self-consistent approach that is based on the simultaneous solution of the BCS mean-field theory for the stationary Cooper pairs and the universal BKT relation for the phase fluctuations. For a two-component Fermi gas that is considered in this work, the attractive Hubbard model can be written as ↑Si with U ≥ 0 takes the onsite intercomponent interactions into account. We treat the interaction term within the BCS mean-field approximation for pairing, and characterize various SF phases through the complex order parameter ∆ Si = U c ↓Si c ↑Si , where . . . denotes the thermal average. However, thanks to the time-reversal symmetry of H, ∆ Si turns out to be uniform for a given sublattice, i.e., ∆ S = (1/M S ) i∈S ∆ Si . Furthermore, in order to fix the total number N = σSi c † σSi c σSi of particles in the thermal state, we include an additional term H μ = -μ σSi c † σSi c σSi in H, where μ is the chemical potential. Similar to the single-particle problem, a compact way to express the mean-field Hamiltonian is where C = k Tr{h -k -μτ 0 + ∆ † ∆/U } is a constant with Tr denoting the trace over sublattices, ) is a four-component spinor operator, and ∆ SS = ∆ S δ SS with δ ij the Kroneckerdelta is diagonal in the sublattice sector. Since ∆ S = (U/M S ) k c ↓S,-k c ↑Sk turns out to be uniform for the entire lattice thanks to the inversion symmetry of the A and B sublattices, we take ∆ A = ∆ B = ∆ as real without losing generality. Combining this expression with the number equation N = σSk c † σSk c σSk , we eventually obtain a set of self-consistency equations for ∆ and μ. Here, M is the number of lattice sites, is a thermal factor with k B → 1 the Boltzmann constant and T the temperature, E sk = ξ 2 sk + ∆ 2 is the quasiparticle energy spectrum, and 0 ≤ F = N/M ≤ 2 is the total particle filling. Thus, we use Eqs. ( While the critical BCS transition temperature T BCS is simply determined by setting ∆ → 0 in Eqs. ( Going beyond the mean-field theory, and including the phase fluctuations, the critical SF transition temperature is determined by the universal BKT relation through an analogy with the XY model where is the SF phase stiffness, A is the area of the system, and Y sk = sech 2 [E sk /(2T )] is a thermal factor. Here, while the conventional contribution D conv μν is of the usual single-band form account-ing for real intraband processes, the geometric contribution D geom μν is due to virtual interband processes that are directly controlled by the total quantum metric of the single-particle bands, i.e., In contrast to the standard BCS mean-field theory, it turns out that a self-consistent solution of Eqs. ( ]. Thus, the BKT relation (4) gives showing that, independently of its sign, t increases T BKT for a given F in the U t limit. Except for the U t and U t limits, the self-consistency equations are not analytically tractable in general, and we resort to numerical methods instead. Having introduced the theoretical framework, here we implement an iterative numerical approach to find fully self-consistent solutions for ∆(T BKT ), μ(T BKT ) and D(T BKT ) that satisfy all Eqs. (2)-( Let us first set U = 0 and analyze the non-interacting limit. Since the lower single-particle band lies within the energy interval -3t -6t ≤ ε ≤ 3t and the upper one lies within 3t ≤ ε ≤ 3t -6t , the Fermi gas first fills the lower band as a function of increasing its Fermi energy ε F = μ up until μ = 3t . For this reason while μ < -3t -6t region is denoted as a vacuum of particles with F = 0 and μ > 3t-6t region is denoted as a vacuum of holes (i.e., a band insulator) with F = 2, μ = 3t corresponds precisely to the half filling with F = 1. Thus, except for the symmetric point μ = 3t where the singleparticle density of states N μ vanishes like a semi-metal, the ground state of a non-interacting Fermi gas is normal when -3t -6t ≤ μ ≤ 3t -6t . All of these regions are clearly seen in Figs. Once the interactions are turned on, the BCS theory suggests that the normal region immediately transits into a SF with T BCS ∝ te -1/(U Nμ) , coinciding with T BKT in the U t limit. While such an exponential growth is clearly seen in the darker region in Figs. In addition, for t = 0, Fig. ) increases with t = 0 independently of its sign in the U t limit. Indeed, our numerical results benchmark very well with this analytic expression in the regime of its validity. Note that our result is considerably higher than the maximal value T BKT ≈ 0.1t reported in the literature for t = -0.15t The discrepancy between our findings and the literature may well be caused by the use of a non-fully-self-FIG. In the U t limit, we may relate D 0 = 4F (2-F )(t 2 + 6t 2 )/( √ 3U ) to the density ρ p and effective mass m p of the SF pairs through the identity D 0 = 4 2 ρ p /m p , where the filling of condensed pairs In order to provide a better contextualization of our results, here we first calculate T BKT in a fully-selfconsistent manner both with and without the geometric contribution D geom 0 , and benchmark these results directly with those of the literature. For this purpose, we set t = -0.15t in Fig. This figure clearly illustrates that exclusion of the D geom 0 contribution from the universal BKT relation leads to a substantial reduction of T BKT for U 2t.This is in accordance with the discussion given above in Sec. II C, where T BKT is determined by the vanishing (∆ → 0) of the BCS mean-field for U t. In addition, since the latter phase diagram turns out to be quantitatively similar to that of Ref. In summary, here we calculated the critical SF transition temperature of the attractive Hubbard model on a two-dimensional honeycomb lattice via a theoretical approach that is based on a self-consistent solution of the BCS mean-field theory for the stationary Cooper pairs and the universal BKT relation for the phase fluctua-tions. For instance, we found that the highest attainable T BKT is around 0.15t for the nearest-neighbor-hopping model, and that it increases quite rapidly with the inclusion of next-nearest-neighbor hoppings. In addition to the construction of the phase diagrams for a large window of model parameters, we also uncovered the critical role played by the quantum geometry of the underlying band structure. In particular, we found that the relative weight of the quantum metric contribution to the SF phase stiffness is a non-monotonous function of the interaction strength, and that it is generally far from being negligible reaching beyond %50. These findings arguably suggest that a SF Fermi gas that is loaded on a honeycomb lattice This line of work offers many extensions for future research. For instance, since the SF stiffness is determined by the ratio of the density and the mass of the SF carriers, we expect sizeable geometric contributions for those observables (e.g., sound velocity) that have explicit dependence on the mass of the two-body bound states or of the Cooper pairs on general grounds 