In this paper, nominal compositions of NdFeAsO 0.8 F 0.2 , NdFeAs 0.95 Sb 0.05 O 0.8 F 0.2 and NdFeAs 0.95 P 0.05 O 0.8 F 0.2 were prepared by one-step solid-state reaction method. The structural, electrical and morphological properties of samples were characterized through the XRD pattern, the 4-probe method and SEM, respectively. The crystal structure of our samples was tetragonal with P4/nmm:2 symmetry group. Also, the (x, y, z), occupancy of ions and lattice parameters were changed by isovalent substitution of Phosphorus (P) and Antimony (Sb)in the NdFeAsO 0.8 F 0.2 sample. The ⍺, β bond angles and Fe-As bond length are changed from the corresponding value of ⍺ and β regular FeAs4-tetrahedron by isovalent doping P/As and Sb/As, that they are effective on the superconductivity transition temperature. The microstrain and crystalline size of samples were studied by the Williamson Hall method. The superconducting critical temperatures were attained at 56 K and 46 K for NdFeAsO 0.8 F 0.2 , NdFeAs 0.95 Sb 0.05 O 0.8 F 0.2 , respectively. The NdFeAs 0.95 P 0.05 O 0.8 F 0.2 showed the structural transition temperature at 140 K. It seems that there is a relation between the superconductivity and shrinkage of the crystal lattice. The flake-type of grains was observed by SEM pictures of samples. For the first time in 2006, superconducting transition temperature (T C ) was observed in a new category of superconductors called iron-based superconductors (IBs), in pure and fluorine-doped LaOFeP at T C =3.2 K Because of the existence of vortices and high superconducting transition temperature in IBs, they are in unconventional superconductor and high temperature superconductors, respectively IBs have some of the most important and unique characteristics such as: parent material: antiferromagnetic metal, impurity robust T C , multi-band nature of Fe-3d, small anisotropy, large upper critical field and advantageous grain boundary nature IBs are divided in to four subgroups, i: FeSe 1-x Te x (11-type) The effects of chemical pressures and bond covalency due to isovalent substitution of P/As in LaFeAs1-xPxO were investigated by C. Wang et al. In 2008, Ren et al. reported a new quaternary iron-arsenide superconductor NdFeAsO 1-x F x , with the onset resistivity transition at 51.9K In the following, our goal is to focus on the effect of the isovalent substitution elements on Arsenic in this nominal composition. For this purpose, the influence of isovalent substitution of Phosphorus (P) and Antimony (Sb) for Arsenic (As) on the structural and electrical properties of nominal composition of NdFeAs 1-x M x O 0.8 F 0.2 (M=P, Sb) is investigated by using X-ray powder diffraction for structural properties along with the 4-probe method for electrical measurement. We study the XRD patterns for calculation of crystal structure parameters such as occupancy, bond length, bond angle, microstrain and crystalline size which is determined by Rietveld refinement by materials analysis using diffraction (MAUD) software Samples with nominal compositions of NdFeAs 1-x M x O 0.8 F 0.2 with x=0.0 ,0.05 for M=Sb or P, labeled as Nd-1111, Nd-Sb0.05 and Nd-P0.05 respectively, were synthesized by one step solid-state reaction method. At first, the stoichiometric amounts of Nd (99.99%), As (99.99%), Fe 2 O 3 (99.9%), Fe (99.9%), FeF 3 and red phosphorus P (99.99%) or antimony Sb (99.5%) powders were mixed according on the equation ( (1) The mixed powder was pressed to 45 kg/cm 2 and further encapsulated in an evacuated quartz tube. All stages of procedure were performed in glove box in the nitrogen atmosphere. Then, the sealed and evacuated quartz tube was heated with a slow heating rate through 4 stages: (i) 5 h at 350 °C, (ii) 14 h at 640 °C, (iii) 20 h at 880 °C, and (iv) 20 h at 1150 °C. After the heat treatment, the sample comes in powder form in the quartz tube. Again, the powder was pressed and was encapsulated in an evacuated quartz tube. The heat treatment was repeated. Then furnace was cooled slowly down to room temperature. After this stage, the obtained compound was hard and in black color. In the structure of NdFeAsO 0.8 F 0.2 , formation of the NdO and FeAs layers is very important, because of this, we used thermogravimetric analysis of NdAs to determine the correct thermal process X-Ray crystallography is a technique used for determining the crystal structure of sample. Xray powder diffraction patterns were measured using a X'Pert PRO MPD, PANalytical Company (Netherlands ( , for Cu-Kα (λ= 0.15406 nm) with a step size of 0.0260°. The XRD patterns of the Nd-1111, Nd-Sb0.05 and Nd-P0.05 have been showed in Fig. This type of IBs has two-dimensional layer of Fe (Pn/Ch) tetrahedra, and there are two angles in tetrahedra that they indicated by ⍺ and β (See Fig. The inset of Fig. The S parameter (S=R wp /R exp ) describe the fit quality, that R wp and R exp are the residual error and the expected error, respectively. Since the antimony atom can react with two oxidation states of +3 and +5, we consider all cases in Rietveld analysis for Nd-Sb0.05. Samples with nominal compositions of NdFeAs 0.95 Sb 0.05 O 0.8 F 0.2 for Sb with +3 and +5 oxidation states, labeled as Nd-Sb(+3)0.05, Nd-Sb(+5)0.05, respectively. All MAUD analyzed patterns of these samples have been showed in Figs. The crystal structure parameters including exact atoms position and occupancy number in unit cell for our sample were refined by MAUD software (See table The occupancy of As, P and Sb for after-refinement, have less amount than the considered value, since these materials are evaporated during the synthesis. In many research works, in order to compensate for the loss of As element during the synthesis, the precursors As has 5%-15% more than stoichiometric value of it Table In cuprates, the highest superconductivity transition temperature is observed for flat and square CuO 2 planes in the tetragonal structure and it is decreased by the structural distortions of the CuO 2 planes in the orthorhombic structure These results indicate relevant approach of superconducting layers for IBs and cuprate superconductors. About the replacement of major Bragg peak (102) based on the refinement of XRD data all diffraction peaks clearly shift to higher angles with increasing of "a" unit cell parameter. Our result confirmed the consistency of dopant value of isovalent atom with their occupancy number and the replacement of origin peaks in XRD pattern of samples. As you know that the integral breadth of the diffraction peaks can be linked to the apparent size of the crystals and to their microstrains. Williamson and Hall method has suggested a simple method for solving this problem. It works by considering that both the limited size of the crystals and the presence of crystallographic distortions lead to Lorentzian intensity distributions. If we denote by β p the pure breadth and by β T and β D the breadths related to size and microstrains, respectively, then we obtain: (1) and therefore: ( where K is Scherrer's constant, β and θ are full width at half maximum and diffraction degree for each peak, respectively As be shown in table 3, the crystalline size of samples increases for Nd-Sb0.05 and Nd-P0.05 respect to Nd-1111 sample, respectively. The greater microstrain in the Nd-P0.05, can be due to the smaller size of the phosphorus atom than Antimony and Arsenic atoms. This causes to more distortion of the unit cell. We used the 4-probe contact method for obtaining superconductivity parameters of our samples. The 20 K Closed Cycle Cryostat (QCS 101), ZSP Croygenics Technology (Iran), was used for measurement of superconductivity behavior of samples. The normalized resistivity as a function of temperature is shown in Fig. The surface morphology and the grain connectivity of the all samples have been determined using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). These three samples imaged with the TESCAN VEGA3 LMU with magnification 60.000e3. The SEM images illustrated in Figs. The apparent shape of grain for all samples can also be confirmed by the sample manufacturing method. In summary, based on Rietveld refinement of XRD patterns of samples, it was showed that the all samples have similar structural properties as tetragonal crystal structure with p4/nmm:2 space group with different unit cell parameters. The "a" unit cell parameter of samples increasing by substitution of P/As to Sb/As. The "c" unit cell parameter of samples due to the electronegativity of isovalent atoms, increases from Nd-P0.05, Nd-Sb0.05 and Nd-1111, respectively. Our results show that the Arsenic isovalent doping increased the ⍺ angle and decreased the β angle, bond length of the Fe-As and the thickness of Fe-As layer. The substitution of P/As in nominal composition of Nd-1111 suppressed the superconductivity. We have observed a structural phase transition at 140 K in Nd-P0.05. Also, the T C had decreased from 56 K to 46K in Nd-Sb0.05 by substitution of Sb/As in nominal composition of Nd-1111. The microstrain of Nd-1111 was increased by substitution of P/As more than Sb/As. It seems that the lattice shrinkage can be related with the T C and it becomes maximum when the FeAs4 tetrahedron of lattices close to the regular tetrahedron. Moreover, the electronegativity of Sb ion (2.05) is smaller than to the electronegativity of As ion (2.18) causes the bond length of Fe-As/Sb is less than Fe-As and then ⍺ angle increases and β angle decreases. The β angle for our samples versus the β angle for regular FeAs4tetrahedron are: