Since their discovery around a century ago, the structure and chemistry of the multi-functional half-Heusler semiconductors have been studied extensively as three component systems. The elemental groups constituting these ternary compounds with the nominal formula XYZ are well established. From the very same set of well-known elements we explore a phase space of quaternary double (X'X''Y2Z2, X2Y'Y''Z2, and X2Y2Z'Z''), triple (X2'X''Y3Z3) and quadruple (X3'X''Y4Z4) half-Heusler compositions which 10 times larger in size. Using a reliable, firstprinciples thermodynamics methodology on a selection of 347 novel compositions, we predict 127 new stable quaternary compounds, already more than the 89 reported almost exhaustively for ternary systems. Thermoelectric performance of the state-of-the-art ternary half-Heusler compounds are limited by their intrinsically high lattice thermal conductivity (κL). In comparison to ternary half-Heuslers, thermal transport in double half-Heuslers is dominated by low frequency phonon modes with smaller group velocities and limited by disorder scattering. The double half-Heusler composition Ti2FeNiSb2 was synthesized and confirmed to have a significantly lower lattice thermal conductivity (factor of 3 at room temperature) than TiCoSb, thereby providing a better starting point for thermoelectric efficiency optimization. We demonstrate a dependable strategy to assist the search for low thermal conductivity half-Heuslers and point towards a huge composition space for implementing it. Our findings can be extended for systematic discovery of other large families of multi-component intermetallic semiconductors. Multi-component phase spaces of intermetallic systems are mostly being explored for high-entropy metallic alloys In the last decade, the half-Heusler compounds have attracted significant research attention for their thermoelectrics properties. In each of these cases however, the actual high performance compositions (Nb0.88Hf0.12FeSb, The valence on each atom (e.g. n+ for X-atom) of a typical semiconducting half-Heusler is assigned according to a Zintl-Klemm concept (Ti +4 , Co -1 , and Sb -3 in TiCoSb). Consider the example of the pseudoternary TiFexCoyNi1-x-ySb (see Figure We focus only on the quaternary half-Heusler compounds, the stability of which can be predicted from first-principles thermodynamic calculations on ordered ground state structures. Similar to Ti2FePtSb2, double half-Heusler candidates based on equal occupancies on the X-(ScVCo2Sb2) and Z-site (Ti2Ni2InSb) can also be conceived. Furthermore, one can think of additional 'triple' and 'quadruple' half-Heusler compositions as well (e.g. Nb2MgCo3Sb3 and Nb3LiCo4Sb4) which obey the valence balanced rule (NV = 0), leading to a phase space of 7719 possible quaternary half-Heusler compositions. This number is over 10 times as large as that of the regularly studied defect-free ternary systems (715) based on the same set of elements (see Figure We select 351 quaternary half-Heusler (315 double half-Heusler, 18 triple half-Heusler and 18 quadruple half-Heusler) compositions to perform high-throughput calculation for examining the thermodynamic stability using convex-hull analysis (see Figure The 315 double half-Heusler compositions studied here are divided into three classes (126 X'X''Y2Z2, 81 X2Y'Y''Z2 and 108 X2Y2Z'Z'' compositions) based on the site of substitution in the XYZ structure (see Figure Going through the list of 127 predicted new compounds using experimental synthesis without well defined starting points can be quite daunting. To guide experimental efforts in initial choice of more likely compositions for laboratory discovery, we arrange (see color bar in Figure We also classify the likelihood of a predicted quaternary half-Heusler to be depending on whether there are past experimental reports of the half-Heusler phase in associated NV ≠ 0 ternary systems (for example Ti-Fe-Sb and Ti-Pt-Sb for Ti2FePtSb2) or not. In this classification (see circles in Figure Despite their impressive electrical properties, the thermoelectric performance of half-Heusler materials is typically limited by an intrinsically high lattice thermal conductivity (κL) associated with their stiff elastic properties. Unlike the low lattice thermal conductivity of common thermoelectric materials such as Bi0.4Sb1.6Te3 ( 1 W/m-K), the intrinsic lattice thermal ∼ conductivity of most well-known half-Heuslers is typically higher than > 15 W/m-K. For two materials with comparable bulk properties, such as debye temperature, average mass per unit cell, specific heat capacity and gruniesen parameter, the magnitude of lattice thermal conductivities (κL) depend primarily on the number of atoms in the primitive unit cell (N). To verify this strategy for systematic discovery of low thermal conductivity half-Heuslers, we compare measured κL of double half-Heusler Ti2FeNiSb2 to that of its corresponding ternary system TiCoSb with the same average atomic mass. At room temperature, κL of Ti2FeNiSb2 is smaller than TiCoSb by a factor of 3 (see Figure While no superlattice peaks associated with Fe/Ni ordering were observed in the powder XRD pattern of Ti2FeNiSb2 (see Figure Calculated cumulative κL in TiCoSb and Ti2FeNiSb2 as a function of frequency (see show similar dependence of group velocity (vg) as well as scattering rates on phonon frequencies (see Figure While other quaternary compounds can be investigated for thermodynamic stability, the current prediction of 127 compounds is already greater than the 89 extensively predicted /reported The present work deals only with quaternary equivalents of half-Heusler compounds with 18-valence electrons, the concepts discussed in the present work are applicalble to other semiconducting Heusler based structures such as 8-electron Nowotnye-Juza phases (for example LiAlSi In conclusion, we demonstrate that the number of known Heusler based semiconductors, despite its hundred years of history, may only be a small fraction of the actual number of stable compounds available from the same intermetallic chemistry. The previously unexplored semiconductor compositions can be conceived by choosing aliovalently substituted combinations which are Zintl valence balanced and predicted systematically using first principles thermodynamics for rapid laboratory discovery. From this strategy we discover quaternary (double, triple and quadruple) half-Heusler compounds with thermal conductivities intrinsically lower than traditional ternary half-Heuslers owing to their complex crystal chemistry. As a result, we significantly advance the decade long search for low thermal conductivity half-Heuslers without tampering with its underlying chemistry which forms the basis for their exciting properties suitable for thermoelectrics, spintronics, topological band structures and transparent conducting thin-films. First-principles thermodynamics calculations: The density functional theory (DFT) calculations Transmission XRD was performed on powder pulverized from the pellet using a Stoe STADI-MP x-ray diffractometer using CuKα radiation. Electronic transport measurements were measured under dynamic high vacuum up to 875 K with a ramp speed of 75 K/h. Resistivity and hall coefficient were measured concurrently using the Van Der Pauw technique with pressure-assisted molybdenum contacts equipped a 2 T magnet41. Thermal diffusivity measurements were taken with a Netzch LFA 457 under purged flowing argon up to 875K with a ramp speed of 75 K/h. Thermal conductivity was calculated estimating heat capacity with the Dulong-Petit law. Seebeck coefficient was measured under dynamic high vacuum up to 875 K with a homebuilt system using Chromel-Nb thermocouples 42. Lattice Thermal Conductivity was calculated by subtracting the electronic contribution from the calculated total thermal conductivity. The electronic portion of thermal conductivity was found using the Weidemann-Franz law, in which a variable Lorenz number was used based on the sample's Seebeck coefficient. 