Vortices in topological superconductors host Majorana zero modes (MZMs), which are proposed to be building blocks of fault-tolerant topological quantum computers. Recently, a new single-material platform for realizing MZM has been discovered in iron-based superconductors, without involving hybrid semiconductor-superconductor structures. Here we report on a detailed scanning tunneling spectroscopy study of a FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 single crystal, revealing two distinct classes of vortices present in this system which differ by a half-integer level shift in the energy spectra of the vortex bound states. This level shift is directly tied with the presence or absence of zero-bias peak and also alters the ratios of higher energy levels from integer to half-odd-integer. Our model calculations fully reproduce the spectra of these two types of vortex bound states, suggesting the presence of topological and conventional superconducting regions that coexist within the same crystal. Our findings provide strong evidence for the topological nature of superconductivity in FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 and establish it as an excellent platform for further studies on MZMs. Majorana zero modes (MZMs) are proposed to be building blocks of fault-tolerant topological quantum computation 1 due to their non-Abelian statistics. Several systems are predicted to host MZMs, such as intrinsic p-wave superconductors 2,3 , and multiple heterostructures combining strong spin-orbital coupling (SOC) and superconductivity naturally While a ZBCP that does not split across the vortex core is regarded as a strong indication of MZM and topological nature of the superconducting vortex Here we report on a systematic scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/S) study of vortices in FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 . We observe two topologically distinct classes of vortices, which differ not only by the presence or absence of ZBCP, but also by quantization sequence of the remaining higher energy subgap states. Our detailed analysis compares and contrasts multiple vortices that belong to these two classes and reveals that the ratios of bound state energy value follow either integer or half-odd-integer numbers, provided that the chemical potential is not too small as compared to the superconducting gap. This fundamental difference, arising due to additional angular momentum contribution, is accounted for by our model calculation, which reproduces the discrete bound state spectra and allows us to identify the integer-spaced levels as emerging from topological surface states. In contrast, in an ordinary vortex without MZM, the discrete CBSs energies have half-odd-integer spacing, reflecting the trivial topology of the underlying band structure. This half-integer level shift of vortex bound states between two distinct classes of vortices provides strong evidence for the existence of a pure Majorana zero mode in the FeSC material. Our results also provide a detailed understanding of vortex bound states in FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 and in this way facilitate future applications of MZM present in this material platform. To investigate the vortex bound state spectra experimentally, we perform low-temperature (T exp = 0.55 K) high-resolution (0.28 meV) STM/S measurements on as-grown superconducting FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 single crystals (T c = 14.5 K). An atomic resolved lattice structure is observed on the in-situ cleaved surface (inset of Fig. In the center of the vortex core, there are sharp ZBCPs with a full width at half-maximum (FWHM) being almost resolution and temperature limited (Extended Data Fig. We next examine the level spacing of these discrete CBSs coexisting with a MZM (Fig. We support this conclusion by an energy spectrum calculation using Fu-Kane Model However, in our samples there exists another class of vortices that do not contain MZMs. To examine their origin, we perform a comparison study for the CBSs in these ordinary vortices. Similarly as in the case of a topological vortex, the CBSs in the ordinary vortex are discrete in energy (Fig. Although we cannot locate the L -1 level of CBSs in Fig. Friedel-like oscillation of local density of states has been predicted in half-odd-integer quantized CBSs of an ordinary vortex core, with the spatial periodicity being approximately of the scale of Fermi wave length ~1/k F We have clearly observed the distinction in the energy spectra of vortex bound states in topological and ordinary vortices. In an ordinary vortex core (Fig. By means of direct comparison between topological and ordinary vortices in the same crystal of FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 , we clearly demonstrated half-integer level shift of CBSs around a Majorana zero mode. This indicates that these two types of vortices are in different topological phases Sample preparation. High quality single crystals of FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 were grown using the self-flux method, and their values of T c were determined to be 14.5 K 39 from magnetization measurements. There are two kinds of single crystals crystalizing simultaneously with similar structures and Te/Se compositions. Fe 1+y Te 0.55 Se 0.45 crystals with excess Fe atoms, with shinning surfaces that are easy to cleave, are non-superconducting before annealing under Te atmosphere. FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 single crystals without excess Fe, usually without shinning surface, are superconducting without postannealing. All STM/STS data shown in this paper are from as-grown FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 single crystals STM measurements. The samples used in the experiments were cleaved in-situ and immediately transferred to a STM head. Experiments were performed in two different ultrahigh vacuum (1 × 10 -11 mbar) LT-STM systems, STM#1 (USM-1300s-3 He) and STM#2 (USM-1300-3 He with a vector magnet) To check the Majorana behavior of ZBCPs within integer quantized CBSs, we performed tunneling barrier evolution measurements on vortex #1. The ZBCPs do not shift across two orders of magnitude of tunneling barrier conductance (Extended Data Fig. The spatial profile of superconducting order parameter is anti-correlated with the local density of states, which enables the detection of the vortices in a STM/S measurement Toward the zero doping limit of a topological vortex core. Occasionally, in some vortices we observe a strong MZM peak at the zero energy without other subgap states in its vicinity, with one example shown in Extended Data Fig. The vortex quasiparticle spectrum of Dirac fermions has been studied in particle physics previously Numerical calculation. To model the experimental results, we performed calculations using Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian for 2D surface states with both linear (Dirac) and parabolic dispersion. We then assumed that a vortex with vorticity |*| = 1 is placed at the origin, which corresponds to the spatial dependence of the superconducting order parameter given by Δ -, / = Δ % 1 -2 where T is the angular momentum. We can express all the lengths in terms of the coherence length and all the energies in terms of Δ % to finally obtain the set of differential equations: This set of equations is then discretized on a 1D lattice (equivalent to solving the equations on a disk with radius _ = 100 U) and lowest lying eigenvalues and eigenvectors are obtained. To avoid fermion doubling problem, we use the approach of Susskind adjusted to quasi-1D radial geometry where the sums are taken over the positive eigenvalues and the spin components. The 2D density maps are then obtained from the radial dependence by using the rotational symmetry of the wave functions in our model. We also modeled the vortices that appear in the usual parabolic bands, which do not host Majorana fermions. The BdG Hamiltonian is then: where again > are Pauli matrices in particle-hole space and g is the effective mass of the band. We similarly decompose the BdG equations into angular momentum modes, obtaining in this a way a set of 1D radial equations. With energies expressed in units of Δ % and lengths in units of U, the equations read: Then the equations are discretized on a 1D lattice. To avoid large numerical errors for small angular momentum values, we employed the discretization scheme proposed in Ref. 47. In order to obtain better fitting of the eigenvalues to the experimental results, we modified the radial profile of the vortex 1(-) from the standard form of tanh 9 ^. Since the iron-based superconductors have a rich phenomenology, there may be multiple causes responsible for such a change. Among these are the effects of multiple bands and gaps or in the case of the alloys (like the material under consideration) inhomogeneities of composition that can lead to spatially dependent superconducting order parameter even in zero field. To model such effects, we introduce a phenomenological radial profile of the vortex, which we obtain by multiplying the standard form by the spatial profile of the presumed region of suppressed superconductivity: and for each case adjust the values of n and o. The radial profiles for the three cases highlighted in the paper are presented in Extended Data Fig. 