An epitaxial NdFeAs(O,F) thin film of 90 nm thickness grown by molecular beam epitaxy on MgO single crystal with T c = 44.2 K has been investigated regarding a possible vortex glass-liquid transition. The voltage-current characteristics show excellent scalability according to the vortexglass model with a static critical exponent ν of around 1.35 and a temperature-dependent dynamic exponent z increasing from 7.8 to 9.0 for the investigated temperature range. The large and non-constant z values are discussed in the frame of 3D vortex glass, thermally activated flux motion, and inhomogeneity broadening. Since Koch et al. For the Fe-based superconductors(FBS), the GLT has also been investigated in all relevant material classes, such as 11 compounds (e.g. thin films of Fe(Se,Te) The class of Ln1111 compounds is not only interesting for basic investigations of FBS but potentially also for high-field and detector applications due to their relatively high T c values of up to 56 K (highest among FBS), high upper critical and irreversibility fields as well as low electronic anisotropies at low temperatures, even though the preparation of films, tapes and wires of these materials is not as straightforward as for 11 and 122 compounds. In order to successfully increase the irreversibility fields and current carrying capabilities, it is helpful to know the behavior of the vortices near the irreversibility line. Epitaxial NdFeAs(O,F) thin films of around 90 nm thickness were fabricated on MgO(001) single crystals by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). For fluorine doping, the NdOF over-layer technique has been employed in which the mother compound NdFeAsO is deposited, followed by a NdOF over-layer. Both NdFeAsO and NdOF were deposited at 800 °C. More details about sample preparation can be found in Ref. For the electrical transport measurements, a microbridge of 30 μm width and 1 mm length was structured by laser cutting. The V(I) characteristics as well as the temperature dependence of the resistance, R(T), were measured in four-point geometry in a Quantum Design 14 T PPMS with Keithley current source 2460 and Nanovoltmeter 2482A. The current and voltage leads were attached at the contact pads via Pogo pins. The film investigated had an onset T c on of 44.2 K, which is determined as the extrapolation of largest slope in R(T) towards the tempera-ture dependent normal state resistance R n (T), corresponding to around 90% of R n , Fig. were measured up to a voltage level of 0.1 mV for constant magnetic fields (B||c) between 1 and 13 T (step size 2 T) at temperature steps of 0.4 K between 4 K and 35 K. The lnV(lnI) curves were fitted with first and second order polynomials with different fit procedures to extract glassliquid temperature T g (disappearance of quadratic term) and the n value (n=dlnV/dlnI) near the critical current density J c , which itself was determined using an electric field criterion of 1 μV/cm. The resistive transition to the superconducting state of the film, Fig. where the prefactor 2R 0 U(B,T)/kT (k...Boltzmann constant) is generally T-dependent, in contrast to the usual analysis. If U(B,T) is separated as U = U 0 (B) (1-t) q , t = T/T c , the temperature dependent derivative U' for each magnetic field reads as follows: (2) Whereas the exponent q is field-dependent as proposed by Zhang et al. and q = 1.55. The zero-temperature activation energy U 0 is shown in Fig. F-doped vs. O-deficient samples The theory of vortex glass-liquid transition (3) where ν and z are the static and the dynamic critical exponent respectively and d the dimensionality of the system. Eq. 4 was modified by the factor 1/T α with α = [0,1] in order to check for these both scaling methods found in the literature. Yamasaki et al. The V(I) curve exactly at T g is following a perfect power law with exponent . We determined this temperature by the disappearance of the quadratic term of second-order polynomial fits to the lnV(lnI) curves, adopted from Ref. within the critical region (Vogel-Fulcher relationship). That means, T g and z being known, ν can be evaluated from the behavior of R near T g . If eq. 8 holds, the derivative D = (dlnR/dT) -1 goes linearly to zero for T→T g with slope 1/s. This is shown in Fig. The results of this study are summarized in Fig. The theory of glass-liquid transition has not been unquestioned. Coppersmith et al. In the end, however, it is a matter of interpretation whether one regards the transport behavior as glass-liquid transition altered by thermal activation and disorder or as thermal activation mimicking a phase transition, since it is not decidable from the data alone according to literature. Whether possibly cleaner Nd1111 (and other Ln1111) film samples with maximized T c would show glass-liquid behavior with constant critical parameters in the expected range is an interesting task for future investigations. In summary, the temperature dependence of the resistance, R(T), as well as the voltage-current characteristics, V(I), of the NdFeAs(O,F) film of this study (grown by MBE, 90 nm thickness) are well explained by the vortex glass theory with a transition to the vortex liquid at the glass-liquid transition temperature T g . Whereas the static critical exponent ν of around 1.35 lies within the expected range (1...2) for a vortex glass, the dynamic exponent z is considerably larger than the expected upper bound of 6 and more importantly temperature-dependent, i.e. non-universal. This can be explained by thermally activated flux motion in the liquid region (also within the critical region T g ...T*) in combination with T c and hence J c variation in the sample. 