We have fabricated superconductor-normal metal side-junctions with different barrier transparencies out of PdTe2 crystalline flakes and measured the differential conductance spectra. Modeling our measurements using a modified Blonder Tinkham Klapwijk (BTK) formalism confirms that the superconductivity is mostly comprised of the conventional s-wave symmetry. We have found that for junctions with very low barrier transparencies, the junctions can enter a thermal regime, where the critical current becomes important. Adding this to the BTK-model allows us to accurately fit the experimental data, from which we conclude that the superconductivity in the a-b plane of PdTe2 is dominated by conventional s-wave pairing. The search for the elusive Majorana particle has brought physicists to the area of topological superconductivity. The mixture of Dirac physics and superconductivity (SC) is seen as a promising way of creating Majorana quasiparticles In this article we present tunneling spectroscopy measurements performed on PdTe 2 -normal metal sidejunctions, to shed light on the in-plane properties of the order parameter and distinguish between the three possible OPs that Teknowijoyo et al. have singled out. We model the data using a combination of the Blonder Tinkham Klapwijk (BTK) formalism We have fabricated our superconductor-(insulator-)normal metal [S(I)N] junctions out of exfoliated flakes of a PdTe 2 crystal. The crystal has a preferred cleavage plane, which orientates all flakes with the c-axis out of plane. The single crystal of PdTe 2 was grown by a modified Bridgman method. High purity Pd (99.99%) and Te (99.9999%) were used as starting materials. The desired components were sealed in an evacuated cone-ended quartz ampoule. The ampoule was heated up to 800 • C, kept for 48 hours and then cooled down to 500 • C at a rate of 3 • C per hour, followed by furnace cooling. All devices are prepared by Ar + milling through the flake prior to the deposition of a barrier and normal metal, in order to create a side-contact, allowing us to probe the in-plane properties of the superconducting order parameter. All patterning for these steps was done using standard electron-beam lithography. The devices differ in their interfaces between the PdTe 2 and the normal metal. The first type of devices was made without a specific barrier and is a 500 nm wide SN interface between PdTe 2 and gold, with a normal state resistance (R N ) of about 30 Ω at 15 mK. The second type of devices was made by transferring the argon milled flakes to a sputter machine where they were cleaned of contaminations by low RF power plasma etching. On the cleaned surface, 1 nm of Al was sputter deposited, followed by oxidiation in 10 mbar of oxygen for one hour to form an Al 2 O 3 oxide barrier. To finalize the devices, a normal metal layer of palladium was sputter deposited on the aluminium oxide without breaking the vacuum. The R N was about 200 Ω at 15 mK. Of the third We drive a DC bias current with a small AC excitation through the junctions while measuring both the DC and AC response across the junction to probe the differential resistance. The measured differential resistance is numerically inverted to differential conductance and plotted against the measured DC bias voltage. The results of these measurements at the lowest temperature reached (T <100 mK) are shown as grey circles in figure Because our PdTe 2 flakes are less than 100 nm thick, which is less than the reported superconducting coherence length Before moving on to fitting our measured conductance spectra, we show the general features of the three OPs in a 2D BTKmodel, where k z = 0. Figures Comparing our model to the differential conductance curves displayed in figure To explain the origin of the sharp dips and dented plateau of figure So far we have found that the main features of all three measured devices can be understood with the same OP symmetry, even though their differential conductance spectra differ greatly. The high resistance device is our best candidate for a more extensive conductance spectroscopy study, as it exhibits ballistic transport for up to 8 mV. We have measured the dI/dV spectrum of this device at different temperatures and for a much larger range of bias currents. The experimental data is presented in figure Over the past decades there have been numerous experiments in which dips such as presented in figure The final feature we discuss is the aforementioned ZBCP. This peak can clearly be distinguished in low bias region of the low transparency device at sufficiently low temperatures. We have subtracted the BTK fits shown in figure In short, we have fabricated three PdTe 2 /Normal metal side-junctions with different transparencies. The shape of the conductance spectra heavily depends on the normal state resistance of the junction and can make conventional superconductivity look unconventional. One should exert caution in analyzing the data of low resistance SN junctions and confirm that the junction is solely in the ballistic limit, or include the effect of the critical current on the dI/dV spectrum in one's model. Taking these critical current effects into account in the data analysis, the conductance spectroscopy measurements on our devices indicate that the order parameter in PdTe 2 is dominated by conventional s-wave pairing. When current-biasing low resistivity devices, one often needs to send relatively high currents to reach voltages of the order of the gap magnitude. In the case of a disordered N-S interface, the critical current of the superconductor near the interface can be reached before eV bias ≈ ∆ and the resulting dI/dV spectrum is no longer well described by the ballistic BTK model. In figure The I-V characteristic of a diffusive metal can in principle be easily described as a linear dependence V dm = IR m . This diffusive contribution causes heating at the interface as T 2 ef f = T 2 bath + V 2 bias /4L, with L the Lorentz number For I < I c , when the resistance contribution of the superconductor drops to zero, the resistance of the interface is entirely governed by the diffusive metal, which behaves again as V dm = IR m , and the ballistic metal which in this case is described by the BTK model: The resulting total conductance spectrum will follow BTK behavior as long as I < I c , damped by a parallel, diffusive contribution, and will jump at I = I c to saturate at a constant value that corresponds to the total metal and normal state PdTe 2 resistances. The effective temperature T ef f at the interface causes thermal smearing of the total I-V characteristic. In the BTK picture, this thermal smearing is taken into account as a broadening of the bias voltage. For the critical current features however, thermal smearing should be taken into account in the V -I curve by broadening the bias current I T hermal ∼ V T hermal /R total . This makes the amount of rounding of the critical current strongly dependent on the total resistance of the device. Figure One of the lowest resistance N(I)S devices fabricated for this work, has a resistance of 11.3 Ω. The measured conductance specrum is shown in Figure Figure In figure The experimental data and theoretical fits presented in this section illustrate neatly the difficulties of studying the superconducting order parameter with a low resistance, point-contact like setup. To make hard state- ments about the nature of the superconducting order parameter, one preferably uses devices with thick barriers without pinholes, so that the resulting tunneling spectrum accurately corresponds to the density of states of the superconductor.