We identify three dimensional higher-order superconductors characterized by the coexistence of onedimensional Majorana hinge states and gapless surface sates. We show how such superconductors can be obtained starting from the model of a spinful quadrupolar semimetal with two orbitals and adding an s-wave superconducting pairing term. By considering all the possible s-wave pairings satisfying Fermi-Dirac statistics we obtain six different superconducting models. We find that for two of these models a flat-band of hinge Majorana states coexist with surface states, and that these models have a non-vanishing quadrupole-like topological invariant. Two of the other models, in the presence of a Zeeman term, exhibit helical and dispersive hinge states localized only at two of the four hinges. We find that these states are protected by combinations of rotation and mirror symmetries, and that the pair of corners exhibiting hinge states switches upon changing the sign of the Zeeman term. Furthermore, we show that these states can be localized to a single hinge with suitable perturbations. The remaining two models retain gapless bulk and surface states that spectroscopically obscure any possible hinge states. The modern theory of polarization for crystalline insulators In this work we identify for the first time a new class of higher-order topological superconductors: second-order Dirac superconductors, Fig. We start by considering a model for a topological quadrupolar semimetal constructed from layers of 2D quadrupolar topological insulators (TIs) In Eq. (1) all the lattice constants are taken to be 1, χ i (k z ) (i = x, y) are periodic functions of k z with forms fixed by the interlayer tunneling terms, {Γ α } are the 4 × 4 matrices given by the direct product of 2 × 2 Pauli matrices σ i , κ i in spin and orbital space, respectively: In the remainder we assume χ i (k z ), γ i , λ i to be independent of the in-plane direction (x or y) such that the normal state topological quadrupolar semimetal has C 4 symmetry. To be explicit we will set λ i = λ and use it as our unit of energy with λ = 1. We then set χ i (k z ) = cos(k z )/2, and γ i = γ = -3/4. With this choice of parametrization, h SM (k) has fixed k z "momentum slices" with a non-vanishing quantized quadrupole moment for cos(k z ) < -1/2, and vanishing quadrupole for cos(k z ) > -1/2. As a consequence, the bulk bands are semimetallic with four-fold degenerate nodes at the locations k z where the quadrupole changes, i.e., cos(k The most general mean-field Hamiltonian describing a superconducting state for our system is given by the superconducting pairing strength in the (ij) spin orbital channel, and {τ i } are the Pauli matrices in Nambu space. The pairings for the six different models discussed in this work. Columns 2-4 show the representation of the pairing term and of the symmetry operators for each model. mx = σ1κ3, my = σ1κ1, r4 = i 2 (σ1+iσ2)κ2+ 1 2 (σ1-iσ2)κ0. Column 6 shows the pairing structure: inter/intra and S/T are short for inter/intra orbital and spin singlet/triplet, respectively. Column 7 shows whether the model is a HOTSC: models with " * " in the parenthesis denotes existence of HOTSC in the presence of magnetic field. Restricting the superconducting pairing to be s-wave, i.e., ∆ where Λ i is a 4 × 4 matrix, independent of k, that determines the structure of the superconducting pairing in orbital and spin space. The requirement that the pairing term satisfies Fermi-Dirac statistics implies that there are only six possible pairing matrices Λ i , listed in the second column of Table Let us consider the quasi-particle spectra in the weak pairing limit ∆ 0 < μ. Explicitly, we choose μ = 1, ∆ 0 = 0.5 and find that models h SC,1 , h SC,3 , h SC,6 are fully gapped in the bulk by the pairing term while h SC,2 , h SC,4 , h SC,5 are gapless (see SM The structure of the spectrum and symmetry is similar to the one of the quadrupolar semimetal obtained in Ref. is referred as path 2, and suggests that the presence of the boundary states, the hinge states in particular, might be due to a second-order topological invariant. To confirm it, we calculated (for details see SM Fig. Due to the presence of Dirac nodes in the band structure of the surface states, and finite value of the quadrupole-like invariant we term superconductors like the one described by model h SC,1 (and h SC,3 ) second order Dirac superconductors. This is one of the main results of this work. For models h SC,2,4 the gapless nature of the bulk and surface states leads to obscured hinge modes (see Fig. For J z > 0 (J z < 0) there are two, counter-propagating modes at two of the four corners, and they are ± eigenstates of C 4 M y (C 4 M x ). The hinge modes are perturbatively stable even in the absence of the two C 4 M i symmetries as long as particle-hole symmetry is preserved. However, the modes can be destroyed through bulk or surface phase transitions. Because the hinge states are located at opposite sides of the antidiagonal (diagonal), the breaking of the C 4 M x (C 4 M y ) symmetry leads to non-symmetric hinge states and, for a strong enough C 4 M x (C 4 M y ) symmetry breaking perturbation, to the almost complete suppression of the hinge states at one corner and the enhancement of the hinge states at the opposite corner, as shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have identified a new class of higherorder topological superconductors (HOTSCs): second-order Dirac superconductors. HOTSCs in this class have both topologically protected Dirac cones for states at the surface (d-1 boundary) and topologically protected dispersionless Majorana states at the hinges (d-2 boundary). The coexistence of gapless surface and hinge modes should lead to novel transport properties that it would be interesting to compare to the ones of conventional topological superconductors As mentioned in the manuscript the bulk states of model h SC,2 . have nodal loops, (see As mentioned in the manuscript the bulk states of model h SC,2 . have nodal loops, (see In this section we show that the hinges states corresponding to second-order topological superconductors of h SC,1 ( or h SC,3 ) are robust against mirror-symmetry breaking perturbations, and that the effect of the Zeeman term J z on the obscured hinges states of models h SC,2 ( or h SC,4 ). Fig. In our calculations, we used N x = 50, N y = 50, N z = 19 and N l = 10. For the bulk Hamiltonian, four bands are occupied.The values of the other parameters are the ones stated in the main text. When calculating the quadrupole moment for model h SC,1 we add a small perturbation of the form δ H1 = 0.005τ 0 Γ 0 + 0.010(τ 3 σ 1 κ 1 + τ 3 σ 0 κ 3 ). 