Research on magnetic systems with broken inversion symmetry has been stimulated by the experimental proof of particle-like configurations known as skyrmions, whose non-trivial topological properties make them ideal candidates for spintronic technology. In this class of materials, Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions (DMI) are present, which favor the stabilization of chiral configurations. Recent advances in material engineering have shown that in confined geometries it is possible to stabilize skyrmionic configurations at zero field. Moreover, it has been shown that in systems based on Pd/Fe bilayers on top of Ir( Recent advances on the study and fabrication of ferromagnetic systems with broken inversion symmetry have been highly motivated by the experimental observation of topologically non-trivial and spatially localized particlelike magnetic configurations known as skyrmions. The theoretical predictions of skyrmions and skyrmion lattices in ferromagnetic materials with Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions (DMI) A 2π-skyrmion corresponds to a particle-like configuration with two radially symmetric spin windings and is also known in the literature as the target state. Target states have been predicted by theory Experimental studies of chiral materials have recently focused on the analysis of skyrmionic textures in confined geometries. In this work we show through SP-STM measurements and numerical simulations, that a variety of chiral configurations can be stabilized in small Pd/Fe/Ir(111) islands of about 20 nm in diameter. We reproduce the experimental images using simulations based on a discrete spin model. We validate the simulations of the islands by comparing the tilting of spins at the boundary with the experimental findings. Simulations show that a variety of the experimentally observed chiral configurations are accessible through a magnetic field sweep and we characterize them through their topological number. Furthermore, we show that the confinement within the islands allows the stabilization of skyrmion-like configurations, such as a target state or a 3π-skyrmion, from zero field up to a wide range of magnetic fields below 1 T. In addition to the analysis of Pd monolayer islands on Fe/Ir(111), we show STM images of Pd double layer islands on Fe/Ir(111) with the presence of a configuration resembling a target state. In this system the environment of the islands in applied field is ferromagnetic owing to the surrounding field-polarized Pd/Fe layer. To understand the stability of skyrmions and target states under different boundary conditions we perform a systematic study of these configurations in perfectly shaped hexagonal islands under different conditions. In this context, we compute the skyrmion and target state size and energy as a function of island size, applied field, and boundary condition. Moreover, we vary these parameters to calculate the ground states of the system, which reveals conditions for the stability of different kπ-skyrmion states. As an additional proof for the stability of skyrmions and target states, we calculate the energy barrier separating a skyrmion from the uniform ordering and the barrier between a target state and a skyrmion. We compute the barriers using the Geodesic Nudged Elastic Band Method (GNEBM) We start this paper by introducing in Sec. II results obtained with SP-STM measurements on the Pd monolayer islands on Fe/Ir(111) together with the theoretical basis for the simulation of these systems. Consequently, in Sec. II B we show discrete spin simulations of the experimentally fabricated quasi-hexagonal hcp Pd islands on fcc Fe. Using different initial states we reproduce the field sweep experiment in these islands in Sec. II C. In Sec. III we discuss additional experiments performed on Pd islands on an extended Pd/Fe film on Ir(111) and simulations of these samples with ferromagnetic boundary conditions. To obtain an understanding of the experimental observation of magnetic orderings resembling a target state in the Pd 2 /Fe islands, in Sec. IV we model perfectly hexagonal islands and study the energy and size of skyrmions and target states as a function of hexagon size, applied field and boundary conditions. In addition, we characterize the lowest energy states with a full phase diagram of the hexagon system in Sec. IV B. Finally, in Sec. IV C we study the stability of skyrmions and target states by means of energy barrier and energy path calculations with the GNEBM. Spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy (SP-STM) is a valuable tool to study nano-scale magnetism in model-type systems. The investigated hexagonal island has a circumradius of about 9.7 nm (see (p)) and the zero magnetic field spin spiral period is about 6 nm. This spiral adjusts to the shape of the island by bending the stripes to be more perpendicular to the island edges, see (a). When a magnetic field is applied, the sample magnetization changes and at intermediate magnetic fields we observe a skyrmion next to a 360 • wall, whereas at larger magnetic fields only skyrmions are observed, see Fig. However, when the applied magnetic field is then increased in the opposite direction the magnetic configuration of the island is dominated by a network of 360 • domain walls and their junctions, see Fig. To obtain a better understanding of the magnetic field dependent stability and topological properties of the observed magnetic states in this particular Pd/Fe island, we performed discrete spin simulations of each magnetic state at the given applied magnetic field using the Fidimag 38 code. We translate the quasi hexagonal experimental Pd/Fe/Ir(111) island into a spin lattice, as illustrated in Fig. In Eq. 1 μ i = μ i s i is the magnetic moment of the spin at the lattice site i, s i is the corresponding spin orientation with |s i | = 1, P is the number of spins, which depends on the lattice constant and the size of the island, K is an effective anisotropy taking into account the uniaxial anisotropy and the approximation of the dipolar interactions, D is the DMI constant that describes the interfacial DMI for this material and the last term is the Zeeman interaction for the field applied perpendicular to the sample plane. For the hcp stacking of Pd on fcc-Fe, as in this island, the continuum magnetic parameters A, D c , and K eff (exchange stiffness, DMI, and effective uniaxial anisotropy) have been obtained from previous experiments The results of relaxing a particular experimentally found magnetic state at the applied magnetic field are shown in the right columns of Fig. The topological charge Q of each of the simulated spin textures in the Pd/Fe island can be calculated according to the method presented in Refs. 32, 44, and 45. This quantity is a mathematical measure of the number of times that the spin orientations, on a two dimensional plane, wrap a unit sphere. It is useful, for example, for quantifying the number of skyrmions in a system as the spin configuration of each skyrmion in an infinite sample contributes with Q = 1. For magnetic states in a confined geometry, such as this Pd/Fe island, the topological charge is usually not an integer due to the edge tilt of the spin texture at the boundary of the structure. Figure was derived from the appearance of the skyrmions in this measurement and was found to be dominantly in the surface plane (see inset to Fig. Comparison between Fig. To compare the experimentally observed magnetic states with other possible equilibrium states we analyze the energy and the topological charge of different simulated magnetic structures. For these simulations we define five different initial states and relax them using the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation at different magnetic fields, see Fig. The energies of the magnetic states (Fig. We can distinguish some of the configurations by their topological charge, which we show in Fig. At weak fields, below 0.7 T, a single skyrmion becomes a worm-like domain, as shown in the second image from the left in Fig. We see in Fig. Two other physically interesting states are the 2π and 3π skyrmions. For the latter there is still no experimen-tal evidence in the literature. In the hexagonal islands we obtained these multiple-rotation states defining the direction of their inner core in the +z direction, which follows the applied field orientation. Referring to Fig. In Fig. To compare the energy of the experimentally observed configurations with the energy of the skyrmionic configurations, we show the energies of the corresponding simulated magnetic states (Fig. With the aim of devising a reproducible method to obtain the magnetic configurations observed during the field sweep experiment, we replicated this process in our simulations by starting with different initial configurations at strong fields. An adequate choice of initial states is not straightforward since it is often not possible to know every possible equilibrium state. In particular, spin spirals are difficult to specify in simulations because they can manifest as branches, i.e. long domains oriented in the +z or -z direction, that bend and extend in any possible direction in the island. Hence, we selected five magnetic states based on a different number of skyrmions and the configuration from experiment of Fig. We set our starting point in the field sweep by relaxing these configurations at a magnetic field of B z = 2.5 T, which are the states in the first row of Fig. When the zero field is crossed, however, we observe interesting magnetic configurations which critically de- pend on the initial state, see Fig. space to do this. Finally, the DMI imposes a boundary condition where spins are tilted and orient perpendicular to the island edge surface, making it energetically inefficient to form a spiral at the corner rather than in a smoother surface. Whereas the phenomenological counting of the topological charge is rather trivial for the magnetic states shown in Fig. For example, referring to column A of Fig. FIG. if we now refer to the state of column C at the same field, we observe elongated boundary domains at the upper sides of the sample with a more straight profile of their surrounding domain walls, but not completely flat. Hence, by only considering the domain at the bottom right of the island as a third of a skyrmion, we obtain a total charge of |Q| ≈ 2 + 1/3 + 2 × 1/6 = 2.66, being the actual total charge |Q| = 2.63. Similarly, the state from column B at -1.0 T is estimated with |Q| ≈ 2.5. In contrast, the flat profile of the domain wall from the bottom domain of the state of column B, at B z = -0.5 T, makes the contribution of this domain to be zero and hence we estimate a |Q| of 3.66 for the whole configuration in the island. Another way to estimate the |Q| magnitudes, is associating the triple junctions from the 360 • walls with a charge of |Q| ≈ 0.5. Hence, discarding the boundary contribution, states from the row at -1.0 T in Fig. To compare the energy of the states from the experimental field sweep with the configurations obtained from the simulations, we plot the energies of all the configurations as a function of the applied field in Fig. We find that the unusual magnetic states (right plot of Fig. From simulations we will show that, in general, confinement can stabilize target skyrmions at weak fields (roughly below 0.9 T) in comparison to extended films. However, both the experiments and field sweep simulations for a nanometer-sized island of Pd/Fe on Ir(111) have not been able to produce a target state and analyzing the observed magnetic states suggests that the edge tilt at the boundary might be responsible. We now turn to a different system, namely a Pd island on a Pd/Fe extended film. Our STM measurements, see Fig. The spin spiral wavelength is about 4.6 nm and thus slightly shorter than that of the surrounding Pd/Fe. Importantly, the transition fields to other magnetic states are much higher in the Pd 2 /Fe, resulting in a situation where at about 3 T the Pd 2 /Fe islands still show complex magnetic order but are surrounded by a fully fieldpolarized Pd/Fe film. This means that in contrast to the effectively non-magnetic environment of a Pd/Fe island, as in Fig. Figures To interpret the target-like states of the small islands in (f) we can start with the outer rim, which we assume to be dominantly parallel to the surrounding field-polarized state of the Pd/Fe extended layer, i.e. the boundary of the island is parallel to the external field. The first dark ring marks the rotation of the spins through the in-plane magnetization to the region where the spins are opposite to the applied field; note that in the upper island this dark ring is not entirely within the island but appears to be pinned to a defect at the island boundary. The second dark ring is another spin rotation through in-plane, meaning that in the center the observed target skyrmion is again parallel to the applied external magnetic field. Comparison with the magnetic states observed in the Pd/Fe island of Fig. To enhance the general understanding on the occurrence of skyrmions and target states in the Pd/Fe and Pd 2 /Fe islands we perform a systematic simulation based study of hexagons, characterized by their circumradius R, where we vary the hexagon size and the out-of-plane applied field B z . We simulate the Pd 2 /Fe islands using the same magnetic parameters as the Pd/Fe islands, but changing the boundary conditions to a ferromagnetic rim, according to the discussion in Sec. III. Although a more complete model should account for the phase changes of the Pd/Fe surrounding a Pd 2 /Fe island at weak fields, a simplified model allows to analyze the effects of modifying the edge condition. This picture is nonetheless accurate enough at stronger fields, where it was shown that the island surrounding is field-polarized. The strategy we employ in the simulations is to start with either a skyrmion or a target state and relax the system with the LLG equation without the precession term, as in Sec. II B. The curve refers to the energy of the ferromagnetic state EFM with respect to the energy of the fully aligned configuration (in the +z direction) E ↑ , as a function of the applied field. (b) Energy E of the skyrmion (circles) and target states (squares) with respect to the energy of the ferromagnetic state, as a function of the applied field. In all configurations (skyrmion, target state and ferromagnetic state), spins are tilted at the boundary. (c) Energy of the skyrmion and the target state with respect to the fully uniform configuration in an island with a ferromagnetic rim (the ferromagnetic state in this case corresponds to the fully aligned configuration). We define islands of sizes from R = 4 nm up to 20 nm in steps of 0.5 nm and initialize three magnetic configu- rations: a skyrmion profile of a radius about 1/4 of the hexagon circumradius, a target state profile of about the size of the island and a ferromagnetic configuration. We firstly compute the energy contribution from the tilted spins at the boundary of the hexagons by subtracting the energy of the fully saturated configuration (in the +z direction) from the energy of the ferromagnetic state. The former is denoted by E ↑ and the latter by E FM . We show this result in Fig. From the plots we observe that when ferromagnetic boundaries are present (Fig. Regarding target states, the critical field below which target states have smaller energy than the ferromagnetic state, depends more critically (steeper energy curves) on the hexagon size R than in the skyrmion case, owing to the larger number of non-collinear spins and thus, a larger influence of the DMI energy. The range of fields where boundary spins do not have an influence is substantially smaller than in the skyrmion case, which is only noticed for the case of a ferromagnetic rim close to a field of 1 T. Furthermore, target states are more affected by the available space in the island since for free boundaries, at small hexagon sizes, R ≈ 6 nm, a target state is observed up to a field of 0.5 T, whereas this crit-ical field is close to the field where target states cannot be stabilized, which is around 1.2 T, when ferromagnetic boundaries are present. A comparison of the energy of skyrmions and target states reveals that with free boundaries target states have always larger energy than skyrmions up to sizes of around R = 8 nm. In contrast, with a ferromagnetic rim target states have lower energy than skyrmions at R = 8 nm and possibly become the ground state of the system at a critical field. This supports the hypothesis that confinement has a larger influence on target states, most likely because of the DMI energy and the repulsion from the boundary spins, which is weaker for a ferromagnetic rim. Additionally, we see that at R ≥ 10 nm skyrmions turn into worm or stripe domains below B z = 0.7 T, however target states are stable down to zero field since their double 360 • spin rotation allows them to cover a larger area without distortion. Similar to the behaviour of isolated skyrmions in extended systems, by increasing the magnetic field strength the skyrmion size decreases. To quantify this change we calculated the skyrmion radius as a function of the magnetic field for hexagon sizes between 3 and 20 nm and different boundary conditions. This result is depicted in Fig. We define the target state radius as the outermost distance where m z = 0 and we plot it as a function of hexagon size and magnetic field in Fig. As observed in experimentally measured islands, spin spiral configurations are the most probable ground state of the system at weak fields. This is illustrated, in part, in Fig. At larger field values, spin spirals are no longer favored and skyrmionic textures are candidates for being the ground state. In Fig. The results illustrated in Fig. Next to the single skyrmion region, at sufficiently large magnetic fields, we marked the area where worm domains or up to 6 multiple skyrmions become the lowest energy state. At the right of this region, a larger number of skyrmions are the lowest energy configurations. Since we specified up to seven skyrmions as initial states, it is likely that a slightly larger number of skyrmions have lower energy in this region. For example, at R = 19 nm and B z = 0.7 T we notice a state with 12 skyrmions and 2 half-skyrmions, whose topological charge is about -12.6. Multiple skyrmion states are favored as the island size and applied field increase because there is enough distance to avoid the inter-skyrmion repulsion that can overcome the energy barrier from the boundary. The optimal arrangement of skyrmions fitting within an island clearly follows a close packing ordering of congruent circles, as has been discussed in Ref. 49 for the case of disks, and the system size affects the number of confined skyrmions, Below the skyrmion regions, at lower magnetic fields and with increasing hexagon radii, target states, 3πskyrmion and 4π-skyrmion states have the lowest energy as the DMI energy is more dominant than the Zeeman energy and there is enough available space for these states. In this context, for sufficiently large island sizes there is a possibility that more complex configurations such as multiple target states and so-called skyrmion bags When ferromagnetic boundaries are present spin spirals are suppressed and the phases of skyrmionic textures significantly expand and are observed down to zero field, as shown in Fig. In Fig. A method for the estimation of the stability of skyrmions is the calculation of energy barriers separating them from other equilibrium states, in particular from the uniform state. Two known mechanisms In Fig. Regarding the collapse mechanism, we summarize the energy barrier calculations in Fig. An investigation of the transition energies of tar-get states into skyrmions can provide us an alternative answer for the problem of stability of target states. We computed this transition for different hexagon sizes and boundary conditions and summarize the results in Fig. The inner collapse transitions are given by the smooth curves of Fig. 1.0 T and ferromagnetic boundaries (Fig. Using (spin-polarized) scanning tunneling microscopy we have studied the magnetic properties of two different systems, namely Pd/Fe and Pd 2 /Fe on Ir(111), in a confined geometry. We find that the investigated islands host a variety of spin textures, including different metastable states. In islands with an effectively nonmagnetic surrounding the spin texture exhibits a tilt at the edges. A strong hysteresis is observed in magnetic field dependent measurements, where the virgin curve magnetic states are qualitatively different from the ones obtained when the magnetic field is subsequently applied in the opposite direction: whereas in the first case magnetic skyrmions are found, in the latter case the magnetic states are characterized by branched 360 • walls which end at island boundaries. When the surrounding of an island is ferromagnetic, such 360 • walls perpendicular to island edges are avoided and target-like configurations can be found. Using discrete spin simulations we can reproduce our experimental observations of multiple chiral configurations in small Pd/Fe islands. An analysis of the energy of chiral textures, which include the skyrmion, the target state and the 3π-skyrmion, indicates that these configurations can be stabilized from zero field up to different critical field magnitudes. Moreover, from the energy curves of these configurations as a function of the applied field, it can be inferred that the stability of some configurations can be explained by measuring the energy barriers separating them from energetically close configurations, for example a target state with a skyrmion. These results can be used as a reference for the observation of these magnetic states in future experiments. In particular, there is still a lack of experimental evidence of the 3π-skyrmion in a small confined system with interfacial DMI. In order to reproduce different magnetic textures from SP-STM images of a field sweep experiment on Pd/Fe islands, we performed field sweep simulations in a range of field magnitudes smaller than the one used in the experiment and using specific initial states based on different numbers of skyrmions. Our simulation results showed multiple skyrmion-like domains trapped within branched spiral states that appear when the direction of the field is inverted after crossing the zero field point, and we provided arguments to identify them by their topological number. The field magnitudes for the observation of chiral structures in our simulations differ from the ones in experiments because simulations are performed at zero temperature without any other external excitations such as the ones generated by the tunnel electrons in SP-STM. Accordingly, we did not exactly reproduce the results from the experiment, nonetheless it was still possible to stabilize most of the observed magnetic structures from the different field stages. Our simulations show that all the observed magnetic configurations should be accessible through an appropriate excitation of the system, thus further evidence of target states or 3π-skyrmions could be obtained in future experimental studies. Using our simulations of a field sweep process it was not possible to obtain a target state from spiral configurations but mostly skyrmions from 360 • domain walls at increasing strong field magnitudes (above 2 T) or large abrupt field changes. A possible solution to obtain these axially symmetric configurations with the field sweep method is specifying a suitable initial state, however this might be difficult in practice. We performed a thorough analysis of skyrmions and target states under different conditions, by varying the size, applied field and boundary conditions of perfectly shaped hexagons. The main motivation for the modification of the boundary condition was the observation of a target-like state in the Pd 2 /Fe islands on Ir(111), where the surrounding of the islands is ferromagnetic. Simulations of hexagonal islands of this material showed that for sufficiently small systems, skyrmions and target states in islands with a ferromagnetic rim have lower energy than the uniform state in a broader range of magnetic fields. In particular, for islands with radii around 8 nm, target states have lower energy than skyrmions when a ferromagnetic boundary is present. In hexagons with free boundaries, we found that for radii up to approximately 8 nm and fields below 1.5 T, the tilting of spins at the island rim decreases the DMI energy and affects the skyrmion structure, by decreasing the skyrmion size in comparison to hexagons with a ferromagnetic rim. In contrast, due to the lack of canted spins at the island rim when ferromagnetic boundaries are present, skyrmions and target states are, in general, larger in size compared to hexagons with open boundaries. We observe that this larger size had an influence on the energy barriers separating the skyrmion from the ferromagnetic ordering and the target state from the skyrmion, making the barriers larger in systems with a ferromagnetic rim. To gain an understanding of the lowest energy states of the hexagon systems we computed a full phase diagram illustrating regions in hexagon radius and applied field space with the possibly lowest energy configurations; there is no guarantee that other complex magnetic states that could not be mapped with our method can have lower energy. On the other hand, our random set of states showed that other configurations beyond kπ-skyrmions are usually highly energetic, thus finding the true ground states requires a dedicated analysis that goes beyond the scope of this work. We confirmed that spin spiral configurations are the lowest energy states at weak fields and we identified regions where multiple kπ-skyrmion states are the lowest energy states at sufficiently large island sizes and applied fields. From the comparison of the energies of target states and skyrmions at hexagon sizes around 9 nm, we confirm that target states become the lowest energy states when a ferromagnetic rim is present, supporting our experimental observations of the favored stabilization of target states in Pd 2 /Fe islands. Furthermore, by analyzing minimum energy paths we found that in hexagons with free boundaries, up to fields of approximately 1.6 T and for hexagon circumradii above 4 nm, the minimum energy path between skyrmions and the uniform ordering is via the boundary, which is consistent with recent studies. In summary, in this work we have performed SP-STM measurements of skyrmionic textures in Pd/Fe and Pd 2 /Fe islands on Ir(111) and we have employed discrete spin simulations to analyze our experimental observations. Our results show that discrete spin simulations can accurately explain our experimental findings. Furthermore, by modelling hexagonally shaped islands we provide a more general understanding of how the applied field, system size and boundary conditions affect the stability of skyrmions and target states in confined geometries with interfacial DMI. In particular, we found that the presence of ferromagnetic boundaries favor the stability of target states in a region of applied field and island size that explains the experimental observation of a target-like state in Pd 2 /Fe/Ir(111) islands. In addition, simulations predict conditions for the stability of novel magnetic configurations, such as kπ-skyrmions, that could be experimentally observed in the future. We believe that the ease to carry out multiple computer simulated experiments can help for the future design of energy efficient spintronic devices based on small confined DMI systems, such as bit patterned recording media, where skyrmions or target states would encode the memory bits. We acknowledge financial support from CONI-CYT Chilean scholarship programme Becas Chile (72140061), the EPSRC Complex Systems Simulations DTC (EP/G03690X/1), the EPSRC Programme grant on Skyrmionics (EP/N032128/1), the Horizon 2020 European Research Infrastructure project OpenDreamKit (67 6541), and by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein-schaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) -402843438; SFB668-A8. The simulation data for a complete reproduction of this work can be found in Ref. 55. 