Recent advances in mechanical-diode based ultrasonic force microscopy techniques are reviewed. The potential of Ultrasonic Force Microscopy (UFM) for the study of material elastic properties is explained in detail. Advantages of the application of UFM in nanofabrication are discussed. Mechanical-Diode Ultrasonic Friction Force Microscopy (MD-UFFM) is introduced, and compared with Lateral Acoustic Force Microscopy (LAFM) and Torsional Resonance (TR) -Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM). MD-UFFM provides a new method for the study of shear elasticity, viscoelasticity and tribological properties on the nanoscale. The excitation of beats at nanocontacs and the implementation of Heterodyne Force Microscopy (HFM) are described. HFM introduces a very interesting procedure to take advantage of the time resolution inherent in high-frequency actuation. 1. Introduction: Acoustic Microscopy in the Near Field. Acoustic microscopy uses acoustic waves for observation in a similar way as optical microscopy uses light waves. In acoustic microscopy, a sample is imaged by ultrasound, and the contrast is related to the spatial distribution of the mechanical properties. The procedure can be implemented in transmission as well as in reflection. The first Scanning Acoustic Microscope (SAM) was introduced in 1974 A schema of a SAM operating in reflexion mode is shown in Fig. Acoustic waves initiated at the piezoelectric transducer refract at the lens/coupling medium interface and focus to a diffraction limited spot. The sound wave is propagated to the sample through a couplant, usually water. When a sudden change in acoustic impedance is encountered, like at a material boundary, a portion of the sound energy is reflected, and the remainder propagates through the boundary. The transducer detects and converts the reflected acoustic waves into an electrical signal, which is digitized and stored at appropriate points during scanning of the lens. The amplitude and phase of the reflected acoustic signal determine the contrast in the acoustic images. SAM also permits the implementation of time of flight (TOF) measurements. In timeresolved acoustic microscopy a short sound pulse is sent towards a sample. The time-offlight method monitors the time required for the pulse sent into the sample to return velocity density Z  = back to the acoustic lens. TOF images provide a means to determine relative depth variations in the location of inhomogeneous or defective sites within a sample. The spatial resolution and depth of penetration in SAM are inter-related, and dependent on the operating frequency. When using acoustic waves of frequencies around 1-2 GHz, SAM images with conventional optical resolution of the order of microns can be obtained. Nevertheless, when using low frequency ultrasound, in the 2-10 MHz range, the spatial resolution is typically limited to the millimetre range. On the contrary, the depth of penetration decreases as the frequency increases. In technical materials, the attenuation of pressure waves is given by the microstructure, and increases at least with the square of frequency. In fine-grained or fine-structured materials, the absorption, which increases linearly with frequency, limits the penetration. For GHz frequencies, the penetration depth may be of the order of microns. When the frequencies are in the MHz range the penetration may be in the millimetre range. The pressure waves, regardless of frequency, are more heavily attenuated in air than in liquids, so water is usually used as a convenient couplant between the transmitter/receiver of acoustic waves and the specimen. Many advanced techniques based on SAM have emerged. In phase sensitive acoustic microscopy (PSAM) In spite of the advantages of the aforementioned acoustic techniques, the resolution achievable when using acoustic waves for observation at its best is still poor for applications in nanotechnology. Acoustic imaging with nanometer scale resolution can be realized using Ultrasonic Atomic Force Microscopy techniques, as described in this chapter. The main motivation for the initial development of Ultrasonic Atomic Force Microscopies was to implement a near-field approach that provided information such as that obtained with the Acoustic Microscope, but with a lateral resolution on the nanometer scale. The area of mechanical contact between the tip of an atomic force microscope (AFM) cantilever and a sample surface is typically of the order of nanometers in diameter. An AFM cantilever with the tip in contact with a sample surface follows small-amplitude out-of-plane surface vibration linearly, provided its frequency is below the cantilever resonance frequency. One might expect that the cantilever would react the same to the pressure exerted at the tip-sample contact by an acoustic wave of millimetre wavelength, realizing ultrasound detection in the near-field. However, due to the inertia of the cantilever, the linear behaviour is not evident in the limit of high-frequency signals. As a matter of fact, if the cantilever is regarded as a simple point mass, the amplitude of vibration at the driving frequency vanishes in the limit of very high frequencies. Basically, we may distinguish two different procedures for the detection of highfrequency surface mechanical vibration with the tip of an AFM cantilever. The first is based on the fact that actually the cantilever is not a point mass, but a tiny elastic beam that can support high-frequency resonant modes Techniques such as Scanning Acoustic Force Microscopy (SAFM) Up-to-now, most ultrasonic-AFM studies have been performed with the tip in contact with the sample surface, although in principle non-contact ultrasonic-AFM techniques can be implemented using either the high-order cantilever resonance frequencies, or the mechanical diode effect, as long as the distance between the tip of an inertial cantilever and a sample surface is swept over a non-linear interaction regime. Recently, the possibility to detect high-frequency vibration using dynamic force microscopy has been demonstrated This chapter is mostly devoted to review the fundamentals and recent advances in mechanical-diode based ultrasonic force microscopy techniques implemented in contact mode. In section 2, Ultrasonic Force Microscopy (UFM) will be explained in detail. The use of UFM in nanofabrication provides unique advantages Discussions of the beat effect and HFM will be included in section 4. The Mechanical Diode Effect. The first observation that the tip of an AFM cantilever can be used to detect out-ofplane high frequency vibration of a sample surface was reported in The physical mechanism that allows a cantilever to detect out-of-plane surface ultrasonic vibration excited at the tip-sample contact is based on the nonlinearity of the tip-sample interaction force However, if the amplitude of ultrasonic vibration is increased, the tip-sample distance sweeps over the nonlinear part of the force curve, and the averaged force includes an additional force Fult given by where d the tip-sample distance, a is the amplitude of ultrasonic vibration, and Tult the ultrasonic period. Due to this additional force, named hereafter the ultrasonic force, the cantilever experiences an additional deflection which can be easily detected by means of the optical lever technique, and is the physical parameter which is monitored in Ultrasonic Force Microscopy (UFM) where kc is the cantilever stiffness, and zeq and deq are the new cantilever deflection and tip indentation depth respectively. As the surface ultrasonic vibration amplitude is further increased, Fult increases due to the nonlinearity of the tip-sample force curve, and hence the cantilever deflection increases too until a new equilibrium position is reached. In this sense, the cantilever behaves as a "mechanical diode" To perform UFM, the ultrasonic excitation signal is typically modulated in amplitude with a triangular or trapezoidal shape (see Fig. To detect surface ultrasonic vibration with dynamic force microscopy in ref. The experimental set-up for UFM can be implemented by appropriately modifying a commercial AFM An ultrasonic piezoelement is located on the sample stage and the sample is directly bonded to the piezo using a thin layer of crystalline salol, or just honey, to ensure good acoustic transmission. In this way, longitudinal acoustic waves may be launched from the back of the sample to the sample surface. A function generator is needed to excite the piezo and generate the acoustic signal (Fig In addition to the described configuration, it is also possible to perform UFM by exciting the ultrasonic vibration at the tip-sample contact using a piezotransducer located at the cantilever base Waveguide-UFM. In this case, the ultrasonic vibration is propagated through the cantilever to the sample surface. Here, the cantilever tip which should necessarily vibrate at the ultrasonic excitation frequency. However, if the ultrasonic frequency is sufficiently high, the amplitude of high-frequency cantilever vibration can be very small, and it has been experimentally demonstrated that a mechanical-diode cantilever response (i.e. an ultrasonic deflection of the cantilever) is activated well under these conditions UFM responses are also detected in liquid environments In order to study the UFM response, UFM data are typically collected in the form of ultrasonic curves, obtained at each surface point by monitoring the cantilever ultrasonic deflection or mechanical-diode response as a function of the ultrasonic excitation amplitude. In the following, a description of the current understanding of those curves is provided. As discussed in section 2.1, the UFM signal stems from the time-averaged force exerted upon a cantilever tip in contact with a sample surface when ultrasonic vibration of sufficiently high amplitude is excited at the tip-sample contact, in such a way that the tip-sample distance is varied over the nonlinear tip-sample force regime at each ultrasonic period. The forces acting at a cantilever tip in contact with a sample surface are often described in the context of continuum mechanics. In particular, a tip-sample forceindentation curve with shape as depicted in Fig. shows a discontinuity at this amplitude value. Fig. Fig. Notice that, as expected, when the initial tip-sample force is increased the ultrasonic thresholds occur at higher vibration amplitudes. The ultrasonic deflection of the cantilever is dependent on both the initial set-point force and the ultrasonic excitation amplitude. For a given set-point force, the threshold amplitude is needed to reach the pull-off point and induce the jump of the ultrasonic cantilever deflection. Consistently, the threshold amplitude increases as the set-point force is increased. From the analysis of the ultrasonic curves, information about the tip-sample interaction force can be obtained, and the elastic and adhesive properties of the tip-sample contact can be derived. The procedure of differential UFM has been proposed to extract quantitative information about the sample stiffness with nanoscale resolution This method has the advantage that for the derivation of the contact stiffness it is not necessary to consider the details of a specific contact-mechanics model for the tipsample interaction. Simulations of the UFM curves have been done introducing the concept of modified tipsample force curves The stiffness values chosen to generate the original JKR curve can be derived from the application of differential UFM to the simulated ultrasonic curves, giving confidence in the reliability of this method Fig. The transfer of ultrasound to an AFM cantilever in contact with a sample surface has also been evaluated by numerically solving the equation of motion, taking into account the full nonlinear force curve and considering that the cantilever is a rectangular beam that supports flexural vibrations. By this procedure, the change in the mean cantilever position that results from the nonlinear tip-sample interactions is also demonstrated The ability of UFM to map material properties simultaneously with the acquisition of contact-mode AFM topographic images over the same surface area has been extensively demonstrated. Given the set-point force and the maximum ultrasonic amplitude, if assumed that the tip-sample adhesion is invariant, the UFM signal corresponding to a locally stiff region is large in magnitude, and gives rise to a bright contrast in the UFM image. So far the UFM signal depends on both adhesion and elasticity, the contrast in the UFM images must be carefully analyzed. The UFM brings advantages for the study of both soft and hard materials. In the presence of surface out-of-plane ultrasonic vibration of sufficiently high amplitude, nanoscale friction reduces or vanishes which facilitates the inspection of soft samples without damage. The elastic properties of hard materials can also be investigated by UFM. Due to the inertia of the cantilever, in the presence of surface ultrasonic vibration a cantilever tip effectively indents hard samples Important applications of UFM rely on its capability to provide subsurface information. The subsurface sensitivity of the UFM has been experimentally demonstrated Subsurface dislocations in HOPG have been observed and manipulated (see Fig. The penetration depth in AFM with ultrasound excitation is determined by the contactstress field, which increases when the set-point force and the ultrasonic amplitude are increased. The penetration depth and the minimum detectable overlayer thickness in Atomic Force Acoustic Microscopy (AFAM) are defined in using Scanning Near-Field Ultrasound Holography (SNFUH). UFM has been applied to characterise defects such as debonding, delaminations, and material inhomogeneities Ultrasonic AFM techniques provide a means to monitor ultrasonic vibration at the nanoscale, and open up novel opportunities to improve nanofabrication technologies Fig. In bottom-up approaches, ultrasound may assist in self-assembly or AFM manipulation of nanostructures Eventually, it should be pointed out that the sensitivity of ultrasonic-AFM to subsurface features makes it feasible to monitor subsurface modifications This effect is illustrated in Fig. A lateral MD effect has also been experimentally observed. Similar to the UFM cantilever deflection that switches on in the presence of out-of-plane surface ultrasonic vibration of sufficiently high amplitude, an additional torsion of the cantilever is activated when the cantilever tip is in contact with a sample surface and scans laterally over the surface at low frequency. This is done in the presence of shear surface ultrasonic vibration of sufficiently high amplitude The lateral MD-effect is exploited in Lateral Scanning Acoustic Force Microscopy (LFM-SAFM) In MD-UFFM, shear ultrasonic vibration is excited at a tip-sample contact using a shear piezoelectric element attached to the back of the sample. Shear acoustic waves originated at the piezo propagate through the sample to reach the tip-surface contact area. An ultrasonic-induced additional torsion of the cantilever or MD-UFFM cantilever torsion is observed while the cantilever tip in contact with the surface is laterally scanning at low frequencies Fig. Most of the time, the tip sticks to a surface point, and then slips to a next sticking point with some energy dissipation. In Fig. where xl is the lateral equilibrium location of the tip in the presence of lateral ultrasonic vibration of amplitude A, which defines the new equilibrium torsion of the cantilever, A is the amplitude of shear ultrasonic vibration and Tult refers to the ultrasonic time period. Once a critical lateral vibration amplitude is reached, sliding sets in, and the MD-UFFM signal does not increase further. A study of the MD-UFFM cantilever torsion may provide information about the sample shear stiffness and frictional response. In Fig. The experimental set-up for Mechanical Diode -Ultrasonic Friction Force Microscopy (MD-UFFM) measurements can be implemented by appropriately modifying a commercial AFM The changes in the cantilever torsion due to the lateral MD effect can be monitored in both forward and backward scans using the laser deflection method with a standard four-segment photodiode, simultaneously with the acquisition of contact-mode topographic images. MD-UFFM images can be collected by modulating the amplitude of the shear ultrasonic excitation and using a lock-in amplifier to detect the MD-UFFM signal. We distinguish torsion and deflection MD-UFFM modes, depending on whether the shear-ultrasonic-vibration-induced cantilever torsion or deflection response is studied. In shear-wave piezoelectric transducer, parasitic out-of-plane vibration may arise due to the existence of bounderies, etc. In the presence of out-of-plane ultrasonic vibration of sufficiently high amplitude, the normal mechanical diode effect described in section 2.1 would lead to the excitation of an additional out-of-place cantilever deflection related to the sample elastic properties. In the absence of out-of-plane ultrasonic vibration, but with shear ultrasonic vibration excited on the sample surface, a lift-off or deflection of the cantilever is expected as a result of elastohydrodynamic lubrication effects of ultrathin viscous layers compressed at the tip-sample contact In UFFM, also named Lateral-Acoustic Friction Force Microscopy (L-AFAM) or Resonant Friction Force Microscopy (R-FFM)) The information obtained from the analysis of the resonance curves in Fig. In TR-AFM As in UFM, in MD-UFFM the data are typically collected in the form of ultrasonic curves, obtained by monitoring the mechanical-diode cantilever responses as a function of the shear ultrasonic excitation amplitude. As discussed in section 3.1, the torsional MD-UFFM response stems from the lateral time-averaged force exerted upon a cantilever tip in contact with a sample surface, and scanning laterally over the surface at low typical AFM velocities when shear ultrasonic vibration of sufficiently high amplitude is excited at the tip-sample contact. Properties such as shear contact stiffness, shear strength and friction of surfaces at a nanometer scale are obtained in lateral force microscopy (LFM), also named Friction Force Microscopy (FFM) In the realm of continuum mechanics, for a sphere-plane geometry, the lateral stiffness of a contact is given by where ac is the contact radius, and G* is the reduced shear modulus, defined as: being Gt, Gs, t, s the shear moduli and the Poisson ́s ratios of the tip and the sample, respectively. This equation is valid for various continuum elasticity models and does not depend on the interaction forces. For small displacements it is reasonable to assume that there is no change in the contact area. The elastic response of the tip-sample contact in shear can be described by a series of springs. A lateral displacement of the sample z is distributed between three springs: And the lateral force Flat at the contact is given by being Keff an effective contact stiffness where Kcontact is the lateral contact stiffness, Ktip is the lateral elastic stiffness of the tip, and cL is the lateral spring constant of the cantilever, considered as a point mass. For most commercial cantilevers, only the torsional spring constant is relevant for the estimation of cL. In FFM experiments, the lateral stiffness of the tip is comparable or even smaller than the lateral stiffness of the cantilever For larger displacements at the contact, the threshold force to overcome the static friction is reached, and the tip starts to move. In FFM, Keff can be measured from the socalled friction force loops, lateral force vs. lateral position, in which a sticking part where the tip essentially stays at the same position and a sliding part can be easily distinguished. Keff is given by the slope of the sticking part. The shear strength can be defined as: where Ff is the friction force, and A is the contact area. From eq. 11, eq. 6 and eq. 7 we obtain an expresion for the shear strength, independent on the contact diameter ac. τ = 64G * 2 F f π(K contact ) 2 (eq. 12) It is well known from FFM studies that at typical low AFM scanning velocities, nanoscale friction proceeds by stick-slip. Once static friction at the tip-sample contact is overcome, the tip "slips" to a next static position and "sticks" there until the surface displacement is again large enough so that a threshold force needed for it to slip is reached again. Stick-slip also occurs at the micro and macro scales and can be observed whatever the chemical nature of the solids in contacts, and the state of their surfaces provided that the loading system is soft enough. Stick-slip friction with atomic periodicity has been demonstrated in numerous LFM experiments with atomic resolution, in which the lateral force exhibits a periodic, sawtoothlike behaviour According to the Tomlinson model, the tip is considered to move in the periodic potential field formed by the subtrate lattice while being dragged along the surface by means of spring-type interactions. Atomic-scale stick-slip is usually limited to low load regime, and sharp tips, although, atomic-scale stick slip at high loads have also been observed. The latter may be restricted to layered materials or to the presence of some lubricating contamination films. In the Prandtl-Tomlinson model, the total potential experienced by the tip is given by: where Eo is the peak-to-eak amplitude of the surface potential, a is the lattice constant of the surface, Keff is the effective lateral spring constant and v is the velocity of the sample. The model for MD-UFFM described in section 3.2 is based on the Tomlinson model This accounts qualitatively quite well for the experimental results (see Fig. Fig. For higher normal loads, the magnitude of torsional MD signal increases, and a higher critical shear ultrasonic amplitude is required to reach the flat torsion regime attributed to sliding. These results are also in agreement with the model sketched in Fig. In Fig. The lift-off (deflection) signals that accompany the MD torsional response in Fig. Slight deviations of the linear shape of the deflection curve when the maximum deviation of the initial cantilever torsion is reached may be related to a coupling of the cantilever lateral and vertical motions at the onset of the sliding regime. The presence of a squeezed liquid layer at the Si surface -Si tip contact has been previously considered to explain a reduction of friction in ambient conditions as a result of the excitation of normal ultrasonic vibration at amplitudes not sufficiently large to break the tip-sample contact during the ultrasonic period As demonstrated in Fig. If we consider now that the nanocontact is this formed by the tip of an AFM cantilever and a sample surface (see Fig. In Heterodyne Force Microscopy (HFM) In principle, even if the modulation frequency is chosen higher than the first cantilever resonance An important feature of the beat effect is that it facilitates the monitoring of phase shifts between tip and sample ultrasonic vibrations with an extremely high temporal sensitivity. In HFM, it has been demonstrated that small differences in the sample dynamic viscoelastic and/or adhesion response to the tip interaction result in a shift in phase of the beat signal that is easily monitored. In this way, HFM makes possible to study dynamic relaxation processes in nanometre volumes with a time-sensitivity of nanoseconds or even better. The experimental set-up for HFM is shown in Fig. The recently proposed technique of Scanning Near-Field Ultrasound Holography (SNFUH) If in UFM the surface ultrasonic vibration excited from a piezo located at the back of the sample is modulated in amplitude using a sinusoidal shape instead of the customary triangular or trapezoidal modulation shape, the tip-sample distance will vary similarly is it does in the case of HFM (see Fig. So far the excitation from one end of the nanocontact will be transmitted through the contact to the other end, i.e. ultrasonic vibration from the sample surface will propagate to the AFM cantilever tip, Amplitude-HFM and UFM signals are expected to be quite similar. In fact, as we mentioned in section 2.2, UFM can also be implemented in the so-called Waveguide UFM mode, in which the ultrasonic vibration at the tip-sample contact is excited from a piezo located the cantilever base, and no significant qualitative differences in the UFM response have been encountered when comparing ultrasonic curves received in either case The great strength of HFM versus UFM relies on the phase measurements. By monitoring the phase of the cantilever vibration at the beat frequency, HFM allow us to detect slight changes in phase of the sample vibration with time resolution of fractions of the sample and cantilever ultrasonic periods. If the excitation frequencies are in the MHz regime, and the difference frequency is of some KHz, phase delays between tip and sample vibrations of the order of nanoseconds are easily detectable As discussed in section 4.3, the big potential of HFM is based on its capability to perform phase-delay measurements with an extremely high sensitivity. Phase delays may originate from different elastic or viscoelastic properties, from different in-depth locations of a same-type of elastic inhomogeneity, and in general from any local dissipative process activated by mechanical vibration. So far ph-HFM provides a means to probe a local response in an extremely short time, the technique may reveal dissipation due to extremely quick transitions, otherwise unresolved from other dissipative effects occurring at larger time scales. Phase-HFN has been applied to PMMA/rubber nanocomposites that consist in an acrylic matrix, a copolymer based upon PMMA, and toughening particles, composed of a core of acrylic enclosed with rubber with a bonded acrylic outer shell to ensure good bonding to the matrix Using the recently proposed SNFUH mode Nevertheless, up-to-date, the data reported with beat-effect related AFM techniques is still very limited. The beat effect may facilitate opportunities ranging from the precise evaluation of elastic or viscoelastic response of nanostructures, the analysis of snap shots or transient states in the mechanical response of nanoobjects, the implementation of nanoscale time-of-flight experiments with high temporal resolution, or the quick transmission of information through nanocontacts by mechanical means. The use of higher beat frequencies opens up the possibility to scan at higher lateral scanning speeds while recording material information. Phase-HFM facilitates straightforward measurements of phase-delays between tip and sample vibrations, with extremely high sensitivity. The opportunities bring about by this technique are still to explore. 