We investigate if the demagnetization factor for a randomly packed powder of magnetic spheroidal particles depend on the shape of the spheroidal particles and what the internal variation in magnetization is within such a powder. A spheroid is an ellipsoid of revolution, i.e. an ellipsoid with two semi-major axis being equal. The demagnetization factor is calculated as function of particle aspect ratio using two independent numerical models for several different packings, and assuming a relative permeability of 2. The calculated demagnetization factor is shown to depend on particle aspect ratio, not because of direct magnetic interaction but because the particle packing depend on the aspect ratio of the particles. The relative standard deviation of the magnetization across the powder was 3%-8%, increasing as the particle shape deviates from spherical, while the relative standard deviation within each particle was relatively constant around 5%. The magnetic response of a sample to an external magnetic field is important in a wide range of fields, from nanomagnetic containers for medicine to magnetic refrigeration. In general, the magnetic properties of a sample when subjected to an external magnetic field depend on the magnetic properties of its constituent magnetic particles. If the sample is solid, certain sample geometries, such as an ellipsoid or an infinite cylinder, will have a uniform magnetization in a uniform external field However, most magnetic samples do not have a geometry that results in uniform magnetization, nor are most samples necessarily solid. When subjecting a magnetic sample to an external field, the sample generates a magnetic field that causes a self-interaction with the magnetic material of the sample. This field is termed the demagnetization field, and the internal field within the sample can be expressed with regards to this self-interaction as where H is the magnetic field, H appl is the externally applied field, M is the magnetization and N is the demagnetization tensor. To express the above equation as a scalar equation the demagnetization tensor can be replaced with an average demagnetization factor, N. For prism-shaped magnetic particles with varying aspect ratios from 0.05 to 10, this scalar approximation has been shown to deviate only 1% compared to the full demagnetization tensor For some sample geometries the demagnetization tensor can be analytically computed, e.g. for a prism If the powder is randomly packed, and consists of spherical particles both Breit Here D is the demagnetization factor of the geometrical shape of the powder sample itself and f is the relative density. The factors of 1/3 in the equation ensure that the demagnetization factor is 1/3 for any object that is symmetric with respect to the direction that the field is applied, such as a sphere or a cube with the field perpendicular to one of its faces. In deriving the above equation it is assumed that all particles are spheres and that these are uniformly magnetized. However, magnetic particles are seldom perfect spheres However, while all of these studies have focused on calculating the demagnetization factor, the variation in internal magnetization both among the magnetic particles and within each individual particle have only been considered for spherical particles Here we present modeling, using two different approaches, of packings of magnetic powders with spheroidal particles, which have often be used to approximate real magnetic particles The demagnetization factor is investigated using different numerical frameworks. Note that a magnetostatic problem is scale invariant, and thus the length scale is arbitrary, as long as the particles considered are much larger than the magnetic domains. Thus the results here do not apply to packings of nanoparticles The finite element framework (FEM) Comsol Multiphysics is used to solve the magnetostatic problem of calculating the demagnetization factor. This has also been used in previous studies Here μ 0 is the permeability of free space, μ r is the relative permeability, which is assumed to be constant and isotropic, and V m is the magnetic scalar potential. The magnetic field is then calculated as -∇V m + H appl = H, where H appl is the applied magnetic field. In all experiments, the applied magnetic field is along the z-axis and has a magnitude of μ 0 H appl = 1 T. To indicate the field direction for the computed demagnetization factor, the demagnetization factor and the demagnetization factor of the geometrical sample shape are denoted N z , and D z , respectively. The built-in Comsol Multiphysics solver Pardiso which is a parallel sparse direct linear solver Furthermore, the demagnetization factor is also computed using an independent numerical framework that can calculate the magnetic field from magnetic particles with a shape for which the demagnetization tensor is known The magnetic particles are assumed to consist of a linear magnetic material with a constant μ r = 2. This is approximately the value for gadolinium at a magnetic field of 1 T The powder packing of the spheroidal particles were generated using the framework described in Ref. When a magnetic field is applied to a packing of nonspherical particles, these will possibly reorient and rearrange their position to align with the field. In this work, this reorientation and rearrangement effect is not taken into account as it is too computationally intensive to solve for as a static magnetic framework can not longer be used. Practically this means that the packings consider here are clamped tightly or the particles are bonded in a non-magnetic medium e.g. epoxy, which is also done experimentally The calculated average demagnetization factor, N z , is shown in Fig. As can be seen from the figure, the overall value of the demagnetization predicted by Eq. ( The FEM calculations also shows that there is an inhomogeneous magnetization both across the the powder sample and also within each individual particle. Shown in Fig. . It is clearly seen that with particle shape different from a sphere, the spread in magnetization increases substantially. The demagnetization factor for a field along the z-direction, N z , as function of the aspect ratio of the spheroidal particles for both the cube sample and the short cylindrical sample. The demagnetization factor is computed using two different numerical approaches, as well as Eq. ( In Fig. To explain the variation in demagnetization factor with the aspect ratio of the particles, we considered the packing of the spheroids in the sample. If the orientation of the particles is random, the packing is uniform and the demagnetization factor should not depend on the particle aspect ratio. The reason for this is that the demagnetization factors for the different sample faces must sum to 1 First an example of the orientation of the individual particles in a packing is shown in Fig. For all packings the average orientation in the azimuthal direction, φ , and the polar direction, θ , as function of the particle aspect ratio is shown in Fig. The above results can be verified by experimental investigation using different approaches. The orientation of particles in a packed powder sample can be determined by X-ray tomography on a sample, while the demagnetization factor can be determined by measuring the magnetization of a powder sample in e.g. a vibrating sample magnetometer. A number of other factors besides the particles orientation may affect the calculated demagnetization factor. These are the relative density (volume fraction of particles) and the overall sample shape. Shown in Fig. (2). As can be seen from the figure there is a small variation of relative density with particle aspect ratio, but this variation does not show the same systematic variation as that of the demagnetization factor shown in Fig. Another factor influencing the demagnetization factor is the overall shape of the powder sample. Although this has been chosen in the modeling setup, there may be a slight variation due to the packing of the powder, which could influence the computed demagnetization factor. The aspect ratio of the sample for both the cube and the short cylinder is shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have shown that the demagnetization factor for a powder sample of packed spheroid particles depend on the aspect ratio of the spheroids. This results from an non-uniform orientation of the spheroids within the powder sample when these are packed with gravity as the driving force. The orientation of the spheroid axes were shown to depend on the spheroid aspect ratio, due to the fact that the particle packing depended on the aspect ratio of the particles. The relative standard deviation of the magnetization in the powder was 3%-8%, increasing as the particle shape deviate from spherical. A relative permeability of μ r = 2 has been used throughout this work. The justification of using this value is given in Fig. 10, which shows the relative permeability of four ferromagnetic materials at three different temperatures around room temperature. Shown on the same figure is also the minimum and maximum magnetic field within the spheroidal particles, for every individual sample, computed using μ r = 2. It can clearly been seen that the four ferromagnetic materials shown on the figure have a relative permeability within a range of μ r = 1 -3.5 between the minimum and maximum value of the magnetic field. When this is considered together with the fact that small changes in the relative permeability does not change the demagnetization factor 