The phase synchronization of two semiconductor DFB lasers submitted to both frequencyshifted cross-injection and self-feedback is investigated, both numerically and experimentally. A dedicated setup based on monolithic DFB lasers permits to effectively lock the frequency difference of the two lasers on an external reference over a broad range of parameters. In agreement with a delayed rate equation model, it is shown that the sensitivity of the locking to the optical feedback phases is mitigated by using strong cross-injection, thus paving the way to applications for microwave photonics. Other synchronization dynamics can also be observed, such as bounded-phase oscillations. Phase synchronization of lasers is at the same time a widely used technique, and an active research domain, with applications in novel telecommunications and metrology. It is also a playground for the study of dynamical systems and generic synchronization. Laser synchronization experiments are often based on two wellunderstood mechanisms, namely optical injection and delayed self-feedback It has already been shown that frequency-shifted feedback (FSF) can be used to control and stabilize the frequency difference between the two polarization modes of dual-frequency diode-pumped solid-state lasers, by injecting one mode into the other The behavior of two lasers subjected to both delayed feedback and injection has been studied before, analytically This work is done with a microwave photonics perspective, as beatnote stabilization is a key requirement for the realization of heterodyne oscillators. Indeed, such systems provide an interesting alternative to direct modulation of light The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the experimental setup, and the corresponding rateequation model describing two lasers submitted to both cross-injection and self-feedback. Section 3 is devoted to the analysis and comparison of the numerical and experimental results. Finally, section 4 is dedicated to the conclusion and offers some perspectives. The experimental setup, based on two DFB lasers, is shown in Fig. As seen on Fig. 2iπf0t + e -2iπf0t + ... . E in and E out are the input and output fields of the modulator respectively, and the coefficient t 0 < 1 takes into account the total transmission and optical power associated to the higher harmonics. In the experiment, m is controlled by changing the bias point of the MZM. In order to model the experimental setup of Fig. Here α is the linewidth enhancement factor, g is the gain coefficient, τ p and τ c are the photon and carrier lifetime respectively. As we consider two identical lasers, these values are supposed to be the same for both lasers, leading to equal threshold pumping current P th . However, we allow the lasers to have different frequencies ν j and pumping currents P j . The K ij coefficients quantify the injection strengths, and the associated angle ψ ij are additional phase shifts, introduced phenomenologically to account for erratic phase drifts of thermal and/or mechanical origin in the feedback loop, and dispersion effects in fiber, that may play a role in a real experiment. They also include any constant phase shift introduced by the modulator. As we are interested in determining the range of parameters allowing for phase-locking, and not in reproducing the phase noise spectrum of the system, noise terms have not been considered in the model. The absence of noise implies that the coherence length is infi-nite in the model, leading to coherent feedback and injection irrespective of the delay. Given the ratio between the feedback loop length (16 m) and the coherence length (1 km), this assumption matches well with our experimental conditions. We introduce equations for the normalized slowly varying amplitudes of the fields by using the rotating frames E 1 = E 1 e -iξ e 2iπν1t and E 2 = E 2 e 2iπ(ν1-f0)t with arbitrary constant phase ξ, along with normalizations e j = E j / E j and m j = (N j -N 0 j )/ N j . We also introduce the pumping rates r j = P j /P th and normalized damping coefficient ε = τp τc(r1-1) . In order to obtain non-stiff equations, we choose a time scale s = 2πf (1) R t, which is normalized to the frequency of the relaxation oscillations of the first laser f R , and injection strengths R . The equations for the slowly varying amplitudes e j and populations m j read: In the amplitude equations, we see the appearance of the following feedback phases φ ij , arising from the propagation of the optical waves in the feedback loop of length L = L + L (with L the length from the lasers to MZM, and L the distance from the MZM to the lasers), assuming optical frequencies ν 1 and ν 1 -f 0 , respectively. Using an appropriate choice of ξ (see Eq. (3e)), we can identify only three phases of physical significance φ 1 , φ 2 and φ x that do not depend on the detuning. These phases cannot be controlled experimentally, and are prone to fluctuate due to the frequency drift of the lasers, or to variations of the fiber optical path induced by environmental fluctuations. Compared to the scheme of Fig. Despite the complex reinjection scheme, we have already demonstrated experimentally that this setup can be used to lock the frequency difference of the lasers on the external synthetizer, resulting in a reduction of the beat-note linewidth from 600 kHz to less than 1 Hz, with a locking range as large as 1 GHz Following the setup described in Fig. This leads to : with κ 0 = GQ 1 being the injection strength parameter. It can be controlled by the in-loop amplifier. However its absolute value depends on losses in the coupler and in the fiber injection, and cannot be measured precisely in our setup. Among the system's parameters, we focus on the influence of detuning δ, modulation ratio m, injection strength κ 0 , and delay τ . The other parameters have been carefully measured for the DFB lasers and are kept fixed through the numerical study. Namely, by measuring relaxation oscillation frequencies and the lasers' transfer function under pump modulation, we conclude that τ p = 8 ± 1 ps and τ c = 60 ± 18 ps, which leads to ε ≈ 0.26. Relaxation oscillations of the least pumped laser are f R ≈ 8 GHz. Using a method based on optical injection In the following study, we will be interested in the measurable outputs of the system, i.e. the characteristics of the beatnote. One is its amplitude defined as , and the other its phase with respect to the reference. Up to an additive constant, it corresponds to the phase difference between the two lasers θ = arg (e 1 e * 2 ). When the frequency difference of the two lasers is stabilized, i.e. locked on the reference, this translates to a phase locking of the two lasers, so that their phase difference θ becomes constant. Feedback phases dependency Equations (2a)-(2b) show that the three uncontrolled parameters φ j can play a role in the dynamics. Indeed, as seen in Fig. The dependency of the dynamics on φ 1,2,x may be detrimental if one is interested in obtaining stable, low noise opto-RF oscillators for microwave photonics applications, because optical phases can be difficult to control in an all-fibered setup, and are subject to environmental drifts. In order to evaluate the sensitivity to the feedback phases, we have performed numerical integrations with 50 different feedback phase values, taken from Halton sequences on [-π, π] 3 . In order to take into account multistability, that is present in our system and is typical of nonlinear coupled systems involving large delays, 5 different initial conditions were used for each phase triplet. For each integration, the phase difference in the steady state (for s > 10 7 ) was computed from e 1 e * 2 , and its extrema were recorded. The mean value of max θ -min θ for all these points is shown on the maps in Fig. In the case of optical injection between lasers with frequency detuning, one is interested in the locking range, i.e. how large can grow the detuning before the stable locking is broken. For low values of the Henry factor α, the locking range usually grows with injection strength. Here we have also to take into account the delay and the feedback phases. Similarly to previous subsection 3.1, numerical simulations have been performed with 50 different values of φ j and varying δ, and the results can be seen in Fig. Also, it can be noted that a lot of points do not lie on the 0 or 2π line. They correspond to an oscillating output phase θ that remains bounded in the [0, 2π] interval, that is bounded phase dynamics, already seen on Fig. Previous computations with random φ j (Fig. We then varied the detuning δ in small steps, and recorded the beatnote electrical spectrum as well as time series. On Fig. they were to vary faster, the locking bands would not be observed, or be very blurred, as we know from Fig. Thus, if we ignore the phases ψ ij , the variation of φ 2 with respect to φ 1 is ruled by the drift of the frequency difference ν 1 -ν 2 , which, according to Fig. We have shown that two DFB lasers coupled by frequency-shifted cross-injection and self-feedback can feature stable frequency locking on a broad range of parameters. Even if their variations cannot be controlled, the optical feedback phases do not prevent the obtention of stable phase-locking, which is more robust against perturbations when using a strong modulation rate, i.e. favoring cross-injection over self-feedback. The large delay τ ≈ 4000 associated to the feedback loop turns out to be preferable to a shorter one τ ≈ 1 -10. We also noted that such a large delay, along with a frequency detuning, breaks the locking range into locking bands, a phenomenon already observed in injection-feedback systems We see that numerical simulations are in good agreement with the experimental observations. This suggests that the observed behaviors are quite robust and general in this kind of systems. Yet, very different values for some parameters could alter the global behavior, for instance a sensibly higher α factor would lead to a quite different picture. The dependence on the laser parameters has still to be precisely explored, as well as other coupling schemes, for instance with pure frequency shifting elements. In that last case, it has been shown that stabilization is also possible Finally, the improved theoretical understanding provided by the present work will assist the design of novel opto-electronic oscillator schemes. Indeed, in an alternative architecture it is possible to remove the electronic synthesizer, and use the beatnote signal received by the photodiode to drive the MZM, thus obtaining a selfreferenced hybrid opto-electronic oscillator with singlesideband output ()