Ge with a quasi-direct band gap can be realized by strain engineering, alloying with Sn or ultra-high n-type doping. In this paper, we use all three approaches together -strain engineering, Sn alloying and n-type doping to fabricate direct band gap GeSn alloys. The heavily-doped n-type GeSn was realized using a CMOS-compatible non-equilibrium material processing. P is used to form a highly-doped n-type GeSn layers and to modify the lattice parameter of GeSn:P alloys. The strain engineering in heavily P-doped GeSn films is confirmed by X-ray diffraction and micro-Raman spectroscopy. The change of the band gap in GeSn:P alloy as a function of P concentration is theoretically predicted using density functional theory and experimentally verified by near-infrared spectroscopic ellipsometry. According to the shift of the absorption edge it is shown that for an electron concentration above 1×10 20 cm -3 the band gap renormalization is partially compensated by the Burstein-Moss effect. These results indicate that Ge-based materials have a large potential for the nearinfrared optoelectronic devices, fully compatible with CMOS technology. Ge is one of the most promising materials which can boost the performance of nanoelectronic devices even further. Due to the chemical and physical similarity to Si, Ge can be integrated into CMOS technology. Intrinsic bulk Ge is an indirect band-gap material, but it can be converted to a quasi-direct band gap material due to the small separation between the  and L valley (136 meV) Kimerling's group has grown relaxed Ge on a Si substrate using high-temperature annealing and fast cooling Recently, much more effort has been taken on the fabrication of direct band gap GeSn alloys. It was shown that GeSn with a Sn concentrations higher than 8 % can be converted to a direct band gap semiconductor, which shows optically-driven lasing at low temperatures In this paper, we report on a combined approach towards direct band gap GeSn by codoping with P which in-turn does not only compensate the biaxial compressive strain in GeSn, but also introduces ultra-high n-type doping. The ultra-doped n-type GeSn layer-on-Si is fabricated by ion implantation of Sn and P into Ge-on-Si wafers followed by non-equilibrium ms-range rear-side flash-lamp annealing (r-FLA). Recrystallization of the implanted layer and the electrical activation of P induce explosive solid-phase epitaxy (ESPE) regrowth According to XRD data the lattice parameter of Ge 0.97 Sn 0.03 :P alloy in comparison to the relaxed Ge 0.97 Sn 0.03 binary alloy is reduced by 0.42% (a Ge0.97Sn0.03:P =5.659 Å vs. a Ge0.97Sn0.03 =5.683 Å). The band gap change of the fabricated Ge 0.97 Sn 0.03 :P alloys cannot be explained just by either the alloy formation or the band gap renormalization. The influence of the reduction of the lattice parameter on the band gap change together with the Burstein-Moss effect has to be considered. The fabricated GeSn:P alloys are n-type with an electron concentration as high as 1×10 20 cm -3 . A 475 nm thick undoped Ge layer was epitaxially grown on a Si (100) substrate using reduced-pressure chemical vapor deposition at IHP Frankfurt/Oder. Prior to ion implantation, a 30 nm thick SiO 2 layer was deposited by plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition. SiO 2 was used to prevent the Ge surface from roughening and sputtering during ion implantation The incorporation efficiency of Sn into Ge during explosive recrystallization was investigated using random and channeling Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS/R and RBS/C). RBS was performed using the 1.7 MeV He + beam of the Rossendorf van de Graff accelerator. P and Sn concentrations versus depth profiles were measured by a dynamic secondary ion mass spectrometer (SIMS) with 1 keV Cs + and O + sputter beams, respectively. Beams of Cs + or O + ions were rastered over a surface area of 300×300 m 2 and secondary ions were collected from the central part of the sputtered crater. Crater depths were measured with a Dektak 8 stylus profilometer, and a constant erosion rate was assumed when converting the sputtering time to the sample depth. To investigate the microstructure properties of the implanted Ge layer, cross-sectional bright-field and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) investigations were performed with a Titan 80-300 (FEI) microscope operated at an accelerating voltage of 300 kV. High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) imaging and element mapping based on energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDXS) were performed at 200 kV with a Talos F200X microscope equipped with a Super-X EDXS detector system (FEI). Prior to TEM analysis, the specimen mounted in a highvisibility low-background holder was placed for 10 s into a Model 1020 Plasma Cleaner (Fischione) to remove contaminations. The strain evolution in both the implanted and the annealed samples was investigated using micro-Raman spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction (XRD). XRD was performed by an Empyrean Panalytical diffractometer with a Cu-target source. The setup is equipped with a Göbel mirror and an asymmetric monochromator to enhance the brilliance and monochromaticity. The band-gap change in GeSnP ternary alloys was determined by means of spectroscopic ellipsometry. The thin film complex dielectric function (DF) was obtained using variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry (VASE) in a polarizer-compensator-sampleanalyzer configuration from J.A. Woolam. Measurements were conducted at room temperature and in the spectral range from 0.5 to 4.0 eV. The ellipsometry spectra were analyzed by a model consisting of a layer stack as follows: (from the bottom) the substrate, the GeSn and GeSnP film layer and a surface layer with a 50% mix of the DF of the top-most film and air. The optical constants of the modified thin layers were determined numerically by using a Kramers-Kronig consistent B-Spline approximation with a knot number choice approach described elsewhere The concentration of carriers in the implanted and annealed samples was estimated from temperature-dependent Hall effect measurements in a van der Pauw configuration. The thickness of the doped layer was extracted from SIMS measurements. The band structure and position of the Fermi energy in P-doped GeSn alloys were calculated using the full potential linearized augmented plane wave (FP-LAPW) WIEN2k code in a supercell (SC) approach with the modified Becke-Johnson local density approximation (MBJLDA) and the spectral weight approach used for the band gap correction and for band unfolding, respectively. The redistribution of the implanted elements and their lattice location in the Ge film were investigated using RBS performed in random and channeling direction on both asimplanted and annealed samples (see Fig. Unfortunately, P was not resolvable in our RBS spectra because P is much lighter than the matrix elements and its signal overlaps with the Ge signal. The thickness of the implanted layer can be calculated from the Ge signal in the RBS/C spectrum. Due to the end-of-range defects and the large implantation fluence of P, the total thickness of the almost amorphous Ge layer formed during ion implantation is 230 nm compared to the assumed thickness of 200 nm of the P-doped layer as calculated by SRIM The RBS/C investigation performed on the annealed samples provides information about the recrystallization efficiency of the implanted layer and the lattice location of the implanted elements. In the ideal crystal, close to the surface region (first 100 nm), the yield of the RBS/C spectrum should be below 10 % of that obtained under random conditions. In the FLA treated sample the RBS/C signal from Sn is remarkably visible, which means that Sn is fully incorporated into the Ge lattice. The Sn content in the fabricated GeSn:P alloy is more than five times greater than the equilibrium solid solubility limit of Sn in Ge. Moreover, according to the RBS results the GeSn:P alloy quality is independent of the P fluence within the investigated range. The yield of the Ge signal in RBS/C is also low, confirming a high recrystallization efficiency during FLA. Since P atoms could not be resolved by RBS, SIMS was used as an alternative method, to observe the depth distribution of P in Ge before and after FLA. Fig. Phenomena such as the snowplow effect are not observed in our annealed films 2c . As can be seen in Fig. In order to obtain the in-plane and out-of-plane strain distribution in the fabricated GeSn films XRD -2 scans and reciprocal space maps were performed (see Fig. [001]. The shift is caused by the formation of GeSn. Due to the fact that the lattice parameter of relaxed GeSn is bigger than that of the Ge virtual-substrate, the fabricated GeSn alloy is biaxially compressively strained. The XRD -2 scan performed along (004) and reciprocal space maps show that the biaxial compressive strain in GeSn can be effectively compensated by co-doping with P. The in-plane lattice parameter "a" is the same in both the Ge virtualsubstrate and the fabricated GeSn layer (a=5.659 Å) while the out-off plane lattice parameter "b" in GeSn alloys decreases from 5.671 Å in GeSnP1 down to 5.659 Å in GeSnP3. Table In-plane "a" (Å) Out-off-plane "b" (Å) Sn has a bigger covalent radius than Ge (140 pm vs. 120 pm, about 16% difference), which is why the lattice parameter of the relaxed GeSn alloy should be bigger than that of undoped Ge. The covalent radius of P (107 pm) is about 11% smaller than that of Ge. This means that P can efficiently reduce the lattice parameter of GeSn:P and compensate the biaxial compressive strain. Even the electronic contribution which normally expands the lattice cannot compensate the effect of P doping x Sn x with x>3 a tensile strained ultra-doped GeSn layer can even be formed, favoring the formation of a direct band gap. Figure Taking the shift of =-0.6 ±1 cm -1 into account, the strain can be calculated using the following expression where  is the shift of the phonon mode position and c is a pre-factor (~ -300 for Ge). A positive  corresponds to the tensile strain while a negative  describes the compressive strain. According to the peak position of the TO phonon mode in the Raman spectrum, the as-grown Ge layer exhibits a tensile strain of 0.20±0.03 %, which is in good agreement with the value calculated from XRD data (=0.16%). The r-FLA performed on the non-implanted sample does not affect the strain redistribution in the Ge layer. In the case of relaxed GeSn alloy the Raman peak shift of the Ge-Ge LO mode is caused by the mass disorder (Ge vs. much heavier Sn) and the bond distortion (Ge-Ge bond vs. much longer Ge-Sn bond). Assuming a fully relaxed GeSn film with 3% of Sn the shift of the peak position of the TO phonon mode in the Raman spectrum in GeSn film () where the  GeSn and  Ge are the TO phonon modes in relaxed GeSn alloy and intrinsic Ge. x Sn is the Sn concentration in GeSn alloy and c=-82.8 after Ref. where  is the biaxial strain, a=-83.11 and b=-374.53, and  strain = is the shift of the TO phonon mode position with the respect to the relaxed GeSn shows the TO phonon mode at 299.5 cm -3 which indicates the existence of biaxial compressive strain of =-1.06 %. This is more than two times bigger than the strain calculated from the XRD data for sample GeSnP3 (=-0.42 %). The TO phonon mode position in Gebased alloys depends on the element, strain and Fano effect Sn incorporated into Ge modifies not only the lattice parameter, but, more importantly, the band structure of Ge Therefore, the strain engineering will result in a band gap modification for a GeSn alloy with a fixed Sn concentration. The band gap of GeSn decreases when applying tensile strain and increases when the compressive strain is present. Moreover, it was shown that the band gap of Ge and GeSn alloys decreases with increasing the electron concentration due to the band gap renormalization The presented simulation data do not take into account the band gap change due to the GeSn:P alloy formation with a reduced lattice parameter. The E F = E F -CBM in Ge 0.963 Sn 0.037 was deduced to be 210 meV for a doping level of 1.1×10 20 cm -3 . Due to the low density of electron states at the  point of the Brillouin zone, E F is located deep in the conduction band and the effective absorption edge can be calculated as the energy difference between the valence band maximum and the E F position in the conduction band. Recently, Koerner et al. have shown that for electron concentrations lower than 5×10 18 cm -3 and Sn concentrations below 6%, the band gap renormalization dominates and the Burstein-Moss Effect can be neglected Figure However, the measured direct band gap in GeSnP3 was found to be E g ()=0.72 eV which is 80 meV bigger than expected. The increase of the band gap in GeSn:P alloy with increasing effective carrier concentration above 7×10 19 cm -3 must be caused by the Burstein-Moss effect due to ultra-high n-type doping Highly-doped n ++ GeSn:P-on-Si alloys have been fabricated using ion beam implantation and post-implantation non-equilibrium thermal processing. Effective strain and 