Mathematical models of capacity fade can reduce the time and cost of lithium-ion battery development and deployment, and growth of the solid-electrolyte interphase (SEI) is a major source of capacity fade. Experiments in Part I reveal nonlinear voltage dependence and strong charge-discharge asymmetry in SEI growth on carbon black negative electrodes, which is not captured by previous models. Here, we present a theoretical model for the electrochemical kinetics of SEI growth coupled to lithium intercalation, which accurately predicts experimental results with few adjustable parameters. The key hypothesis is that the initial SEI is a mixed ionelectron conductor, and its electronic conductivity varies approximately with the square of the local lithium concentration, consistent with hopping conduction of electrons along percolating networks. By including a lithium-ion concentration dependence for the electronic conductivity in the SEI, the bulk SEI thus modulates the overpotential and exchange current of the electrolyte reduction reaction. As a result, SEI growth is promoted during lithiation but suppressed during delithiation. This new insight establishes the fundamental electrochemistry of SEI growth kinetics. Our model improves upon existing models by introducing the effects of electrochemical SEI growth and its dependence on potential, current magnitude, and current direction in predicting capacity fade. To operate a lithium-ion battery in the thermodynamically stable regime, the electrochemical potential of its electrodes must lie within the stability window of the electrolyte, constraining the open circuit voltage of the full cell. If the negative electrode potential falls below this stability window, a passivating SEI layer will grow on the electrode surface. The SEI layer forms on top of the active negative electrode material, typically graphitic carbon, resulting in depletion of the lithium ion inventory inside the battery Continuum modeling of SEI growth involves the interplay of multiple phenomena, any of which could be rate-limiting: (a) electron conduction through the SEI, (b) lithium ion conduction through the SEI, (c) solvent/electrolyte diffusion through pores in the SEI, (d) chemical and mechanical dissolution of the SEI to expose more fresh surface to electrolyte, and (e) charge transfer in SEI growth reaction and its coupling with (de)intercalation and capacitive charge storage. To further complicate this system, the many electrolyte reduction mechanisms result in a variety of products Many models are able to reproduce the experimental 'square-root of time' dependence of capacity fade in the long-term More recent modeling work has yet to resolve the controversy over the rate-limiting step. In 2013, Pinson and Bazant All of the aforementioned models assume a uniform spatial thickness of the growing passivation layer and a single rate-limiting species. Single particle level inhomogeneities were modeled by Roder et al. In Part I of this work, we demonstrated that the postfirst cycle growth of the SEI layer shows a strong dependence on voltage, carbon black intercalation current and current direction. Carbon black is used as the model active material for this study due to its high surface area and solid solution behavior during lithium intercalation (see Part I).The SEI layer grows substantially at low potential, consistent with previous work The most intriguing observation stated in Part I is the strong dependence of irreversible SEI growth on the direction of the carbon intercalation current. SEI growth is considerable during lithiation of the carbon black electrode, but the growth ceases nearly instantaneously upon reversal of the current. This question of directional asymmetry in intercalation direction at identical potentials is distinct from that of the reversibility of SEI reactions at high potential, which has been previously studied in literature In Part II, we investigate the hypotheses proposed in Part I to explain the observed directional asymmetry. We mainly explore the third hypothesis, which treats the SEI as a mixed ion-electron conductor (MIEC). In this model, the exchange current and overpotential of the electrolyte reduction reaction are functions of the lithium ion and electron concentrations in the SEI. Specifically, the electronic conductivity of the SEI is a dynamic parameter dependent on both current rate and direction through its coupling to the lithium-ion concentration. We explore The SEI layer growth process in the post-first-cycle regime depends upon numerous coupled electrode and particle scale phenomena, all of which depend on the potential and the concentrations of lithium ions, solvent molecules, and electrons at a particular point in the Some key features of this model framework are as follows: i. This work endeavors to understand the electrochemistry of SEI growth in a small, welldefined time scale: the second cycle to the first few cycles, dubbed 'post-first-cycle' regime, an important regime in lithium ion battery degradation. The SEI formation process on the first cycle is distinct and not considered in this study. ii. The model is agnostic to the details of individual reactions leading to SEI growth; the equilibrium potential of SEI growth is obtained using data from experimental measurements. This "effective" equilibrium potential is a lumped value that incorporates the multitude of solvent/electrolyte reduction reactions, each with their own distinct equilibrium potentials iv. All electrochemical reactions described in the model consider the effect of changing species concentrations (specifically, electrons and ions) at the interfaces in which they occur. This allows us to study the effect of ion and electron concentrations on fluxes at the reaction interfaces. Model formulation: Since the model is motivated by the key experimental results discussed in Part I, we make use of these insights to simplify the picture. The diffusion and transport of lithium ions through the porous and non-porous SEI layers (process 2b in Figure Based on the experimental observation of strong voltage dependence for SEI growth, we assume that electron transport is rate limiting as opposed to solvent diffusion (process 3 a-b in Figure for 'post-first-cycle' early stage SEI, since the former is expected to exhibit stronger voltage dependence. In this picture, the (de)intercalation reaction takes place at the electrode/SEI interface where an electron supplied from the electrode reacts with a lithium ion diffusing through the SEI from the electrolyte. Electrons also move across the SEI layer to reach the outer electrolyte interface, where they react with lithium ions and electrolyte (solvent and/or salt) to form more SEI as a parasitic reaction that passivates the surface. We model the SEI-forming Faradaic reaction using the classical Butler-Volmer equation, where the (dimensionless) overpotential is the potential drop across the compact Stern layer at the SEI/electrolyte interface, relative to its equilibrium value given by the Nernst equation. We set the charge-transfer coefficient to 0.5, consistent with most models and Marcus theory for outer-sphere electron transfer We neglect the diffuse part of the electric double layer in the electrolyte by taking the Helmholtz limit A critical aspect of our model is to view the SEI layer as a MIEC with time-varying concentrations of both mobile electrons and inserted ions . Accounting for all species involved in the SEI growth reaction, the Nernst equation for the equilibrium Stern layer voltage drop then reads, where the reference value is related below to the electrode potential for the onset of the SEI reaction relative to lithium metal reference (see Table In Equation ( In the same spirit, we must also account for both ion and electron concentrations in the derivation of the Butler-Volmer equation ( where is a dimensionless rate constant. Although we neglect the dependence of the SEI growth reaction on the specific composition of the SEI matrix, we do account for its dependence on the concentrations of mobile electrons and inserted lithium ions, which are strongly coupled to carbon black intercalation and SEI growth kinetics. We recognize that space charge may play a role, resulting from imbalances in the concentrations of electrons, ions, and fixed charges in the SEI matrix, which are governed additionally by Poisson's equation. Here, as a first approximation, we assume local electroneutrality. Moreover, we also assume intrinsic defect chemistry. Together, these assumptions result in equal electron and ion concentrations, i.e. , everywhere within the SEI. Although we do not explicitly model charge as a first approximation, our model can be derived as the self-consistent thin double-layer limit of more general "Frumkin-Butler-Volmer" models of electrochemical kinetics coupled with diffuse interfacial charge Assuming all charge resides in thin interfaces between charge-free dielectric layers, the capacitance of each layer could be estimated as its dielectric constant divided by thickness. In this way, the implied surface charge density at the SEI/electrolyte interface could be calculated from the Stern layer voltage drop as , where is the dielectric constant and the thickness of the Stern layer, although this is not required for the SEI growth model. Finally, although the mobile ions and electrons are strongly coupled by Coulomb forces and exhibit ambipolar diffusion while maintaining electroneutrality Since electrons do not cross into the electrolyte, the Faradaic reaction current for SEI growth must be equal to the electronic "leakage current" across the SEI layer. Consistent with the assumptions above, the latter is given by Ohm's law, where is the electronic resistance of the SEI per unit area of active electrode material and is the voltage drop across the SEI layer. To capture trends over many cycles, the SEI resistance may depend nonlinearly on the dimensionless thickness as a power law to indirectly account for changing porosity or fractal dimension, where is a reference electronic resistance for the initial SEI layer and is the dimensionless mean electronic conductivity, assumed to be approximately uniform across the SEI layer but varying in time with the mobile electron concentration , or the ion concentration by electroneutrality. The SEI electronic conductivity depends on the mobile electron concentration, which is equal to the inserted ion concentration by the assumption of electroneutrality in the intrinsic limit discussed above. For simplicity, we postulate that the electronic conductivity exhibits a power-law dependence on the lithium ion concentration: The exponent allows us to explore different modes of electron conduction, including three limiting cases from semiconductor physics: 1) Constant conductivity ( ): In this case, the SEI layer has a constant electronic conductivity irrespective of lithium-ion concentration and potential. Physically, this corresponds to the situation where the SEI cannot insert lithium ions, or that the electron concentration is fixed by impurities. 2) Ideal mixed ion-electron conductor ( ): In this case, each inserted ion adjusts the Fermi level so as to enable another mobile electron to enter the material and carry electronic current, in proportion to the local ion concentration. The SEI electronic conductivity is thus linear with lithium-ion concentration. Physically, this corresponds to a semi-metal, where the additional mobile electrons associated with ion insertion are sufficiently delocalized and concentrated that each contributes equally to the total conductivity. 3) Non-ideal mixed ion-electron conductor : In this case, the electronic conductivity increases nonlinearly with inserted ion concentration, as in an semiconductor with hopping conduction of electrons across percolating clusters of localized states In the absence of any direct measurement or predictive simulations of electronic conductivity, we fit the prefactor in each case to the experimental data as a function of voltage (and indirectly to state of charge). By combining Equations ( To complete the model, we postulate mechanisms for lithium ion insertion into and transport through the SEI layer, followed by Faradaic reaction and intercalation into the active carbon material. To determine the lithium concentration in SEI, we adopt the standard model of surface charge regulation by quasi-equilibrium ion absorption from the electrolyte, which has been successful in diverse applications The modulation of the ion concentration in SEI, and thus its electronic conductivity, by the Stern layer voltage is an important source of asymmetry in the model. where is the standard redox potential for intercalation, relative to the ideal counterelectrode (e.g. lithium metal), and is the activity of the oxidized state of the reaction (the lithium ion in SEI), which we set equal to the dimensionless ion concentration, consistent with the dilute solution approximation above. Lithiated carbon black exhibits solid solution behavior and a suppression of graphitic phase separation where the first term is the (dimensionless) configurational entropy of an ideal solid solution of intercalated ions and vacancies and the second term is an empirical approximation for the dimensionless enthalpy of intercalation. Fitted values of the parameters , and are given in Table The Faradaic intercalation reaction is again described using Butler-Volmer kinetics, (10) where the intercalation overpotential is given by and the intercalation exchange current is given by, (11) where is another rate constant, and captures the asymmetry between carbon lithiation and delithiation reactions. The carbon black intercalation kinetics is assumed to be reaction limited. The model is completed by the conservation of ionic current. We operate our simulations in galvanostatic mode. The sum of the intercalation and SEI electronic currents is constrained to be equal to the total driving current in the cell as, While the SEI growth "leakage" current is carried by electrons across the SEI layer, the intercalation current is carried by the ions, (13) which encounter their own ohmic resistance across the SEI layer, in parallel with that of the electrons. For typical situations where , we expect the SEI layer to be much more resistive to electrons than to ions, , although these are left as fitting parameters. Since ions encounter much less resistance than electrons, the transport mechanism is not expected to affect the overall simulation. Thus, we take ionic conductivity in the SEI to be linearly proportional to the carrier concentration, . Finally, we consider the mass balance of SEI growth driven by the electronic leakage current, where is the specific surface area of the typical SEI reaction product in contact with the electrolyte. In our simulation, it is assumed that SEI grows uniformly on the active material, and thus is assumed equal to the specific surface area of active material. Values of all tunable parameters used in this model are tabulated in Table We solve all the equations on a static equidistant onedimensional grid within the SEI layer. The of the grid is located at the base of the SEI layer on the carbon black/SEI interface, while is the moving outer boundary of the SEI (the SEI/electrolyte interface). To solve this system of equations, we take the general approach of discretizing each in space using a finite difference method to obtain a system of differential This modeling endeavor is inspired by the experimental findings outlined in Part I and undertakes an approach that uses only the level of detail that can be supported directly using the experimental data, minimizing the number of parameters. We briefly summarize some key assumptions here: Outer surface growth of SEI: One of the biggest challenges in SEI growth modeling is obtaining conclusive evidence of the location of its growth plane. Motivated by the strong voltage dependence observed experimentally, we assume that the SEI layer grows from its outer surface (i.e. electron-transport limited) and formulate our rate-limiting step hypotheses accordingly. This allows us to effectively model the potential dependence and coupling between intercalation and SEI growth. The model is area-averaged (i.e. 1-dimensional) and assumes SEI of uniform thickness to be growing on top of a single particle of carbon black, which is a simplification of the actual scenario of SEI growth in porous electrodes. Intercalative charge storage in carbon black: Carbon nanomaterials such as carbon black typically have high specific capacitance due to the high specific surface area In this work, we assume the only source of lithium ions participating in SEI growth is the electrolyte, as opposed to the intercalated lithium in the lithiated electrode. The latter source can be expected to become important under long periods of storage, where chemical SEI growth reactions may occur under open circuit conditions (affecting "calendar life"). Butler-Volmer kinetics: As in most electrochemical engineering models, we use the empirical Butler-Volmer equation to model the faradaic reaction kinetics of intercalation and SEI formation, which can be justified at low overpotentials but may over-estimate the reaction rate at high overpotentials, compared to quantum mechanical models of electron transfer, such as Marcus kinetics We assume a spatially uniform concentration profile of lithium ions in the SEI layer in this time regime, where the thickness of the layer is small. Effects due to diffusion driven concentration gradients usually occur over longer timescales than that of the system under study. Therefore, this assumption is unlikely to produce significant errors in the model predictions. However, the errors in prediction may increase at larger SEI thicknesses or evolution of sufficiently porous SEI Moderately dilute solution approximation: While we do account for concentration dependencies of the exchange current and the overpotential for both intercalation and SEI formation, we set the activity coefficients to unity for all species, as in a dilute solution. On the other hand, we assume the solution is concentrated enough (as in typical battery electrolytes) to neglect diffuse double layers and associated Frumkin corrections In Part I, we isolate the contribution of the SEI to the differential capacity, , by subtracting the differential capacity in an early cycle from the differential capacity at a later "baseline" cycle. The differential capacity in an early cycle (e.g. cycle 2) has contributions from both carbon black and SEI, while the differential capacity in the baseline cycle primarily measures carbon black. Thus, the resultant difference, , measures the voltage dependence of SEI growth within the early cycle. We use as the experimental quantity to evaluate goodness of fits with model predictions. In this section, we evaluate the second and third hypotheses described in Part I to understand the nature of the rate-limiting step of post-firstcycle SEI growth. Briefly, the second hypothesis states that directional asymmetry of SEI growth on carbon lithiation vs. delithiation could arise from the intrinsic differences between lithiation and delithiation into carbon, phenomenologically captured through deviations of from 0.5 in our model. The third hypothesis states that the SEI behaves as a MIEC, and a concentrationdependent electron conductivity is the cause of directional asymmetry in SEI growth. The outcome guides our understanding of the rate-limiting process that governs the kinetics of SEI growth. Constant current asymmetry: Figure and rapidly accelerates as the potential decreases below 0.3 V. The constant conductivity SEI model, though not in quantitative agreement with experiments, does demonstrate some degree of directional asymmetryin this case, the growth in the delithiation step is 27% of that in the lithiation step. During lithiation, as the SEI current reduces the total current available for intercalation (Figure observed experimentally that the directional asymmetry of SEI growth persists under potentiostatic conditions as well (see Figure The upper bound of is the value at which the SEI current approaches the total current. The predicts a symmetric charge transfer coefficient equal to 0.5 for a Butler-Volmer formulation We account for this diode-like behavior explicitly by considering a non-ideal MIEC model ( ), and set equal to 0.5. A parabolic dependence physically corresponds to the effect of percolation for hopping conduction of electrons across the SEI, as described earlier. The asymmetric nature of the functional form of Equation ( The simulation results in Figures The SEI, often considered an electronic insulator, may behave like a non-ideal MIEC if the concentration of inserted ions increases beyond a certain threshold to facilitate hopping conduction among the localized nearby electronic states Figure Upon reversal of the direction of the electric field in the SEI (i.e. reversal of the driving current), the outer film is depleted of lithium ions, and the concentration of ions drops instantaneously in the SEI as the effect of this depletion is felt throughout the layer (assuming fast transport of lithium ions in the SEI). This event causes the long-range connectivity of the percolating network of localized electronic states to be disrupted, leading to a large and instantaneous drop in electron conductivity (6b) per Equation ( Given the rapid change in SEI growth rate upon reversal of the sign of the current, we mention that an interfacial electron transfer effect, as proposed here, is a more plausible mechanism of directional asymmetry in SEI growth than a mechanism involving bulk transport by solid diffusion (i.e. within a carbon black particle). Although solid diffusion is also affected by the sign of current and can exhibit history dependence, solid diffusion is slow and cannot respond so quickly to current reversal. The idea of a dependence of SEI conductivity on concentration and potential is not new. Many authors have considered ion diffusion through defects in the SEI to be the rate determining step for SEI growth by performing atomistic calculations defects in the SEI. In this study, we claim that the coupling between ionic concentration and electronic conduction across the SEI is what governs the post-first-cycle growth kinetics. To the best of the authors' knowledge, this paper presents the first experimentally validated electron conduction mechanism for post-first cycle SEI growth that is coupled to the inserted ion concentration within the layer. As the SEI layer gets thicker with increasing cycle number, electron diffusion across the SEI layer may eventually become more difficult, as finite clusters of hopping sites no longer percolate across the layer. This picture for thicker SEI layers would be consistent with Peled's original theory of electron transport limited growth This modeling work is based on the experimental observations of Part I, which identifies strong dependencies of SEI growth to voltage, current magnitude, and current direction. In Part II, we develop a model of post-first-cycle SEI growth that is extensively validated across a range of low (C/100) to moderate (C/5) current rates. To explain the observed stark directional asymmetry in SEI growth between lithiation and delithiation, we develop a model that assumes a non-linear coupling of ion concentration and electron transfer. In this framework, the SEI behaves as a mixed ion-electron conductor, with the electron conductivity varying approximately as the square of lithium ion concentration in the SEI. This mechanism is consistent with hopping conduction of electrons across a percolating cluster of inserted lithium ions. We find that SEI growth is limited by electron availability in the outer reaction film. Delithiation of the electrode results in an instantaneous depletion of the lithium ion concentration in the SEI, breaking the symmetry of electron availability for SEI and leading to low growth on delithiation. We have explored how the coupling between the concentration of lithium ions and electrons in the SEI can influence the electron conductivity, the exchange current, and overpotential of the electrolyte reduction reaction. From the results in Figures Our model has seven fitted parameters that influence the electrochemical kinetics of SEI growth. We have presented one set of parameter values in Table 