We suggest a single-photon thermal detector based on the abrupt jump of the critical current of a temperature-biased tunnel Josephson junction formed by different superconductors, working in the dissipationless regime. The electrode with the lower critical temperature is used as a radiation sensing element, so it is thermally floating and is connected to an antenna/absorber. The warming up resulting from the absorption of a photon can induce a drastic measurable enhancement of the critical current of the junction. We propose a detection scheme based on a threshold mechanism for single-or multi-photon detection. This Josephson threshold detector has indeed calorimetric capabilities being able to discriminate the energy of the incident photon. So, for the realistic setup that we discuss, our detector can efficiently work as a calorimeter for photons from the mid infrared, through the optical, into the ultraviolet, specifically, for photons with frequencies in the range [30 -9 × 10 4 ] THz. In the whole range of detectable frequencies, we obtain a resolving power significantly larger than one. In order to reveal the signal, we suggest the fast measurement of the Josephson kinetic inductance. Indeed, the photon-induced change in the critical current affects the Josephson kinetic inductance of the junction, which can be non-invasively read through an LC tank circuit, inductively coupled to the junction. Finally, this readout scheme shows remarkable multiplexing capabilities. Superconducting electronics is nowadays efficiently employed for developing detectors for (single-) photon and particle calorimetry. These sensors are particularly appealing in view of their high detection efficiency, low energy threshold, and high energy resolution Low-temperature detectors provide a drastic thermal noise suppression and pave the way to quantummechanical phenomena at cryogenic temperatures Thermal detectors rely on the conversion of a temperature rise in a measurable variation of an electric signal. In * claudio.guarcello@nano.cnr.it particular, "quantum" calorimetry permits to detect single photons and measure their energy Here, we suggest a dissipationless Josephson-based quantum calorimeter based on the peculiar sharp temperature dependence of the critical current in a Josephson tunnel junction formed by different superconductors, residing at different temperatures The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the working principles of a radiation detector based on a temperature-biased asymmetric Josephson junction (JJ), looking also the influence of the thermal fluctuations. In Sec. III, we focus on the calorimeter detection modes of our device, discussing the idle state of the detector, proper figure of merits, i.e., the resolving power and frequency dynamical ranges, the time evolution of both the temperature and the critical current, and finally a readout scheme based on the measurement of the Josephson kinetic inductance, including a proposal of a multiplexing scheme. In Sec. IV, the conclusions are drawn. In this section we discuss the operating principles of a radiation detector based on the discontinuous thermal response of the critical current, I c , of an asymmetric tunnel JJ at low temperatures This peculiar behavior of I c derives from the matching of the superconducting gaps at specific temperatures. Essentially, we briefly recollect the main mechanisms discussed in detail in Ref. where T cj is the critical temperature and ∆ 0,j = 1.764k B T cj is the zero-temperature superconducting BCS gap Here, R is the normal-state resistance of the junction, e is the electron charge, F (ε, T j ) = tanh (ε/2k B T j ), and is the anomalous Green's function of the j-th superconductor FIG. In Fig. Under this conditions we neglect the heat transfer between S 1,2 and S 3 due to Andreev reflection heat mirroring effect The JTC that we are conceiving is based on the critical current steeper behavior, which stems from the matching of the superconducting gaps. This phenomenon is better illustrated in the next section. With the aim to understand the conditions at which I c abruptly jumps, we show in Fig. We observe that for r > 1 the superconducting gaps can be equal if and only if the temperature T 1 assumes a value higher than a threshold T th 1 , then for T 1 within the shaded region in Fig. ] is settled, the critical current jumps at a specific T 2 = T J 2 [see the dashed line in the inset of Fig. 2 ) = ∆ 1 (T 1 ). Therefore, T J 2 depends on the operating value of T 1 , but it can in principle assume every value in the whole range [0, T c2 ]. Following the previous discussion, it is worthwhile to choose the electrode with the lower T c as sensing element. In fact, this choice broadens the range of temperatures available as a result of a photonic energy absorption. Then, since we label the absorbing lead with S 2 , this electrode has the lower critical temperature, that is T c2 < T c1 and, consequently, r > 1. This case corresponds to a sudden increase of I c at T 2 = T J 2 We also note that by reducing the asymmetry of the junction, i.e., r → 1, the threshold temperature T th 1 decreases. This could be beneficial in order to choose an operating point for T 1 not too close to the critical temperature. On the other hand, the height of I c jump, and therefore the sensor sensitivity, is expected to decrease when r → 1, vanishing for r = 1. Conversely, by increasing the asymmetry between the gaps, that is for r 1, we are suppressing one superconducting gap with respect to the other. In these cases, T th 1 → T c1 . This implies that the range of T 1 values suitable for the detection [see the grey region in Fig. Therefore, one has to find an optimal value of the asymmetry parameter r 1 which maximizes the sensitivity without requiring an operating temperature T 1 too close to T c1 . In Ref. To allow a photon to be detected, the absorbing element has to reside at a temperature, T 0 2 , which is just below the temperature T J 2 at which an I c jump occurs. Consequently, due to a photonic event the temperature T 2 can increase enough to exceed the threshold value, inducing an abrupt increment of the critical current. However, if T 0 2 is not close enough to T J 2 , lower energy photons may not trigger an appreciable I c enhancement. Conversely, if T 0 2 is too close to T J 2 , thermal fluctuations could induce undesired critical current jumps. Therefore, we need first of all to estimate the amplitude of the temperature fluctuations in S 2 , in order to set a suitable detection threshold temperature, ∆T 2 , which is the distance between T 0 2 and T J 2 . Choosing an optimal detection threshold ∆T 2 is essential for the proper functioning of the JTC and for minimizing the dark counts rate, i.e., the probability of false positive detections. Thermodynamic fluctuations of S 2 can be estimated through the root-mean-square fluctuations in energy ( In this equation, S 2 (T 2 ) is the electronic entropy of S 2 , which is given by where N F,2 is the density of states at the Fermi energy, V 2 is the volume of S 2 , f (ε, T j ) is the Fermi distribution function, and is the smeared BCS density of states of the j-th superconducting lead. Then, we can evaluate the temperature fluctuation as The behavior of thermal fluctuations, δT 2 , in the absorbing lead S 2 , setting V 2 = 1 μm 3 , as a function of T 2 is shown in Fig. With the aim to avoid unwanted transitions and to minimize the dark counts, one needs to set an idle temperature T 0 2 which is distant more than δT 2 from the threshold value T J 2 . The idle temperature T 0 2 has to be chosen so that its difference with T J 2 [see the inset of Fig. For a detector with a sensing element volume V 2 = 1 μm 3 , we set a detection threshold equal to ∆T 2 = 2 mK, since it would be roughly 10 times more than the δT 2 values shown in Fig. In Fig. The stationary phase-dependent total thermal power flowing from S 1 to S 2 reads In the adiabatic regime, that is the case of a negligible voltage drop with respect to the relevant energy scales in the system, eV }, the terms in Eq. ( Heuristically, Eq. ( The thermal current flowing through the S 2 IN junction is For low R S2IN , the cooling finger can become the predominant thermal relaxation channel. Instead, for high R S2IN , the heat relaxed through the cooling finger competes with the heat exchanged between electrons and phonons, the latter being thermalized at T bath . The term P e-ph,2 in Eqs. ( where and ζ is the Riemann zeta function. In the heat exchange analysis we neglect any contribution from the photonic radiative channel, as discussed in Ref. Depending on the characteristic timescales of the process, the JJ can operate as a bolometer or as a calorimeter. Specifically, the detector works as a bolometer if the mean time between the arrival of incident photons is much shorter than the characteristic thermal relaxation time of the device. In the opposite regime, as the photonic arrival time exceeds the thermal relaxation time, the detector operates as a calorimeter. Therefore, a bolometer measures the total amount of radiation incident on an active area, whereas a calorimeter measures the energy of each single-photon absorption event Hereafter we propose a calorimetric detection scheme based on a threshold mechanism for single-or multiphoton detection that takes advantages of the discussed very sharp variation of the critical current. During the design stage of this detector we realized the possibility of developing a different type of detection scheme, suitable for bolometric sensing, which is still based on the same physical mechanism. It will be thus considered elsewhere. In order to evaluate the thermal evolution following the absorption of a photon in S 2 , we firstly need to determine the stationary operating temperatures in the absence of photonic excitation, T 0 1 and T 0 2 , suitable for our detection scheme. So, once we have chosen the value of the detection threshold ∆T 2 , we need to identify the stationary operating temperatures T 0 1 and T 0 2 yielding an idle state of the detector close enough to a jump in the critical current, that is the temperatures at which Here, we are labelling these temperatures with T 0 1 and T 0 2 , since in next sections we will use them as the initial values for the time-dependent analysis. Now, in order to tune the detector at a specific working point (T 0 1 , T 0 2 ), the temperature T 0 2 of the floating lead has to be obtained by numerically solving a steady-state heat balance equation for S 2 , in the presence of the gap constraint Eq. ( The selection of a specific device configuration (i.e., the values of R, R S2IN , and V 2 ) is a crucial point to best set the operation mode and the performances of the detector. We use the resistance of the cooling finger as a knob to set the operating point of the device. This means, at this stage, to properly choose the values or R and V 2 and to study how R S2IN affects the operations of the detector. In fact, in order to reduce the operative value of T 0 2 one can make the thermal contact with the normal lead more transparent, by lowering the resistance R S2IN . Reducing the temperature T 0 2 can be advantageous since it leads both to the enhancement of the amplitude of the I c jumps, as it is discussed in Ref. We observe that the higher the JJ normal-state resistance R, the lower the maximum value of the critical current, see Eq. (2). To choose the value of R, we require that the Josephson energy E J = Φ0 2π I c is much larger than the thermal energy k B T . For instance, by assuming the value R = 1 kΩ we obtain a maximum critical current of ∼ 0.2 μA, corresponding to a Josephson energy in units of k B of ∼ 5.5 K, a value well above the working temperatures that we will discuss later. Then, one can assume to keep fixed the resistance R = 1 kΩ and the volume V 2 = 1 μm 3 , and to find for each value of R S2IN the idle temperatures T 0 1 and T 0 2 . This is displayed in Fig. The thermal bath is kept at a low temperature, reducing the strength of the phononic thermalization channel and to enhance at the same time the effectiveness of the metallic cooling finger. The need for an accurate phase regulation, which is performed through the external flux Φ, is significantly relaxed, since we observed that at low values of R S2IN the idle temperatures are only slightly affected by a modifications in φ (not shown). At low R S2IN 's, T 0 1 and T 0 2 tend to the threshold value T th 1 and the bath temperature, respectively [see Fig. 1 kΩ, both temperatures reach a plateau, since this relaxation channel is too weak and does not affect the idle state of the device. Therefore, each value of R S2IN corresponds to specific operating temperatures (T 0 1 , T 0 2 ). This means that a given R S2IN results in a specific critical current profile, I c (T 0 1 , T 2 ), as it is shown in Fig. In fact, we notice that the jump in the I c profile tends to become smoother at low R S2IN . In this case, the jump is located at low temperatures, roughly when the temperature T J 2 is less than T 2 0.4 T c . At these temperatures, the superconducting gap is roughly flat [see Fig. In summary, the selection of R S2IN makes it possible to engineer both the position and the sharpness of the jump in the critical current profile. A small value of R S2IN ensures a low working temperature, and therefore a larger dynamical range of the detector, but it corresponds to a smooth I c variation at the jump. Conversely, for the threshold calorimetric mechanism that we are suggesting, it is more convenient to have a sharp I c transition. Nonetheless, by increasing further R S2IN the height of the I c jump tends to reduce. Then, we settle the value R S2IN = 10 Ω which guarantees a steep and sufficiently high I c jump. This resistance gives an idle temperature T 0 2 = 0.258 K. Finally, we verify that the temperatures T 0 1 and T 0 2 , obtained by solving Eqs. ( In the following, we assume that the system is always in a quasi-equilibrium state and that all the photon energy is transformed into internal energy of the electron. This a simplified situation since the dynamics of the superconducting lead is much more complicated. However, as we will discuss in Sec. III D, for the time scale and the parameters used, these are good approximations. So, we assume in a first approximation the full conversion of the photon energy to internal energy of electrons, i.e., we neglect any energy losses during the initial thermalization process following a photonic event. Indeed, we can thermodynamically estimate, in a very simple and direct manner, the temperature rise, T peak , of the absorber. Specifically, T peak can be computed by equating the integrated internal energy of S 2 with the photon energy, that is We point out that in Sec. III D we will calculate the full thermal evolution following a photon absorption including all heat exchange terms, accounting for all losses and heating processes in S 2 . In the low temperature limit, T T c , we can give an analytic expression of T peak . In fact, in this temperature regime the entropy of a BCS superconductor behaves exponentially with the temperature as from which the heat capacity at the leading order reads By inserting Eq. ( where erf(x) is the error function, one finds with ε = √ 2πN F,2 ∆ 2 0,2 . In the low temperature regime, i.e., T 0 2 T c2 , where erf ∆0,2 k B T 0 2 → 1, we can determine from Eq. ( Fig. The Eq. ( The preliminary analysis performed here through Eq. ( Finally, we observe that a photon can be absorbed if its energy is hν 2∆ 2 (T 2 ). For T c2 = 0.8 K, we obtain ν 50 GHz at T 2 = 0.258 K. To estimate the performance of a calorimeter a relevant figure of merit is the resolving power, which is calculated in the idle state and represents the energy sensitivity for the case of low-energy photons absorption. The resolving power reads where T 2 is the steady temperature of the absorber and ∆E is the intrinsic energy resolution of full width at half maximum for a calorimeter, determined by Jonhson-Nyquist thermodynamics fluctuations in energy The temperature dependence of the resolving power at a few values of the photon frequency is displayed in Fig. Finally, we note that the preliminary evaluations developed in these sections are performed by omitting both the phononic and the S 2 IN thermal relaxation channels, that will be instead considered in the next section, where we deal with the full thermal dynamics of the device. In principle, these terms could modify the dynamical ranges of the calorimeter, but as we will see the estimate given before are still valid. In this section we study the time evolution of the electronic temperature of the electrode S 2 , when a photon is absorbed. The results presented hereafter are obtained assuming that the system is always in quasi-equilibrium. This allows us to clearly identify the electronic temperatures of S 2 and, at the same time, to describe the time evolution of T 2 , which is governed by the equation This equation includes all the incoming and outgoing thermal powers in S 2 . We are confident that the predictions of previous equation well represent the detector response on a timescale longer than the intrinsic energy equilibration time of the superconductor. Indeed, in order to define a proper unique temperature for the floating lead through Eq. ( The dynamical timescale described by Eq. ( , where G and K j indicate the electron-phonon and electron thermal conductances of the JJ, respectively. The full expressions of the thermal conductances are shown in Appendix A. In our case, at the idle temperature T 0 2 = 0.258 K and for the device parameters used previously, one obtains τ th ∼ 26 ns. We note that τ th underestimates the effective time the system takes to restore the initial temperature after a photon absorption. In fact, when we will discuss the time response of the system to two distinct photonic events, we will observe that the system returns back to the idle state in approximatively 0.1 -0.2 μs, that is in a time definitively longer than the τ values estimated before. Interestingly, we observe that at low values of the resistance of the junction between S 2 and N, the thermalization process is mainly ruled by this thermal relaxation channel, so that τ th strongly depends on the resistance R S2IN , since K S2IN ∝ R S2IN -1 . So, in principle, our detector can potentially react in a very short time depending on the value of R S2IN . Alternatively, we could adjust the value of this resistance, in order to make longer the thermal response time, so to better satisfy the required timescale separation. We can also calculate the typical length over which a system can be considered homogeneous with a thermal electronic distribution, that is the inelastic scattering length, in = √ Dτ , where D = σ N /(e 2 N F ) is the diffusion constant and σ N is the electrical conductivity in the normal state. From the values of τ estimated previously, we obtain Ta in ∼ 6 μm, In in ∼ 5 μm, and Pb in ∼ 1.6 μm. Since in our case this characteristic length is larger the lateral dimension of the floating lead (∼ 1 μm) we can consider S 2 as thermally homogeneous. Given these estimations, since the quantity τ -1 represents a sort of minimal bandwidth, we would expect that the analysis is valid for an electrical bandwidth between 0.1 -1 GHz, which well fits the requirements of the proposed detection methods based on the kinetic inductance readout (see later). We model the photon-induced energy diffusion in the superconductor by a Gaussian envelope centered in t 0 with standard deviation (in time) σ, reading as follow We fix the width σ = 2 ns of the Gaussian envelope of the photonic energy diffusion. Since σ τ th , this choice permits to well mimic the short-time behavior of the detector, making also the best from our quasi-equilibrium approach. At the same time, if σ is "too large", thermal losses can play a role even during the initial thermalization process, making the temperature initially reached by S 2 lower than the estimate one obtained previously through Eq. In Fig. Interestingly, we observe also that the higher the photon energy, the higher T 2,max and therefore the longer the time that the system takes to approach its idle state, that is the longer the dead time τ d [see Figs. Finally, according to the nonlinear behavior of τ d , we can define another adimensional figure of merit of our calorimeter, namely, the logarithmic derivative α d = dν . This quantity is larger at the low frequencies, but it tends to drastically reduces in the UV part of the frequency spectrum. This means that the capability of the device to discern the photon frequency by measuring the dead time is higher in the low part of the detection frequency range [see Fig. From the dead time shown in Fig. Inasmuch as the dead time is proportional to the exponential of the energy absorbed, in the case of monochromatic radiation our device can show unique photonnumber-resolving detection capabilities. Finally, we observe that one could in principle include thermodynamic fluctuations, estimated through Eq. ( Detection of photonic events can be done by reading the Josephson kinetic inductance, L φ , of the junction. In fact, the behavior of I c reflects on the kinetic inductance according to as shown in Fig. In this scheme, a rf-SQUID is inductively coupled to a resonator, with a specific characteristic frequency. The change in the kinetic inductance of the SQUID affects the frequency response of each resonator. Then, all the resonators are coupled to a common feedline towards a high-bandwidth cryogenic HEMT amplifier A schematic representation showing just three multiplexing channels is depicted in Fig. In summary, we propose a threshold calorimeter based on the peculiar behavior of the critical current, I c , of a temperature-biased tunnel Josephson junction made by different superconductors. In fact, the step-like variation with the temperature of I c , already shown in Ref. The conceived device is inherently energy resolving, and can be also engineered to determine the photon number in the case of a monochromatic source of light. In order to prevent an unreliable absorber temperature readout and minimize dark counts, we investigated the thermodynamics fluctuations in the superconductor. This analysis allows us to settle the idle temperatures of the device. Then, we discussed the essential figure of merit of this type of detector, i.e., the resolving power, in order to find the optimal detection design. With our choice of realistic parameters for the setup investigated, the proposed sensor can efficiently detect photons of frequencies ν ∈ [30 -9 × 10 4 ] THz. Our sensor is also able to determine the photon frequency by measuring the dead time of the detector. Interestingly, we observe that both the capability to discriminate the photon frequency through the dead time and the detection rate of the sensor are stronger at low frequencies. We propose a non-invasive readout scheme based on the modification of the Josephson kinetic inductance caused by a photon-induced temperature enhancement. This quantity can be dispersively read via a LC resonator inductively coupled to the detector. This readout scheme is suitable for a multiplexing configuration. We note that our proposal evinces some similarities with other single-photon detectors based on the photoninduced I c changes in a proximized nanowire Finally, we observe that the characteristic timescales of the system depend on the choice of the superconductor used as absorbing element and on the characteristics of the metallic cooling finger. Moreover, the use of superconductors with higher T c 's would permit higher working temperatures, resulting in a further reduction of both the thermal response 