We report first-principles calculations that reveal the atomic forms, stability, and energy levels of carbon-related defects in SiC (0001)/SiO2 systems. We clarify the stable position (SiC side, SiO2 side, or just at the SiC/SiO2 interface) of defects depending on the oxidation environment. Under an O-rich condition, the di-carbon antisite ((C2)Si) in the SiC side is stable and critical for n-channel MOSFETs, whereas the di-carbon defect (Si-C-C-Si) at the interface becomes critical under an O-poor condition. Our results suggest that the oxidation of SiC under a hightemperature O-poor condition is favorable in reducing the defects, in consistent with recent experimental reports. Silicon carbide (SiC) has attracted increasing attention as a suitable material for next-generation power devices, owing to its superior physical properties (e.g., wide bandgap, high critical electric field, and high thermal conductivity). In this report, we provide systematic first-principles calculations that reveal the possible atomic forms of carbon-related defects in the SiC side, SiO2 side, and just at the SiC/SiO2 interface. We compare the formation energies of the defects under different chemical potential conditions to discuss the defect stability depending on the oxidation environment. We also calculate the localized levels induced by the defects for those which are stable. All of the calculations in this study were performed on the basis of density functional theory (DFT) We used a 128-atom 4H-SiC supercell (a 4×4×1 supercell), a 72-atom α-quartz-SiO2 supercell, and a 128-atom 4H-SiC surface slab as basic structures to investigate the carbon defects in SiC, SiO2, and just at their interface, respectively (see supplementary data in detail). We considered 114 patterns of initial structures (SiC-side: 23 patterns, SiO2-side: 12 patterns, SiC (0001)/SiO2 interface: 79 patterns) to investigate a variety of mono-and di-carbon defects, which is also explained in detail in the supplementary data. The formation energy, EF, of defects was calculated by where ED and E0 are the total energy of the simulation cell with and without the defect, respectively. Ni and μi are number of the removed (ni < 0) or added (ni > 0) i-type atom and its chemical potential, respectively. We supposed four extreme situations during the oxidation of SiC, where the chemical potentials of the atomic species were calculated as Here, E(Si), E(CO2), E(SiO2), E(O2), and E(SiC) are the total energies of crystal silicon (Si), a carbon dioxide (CO2) molecule, α-quartz SiO2, an oxygen (O2) molecule, and 4H-SiC per formula unit, respectively. We determined the relationships between the chemical potentials (Eqs. (2)-( irrespective of the condition (Eq. ( When looking at the temperature dependences, CO and CO2 molecules become more stable compared to the carbon defects at higher temperatures, suggesting that oxidation at higher temperatures is also favorable. In fact, a recent experimental study proved that high-temperature oxidation at 1450 ○ C (~ 1720 K) combined with rapid cooling reduces the defects at a SiC (0001)/SiO2 interface. Figure (about E C -0.1 eV for h-site and E C -0.4 eV for k-site defect: Fig. eV. In such a case, the Si 3 -C (#10) defect may create a defect level inside the bandgap near E V and hinder electrical characteristics of p-channel MOSFETs. However, since the Si3-C (#10) defect owns a C-dangling bond, the defect level would be relatively easily passivated by hydrogen annealing. In summary, we investigated the possible atomic forms of carbon-related defects in SiC side, SiO2 side, and just at the SiC (0001)/SiO2 interface. Our results indicate that oxidation of SiC under an O-rich condition, especially at low temperatures, results in the creation of critical defects both for n-and p-channel MOSFETs. For instance, the di-carbon antisite in the SiC side ((C2)Si (#2)) is stable under the O-rich condition and creates a defect level near EC, being crucial for n-channel MOSFETs. As critical defects for p-channel MOSFETs, many types of interface carbon-dimer defects, such as Si-CO-CO2 (#1), Si-CO-CO-Si (#4), and Si-(CO)-CO2 (#5), are stable under the O-rich condition and they create defect levels relatively close to EV. Thus, in the viewpoint of static energetics, we suggest the oxidation of SiC at a high-temperature O-poor condition in order to reduce the carbon defects. Even at such a condition, however, a certain number of carbon-dimer defects (Si-C-C-Si, #6) may remain just at the interface and create defect levels very near EC. realizing high-performance nchannel MOSFETs, this defect should be somehow further reduced. (Supplementary Data) Structure and energetics of carbon-related defects in SiC (0001)/SiO2 systems revealed by firstprinciples calculations: Defects in SiC, SiO2, and just at their interface Takuma Kobayashi (i) SiC-side defects, (ii) SiO2-side defects, and (iii) defects just at a SiC/SiO2 interface. (i) SiC-side defects In investigating the carbon defects in the SiC side, we prepared a 128-atom 4H-SiC supercell (a 4×4×1 supercell) as shown in Fig. 