In this paper we compare the composition fluctuations and interaction potentials of a good metallic glass former, Cu 50 Zr 50 , and a poor glass former, Ni 50 Al 50 . The Bhatia-Thornton correlations functions are calculated. Inspired by the observation of chemical ordering at the NiAl surface, we derive a new property, , corresponding to linear susceptibility of concentration to a perturbation in density. We present a direct comparison of the potentials for the two model alloys, using a 2 nd order density expansion, establish that the one body energy plays a crucial role in stabilizing the crystal relative to the liquid in both alloys but that the three body contribution to the heat of fusion is significantly larger in NiAl that CuZr. Liquid CuZr -4.716 -4. The rate of crystallization establishes the lifetime of the metastable supercooled liquid and the minimum cooling rate necessary to form a glass. Understanding the factors that determine this rate has been a subject of active research for over 60 years Since the initial suggestion along these lines by Frank in 1952 In a liquid alloy, crystallization typically requires chemical ordering alongside geometrical ordering. Desré and coworkers Recently In this paper, we address the question -can the composition fluctuations observed in the supercooled liquid be correlated with the observed glass forming ability using simulations of Ni 50 Al 50 and Cu 50 Zr 50 ? The model and algorithm details are provided in the following Section. In Section 3, we present data for the partial pair correlation functions and the analogous Bhatia-Thornton correlation functions. In Section 4 we look at the linear response of the composition to spatially varying perturbations. In Section 5 with present a detailed examination of the problem of directly comparing the many body potentials for two different alloys In this paper we have modelled the alloys using many bodied Embedded Atom Model (EAM) potentials of CuZr due to Mendelev et al The partial pair radial distribution functions represent the standard characterization of structure in a liquid mixture. These functions for the supercooled CuZr and NiAl are plotted in Fig. To put these observations regarding the liquid structure into some sort of context, it is useful to compare the distribution of atomic separations in the liquid and crystal state. In Fig. . All three of these correlations are evident in the distributions plotted in Fig. If the nature of compositional ordering distinguishes the two alloys, then an alternative representation of correlations that specifically addresses composition fluctuations might be useful. Such an alternative to the particle distribution functions was proposed by Bhatia and Thornton fluctuations. Here c = c 1 , the number concentration of species 1. The measurement of Bhatia-Thornton (BT) structure factors using neutron scattering has been reviewed by Fischer et al Previously, Kaban et al Mixture: Linear Response Theory. Along with information about the distribution of length scales in a liquid, the pair correlation functions also express the susceptibility, in the linear response limit, of the density with respect to an applied field. This perspective suggests a new approach to connecting liquid structure and crystallization kinetics. Previously First, we should note the rigorous connection between the Bhatia-Thornton structure factors and thermodynamic properties of the binary mixture where G is the Gibbs free energy per particle, κ T is the isothermal compressibility, n o is the atomic number density and the dilation factor where υ 1 and ν 2 are the particle molar volumes per particle of the two species. A direct perturbation would be to apply a field u(r) and measure the response in terms of the density . The identity of the susceptibilities G αβ (r 1 ,r 2 ) is most simply expressed in the Fourier transformed versions of Eq. 7-10, i.e. where The essential result of this analysis is to establish that the structure factors can be regarded as wavevector dependent susceptibilities of the liquids, expressing the magnitude of the concentration or density variation arising from the application of the appropriate spatially varying field. In the case of an interface, it is the response of the concentration to a density variation δn(r) rather than an external field u n (r) that we are interested in. A central tenant of density functional theory is that there is a one-to-one relationship between the potential and the density change The interesting feature of the plotted response function is the vanishing of ) ( ˆq R cn for the CuZr mixture at a wavevector slightly larger than that associated with crystal orderingi.e. over the range of q associated with crystal order and so it is not clear how significant the vanishing of the response function is. Any difference in crystallization kinetics between two simulated alloys must ultimately originate in the differences in their interaction potentials. When the potentials are of the many-bodied typesuch as the Finnis-Sinclair potential where F(ρ i ) is the many-bodied contribution to the potential energy arising from electron delocalization and is a function of the local density ρ i about particle i given by where w(r) is a monotonically decaying function, explicitly defined as part of the EAM potential, that determines the extent of the neighbour environment. Note that the magnitude of i  will depend on the amplitude and extent of the function w(r). As the local density is used only as input to the embedding field F(ρ i ), the actual magnitude of i  will be accommodated within the parameters of F. This means that the absolute magnitude of i  in EAM potentials is arbitrary, a point that shall need to be kept in mind when comparing the results for different alloys. The problem with a potential energy of the form expressed in Eq. 17 is that it is invariant to the following linear transformation The continuous family of potentials    , F , parameterised by λ, that can be generated by the transformation in Eq. 19 all result in exactly the same energy for any given configuration. The transformation has simply mixed the 2-body and many-body components (as described by the F(ρ i )) such that the changes cancel each other. This means that some differences between the potentials for two different mixtures do not correspond to any actual physical difference at all and so are irrelevant in terms of differentiating the behaviour of the two alloys. To properly compare the interactions of different alloys, therefore, we must first find a representation of the potential energy that is independent of the transformation of Eq. 19. Just such a unique representation of the particle interactions can be obtained through an approximation due to Foiles We shall focus here on binary mixtures. The embedding field term F(ρ α ) for each of the metals is plotted in Fig. where the 2-body interactions are and where In Fig. Based on these 2-body interactions alone, we would expect that the B2 crystal structure would be significantly destabilized in the case of CuZr since this crystal typically requires an d SL length that is ≈ 0.86 d LL , where d SL and d LL are the distances between small-large and large-large nearest neighbours, respectively. Since the 3-body contributions in CuZr are all repulsive in character, the absence of significant attraction in the CuZr 2-body interactions implies that the cohesion of this alloy rests on the embedding field contribution given by The reasoning of the preceding paragraph is based on the dominance of 2-body interactions as expressed in the pairwise additive models. The applicability of this reasoning must be questioned in the case of metallic liquids. To understand how the interaction energy differs between the two alloys, we need to assess the contributions of the one body and three body terms, as well as the pairwise contribution, to the potential energy. In Table The key result of Table The conclusions of this paper are as follows. i) The chemical ordering in the liquid NiAl is consistent with that induced by the crystal structure (with its characteristic dominance by the larger particle length scale) while the weaker chemical ordering in CuZr shows less evidence of this connection. ii) The BT correlations functions do not, in the context of these two model alloys, provide any clear benefit over the partial correlation functions in differentiating the structure in the two alloys. iii) We have derived a new property, ) ( ˆq R cn , the wave-vector dependent susceptibility of the composition to density fluctuations, and shown that it vanishes in the CuZr alloy at wavelengths associated with crystal ordering, while the analogous susceptibility in NiAl does not. The significance of this result is qualified by the large variation of ) ( ˆq R cn in the range of interest. iv) We have presented a direct comparison of the potentials for the two model alloys, using a 2 nd order density expansion, to arrive at a unique decomposition of the interactions in each system into one, two and three body contributions. We established that the one body energy plays a crucial role in stabilizing the crystal relative to the liquid in both alloys but that, in the case of the NiAl alloy, the three body contribution to the heat of fusion is also substantial, considerably larger than the analogous contribution in CuZr. Looking through these results we acknowledge that none of them can provide a clear rationale for the striking difference in crystallization kinetics of these two alloys. The three body contributions to the potential energy provide some clear difference between the two alloys but none that point directly to a difference in glass forming ability. While it is perilous to draw strong conclusions from null outcomes, this study lends some support to the suggestion that the quest for an explanation of crystallization kinetics based solely on liquid properties may be futile. We have already established 