Photon recycling is required for a solar cell to achieve an open-circuit voltage (VOC) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) approaching the Shockley-Queisser theoretical limit. In metal halide perovskite solar cells, the achievable performance gains from photon recycling remain uncertain due to high variability in perovskite material quality and the non-radiative recombination rate (k1). In this work, we study state-of-the-art Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 films and analyze the impact of varying non-radiative recombination rates on photon recycling and device performance. Importantly, we predict the impact of photon recycling at the maximum power point (MPP), demonstrating an absolute PCE increase of up to 2.0% in the radiative limit, primarily due to a 77 mV increase in VMPP. Even with finite non-radiative recombination, benefits from photon recycling can be achieved when non-radiative lifetimes and external LED electroluminescence efficiencies measured at opencircuit, Q e LED (V OC ), exceed 2 μs and 10%, respectively. This analysis clarifies the opportunity to fully exploit photon recycling to push the real-world performance of perovskite solar cells toward theoretical limits. Improving solar cell power conversion efficiency (PCE) requires both optimization of device architectures and an understanding of fundamental photophysics. For example, GaAs cell efficiencies increased rapidly from 25.1% to 28.8% through photon management and efficient light extraction Relatively low PLQEs have thus far limited the extent of photon recycling observed in perovskite thin films and single crystals Passivated perovskite thin films with record-low non-radiative recombination rates and defect densities have achieved internal PLQEs exceeding 90% Here we perform a theoretical analysis of the impact of photon recycling in state-of-theart Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 (triple-cation) films at maximum-power-point with varying first-order non-radiative recombination rates (k1) and external emission efficiencies. To quantify the effect of photon recycling on device performance, current-voltage (J-V) curves were simulated using a detailed balance model and experimentally determined absorption coefficient and refractive index data for Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 (S2) We first perform a detailed-balance calculation in the radiative limit (i.e., no non-radiative recombination) by equating the generation current with the recombination and extraction currents. The total current (J ,-,./ ) as a function of voltage (V) is then defined as follows: where J 23 is the short-circuit current density and J 5 6.7,9:, is the radiative saturation current where q is the fundamental charge, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the cell temperature, a(E) is the absorptivity, ∅ @AB (E) is the AM1.5 spectral photon flux, and ∅ LL (E) is the blackbody spectral photon flux all as a function of energy. Importantly, and as discussed in depth previously where n S (E) is the index of refraction and α(E) is the absorption coefficient. As a proof of concept, we use Equations 3 and 4 to calculate the internal and external second-order radiative recombination rate constants for a triple-cation film with an intrinsic carrier density of ni = 2.3×10 5 cm -3 : k2 int = 2×10 -10 cm 3 s -1 and k2 ext = 1×10 -11 cm 3 s -1 , respectively, which agree well with experimental reports considering photon recycling effects In order to make our calculations relevant for real-world perovskite devices exhibiting disorder and band-tailing, we experimentally determined the energy-dependent absorption coefficient and refractive index using photothermal deflection spectroscopy (PDS) and ellipsometry. Figure Figure Table One highlight of this analysis is that the maximum VOC achievable without photon recycling is only 1.22 V for both the triple cation and CH3NH3PbI3 films (SI) -a voltage deficit of 0.38 V for each formulation. Our results suggest that any perovskite device (bandgap ~ 1.6 eV) with VOC > 1.22 V and VMPP > 1.12 V benefits from photon recycling Theoretical photovoltaic performance limits are useful for setting efficiency targets, but most absorber layers perform far from the radiative limit due to non-radiative losses. Perovskites are no exception -typical films exhibit PLQEs of <15% at 1-sun equivalent generation, with firstorder non-radiative recombination rates ranging from k1 ~ 10 6 -10 9 s -1 , depending on chemical composition and processing methods To adapt our model to non-ideal scenarios, we modify the saturation current density (Eq. 3 and Eq. 4) to account for non-radiative Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) and Auger recombination, as previously reported by Pazos-Outón et al. (Eq. 5) where n [ is the intrinsic carrier density, d is the film thickness, and k1 and k3 are the first-order SRH and third-order Auger recombination rate constants, respectively. Figure Figure To better understand the recombination processes governing PV device behavior with and without photon recycling, we break down the J-V curve from Figure Figures The radiative recombination fraction with photon recycling in Figure Here, the escape probability (Pesc) can be defined as the ratio of the external to the internal radiative saturation current (Eq. 11) bcd is a function of the injection current, and thus it is necessary to denote both the injection current and corresponding voltage at which the current is achieved for a given Q 9 bcd . Due to the reciprocity relations that link optical output to electrical input, Q 9 bcd values are often measured at an injection current equivalent to the photocurrent varying k1 in Equation increases with decreasing k1, resulting in voltage enhancements at open-circuit and MPP. We report a photon recycling threshold of Q 9 bcd (V •3 ) > ~0.3% and significant performance improvements for Q 9 bcd (V •3 ) = 10%, yielding ∆VOC PR = 36 mV and ∆VMPP PR = 9 mV (Figure Recently, Liu et al. reported a Q 9 bcd (V •3 ) of 7.5±2.5% for CH3NH3PbI3 devices achieving a VOC of 1.26 V. This experimental VOC is higher than the maximum achievable theoretical VOC in the radiative limit without photon recycling, indicating real-world performance enhancements due to photon recycling QeLED at open-circuit at lower carrier densities. These results appear to counteract one another, as both a high steadystate carrier density and Q 9 bcd (V •3 ) are desired. This observation raises the question as to whether solely increasing the escape probability can enhance device performance and, in particular, open-circuit voltage Here, it appears that increasing Q 9 bcd (V •3 ) through enhancing the escape probability should allow V •3 f.: to approach V •3 6.7 -however, the implicit dependence of the radiative component (V •3 6.7 ) on Pesc is often overlooked. This dependence becomes clear if we equate J 5 6.7,9:, with the product of J 5 6.7,NO, and Pesc (Eq. [13] V •3 To better understand the competition between V •3 6.7 and Q 9 bcd (V •3 ) on V •3 f.: , Figures Ultimately, V •3 f.: is dominated by the radiative dependence on Pesc, so V •3 f.: decreases monotonically with increasing Pesc at a constant k1 value (Fig. With recycling, photons waveguided within the film can be re-absorbed and re-emitted in the escape cone, allowing Q 9 bcd (V •3 ) to approach the intrinsic limit while maintaining a high steady-state carrier density. If Q 9 bcd (V •3 ) is enhanced only by increasing Pesc, the steady-state carrier density subsequently decreases, resulting in a lower VOC. For triple cation films, enhancements in VOC and VMPP are observed for k1 <2×10 6 s -1 (τ1 > 500 ns) and k1 <7×10 5 s -1 ( τ1 > 1430 ns), respectively, while, for k1 <1×10 4 s -1 ( τ1 > 100 μs), further performance improvements become negligible. Our analysis identifies a target non-radiative recombination rate for perovskite films of k1 = 1×10 4 s -1 . Below this threshold, the steady-state carrier density plateaus at 4× the density without photon recycling. In theory, a perovskite film reaching this lower bound of k1 = 1×10 4 s -1 (Pesc = 4.7%) can achieve a 74 mV increase in VOC, 73 mV improvement in VMPP, 0.3% absolute increase in fill factor, and 1.79% increase in PCE -due solely to photon recycling. We note that the model used to simulate J-V curves in this study represents an ideal case and sets an upper limit for the target non-radiative recombination rate constants. For example, perovskite material quality will likely need to be even better than these targets, as charge transport layers in devices introduce new pathways for interfacial recombination. Passivation methods and surface modifiers that reduce the number of defects at the interfaces and lead to favorable band alignment will be critical in minimizing non-radiative loss to fully harness photon recycling The sample is secured using a custom holder in a standard 10 mm quartz cuvette. Perfluorohexane (Acros Organics Fluorinert FC-72) filtered with 0.02 μm PTFE is used as a deflection medium. The probe beam consists of a 658 nm, 40 mW temperature-controlled laser diode, an anamorphic prism pair, spatial filter, and iris to circularize the beam and isolate the fundamental mode; a bandpass filter to eliminate scattered light; and a quadrant detector with built-in transimpedance amplifier. A DAQ is used to drive the chopper and acquire the quad detector signal. AC lock-in detection is performed using custom LabView software with a low-pass filter cutoff frequency of 0.5 Hz. The entire PDS system is assembled on an optical table to minimize vibrations and enclosed in a box to mitigate stray light and air flow. Spectroscopic ellipsometry was performed using a variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometer (Woollam) at 65°, 70°, and 75° angles of incidence. Ellipsometry data were fitted to obtain film optical constants and thicknesses used in PDS data analysis. Reflection spectrophotometry was performed with light incident from the film side using an Agilent Cary 5000 dual-beam UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer. Specular reflectance was collected at an incident angle of 8°. A 3 mm round aperture was used for all measurements. Acquired PDS data for the perovskite samples was normalized with respect to the pump power spectrum. The data was then re-normalized to one at a highly absorbing wavelength (400 nm) and divided by the PDS spectrum of a black reference sample to obtain a relative absorptance spectrum. Absolute absorptance was then obtained by scaling the data by (1-R), where R is the reflectivity of the perovskite sample at a highly absorbing wavelength obtained from spectrophotometry measurements. To determine the absorption coefficient from the absolute absorptance spectrum, we followed the procedure developed by Ritter and Weisser utilizing thicknesses and optical constants for fused silica and the perovskite absorber layer determined from ellipsometry The absorption coefficient spectrum determined from ellipsometry was used as the basis data set. Since PDS measurements provide increased sensitivity by multiple orders of magnitude, the absorption coefficient spectrum obtained from PDS measurements was used for the band edge. The PDS data was shifted by 20 meV to match with the absorption coefficient spectrum from ellipsometry. The Urbach expression α = α # exp( ), where α is the absorption coefficient, α # is an absorption coefficient scaling factor, E is the photon energy, E # is an energy offset and E , is the Urbach energy was fitted to the band edge to extrapolate the absorption coefficient spectrum beyond the noise floor of the PDS measurements. We obtained a fitted value of E , = 15 meV, consistent with previous reports for other perovskite absorber materials Jtotal, JSC, and the radiative saturation current (internal and external) are calculated assuming angle independence of irradiation, optical constants, and absorption. Furthermore, when calculating Jsc for these simulations, we assume perfect incoupling due to the low short-circuit current deficit between theoretical and experimental reports (Jsc theoretical = 25.8 mA cm -2 and Jsc experimental = 24.5 mA cm -2 The expression for the enhancement in VOC solely due to photon recycling is as derived by Abebe The internal photon population corresponds to the addition of incident photons and the photons generated by radiative recombination that are waveguided within the film. This can be expressed in terms of the short circuit current and saturation currents which, when normalized with respect to the short circuit current, provide an equivalent number of internal suns (Eq. 3). [ 