I study theoretically quadrupolar topological insulators under applied static electric field rotated along the crystal axis. I demonstrate, that the energy spectrum of this structure is a Wannier-Stark ladder that is quantized and directly distinguishes between the topological phase, possessing localized corner states, and the trivial phase, lacking the corner states. These results may find applications in the characterization of rapidly emerging higher-order topological phases of light and matter. Introduction. Berry phase and Chern numbers are now well established concepts to characterize the excitations in crystalline solids Recently, a quadrupolar two-dimensional (2D) topological phase has been put forward Here, I put forward a procedure for bulk spectroscopy of topological features of the quadrupolar phase based on the application of a constant electric field F to the structure. The energy spectrum of the general onedimensional biased periodic structure is a Wannier-Stark ladder of discrete levels Quadrupolar phase in the rotated electric field. The structure under consideration is schematically illustrated in Fig. where k is the Bloch wave vector and the basis corresponds to the atoms in the unit cell ordered as indicated in Fig. The goal of this work is to distinguish between the topological and trivial phases from the bulk, rather than edge, spectral features by applying the external electric field F . The main idea is sketched in Fig. Stark ladders for F y = 0. I start by considering the structure with the electric field applied along the x direction and the periodic boundary conditions with the wave vector k y along y. The energy spectra in the topological and trivial phases are shown in Fig. where n = 0, ±1 . . ., σ = ±1 distinguishes the upper and lower bands and q = 1 + γ cos k y /(2λ). These equations can be rigorously obtained as E nσ = F x (n + c ± ), where c ± = ln(λ ± )/2πi and λ are the eigenvalues of the 2 × 2 Wilson loop operator Landau-Zener effect. Equations ( shown by the red lines in Fig. Finally, in Fig. To summarize, I have introduced the concept of bulk spectroscopy of topological invariants in the quadrupolar insulators by relating the quantized phases of nested Wilson loops to the spectra of Wannier-Stark ladders. The easiest experimental implementation of the current scheme might be provided by topoelectric circuits I acknowledge the financial support by the Foundation for Advancement of Theoretical Physics and Mathematics "Basis" and the Russian Foundation for Basic Research Grants No. 