Temperature rise (∆T ) associated with shear-banding of metallic glasses is of great importance for their performance. However, experimental measurement of ∆T is difficult due to temporal and spatial localization of shear bands and, as a result, our understanding of the mechanism of ∆T is limited. Here, based on molecular dynamics simulations we observe a spectrum of ∆T , which depends on both sample size and strain rate, in the shear bands of CuZr metallic glass under tension. More importantly, we find that the maximum sliding velocity of the shear bands correlates linearly with the corresponding ∆T , ranging from ∼25 K up to near the melting point for the samples studied. Taking heat diffusion into account, we expect ∆T to be lower than 25 K for the lower end of sliding velocity. At high temperature, shear band bifurcation and/or multiplication can occur as a negative feedback mechanism that prevents temperature rising well above the melting point. Shear-banding is a form of highly localized plastic deformation widely found in polymers, granular suspensions, and even crystalline metals Intuitively, one would expect higher temperature rise in samples of larger size and at larger strain rates While the above studies confirm the rise in temperature associated with shear-banding, direct and accurate measurements of ∆T in a shear band is nearly impossible because it occurs within the bulk of the material and is only accessible for post-mortem analysis As can be seen, the measurement of temperature within shear bands is intrinsically difficult, and our understanding of temperature rise is limited. On the other hand, atomistic simulations First, a bulk rectangular simulation cell containing 2592 Cu and 2592 Zr atoms, modelled by the embedded atom method (EAM) potential proposed for CuZr Unless otherwise specified, for all temperature calculations in this study, we refer to a group of atoms in the center of the shear band that initially form a parallelepipedshaped zone with the edges along the loading axis being 3 nm. Although this means a relatively wider zone is used for ∆T computation in a smaller sample, we note this choice does not qualitatively alter our conclusions in this work. We calculated the temperature of zones of interest TABLE II. Contributions to temperature of atomic velocity components along the shear band direction (T1), normal to the shear band but parallel to sample plane (T2), and normal to sample plane (T3) . Each contribution is obtained from the corresponding kinetic energy component averaged over atoms and divided by 1.5k b . Three parallelepiped-shaped zones with various distances, d, to the shear band center are examined for two samples at ε=0.08. It can be seen that the translational effect, or the difference between T1 and the average of T2 and T3, is small within a shear band. using where E k is the average kinetic energy of the atoms in the zones and k b is the Boltzmann constant. In this formula, the portion of kinetic energy from translational movement of atoms along the shear-banding direction should be factored out since this inertial collective movement does not contribute to temperature rise. We noted that at the center of a shear band the collective translational velocity is nearly zero due to the opposite movements of either side of the band, although the sliding velocity, i.e., the relative velocities of neighboring atom layers, can be high. As shown in Table We start by examining the shear banding process associated with temperature rise using a 1×5×5 sample as an example. For this sample, a mature shear band with thickness of ∼6 nm is formed at an engineering strain of ε ≈ 0.08, as shown in the inset of Fig. Since ∆T correlates with the sliding velocity of shear band, strain rate is expected to directly affect ∆T . As can be seen from Fig. From an energetic perspective, ∆T results from the elastic energy released during the process of shear band formation. As shown in Fig. Using a constant strain rate of 10 8 /s, we computed ∆T as a function of sample size. For samples up to 1×10×10, the measured ∆T values are less than ∼200 K, comparable to previous simulation results For the samples studied we found that shear band bifurcation is less likely for samples with n z ≤20, likely for 40≤n z ≤60, and almost inevitable for n z ≥80. Correspondingly, the change in internal energy, ∆U , near the surface notch increases with increasing sample size, as shown in Fig. The effects of strain rate and sample size on temperature rise in shear bands can be illustrated using ∆T at some representative strain. Here we choose the point of the maximum sliding velocity (V ms ), where the corresponding temperature rise, denoted as ∆T ms , is near a peak or the maximum. For stable shear-banding (i.e., slow sliding), we did not choose the higher ∆T values during the following slower sliding process because these higher ∆T values result from the accumulated heating during the continuous sliding process while for serrated shear-banding the generated heat is nearly exhausted during the 'stop' stage Experimentally, measurements of shear-banding focus on the quasistatic cases that usually associate with serrated flow stresses On the other hand, the sliding velocity can be high during fracture. In a recent quasistatic compression experiment Although so far no velocities are reported for the intermediate range in Fig. Finally, we note that the results obtained in this study are based on some specific relaxed structure (quenched at 10 10 K/s), specific environmental temperature (100 K), and a limited number of sample geometries. For lowering the computational cost, we used a thin slab geometry with only 2 nm in the x direction. While this thickness is much larger than the cutoff distance of atomic interaction and indeed we obtained similar ∆T for a few thicker slabs, such as sample 2×5×5, it is worth exploring the effect of sample geometry in the future. Also, as shear-banding is a thermally activated process In summary, we have studied temperature rise in shear bands during tensile loading of CuZr metallic glass through molecular dynamics simulations. It was found that the temperature rise correlates positively with strain rate and sample size. Especially, the maximum sliding velocity of the shear band, a function of both strain rate and sample size, correlates linearly with the corresponding temperature rise, ranging from ∼20 K to near the melting point. For quasistatic loading temperature rise lower than 20 K is expected from our study. Temperature well above the melting point was not observed because of shear band bifurcation or multiplication, which occurs in response to the instability of shear bands, hinders further temperature rise.