Introduction: Stenotic aortic valve disease (AS) causes pressure overload of the left ventricle (LV) that may trigger adverse remodeling and precipitate progression towards heart failure (HF). As myocardial energetics can be impaired during AS, LV wall stresses and biomechanical power provide a complementary view of LV performance that may aide in better assessing the state of disease. Objectives: Using a high-resolution electro-mechanical (EM) in silico model of the LV as a reference, we evaluated clinically feasible Laplace-based methods for assessing global LV wall stresses and biomechanical power. Methods: We used N = 4 in silico finite element (FE) EM models of LV and aorta of patients suffering from AS. All models were personalized with clinical data under pre-treatment conditions. LV wall stresses and biomechanical power were computed accurately from FE kinematic data and compared to Laplace-based estimation methods which were applied to the same FE model data. Results and Conclusion: Laplace estimates of LV wall stress are able to provide a rough approximation of global mean stress in the circumferential-longitudinal plane of the LV. However, according to FE results spatial heterogeneity of stresses in the LV wall is significant, leading to major discrepancies between local stresses and global mean stress. Assessment of mechanical power with Laplace methods is feasible, but these are inferior in accuracy compared to FE models. The accurate assessment of stress and power density distribution in the LV wall is only feasible based on patient-specific FE modeling. In AS elevated pressure gradients impose a higher load upon the LV. Under such conditions, the pressure produced by the LV must increase in order to achieve an adequate cardiac output that meets the metabolic demands. This requires the LV wall to generate higher active forces, which can be achieved either by an increase in wall stresses or a change in ventricular shape and mass. Such pressure overload conditions, if persistent for long enough, trigger adverse remodeling processes, eventually precipitating progression towards HF As a consequence, alternative biomarkers beyond pressure gradients are sought to that provide a complementary view of cardiac function and, potentially, offer a higher predictive power with regard to outcomes. In a recent study, the use of end-diastolic or end-systolic wall stresses as assessed by a wall stress index has been proposed as a novel diagnostic criterion of HF Another method used to determine the work performed by the muscle is pressure-volume (PV) relations. These are usually measured using conductance catheter techniques. However, these procedures are invasive, time-consuming and expensive. Alternatively, PV-loops are measured with 3D echo or MRI Despite the diagnostic potential of markers based on wall stresses and expended mechanical power, this assessment has not evolved towards a routinely used diagnostic tool in the clinic mainly due to methodological limitations. Attempts to address this relied upon different variants of Laplace's law, which require the acquisition of only a small number of measures representing LV cavity volume, wall width and pressure To evaluate the accuracy of Laplace analysis for estimating global wall stresses and mechanical power in the LV we employed four FE based EM LV models which have been previously fitted The ventricular myocardium was modeled as a non-linear, hyperelastic, nearly incompressible and anisotropic material with a layered organization of myocytes and fibres that is characterized by a right-handed orthonormal set of basis vectors By Ω we denote the deformed geometry and by Γ = ∂Ω we define its boundary with Γ = Γ D ∪ Γ H ∪ Γ N and |Γ D | > 0. The normal outward vector of Γ is denoted by n. The total Cauchy stress tensor σ refers to the sum of a passive stress tensor σ pas and an active stress tensor σ act . That is, σ = σ pas + σ act with where F is the deformation gradient, Ψ is the strain energy function, f 0 is fiber orientation in the reference configuration, J = det F is the Jacobian, C = F F is the right Cauchy-Green strain tensor and S a is the scalar active contractile stress generated by the myocytes acting along f 0 . The passive behavior of myocardial tissue was modeled using two material models, either the transversely-isotropic Guccione et al. model where and is the modified isochoric Green-Lagrange strain tensor, or the isotropic Demiray model with C = J -2 3 C the modified isochoric right Cauchy-Green tensor. In both models, Eqs. ( A simplified phenomenological contractile model where S peak is the peak isometric tension, φ(λ) is a non-linear function dependent on fiber stretch λ = |Ff 0 | describing the length-dependence of active stress generation, t s is the onset of contraction, τ c is the upstroke time constant, t dur is the active stress transient duration and τ r is the downstroke time constant. This simplified model allows efficient fitting to patient data as the parameters for peak stress, S peak , and time constant of contraction, τ c , and twitch duration, t dur , are related to the two clinical key parameters of interest, peak pressure and maximum rate of pressure increase, in an intuitive manner. Solving these equations under given mechanical boundary conditions using the FE method at a sufficiently high spatio-temporal discretization provides an accurate description of tissue kinematics. Computed displacement u serve as input then in a post-processing procedure to evaluate wall stresses σ(x, t) and to compute internal power expended by the LV (see Sec. 2.6). A Newton scheme was applied in each time step to linearize the nonlinear boundary value problem (1) yielding a non-symmetric FE system. The linear FE system was solved by a parallel GMRES algorithm with an algebraic multigrid preconditioner. For the Newton scheme a relative tolerance of 1.0e -5 and an absolute tolerance of 1.0e -8 was used as stopping criterion. To verify the FE-based calculation of stress-derived metrics, a geometrically simple and wellstudied benchmark problem was chosen for which circumferential hoop stresses can be found from Laplace's law under the following assumptions: (A1) The wall material is isotropic. The shape is a symmetric spherical shell with inner radius, r, and outer radius, R. The thickness of the wall, h = R -r, is sufficiently small, that is, the wall thickness to radius of curvature ratio is small, h/r 1. Since all these assumptions are violated in the LV which is orthotropic (A1), non-spherical in shape (A2), and thick-walled (A3) with h/r ≈ 1, differences between Laplace analysis and FE computation are to be expected. Three configurations were considered, an ideal thin-walled spherical shell, Sph 5 , which complies with all assumptions (A1)-(A3) and thus can serve as a reference for FE validation, and two thicker-walled spheres, Sph Figure The inner radius was chosen as r = 15.0 mm in all models with h varying from h = 0.5 mm to h = 15.0 mm in Sph 5 and Sph 150 , respectively. The choices for Sph 150 are representative of the h/r ratios found in the LVs of patients in this study (Tab. 2). In line with assumption (A1), the nonlinear isotropic material law stated in Eq. ( To remove rigid body motion and provide physiological boundary conditions that allow a vertical movement of the LV base, as observed in-vivo, mechanical boundary conditions were applied by fixing the terminal rim of the clipped aorta (Fig. Rather, default values for the parameters b f = 18.48, b t = 3.58 and b f s = 1.627 were used as reported in the literature In a final step, active mechanical properties were fit to the same hemodynamic data used for fitting the afterload model. A reaction-eikonal model was used to generate activation sequences and simulate action potential propagation in the LV Stresses can be computed from deformations u using constitutive material models based on ex vivo experimental data which link stresses to strains. In the FE model stress tensors σ(x, t) are computed by evaluating Eqs. ( with the projection matrix P = (e r , e φ , e θ ) and While all quantities in the spherical models must be perfectly symmetric this is not necessarily the case in the FE solutions. Depending on spatial resolution and boundary conditions, a minor numerical jitter around mean values will inevitably occur. For comparing FE with Laplace analysis averaged mean quantities were therefore computed over the entire domain by with u being the FE solution at time t and ∈ {r, θ, φ}. In a thin-walled spherical shell stresses in azimuthal and meridional direction must be equal due to symmetry, that is, σ circ = σ φφ = σ θθ , and with h r radial stresses can be assumed to be negligible relative to circumferential hoop stresses, that is, 0 ≈ σ rr σ circ . The stress tensor in spherical coordinates simplifies therefore to As a reference for verifying FE-based stresses different variants of Laplace's law were used. In particular, we use an extension of Laplace's law which takes into account the finite thickness of the wall and refer to stress estimates based on this formula as Laplace stress in thick-walled spherical shells, σ L,H . Exploiting assumption (A3), that is, h r 1 and thus 1 + h 2 r ≈ 1, allows a further simplification yielding which we refer to as Laplace stress in thin-walled spherical shells, σ L,h . Finally, we consider a volume-based estimation of σ circ which has been used previously in clinical studies For a given displacement u at time t ∈ [0, T ], where T refers to the duration of a cardiac cycle and t 0 = t ED = 0 marks the end of diastole, the biomechanical power density, p int , generated or consumed at location x within the LV wall can be computed by evaluating where ε is the strain rate tensor and A : B = tr(A B) denotes the double contraction of two tensors, see e.g. and integration of Eq. ( Based on Laplace's law biomechanical power can be estimated using where denotes which formula was used for estimating the circumferential wall stress that is, ∈ {h, H, V} and εcirc approximates circumferential strains. For a derivation of Eq. ( In addition, a recently introduced also Laplace-based relative power indicator, IHP, was evaluated which attempts to estimate the power generated by the LV around the instant of peak pressure, t p. Based on IHW is interpreted as a measure of the mechanical potential energy stored in the LV from which a measure of the peak biomechanical power generated by the LV between t ED and t p is derived then by Note that Eq. ( Hydrodynamic power, P ext , is given by where p is the hydrostatic pressure acting at endocardial surface, Γ endo and q represents blood flow out of the LV cavity during ejection. Hydrodynamic work, W ext , is then the work expended by the LV myocardium when changing the volume of its cavity, V cav , given by or, equivalently, expressed as PV work by In absence of active stresses, i.e. σ act = 0, and isovolumetric contstraints imposed by valves upon V cav , P int ≡ P ext must hold. Under such conditions, external work can therefore serve as a reference for validating the FE-based computation of internal power and work. This is not necessarily the case during the isovolumetric phases of a heartbeat where internal work may be expended which does not necessarily manifest as external work. During these phases, changes in σ occur which may entail shape changes of the LV myocardium and thus induce a non-zero strain rate tensor ε. However, due to the isovlumetric constraints imposed by the incompressibility of the blood pool and the closed state of all valves, no global change in cavity volume can occur, i.e. dV cav = 0. Under healthy conditions, hydrodynamic power in the LV cavity equals the power delivered to the arterial system as transvalvular power losses are small. However, in AS cases where transvalvular pressure gradients, ∆p, are significant, the effective hydrodynamic power externally delivered to the arterial system is reduced. Following where MAP and CO are mean arterial pressure and cardiac output, respectively, and p ao = p LV -∆p is the pressure in the aorta ascendens. Power efficiency, P eff , has been defined previously in Since P eff essentially relates the mean hydrodynamic power delivered to the arterial system to the peak biomechanical power generated by the LV myocardium during systole, P eff can be expressed as where Pint , Pext and Pext,ao are determined based on Eqs. ( Human EM LV models which were validated against clinical data (see Sec. 2.4.2), provided accurate ground truth data on strains ε(u, t) and stresses σ(u, t) in the LV wall. Using these as reference, Laplace analysis was applied to the in silico models to assess its accuracy and validity. Geometric input parameters r and h required for Laplace analysis must be determined from clinical imaging datasets. As LV shape deviates markedly from a spherical shell representative mean parameters of r and h must be found. Since there is no unique best solution to establish a geometric correspondence between LV shape and a spherical shell, various methods have been used in clinical applications. Typically, transverse slices from short-axis Cine-MRI scans were analyzed to measure, either manually or semi-automatically, r and h, where h is measured in the postero-lateral wall, the septum or an average is taken. The analysis is either carried out in one representative mid-cavity LV short axis slice, or a number of slices is selected to capture representative basal, mid-cavity and apical LV cross-sections. Similar issues arise when applying Laplace analysis to in silico datasets. In order to extract r and h as objectively as possible without operator bias, automated processing workflows were implemented (see Fig. Finally, multi-slice mean r and h were computed by averaging over M slices The time course of the mean values r(t) and h(t) (see Fig. To evaluate the influence of violating the assumptions (A1) and (A2), passive inflation experiments were performed with LV models and the anisotropic material given in Eq. ( Laplace-based stress estimates σ L,h , σ L,H and σ L,V were compared to the mean stresses obtained from the FE solution. Stresses were evaluated with respect to an ellipsoidal coordinate system to facilitate a comparison with stresses in the spherical shell models (see Fig. Discretization of all PDEs and the solution of the arising systems of equations relied upon the Cardiac Arrhythmia Research Package framework The After verification with spherical shell models FE analysis was applied to a validated in silico EM LV model to compute stresses, power and work during both diastolic and systolic phases. Since all assumptions underlying Laplace laws are violated in LV models the FE-based results were considered the ground truth and, thus, could be used to gauge the accuracy of Laplace-based assessment of LV mechanics. LV models LV A -LV D were inflated following the same protocol as in Sec. 2.3 (see Fig. The temporal evolution of FE-and Laplace-based stresses, power and work are shown in Fig. Using Cine-MRI-based LV volume traces and estimated pLV as inputs the models LV A -LV D were fitted over the cycle phases isovolumetric contraction (IVC), ejection and isovolumetric relaxation (IVR) (Fig. Laplace-based power estimates P int,h , P int,H and P int,V were qualitatively comparable to the exact FE-based P int , but quantitatively marked discrepancies were observed. The time course of Laplace-based power showed both a faster onset and decay with an early peak in power. Quantitative differences between the Laplace estimates were also significant with P int,V > P int,h > P int,H . Around the instant t p deviations were in the range of -2.41/ + 2.92, -6.22/ -0.58, -9.19/ + 9.34 A numerical comparison between markers of LV peak power is given in Tab. 5. Differences between true mechanical peak power Pint and P int at the instant of peak pressure, t p, were minor, with the maximum difference being Pint -P int (t p) < 0.19 W or 2.15%. Laplace estimation of P int , evaluated at t p, misestimated Pint by 5.1% -54.7%. Interestingly, P int,h performed better than P int,H in all cases, but with non-negligible maximum relative errors of 23.37%, 32.23%, 18.51% and 7.68% for LV A , LV B , LV C and LV D , respectively. IHP overestimated Pint significantly, in the range between 24.10% to 140.28%. Since the mechanical power developed during isovolumetric phases was marginal (see Fig. Wall stress and mechanical power generated by the LV are considered important biomarkers that promise potential clinical utility for diagnosis and as a predictor of post-treatment LV remodeling after interventions FE computation of stresses and mechanical power was verified by performing passive inflation experiments with geometrically well defined spherical shell models of varying wall width for which Laplace laws hold with sufficient accuracy. FE computed circumferential stresses σ circ in all models agreed closely with the Laplace stresses σ L, (see Fig. The validated high resolution in silico model served as a reference for evaluating the accuracy of the Laplace-based approximation of σ, P int and W int . While the FE models which were built from, fitted to and validated against clinical data, may deviate from clinical data within the limits of clinical data uncertainty, for assessing Laplace analysis, the FE model represents the ground truth as it provides accurate data on stresses σ(x, t) and strains ε(x, t) which can serve to compute local power and work densities p int (x, t) and w int (x, t), respectively, as well as global P int , W int and W ext with highest possible accuracy. All input parameters needed for Laplace analysis can be derived from the FE model with higher accuracy than what is achievable clinically. In this regard, the application of Laplace analysis to the in silico model can be considered a best case scenario. Wall stress σ(x) in the LV is a tensorial quantity that varies in space (see Fig. Besides the fundamental problem of stress heterogeneity and tensorial properties of LV wall stress, Laplace calculations are afflicted with significant uncertainties. The meaning of geometric parameters r and h required for the evaluation of Eqs. It is well known that Laplace-based calculation of stresses is afflicted with various inaccuracies Mechanical heart power P int and cardiac power efficiency P eff defined as the ratio between peak mechanical power expended by the LV, Pint , and the mean hydrodynamic power delivered to the arterial system, EHP, have been proposed recently as a diagnostic marker The estimation of P int is feasible directly from LV deformation either by using FE models or, as suggested in First of all, the evaluation of P int, based on Eq. ( The evaluation of cardiac power efficiency P eff or P eff,clin requires only point estimates of peak mechanical power. Following Alternatively, the simpler P eff,clin marker can be used as in The mechanical power generated by the LV is an indicator of metabolic demands. Local wall stresses and power densities governing energetic demand and supply ratios in the LV myocardium are known to play important roles as drivers of remodeling in the pressure-overloaded LV of AS patients. However, analogous to the stresses shown in Fig. An accurate representation of local mechanical stresses σ(x, t) and power p int (x, t) over a cardiac cycle depends on reliable sets of strains ε(x, t). While techniques for measuring strains in 3D throughout the LV myocardium are available Such models are able to provide either global power P int (t), but also fine-grained distributed power density p int (x, t). A spatio-temporal view on ε(x, t), σ(x, t) and p int (x, t) in the LV may provide additional insights as regions of elevated strain, stress or power are assumed to be implicated in the mechanisms driving remodeling in the pressure overloaded LV Laplace estimates of LV wall stress are able to provide a rough approximation of global mean stress in the circumferential-longitudinal plane of the LV. However, according to FE results spatial heterogeneity of stresses in the LV wall is significant, leading to major discrepancies between local stresses and global mean stress. Assessment of mechanical power with Laplace methods is feasible, but these are inferior in accuracy compared to FE models and do not offer any benefits compared to standard methods based on hemodynamic data. In this view, the scope for Laplace-based analysis in clinical applications seems narrow. The accurate assessment of stress and power density distribution in the LV wall is only feasible based on patient-specific FE modeling. 6 Supplementary Material To derive the law of Laplace we consider a spherical shell of inner radius, r and thin walls of a given thickness, h. Inflating the shell by applying a pressure, p, within the shell's cavity, induces deformation which causes the buildup of stresses within the wall. If we consider one half of the sphere, the total force F p acting on the inner surface must be balanced with the total force acting over the cut surface (see Fig. Assuming that h r, radial stresses are small compared to circumferential stresses, σ rr σ circ , and the total stress tensor is approximated by with respect to the spherical coordinate system and the projection matrix P = (e r , e φ , e θ ) , see Fig. From Eq. ( which we denote as σ L,H . Using assumption (A3), i.e. h/r 1, we have 1 + h 2 r ≈ 1 which yields the simple law of Laplace for a thin-walled sphere given by which we denote as σ L,h . Since radius r and wall thickness h are two quantities which are not always available or are hard to determine for a general geometry like a LV, we rewrite Eq. ( which we denote as σ L,V . The approximations σ L,h , σ L,H and σ L,V for the circumferential stress σ circ can be used to derive an estimator for the internal power and internal work For this sake, we consider Eq. ( where P is the projection matrix introduced in Sec. 6.1. Similarly, the strain rate ε is expressed as ε = P   εrr εrφ εrθ εφr εφφ εφθ εθr εθφ εθθ   P . Using Eq. ( where r 0 is the initial inner radius and R 0 is the initial outer radius of the spherical shell at its stress free configuration, i.e. p = 0. Using Eqs. ( To delineate anisotropy from pure geometry effects, passive inflation experiments were also performed with LV models using the Demiray model and passive mechanical behavior was compared to the spherical shell models Sph 5 , Sph 25 and Sph 150 . In these cases, parameters were set to b = 7 and a was chosen in a patient-specific manner to obtain the same volume at maximum inflation pressure as with the Guccione model. Note that in none of the simulations of a full cardiac cycle the Demiray model was considered as the resulting kinematics was in stark contrast to the clinical data. To evaluate the influence of violating the assumption on the geometry (A2), passive inflation experiments were performed with LV models and the isotropic material due to Demiray, Eq. ( Similarly, with increasing h the accuracy of the thick-walled Laplace estimate W int,H performed better than the simpler thin-walled Laplace estimate W int,h . As expected on grounds of conservation of energy, the agreement between biomechanical work W int and hemodynamic work W ext was essentially perfect with differences < 2% for all models. The LV models LV A -LV D were inflated following the loading protocol in Fig. Pre-treatment AS patient characteristics from MRI and non-invasive cuff pressure recordings including end-diastolic volume (EDV), end-systolic volume (ESV), stroke volume (SV), ejection fraction (EF), heart rate (HR), diastolic and systolic cuff pressures (p dia and p sys ), mean arterial pressure (MAP), wall thickness at the LV equator measured in septum / lateral free wall (h), pressure drop across aortic valve (∆p), presence of hypertension (HT) and mitral valve regurgitation (MVR). Pint P int (t p) Using an estimate for σ circ we obtain