In this work, for the first time of our knowledge, we present a well-supported procedure to fabricate ridge optical waveguides onto thin films of PLZT by femtosecond laser ablation. In order to achieve smooth guiding structures to guarantee good optical performance, we have studied the ablation threshold characteristics for different kinematic conditions of fs laser machining and also we have explored the different ablation regimens for several fluencies reached. Besides, we characterize the morphology and roughness of ridge waveguides through a modal and scattering loss analysis, for waveguides made with single and multiple scan. An innovative phenomenological model that relates the sidewall roughness to process parameters is proposed in this paper. Conducting this approach it is possible to extend the fabrication method of smooth guiding structures by fs micromachining to many optical thin films in order to develop integrated photonics devices addressed to different technological applications. The integrated photonic devices are currently used in many technological applications, including optical communications systems, microfluidics and sensors An interesting material to be used in integrated photonics is lanthanum-modified lead zirconate titanate, well-known as PLZT (Pb,La)(Zr,Ti)O 3 The femtosecond laser micromachining is a procedure to remove or change a materials properties, which has been used in a large range of applications, from optical waveguide fabrication to cell ablation. This method usually has been performed on many field of applications as it is reported in The ridge waveguides are particularly used in the fabrication of microfluidic chips, sensors and active photonics devices; in this sense many works have been reported In this article, we fabricate ridge optical waveguides on thin PLZT films by femtosecond laser ablation technique. In particular, we study the ablation threshold for different kinematic conditions and the ablation regimens for several fluencies, in order to achieve smooth structures. Additionally, we propose a phenomenological model that relates the sidewall roughness to the process parameters. An ablation quality factor that takes into account the process randomness has been introduced. Finally, we characterize the morphology and roughness of ridge waveguides through the modal analysis and scattering losses, respectively, using one and multiple writing scans during the fabrication process. The ridge optical waveguides were fabricated using a commercial Ti:sapphire ultrafast laser system (Spectra Physics Spitfire) working at 793 nm. Pulse duration was 173 fs at 1 kHz repetition rate. The pulse energy was adjusted combining a half-wave plate plus a Glan polarizer and a neutral density filter of 1.3 OD. A 10x (NA = 0.25) microscope objective was used to focus the laser on the sample surface and the spot size was w 0 = 2.9 μm at 1/e 2 . A micrometer motorized station system (Newport, Inc) with an accuracy at about ±275 nm and a shutter with a time resolution of 1 ms were used. Furthermore, the plasma emission during the laser ablation was captured by a HR2000+ spectrometer (OceanOptics, Inc.). Pb 0.91 La 0.09 Zr 0.65 Ti 0.35 O 3 thin films with a thickness of around 500 nm were prepared by the chemical solution deposition technique on SiO 2 /Si substrates. The amorphous films were deposited by spin coating technique (CSD) and thermal treated by Rapid Thermal Processing for film crystallization. The PLZT films have exhibited a well-crystallized perovskite structure The morphology and roughness were analyzed using a scanning electron microscope system (Quanta 200, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The end-coupling technique was used to characterize the ridge optical waveguides In order to choose correctly the machining parameters, it is necessary consider the ablation characteristics of the samples. In this sense, the ablation threshold fluence Φ th is the most important feature. This parameter is related to the number of laser shots N and an incubation factor k, which depend on the micromachining kinematic and the sample properties, respectively. As it has been discussed in several previous studies FIG. where Φ 1 is the threshold fluence for a single shot and Φ ∞ is the threshold fluence for an infinite number of pulses. For determining these parameters, we investigated the ablation threshold values for different numbers of shots N, varying the scan velocity for it. In all experiments, the beam focus was positioned on the sample surface. Making several experiments, no significant damage differences (∽4%) have been observed from 300 to 500 pulses. Therefore, we can conclude that Φ ∞ converges to Φ th (500). The experimental values obtained for Φ 1 and Φ ∞ are 6.1 J/cm 2 and 2.9 J/cm 2 , respectively. These fluences are similar to those published by Zhang et al. For the purpose of comparing only the incubation effects of different types of samples, non-dimensional functions of the ablation threshold fluences Φ * th are plotted. This expression is shown in Fig. However, in our analysis is more convenient represent the ablation threshold by the kinematic parameters of micromachining. N can be written as a function of the repetition rate f , scan velocity v and spot size w 0 . Assuming that the focal position and the scan velocity remain constant throughout the process, the number of incident pulses is given by where where A o is the overlapping area Obviously, there is a trade-off decision between keeping the stability and the machining speed. The machining kinematic parameters to work in stable regime of threshold ablation is shown in the box of Fig. The scan speed and a study of the ablation threshold were determined in the previous section, but still we do not know how much higher the incident fluence should be respected to the threshold fluence. Hence, it is convenient to analyze the dynamical of the process. The ultrafast ablation is classified into three different regimens (melting, spallation and phase explosion), each of them has a probability of occurrence and a particular modification. As expected, the dominant ablation regime depends on the relationship between the incident fluence and threshold fluence. It is defined as the fluence ratio R where Φ is the incident fluence at the surface. Physically, the regimens are three different hydrodynamics process those relate to the dynamics of phase transitions due to the laser-matter interaction. Below are explained some important features of these regimens: Fig. On the other hand, the fabrication of the ridge waveguides is based on removing material of the sample surface. It is desirable to control over the groove dimension and the sidewall roughness, after that the ablation process must be stable. Consequently, the ridge waveguides are fabricated under spallation ultrafast ablation regime. Fig. Next, we carried out a series of experiments in order to determine the most suitable machining fluence for fabricating waveguides in PLZT/SiO 2 /Si. Grooves are gener-FIG. ated on samples at different incident fluences, varying in each case the laser pulse energy. All tests were performed by scanning at 10 μm/s and the beam waist positioned on the sample's surface. Under these conditions we are in a steady state fluence regime, where Φ th = 2.9 J/cm 2 . Six images of grooves ablated at different incident fluences are shown in Fig. where D c is the crater diameter. Although this equation is used for static ablation, we will show later that at constant velocities and with a high degree of overlap, equation Eq. ( In contrast, the depth of the ablated grooves is increased with the incident fluence due to the penetration of the electromagnetic pulse in the sample. Commonly approaches the Beer-Lambert model. where H c is the crater depth and L is the effective penetration depth of the laser. In this way, we could adjust R in order to remove the thin film. For example, in Fig. In order to achieve smooth structures, a phonomenological study of the roughness is performed. This relates the incident fluence to the roughness considering that the threshold fluence is constant. The latter was supported considering that by using a scan speed at 10 μm/s, Φ th goes to Φ ∞ . We propose a model for that in which two factors affect the machining quality, one is due to deterministic effect and other due to randomness effect. As the roughness can be understood as a result about changes in the machining track, then it is convenient to define the width W of ablated groove as where W is the mean width of the groove, δ is a deterministic function of the trajectory and ξ is a random variable. FIG. The function δ is related to discontinuity of laser micromachining technique. Indeed, since the groove is done by pulse overlapping, it could show a periodic peaks in the sidewall of tracks related to the sample displacement If assuming ξ=0, we can clear δ of Eq. ( The inequality of Eq. ( Combining Eq. ( Therefore, if we show that δ * tends to zero for a large pulse number, then we can demonstrate that δ also tends to zero. Since N i is larger than 1 and using geometric models Replacing Eq. ( Therefore, we prove the origin random of the roughness by taking the limit of δ * for N i going to infinity The normalized roughness δ * as a function of N i is evaluated in Fig. Otherwise, the roughness of ablated grooves recorded at 10 μm/s and by using fluences from 3.3 to 6.2 J/cm 2 have been measured by SEM microscopy. Fig. diameter, as black bars shown in Fig. The roughness typically is related to scattering losses by the mean square error of the waveguide. It can be obtained from measurements as ξ rms and it is given by ( On the other hand, the fluence ratio is the main source of roughness due to the random origin of the laser-matter interaction process. Therefore, we could explain the roughness of micromachining as a function of the mean square error of the fluence ratio R ξ . Using a first-order approximation of the crater diameter and R ξ , the following expression is proposed where R ξ is an ablation quality factor. See that, the approximation is valid for small values of R ξ . Deriving Eq. ( where R ξ must be adjusted. Indeed, the ablation quality factor was fitted with the measurements. Fig. Once defined the most suitable micromachining parameters, we proceed to fabricate the ridge optical waveguides and measure their performance. In order to characterize the quality of machining, the coupled modes and scattering losses were analyzed. The same experiment proceeding have been repeated. The beam focus was placed on the sample surface and a track distance of 20 μm was used. An effective width of waveguides around 17 μm was measured. Under these conditions and using a laser with 532 nm of wavelength, the waveguides are multi-mode and support TE/TM modes. Additionally, we have fabricated two types of devices to verify the effect of multiple scan technique, waveguides with a single scan and other with several round trips (multiple scans). There is a considerable difference in the distribution of intensity, obviously it indicates that the ablated grooves are morphologically different according to the number of scans. The mode profile of waveguides performed by multiple scans is similar to the theoretical mode profile of strip waveguides, while it is not achieved with a single scanning. Therefore the ridge waveguides made by multiple scans exhibit better geometric characteristics. These are interesting for photonic applications due to the performance of waveguides can be precisely predicted and the decoupling losses will be lower. There are differences because, when the ablation process is repeated many times, the pulse penetration and the generation of groove are saturated, and hence the width and the depth randomness of grooves tend to cancel. However, more debris was observed on the surface of the samples which contributes to the surface scattering losses. The sidewall of grooves ablated by multiple scans is much more vertical than grooves fabricated by a simple scan. Referred to the roughness the waveguides fabricated by multiple scans also reported better capabilities than those made with a single scan. The scattering losses of the ridge waveguides are shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have reported, for the first time of our knowledge, on the micromachining of ridge optical waveguides on PLZT thin film by femtosecond laser ablation. We also have studied the relationship between machining parameters and morphology of ablated grooves with the goal of reducing the roughness of sidewall. In this sense, we have investigated firstly the incubation effect on the threshold fluence and its connection with the kinematic of the ultrafast ablation process. At low velocities, the threshold fluence is established in a regime stable and smooth structures are more likely promoted. The threshold fluence converges to a common value of ∽2.9 J/cm 2 for velocities lower than 15.2 μm/s, in particular, we have used 10 μm/s. We have analyzed subsequently the morphology of ablation regimens for different incident fluences, using SEM microscopy and laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy, in order to establish the suitable fluence range for photonics applications. Thus a phenomenological model of roughness has been proposed from which the best result was reported at 5 J/cm 2 . This model is innovative from several points of view, nevertheless the most important is the correlation exposed between roughness and incident fluence through an ablation quality factor, see Eq. (17). The ridge optical waveguides have been carried out by a simple and multiple scan with the purpose of characterization their performance. The waveguides made with six scans have achieved cut down the scattering losses in 2.5 dB for TE modes and 1.9 dB for TM modes and additionally shows an improvement in their geometrical morphology. In summary, this work explains how to define the key micromachining parameters for achieving smooth structures, what must be considered and which is the link among roughness and random process inherent to femtosencond laser ablation.