Despite intense efforts it has remained unresolved whether and how interfacial spin-orbit coupling (ISOC) affects spin transport across heavy metal (HM)/ferromagnet (FM) interfaces. Here we report conclusive experiment evidence that the ISOC at HM/FM interfaces is the dominant mechanism for "spin memory loss". An increase in ISOC significantly reduces, in a linear manner, the dampinglike spin-orbit torque (SOT) exerted on the FM layer via degradation of the spin transparency of the interface for spin currents generated in the HM. In addition, the fieldlike SOT is also dominated by the spin Hall contribution of the HM and decreases with increasing ISOC. This work reveals that ISOC at HM/FM interfaces should be minimized to advance efficient SOT devices through atomic layer passivation of the HM/FM interface or other means. primary importance for efficiently driving magnetization switching In this letter, we demonstrate that ISOC at Pt/Co and Au0.25Pt0.75/Co interfaces can be tuned significantly via thermal engineering of the spin-orbit proximity effect. From this ability we show that ISOC is the dominant mechanism for SML and reduces the dampinglike SOT efficiency by degrading Tint in a linear manner. We also find that the fieldlike torque is dominated by the SHE of the HM and is affected by ISOC only via degradation of Tint. The ISOCgenerated SOTs is found to be negligible in the studied HM/Co systems. We studied several magnetic bilayers (see Supplemental Material We used two quantities, the interfacial magnetic anisotropy energy density (Ks) and the anomalous Hall conductivity (σAH), as indicators of the strength of ISOC. It has been well established that Ks in HM/Co bilayers and superlattices originates from spin-orbit coupling (SOC)enhanced orbital magnetic moments localized at the first layer adjacent to the interface As is clearly seen in Fig. In Figs. Focusing first on the technologically more important and stronger dampinglike component ξ DL E for the PMA series Pt/Co (P1-P4) and Au0.25Pt0.75/Co (P5-P9), upon the first annealing step ξ DL E drops by ~50% and then gradually recovers back to some extent as result of the two subsequent annealing steps. For the IMA Pt/Co series (I1-I4), ξ DL E monotonically decreases with annealing. The key observation is that for all three cases the variations of ξ DL E upon annealing are strikingly well (negatively) correlated with the variation of the ISOC strength as seen in both Figs. Turning to the fieldlike torque, for all the samples ξ FL E is negative (opposite to the Oersted field generated by the bias current) and small in magnitude compared to ξ DL E (Fig. Recent theoretical work In summary, we have demonstrated that thermal engineering of the spin-orbit proximity effect is a simple but effective approach to controllably vary the strength of ISOC at Pt/Co and Au25Pt75/Co interfaces. From this variation, we have obtained conclusive experimental evidence that ISOC at a HM/FM interface is the dominant mechanism for SML and increasing ISOC significantly reduces the dampinglike and fieldlike SOTs by enhancing interfacial spin scattering and degrading Tint in a linear manner. For both PMA and IMA HM/FM systems studied here, the ISOC-generated torques are negligible. This work also indicates that the development of highly efficient HM/FM spin-torque devices, e.g. magnetic memories, will generally be advanced by minimizing ISOC effects, through atomic layer passivation of the HM/FM interface or other means. The approach we utilized here to tune the ISOC strength should be also beneficial for research and applications of Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (skyrmion and chiral domain wall physics) and other ISOC effects. The samples were deposited at room temperature by sputtering onto oxidized Si substrates with an argon pressure of 2 mTorr and a base pressure of ~10 -8 Torr. A 1 nm Ta underlayer was utilized to improve the adhesion and smoothness of the HM layer, i.e. Pt or Au0.25Pt0.75, but is expected to contribute negligible spin current into the Co layer as a consequence of the small thickness and high resistivity of Ta, the short spin diffusion length (< 2 nm) of Pt and Au0.25Pt0.75. Each sample was capped with a 2 nm MgO layer and a 1.5 nm Ta layer that was fully oxidized upon exposure to atmosphere. To minimize interfacial intermixing, each layer was sputtered at a low rate (e.g. 0.007 nm/s for Co and 0.016 nm/s for Pt) by introducing an oblique orientation of the target to the substrate and by using low magnetron sputter power. Annealing was performed in a vacuum furnace with a background pressure of ~10 -7 Torr. The samples were patterned into 5×60 μm 2 Hall bars and 10×20 μm 2 microstrips by ultraviolet photolithography and argon ion milling, followed by deposition of 5 nm Ti and 150 nm Pt as electrical contacts. A Quantum Design PPMS with a vibrating sample magnetometer (sensitivity~10 -7 emu) was used to determine the sample magnetization (Ms). A Signal Recovery DSP Lock-in Amplifier (Model 7265) was used to source a 4 V sinusoidal voltage onto the Hall bars and to detect the first and second harmonic Hall voltage responses, V1ω and V2ω. All the measurements were performed at room temperature. The magnetic damping of the in-plane magnetized samples (10×20 μm 2 microstrips) was measured by spin-torque ferromagnetic resonance as a function of frequency. For a PMA HM/FM system, the effective PMA field (Hk) can be determined by fitting the in-plane bias field (H) dependence of the in-phase first harmonic Hall voltage response (V1ω) to the sinusoidal voltage (Vin = 4 V) applied to the Hall bar following where VAH is the anomalous Hall voltage determined by measuring V1ω as a function of Hz, θ ≈ H/Hk << 1 is the polar angle of the magnetic moment tilted away from the film normal direction, and the signs ± correspond to the initial magnetization states of ±Mz, respectively. Here the charge current flows in the x-direction, V1ω is measured along the transverse direction y, and z is the out-of-plane direction. We measured both Hx and Hy dependencies of V1ω for the ±Mz cases (see Fig. For IMA Pt 4/Co 3.2 (I1-I4), dV1ω/dHz is first determined under different in-plane bias fields Hx. Hk and VAH were then determined by fitting the data to dV1ω/dHz=VAH/(-Hk+Hx) (see Fig. The values of Hk we determined for both the PMA (P1-P8) and the IMA (I1-I4) bilayers are plotted in Fig. We determined the SOT efficiencies for the HM/Co bilayers by harmonic response measurements. For the IMA Pt/Co samples, the in-plane angle (φ) dependence of the out-of-phase second harmonic voltage response V2ω is given by V2ω = Vacosφ + Vpcos2φcosφ, where Va = -HDLVAH/2(Hk+Hin) + VANE, Vp = -VPHHFL/2Hin, and VPH, VANE, and Hin are the planar Hall voltage, the anomalous Nernst effect voltage, and the applied in-plane magnetic field, respectively, and φ is the angle between Hin and the bias current direction (Fig. For both PMA and IMA samples, the dampinglike and fieldlike SOT efficiencies per unit bias current density are ξ DL(FL) j = 2eμ0MstHDL(FL)/ħje, with HDL(FL), e, μ0, t, ħ, and je = Vin /LρHM being the damping-like (field-like) effective spin torque field, the elementary charge, the permeability of vacuum, the ferromagnetic layer thickness, the reduced Planck constant, and the charge current density, respectively. For the PMA HM/Co samples, HDL(FL) = -2 We note that in analyzing our out-of-plane harmonic-response results we do not employ the so-called "planar Hall correction (PHC)" which was developed to account for magnetoresistance effects (e.g. anisotropic magnetoresistance in the FM and spin Hall magnetoresistance in the HM) in the determination of SOTs in PMA HM/FM bilayers The HM resistivity of each sample with the HM thickness d of 4 nm was determined by measuring the conductance enhancement of the corresponding stacks (d =4 nm) with respect to a d = 0 stack. Figure Figure In particular, the PMA and VAH for all the samples, i.e. PMA Pt/Co and Au0.25Pt0.75/Co, and IMA Pt/Co, increase substantially right after the first annealing. This excludes the possibility of intermixing occurrence after the first annealing step because Pt-Co intermixing decreases PMA and VAH as we show in Fig. The annealing-induced variations of the SOT efficiencies of our samples also cannot be explained by increased interfacial intermixing. To demonstrate this point directly we produced two additional Pt/Co samples, one with an insertion layer of Pt3Co 0.2 nm/Co50Pt50 0.2 nm/Co3Pt 0.2 nm at the Pt/Co interface as a simulation of a possible intermixing upon annealing and one without this insertion layer. As shown in Fig. with the Pt thickness d = 4 nm. Doping magnetic impurities into Pt has also been found to introduce strong additive skew scattering, which can increase the total spin Hall conductivity and E DL  [12]. As shown in the main text, for the in-plane Pt/Co sample, E DL  decreases monotonically with annealing, which is sharply contrary to an occurrence of a significant intermixing at the HM/Co interface. Even though we have already shown that neither the ISOC variations nor the SOT variations are due to annealing-induced interfacial intermixing, it is still interesting to directly characterize whether or not there is intermixing at the HM/Co interfaces after annealing. We first performed x-ray reflectivity measurements. In the incident-angle-dependent x-ray reflectivity measurements, the oscillation strength and attenuation length reflect the interface sharpness. As can be seen from Figs. We also carried out chemical depth profile measurements with secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) to independently characterize the HM/Co interfaces. In order to minimize the etching-induced diffusion and to maximize the depth resolution, we used low-energy oblique argon-beam etching (accelerating voltage = 150 V, 20 o degrees away from the sample surface). As shown in Fig. Finally we note that in literature there is disagreement on the thermal stability of the Pt/Co interfaces. MeGee et al. find sputtered amorphous Pt/Co samples are more stable than those epitaxially grown on single-crystal substrate by molecular-beam epitaxy 