In this study, we systematically study on crystal and electronic structures and optical absorption properties of perfect monolayer MoS2 (M), M with S vacancy (M@SV), M with N doping at S site (M@ND) and M with both S vacancy and N doping at S site (M@V-D) using first-principles method. It is showed that the N atom is tend to located between Mo and S layers, leaving one vacancy at original site, to form interstitial N atom. Thus, the interstitial N atom and the S vacancy make up the NI-VS dimer. We study M@V-D with five atomic configurations and find the most stable structure having the NI-VS-VS trimer. It is showed that the absorbance for the stable M@V-D in the most infrared region is obviously higher than that for the other systems. It is revealed that large enhancement of infrared absorption for the stable M@V-D is mainly attributable to the special electronic structure determined by the crystal structure with the trimer. It is considered that M@V-D could be the promising candidate for infrared materials. In the past few years, two-dimensional (2D) materials such as grapheme For instance the S vacancy can increase the total magnetic moment of Mn-doped monolayer MoS2 Given the above considerations, we use the first-principles method to theoretically investigate crystal and electronic structures and optical absorption properties for perfect monolayer MoS2, monolayer MoS2 with S vacancy, monolayer MoS2 with N doping at S site and monolayer MoS2 with S vacancy and N doping at S site. For the sake of simplicity, we noted the above four systems respectively by M, M@SV, M@ND and M@V-D in the following statement. There are many possible atomic configurations for M@V-D due to the coexisting of N doing and S vacancy. In the letter, five atomic configurations (see Fig. MoS2 monolayers are performed with Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional Second, the initial supercell structures are optimizes using the total energy convergence of 10 -4 eV, and the maximum force on each atom is less than 0.05 eV/Å. For the calculations of structure optimization and electronic structure, the Monkhorst-Pack mesh is set to 551 k-points. However, in order to obtain more accurate data in optical property calculation, the denser 21211 k-points is set. Third, the cohesive energy Ec, indicating the stability of the solid material, is calculated using the formula N and nj represent the number of atomic species and the number of the kind of atoms j in the unit cell. Ej and Et are the energy of one isolated atom j and the total energy for the unit cell. We also calculated the formation energy E given by where E i and E p respectively stand for the total energies of imperfect and perfect unit cells and E V is the energy of isolated S atom which is away from perfect unit cell and leads to the formation of vacancy, and E D is the difference between the energies of isolated doping atom and isolated atom replaced by doping atom. Finally, the liner absorption coefficient (ω) and the absorbance A(ω) are studies in detail. It is well known that the (ω) and A(ω) can be described by the dielectric function (ω) which is the complex function where  is the angular frequency, 1, 2 are the real and imaginary parts, respectively. The liner absorption coefficient (ω) is given by the following equation: where c is a constant and is equal to the speed of light. In the optical properties, another more commonly used physical quantity is the absorbance here,z is the thickness of the monolayer MoS2. While the z tends to 0, we can obtain another formula of the absorbance according to Taylor expansion First, the influence of N doping at S site (NS) or S vacancy (VS) or NS-VS coexisting in the crystal structure is studied. Five atomic configurations (see Fig. for M@V-D are considered and noted by M@V1-D, M@V2-D, M@V3-D, M@V4-D and M@V5-D, respectively. When modeling the N atom is fixed on the top S layer, and then the S vacancy has five possible sites noted by 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. Sites of 1, 2 and the N atom are on the same S layer. Sites of 3, 4 and 5 are on the other S layer. The sites of 1, 2 and N are corresponding to the sites of 3, 4 and 5 on the other S layer. It is found that M@V5-D has the lowest total energy. Thus, only the lattice constants of M@V5-D are added to Fig. supercell is the highest up to 7.348 eV, all five atomic configurations for M@V-D have higher ECP than the other three systems at the same size of supercell. The ECP of all systems increases with the impurity concentration increasing. ECP of M@V5-D is the most sensitive to impurity concentration and changes 0.09eV from 3×3×1 supercell to 5×5×1 supercell. It is worth to note that the perfect M possess the lowest ECP of 7.211eV, implying that the perfect M has the most unstable structure. Table Cohesive energy per atom ECP (eV) Table Formation energy E (eV) The formation energy E can indicate the degree of difficulty for formation of material. The smaller the formation energy is, the easier the formation of material is. E of each imperfect structure is also calculated by Eq. ( Thus, experimental preparation for M@ND and M@V-D is operable. E of both M@SV and M@ND is decreasing with impurity concentration increasing, while E and impurity concentration dependence in M@V-D is determined by relative positions of N atom and S vacancy. It is obviously seen that E of M@V2-D, M@V4-D and M@V5-D is decreasing with impurity concentration increasing while that of M@V1-D and M@V3-D is first decreasing and then increasing with impurity concentration increasing. The E difference between M@V1-D and M@V2-D is small as well as that between M@V3-D and M@V4-D at the same impurity concentration. E of M@V3-D at different 3×3×1, 4×4×1 and 5×5×1 supecells is 3.634, 3.698 and 3.705 eV, which is obviously lower than that of the other four atomic configurations for M@V-D. The E difference between M@V1-D and M@V5-D at the same 3×3×1 supercell is the largest up to 0.815 eV, and then the smallest E difference also reaches to 0.585 eV between M@V2-D and M@V5-D at the same 3×3×1 supercell. It is implied that M@V5-D is very stable and difficult to turn into the other atomic configurations due to thermal vibration of the lattice because thermal vibration induces the energy difference about 3kBT = 0.078eV which is far lower than 0.585 eV. In this section, the band structure and density of states (DOS) of each system at 331 supercell are presented in Figs. supercell. Corresponding atom-projected DOS of them is plotted in (a1), (b1), (c1) and (d1). Three dimensional charge density difference of M@SV (e1), M@ND (e2), M@V-D (e3) with 3×3×1 supercell, yellow and blue mean to gain and lose electrons, respectively. The band structure of M@V5-D in Fig. The band structure and density of states (DOS) of each system with 441 and 551 supercells are plotted in Fig. It is known that the dielectric function is a tensor composed of nine components. Thus, the absorption coefficient is also a tensor with nine components. We put focus on optical properties along the layer-normal direction, and plot the absorption coefficient and the absorbance in Fig. The absorption peak is sensitive to the size of supercell, which change from 0.7% to 0.3% when 3×3×1 supercell is expanded to 5×5×1 supercell. Nevertheless, the peak position is barely affected by the size of supercell. There is obvious absorption peak at 0.1 eV in the M@V-D with 3×3×1 supercell. The peak values decrease with the impurity concentration increasing. There are the other two peaks in M@V-D respectively located at 0.67 and 1.2 eV. The former peak becomes obvious while the later becomes disappeared as the impurity concentration increases. In the letter, we reported that the crystal and electronic structures and optical properties of the perfect monolayer MoS2 and three kinds of imperfect monolayer MoS2 with different impurity concentrations. It is found that doping N at the site of S atom tends to form an interstitial N atom leaving the vacancy, the N atom and the vacancy constitute the NI-VS dimer. Thus, there is NI-VS-VS trimer in monolayer MoS2 with doping N and S vacancy. Doping states and defect states respectively appears in the band gap of M@ND and M@SV, and both coexist in the band gap of M@V-D. It is revealed the hybridization of Mo-4d and S-3p orbitals yield the defect states, and the mutual hybridizations of Mo-4d, S-3p and N-2p orbitals yield the doping states. We predicted that the infrared absorbance of the monolayer MoS2 with S vacancy and doping N coexisting is the most excellent. It is revealed that special electronic structure determined by special crystal structure of M@V-D with NI-VS-VS trimer.