We probe the local magnetic properties of interfaces between the insulating ferromagnet EuS and the topological insulator Bi2Se3 using low energy muon spin rotation (LE-μSR). We compare these to the interface between EuS and the topologically trivial metal, titanium. Below the magnetic transition of EuS, we detect strong local magnetic fields which extend several nm into the adjacent layer and cause a complete depolarization of the muons. However, in both Bi2Se3 and titanium we measure similar local magnetic fields, implying that their origin is mostly independent of the topological properties of the interface electronic states. In addition, we use resonant soft X-ray angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (SX-ARPES) to probe the electronic band structure at the interface between EuS and Bi2Se3. By tuning the photon energy to the Eu anti-resonance at the Eu M5 pre-edge we are able to detect the Bi2Se3 conduction band, through a protective Al2O3 capping layer and the EuS layer. Moreover, we observe a signature of an interface-induced modification of the buried Bi2Se3 wave functions and/or the presence of interface states. Breaking the time reversal symmetry in topological insulators (TI) opens a gap in the topological surface states (TSS) which are otherwise protected against local perturbations. This has been proposed as a route towards several new quantum phenomena, such as the quantum anomalous Hall (QAH) effect One of the candidate insulating magnets that has a structure compatible with the Bi 2 Se 3 TI family is EuS. The EuS layer orders ferromagntically in-plane with a Curie temperature T EuS C ≈ 16 K. It has been shown with polarized neutron reflectometry that at low temperature there is a large induced in-plane magnetic moments extending typically ∼ 2 nm into the TI The origin of these unusual properties, in particular the high magnetic transition temperature, were attributed to the presence of TSS at the EuS/TI interface The absence of the QAH effect in current EuS/(charge compensated TI) devices may be due to a small overlap between the TSS and the localized Eu 4f states which would result in a small exchange interaction between the TI and EuS Here, we address this question directly using depth resolved measurements of the local magnetic and electronic properties of EuS/Bi 2 Se 3 heterostructures using muon spin spectroscopy (μSR) and soft X-ray angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (SX-ARPES) at the buried interface. By tuning the photon energy (hν) to the Eu anti-resonance at the Eu M 5 pre-edge we find a clear photoemission signal of the Bi 2 Se 3 conduction band, through a protective Al 2 O 3 capping layer and the EuS layer. This allows us to confirm that the electronic structure of the buried Bi 2 Se 3 layer is preserved in the presence of the EuS and capping layer. Our μSR measurements show that below the magnetic transition of EuS, there are strong local magnetic fields which extend several nanometers into the adjacent TI layer and completely depolarize the muons. Comparison between the properties of the EuS/Bi 2 Se 3 and EuS/titanium interfaces reveals that they are very similar magnetically, implying that the presence of TSS at the interface are most probably not a dominant factor in the observed proximity effect at these interfaces. The studied samples consist of layers of Bi 2 Se 3 , V 0.2 (Bi 0.32 Sb 0.68 ) 1.8 Te 3 and Ti grown onto sapphire (0001) substrates by molecular beam epitaxy The low energy μSR experiments were performed on the μE4 beamline of the Swiss Muon Source at Paul Scherrer Institute in Villigen, Switzerland The thickness and stoichiometric properties of the layers were verified using RBS measurements. The RBS yield as a function of final He energy is shown in Fig. The ARPES intensity form a buried layer is usually very small. It is therefore helpful to first characterize a reference Bi 2 Se 3 sample independently before considering the full heterostructure. In Figure For the heterostructure samples, which have been capped with an Al 2 O 3 layer of 1 nm thickness, we have confirmed the absence of any significant degradation by checking the Eu valence using XAS. The shape and position of the Eu M 5 XAS peak in Fig. Results of resonant photoemission spectroscopy measurements across the Eu M 4,5 edges are shown in Fig. Despite the large probing depth of SX-ARPES, observation of a weak dispersive signal from the buried Bi 2 Se 3 is hindered by overwhelming intensity around E b ≈ -1.7 eV, which mainly corresponds to a 7 F final state multiplett excited from Eu 2+ [51, 52, Fig. Representative μSR asymmetry spectra of EuS/(20 QL) Bi 2 Se 3 are shown in Fig. The initial asymmetry, A 0 , as a function of the implantation energy E for EuS/(60 QL) Bi 2 Se 3 and EuS/(60 nm)Ti is shown in Figs. In Figure The V 0.2 (Bi,Sb) 1.8 Te 3 layer is expected to have a broad magnetic transition with an onset around T C ≈ 150 K In DFT calculations of EuS/Bi 2 Se 3 , a sharp interface between a Se and Eu layer is typically assumed. This leads to the presence of a topologically trivial interface state that crosses the Fermi surface between Γ-K and forms a plateau at the M point along Γ-M around E b ≈ -0.2 eV A detailed comparison of the momentum and energy distribution curves (MDC and EDC, respectively) of the EuS/Bi 2 Se 3 and bare Bi 2 Se 3 reveals a very similar dispersion [Fig. Zero-field measurements in the magnetic phase of bulk samples of EuS have shown that the local field at the muon stopping position is on the order of 0.336 T The energy and temperature dependence of A 0 in Fig. We now turn to a quantitative estimation of the magnetic volume fraction in the samples. From the calculated muon stopping profile of EuS/V 0.2 (Bi,Sb) 1.8 Te 3 we expect that ∼ 23 % of the muons stop in the EuS layer when using an implantation energy of 1.5 keV. The measured asymmetry is an ensemble average over all muons in the sample. Therefore, if we assume that only muons stopping in the EuS layer are depolarized, we expect to observe a 23 % decrease relative to the full asymmetry in this sample as indicated with a bar in Fig. The fact that the size of the drop at T EuS C in EuS/V 0.2 (Bi,Sb) 1.8 Te 3 is correctly predicted by the simulation, further attests to the accuracy of the Trim.SP results and justifies their use to make rough estimation of the involved length scale of the region influenced by the magnetic layer in the other samples. In these estimates we use the calculated muon stopping profiles shown in Figs. 9(a) and 9(c). In order to evaluate the measured asymmetry, we assume that muons stopping in EuS do not contribute, while those stopping in the sapphire substrate contribute only 42 % of their polarization Here, the total A 0 was scaled to match the point measured at RT and E = 6 keV, where most muons stop in the interlayer. As expected, this curve overestimates A 0 at low implantation energy and recovers to the RT values too quickly with increasing energy. To better account for our measurements, we introduce an additional "proximity magnetized" layer of thickness d in the near-interface region of the interlayer, close to EuS. We assume that muons stopping in this layer are also depolarized rapidly and do not contribute to the measured asymmetry. The calculated curves for various values of d are shown in Fig. We conclude that our calculations provide a rough estimate of the thickness of the affected region, between 4 -8 nm for both EuS/(60 QL) Bi 2 Se 3 and EuS/(60 nm)Ti, which is larger than the 2 nm proximity that is typically observed with PNR Note that the depolarization of the muons within 4 -8 nm adjacent to the interface could be caused either by proximity induced magnetism or by stray fields, e.g. due to roughness of the interface or finite magnetic domain size in the EuS layer. However, while the prox- imity effect, mediated by the TSS or bulk metallic states, should occur close to the interface (within a few A, Another unexpected feature in Fig. We combine several depth sensitive experimental techniques to investigate the magnetic proximity effect in EuS/Bi 2 Se 3 . Our μSR measurements reveal the presence of large local magnetic fields that extend several nanometers away from the EuS layer and into the adjacent nonmagnetic layer. However, this length scale indicates that the main contribution to the detected fields in the nonmagnetic layer is stray fields from EuS magnetic domains. A careful comparison between EuS/Bi 2 Se 3 and EuS/Ti reveals a qualitatively similar behavior which implies that it does not rely upon the presence of topological states at the interface. Rather, the dominant contribution to the observed local magnetic properties appears to be independent of the topology and the exact electronic structure at the interface. Using anti-resonant SX-ARPES at the Eu M 5 pre-edge we find that the dispersive electronic band structure of the buried Bi 2 Se 3 layer remains mostly unaffected by the presence of the EuS and Al 2 O 3 layers. There is no clear signature of the previously predicted interface states The combined LE-μSR and SX-ARPES results show that there can be strong magnetic fields in the layer beneath EuS, unrelated to topological interface states or the presence of strong magnetic exchange coupling. However, both of those are desirable when considering topological insulator/magnetic insulator interfaces for QAH devices. Finally, to answer our initial question, the presented results can be fully explained without a need to introduce an interplay between topology and ferromagnetism at the EuS/Bi 2 Se 3 interface. The μSR spectra were fitted to an exponentially damped cosine of the form A(t) = A 0 e -λt cos (γ μ Bt + φ) . (1) In the main text we mainly discuss the initial asymmetry at t = 0 μs, A 0 . However, the damping rate λ and the oscillation frequency ω = γ μ B are also affected by the magnetic transition. Here, B is the mean magnetic field at the muons' stopping sites and γ μ = 2π × 135.5 MHz/T is the muon gyromagnetic ratio. Note that B is mostly sensitive to out-of-plane component of the internal magnetic field (denoted as tilt rotation in Figure [65] In a transverse field (Bext) the mean field is more sensitive to out-of-plane components (B ⊥ ) than to in-plane components (B ) of the internal magnetic field Bint.