Magnetic lanthanide half-Heuslers (RPtBi; R being the lanthanide) represent an attractive subgroup of the Heusler family and have been identified as ideal candidates for time reversal symmetry breaking topological Weyl semimetals. In this paper, we present the detailed analysis of the magnetotransport properties of frustrated antiferromagnet TbPtBi. This material shows large, nonsaturating magnetoresistance (MR) with unusual magnetic field dependence. The MR of TbPtBi is significantly anisotropic with respect to the magnetic field, applied along different crystallographic directions and indicates the anisotropic nature of the Fermi surface. The chiral anomaly induced negative longitudinal magnetoresistance confirms the presence of Weyl fermions. At low temperature, Berry phase driven large anomalous Hall conductivity has been observed. The calculated anomalous Hall angle is the largest reported so far. The family of Heusler compounds consists of more than 1000 ternary metallic or semiconducting materials with wide range of multifunctional properties Half-Heusler compounds are a subgroup of this family with general chemical formula XYZ, where X and Y are either transition metal or rare earth element and Z is a main group element. Several half-Heusler materials have been theoretically proposed The single crystals of TbPtBi were grown in Bi-flux As shown in Fig. In Fig. ], in Fig. The zero-field resistivity (ρ xx ) for TbPtBi exhibits metallic character [Fig. In Fig. Identifying the presence of Weyl fermions in a material is of fundamental importance and requires sophisticated techniques such as angle resolved photo emission spectroscopy. Nevertheless, their signature can be observed in transport experiments. The ABJ chiral anomaly is a relativistic phenomenon, which appears due to the nonconservation of Weyl fermions of a definite chirality in a system where ρ 0 and σ 0 are zero-field resistivity and conductivity, respectively. C w is a temperature dependent parameter, whereas C 1 and C 2 are arbitrary constants. The term (σ 0 + C 1 √ B) describes the low-field minimum in the conductivity, which appears due to weak antilocalization effect. Our experimental data are in good agreement with the theoretical prediction [Fig. To calculate the density and mobility of the charge carriers, next, we have performed the Hall resistivity (ρ yx ) measurements. In Fig. With increasing temperature, the AHA decreases whereas the maximum shifts towards higher magnetic field value. To summarize, we have presented a systematic analysis on the magnetotransport properties of half-Heusler compound TbPtBi. This material hosts a frustrated antiferromagnetic ground state below 3.4 K. Large, nonsaturating MR has been observed with unconventional magnetic field dependence. The MR shows significant anisotropy with crystallographic direction and hence, indicates the anisotropic nature of the Fermi surface. From the longitudinal MR, we have observed the signature of relativistic Adler-Bell-Jackiw chiral anomaly, which confirms the presence of Weyl fermions in this material. Hall resistivity measurements reveal hole type carriers along with very high mobility. At low temperature, a large anomalous Hall conductivity has been observed, which is originated from the non-trivial Berry curvature of the electronic band structure. The calculated anomalous Hall angle is largest among the members of the half-Heusler RPtBi family as well as other compounds studied so far. Therefore, TbPtBi is an ideal system to investigate the complex interplay of magnetism and topologically non-trivial quantum states.