After the electromagnetic generator, searching for novel electric generators without strong magnetic field is highly demanded. The generator without strong magnetic field calls for a physical picture distinct from the traditional generators. As the counterpart of the static PN junction has been widely used in the integrated circuits, we develop an electric generator named "dynamic PN generator" with a high current density and voltage output, which converts mechanical energy into electricity by sliding two semiconductors with different Fermi level. A dynamic N-GaAs/SiO 2 /P-Si generator with the open-circuit voltage of 3.1 V and short-circuit density of 1.0 A/m 2 have been achieved. The physical mechanism of the dynamic PN generator is proposed based on the built-in electric field bounding back diffusing carriers in dynamic PN junctions, which breaks the equilibrium between drift and diffusion current in the PN junction. Moreover, the dynamic MoS 2 /AlN/Si generator with the open-circuit voltage of 5.1 V and short-circuit density of 112 A/m 2 (11.2 mA/cm 2 ) have also been achieved, which can effectively output a direct-current and light up a blue light-emitting diode directly. This dynamic MoS 2 /AlN/Si generator can continuously work for hours without obvious degradation, demonstrating its unique mechanism and potential applications in many fields where the mechanical energy is available. The understanding of electron movements advances the information society and satisfying the requirements of electrical energy for human society. Michael Faraday is well known for the discovery of electromagnetic induction, who revealed the connection between magnetism and electricity in the year of 1831 Since the invention of PN junction in 1940s Typically, a dynamic GaAs/Si junction can convert the mechanical energy into electricity, whose open-circuit voltage (V oc ) reaches 0.7 V and short-circuit density (J sc ) reaches 1.8 A/m 2 . Both the V oc and J sc are the peak value of voltage and current output. Furthermore, compared with the semiconductor-semiconductor dynamic PN generator, the semiconductor-insulator-semiconductor structure based dynamic PN generator outputs higher voltage attributed to the interface passivation and insulator bounding effect under the localized built-in electric field As a representative dynamic PN generator, the schematic structure of the dynamic GaAs/Si generator is illustrated in Figure Accordingly, the work function of N-GaAs is smaller than P-Si, thus a built-in electric field will be formed between the N-GaAs and P-Si substrate. Primarily, the N-type GaAs was dragged along the surface of the P-type Si and a maximal V oc up to 0.7 V was observed, which is independent on the working area. The dynamic P-Si/N-Si and P-Si/N-GaN junction can also output voltage signal as well as P-Si/N-GaAs junction, among which the V oc of P-Si/N-GaAs junction is the highest, which is 7 times of dynamic P-Si/N-Si generator (Figure The destruction of the PN junction at the rear part inhibits the diffusion paths for the diffusing electrons and holes, which is necessary for balancing the drift current. Those otherwise diffused carriers are bound back and accelerated by the built-in field. As the P-type side contacts with N-type side at the front part, the drift current will balance with the diffusion current very soon. As time passes in a series of pieces, more electrons and holes are bound back the N-type side and P-type side, respectively, leading a net current output and building a voltage output. Figure where J n , J p , μ n , μ p , D n, D p are the electron/hole current density, the electron/hole mobility and the electron/hole diffusion coefficient of GaAs and Si, respectively. E is the built-in field, q is the elementary charge, n and p are the position dependent electron/hole density in GaAs and Si, respectively. When the GaAs wafer moves along the Si substrate, there is a dynamic process of disappearance of the depletion layer in the rear end and the re-establishment of the depletion layer in the front end. In macro scale, the effective working area of the dynamic PN junction is assumed as the contact area of the GaAs wafer and Si substrate during the movement. According to equation ( To reveal this distinctive current generation mechanism and prove the barrier height of the PN junction plays a crucial role in our generator, P-type silicon wafers with different thickness (d) of silicon oxide are used here for further experiments. We find this dynamic semiconductor-insulator-semiconductor structure generator has higher voltage output because of the increased barrier height On this basis, we use the electricity of our devices to light up a blue LED (the picture of experimental model is shown in Supplementary Figure 