Fe 3+ S = 5/2 ions form saw-tooth like chains along the a axis of the oxo-selenite Fe2O(SeO3)2 and an onset of long-range magnetic order is observed for temperatures below TC = 105 K. This order leads to distinct fingerprints in phonon mode linewidths and energies as resolved by Raman scattering. In addition, new excitations with small linewidths emerge below T = 150 K, and are assigned to two-magnon scattering processes with the participation of flat-band and high energy magnon branches. From this a set of exchange coupling constants is estimated. The specific ratio of the saw-tooth spine-spine and spine-vertex interactions may explain the instability of the dimer quantum ground state against an incommensurate 3D magnetic order. There is great interest in magnetic quantum systems with well known magnetic ground states and complex excitation spectra. One such system is the antiferromagnetic saw-tooth chain, or ∆ chain -a one-dimensional lattice spin system with a topology of corner-sharing antiferromagnetically connected triangles. In contrast to many other frustrated systems, the ground state of a perfect S = 1/2 saw-tooth chain with couplings between the base (J bb ) and the base-vertex neighbor-nearest (NN) spins (J bv ) is exactly known The saw-tooth lattice topology implies the presence of magnetic ions in at least two different Wyckoff positions. Thus, an interplay between different magnetic order parameters and geometrical frustration may yield a rich magnetic phase diagram. An easy switching between different 3D ordered ground states requires a complex and unusual spin dynamics with the presence of few low energy magnon modes. The latter modes might originate from zero energy flat-band modes activated by exchange interactions which are slightly different from characteristic interactions of the ideal saw-tooth structure. In the classical limit some saw-tooth model systems possess zero energy flat-band modes, remarkably similar to a Kagome antiferromagnet Despite this theoretical effort, only a small number of respective experimental realizations exists. This includes the delafossite YCuO 2.5 With respect to 3D ordered ground states the most prominent representative is Mn 2 GeO 4 with T N 1 = 47 K and additional first-order magnetic transitions at T N 2 = 17 K and T N 3 = 5.5 K Here we report a Raman scattering study accompanied by magnetic susceptibility measurements of a new saw-tooth chain compound -the iron oxoselenite Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 . Unlike other saw-tooth chain compounds, its magnetic susceptibility evidences low-dimensional behavior above T C ∼ 105 K which can not be described by a Curie-Weiss law. This highlights the proximity of Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 to a quantum critical point (QCP). Below T C the susceptibility follows antiferromagnetic behavior. We observe several phonon anomalies related to the onset of 3D magnetic order in Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 . Our lattice dynamic calculations support magnetoelastic coupling between lattice and magnetic subsystems. Below T C we observe a few highly polarized and relatively narrow magnetic excitations at different energy scales. We assign these signals to two-magnon scattering with the participation of weakly dispersive magnon branches. We uncover four-fold and two-fold degenerate modes which are almost flat on the k y k z plane of reciprocal space, independently on the presence of 3D interchain exchange interactions. Furthermore, we demonstrate that 3D magnetic order can develop from a fluctuating valence bond state as a consequence of specific relations between exchange interactions. Raman scattering experiments were performed with different setups in quasi-backscattering geometry on the as-grown surfaces of Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 single crystals. We used an excitation wavelength λ = 532.1 nm of a Nd:YAG solid-state laser with the power P = 2 mW. The scattered light was collected and dispersed by a triple monochromator DILOR XY spectrometer onto a liquid-nitrogencooled Horiba Jobin Yvon, Spectrum One CCD-3000V detector. The temperature dependence of the Raman spectra was obtained in a variable temperature closedcycle cryostat (Oxford/Cryomech Optistat). A Horiba LabRam HR800 spectrometer was used for measurements from the top of the needle-like sample with a regular size of 0.1 × 0.1 × 1 mm 3 . Raman spectra were measured in aa, bb, cc, ac, and bc scattering geometries. Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 crystallizes in the orthorhombic structure The temperature dependence of the magnetic susceptibility χ(T ) of Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 taken at B = 0.1 T is shown in Fig. For an analysis of the coupling between lattice and spin degrees of freedom a complete knowledge of the vibrational properties of the material is essential. For the P ccn orthorhombic structure of Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 with three Fe ions located at the 4c, 4d, and 8e Wyckoff positions, and all selenium and oxygen ions at the 8e position We find that the Raman spectra of Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 at T = 290 K and 6 K are very well polarized [see Fig. Narrow and well-distinguishable phonon peaks (accounting for a high sample quality) with various intensities are observed. In the frequency range of 10 -900 cm -1 and at T = 6 K all 100 Γ-point Raman-active phonon modes of A g , B 2g , and B 3g symmetry can be clearly identified. In addition, very weak and broad second order excitations are observed in the higher frequency regime up to 1300 cm -1 (not shown). The temperature dependence of the Raman spectra of Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 obtained in aa scattering geometry is shown in Fig. An exception is the behavior of the low-frequency phonon mode at 80 cm -1 (295 K). It hardens by more than 10 cm -1 upon cooling from 290 to 6 K [see Figs. , which is several times larger than the hardening of the remaining phonon lines. This indicates that this excitation responds especially strong to magnetic ordering. The most striking observation in our experiment is the set of bands appearing at low temperatures and observable only in aa polarization at 54 cm -1 , 523 cm -1 and 600 cm -1 , and a further excitation at 163 cm -1 in ac polarization. Their unique temperature dependence allows us to assign them to two-magnon Raman scattering processes related to 3D long-range order in Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 (see Fig. The broad two-humped feature with a strong maximum centered at around 600 cm -1 in the spectrum at 6 K demonstrates a typical two-magnon behavior: It softens in frequency and broadens in linewidth upon increasing temperature and strongly drops in intensity for T > T C , although it remains distinguishable up to 150 K [see Fig. The excitation at 523 cm -1 [Fig. 3(b)] has a comparably smaller linewidth and remains distinguishable even at room temperature. With lowering temperature its linewidth decreases in an unusual way [see Fig. The observed signals share some general feature -their relatively narrow linewidth compared to the scale of exchange that follows from the rather high T C . Since there are sixteen magnetic Fe ions per unit cell, the spin-wave spectrum of Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 contains sixteen branches [see Figs. We will first focus on structural details of Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 which affect the aforementioned properties. The Fe ions build up the four saw-tooth chains that are running along the a axis. The spin chain is formed by a sequence of corner-sharing Fe1O 6 octahedra and Fe2O 4 tetrahedra. Looking at the arrangement of magnetic bonds (e.g. in the approximation of nearest-neighbor exchange interactions) one can sort out two weakly coupled Fe 3+ ab planes which are formed by two saw-tooth chains running along the a axis. The interaction between these chains is weaker than the intrachain interactions. Indeed, the angle of the Fe1-O-Fe2 bonds in corner-shared octahedra The susceptibility measurements suggest that below T C the magnetic long range order is antiferromagnetic [see Fig. Fig. Here we assume that Fe1-Fe2 (with an angle of Fe1-O-Fe2 = 127.79 • ) and Fe2-Fe3 (with an angle of Fe2-O-Fe3 = 123.7 • ) are bonded by the same AFM exchange. The Fe1-Fe3 bonding is weaker, as it forms through Fe1-O2-Fe3 plaquettes of edge-shared Fe1 and Fe3 octahedra with both angles Fe-O-Fe (Fe-O'-Fe = 93.24 • and Fe-O"-Fe = 107.95 • ) being closer to the critical value where the exchange interaction changes sign. The Fe3-O-Se-O-Fe3 exchange j between the tooth's vertices with a distance of 4.32 Å is supposed to be nonzero as it has the same origin as the interlayer Fe2-O-Se-O-Fe3 exchange with a distance of 4.64 Å. It's worth repeating that this last interaction is responsible for establishing long-range order. To elucidate the general structure of the magnon spectrum and to check the stability of uniform magnetic order we proceed with the one-magnon spectra calculation with small variations of the δ and j constants compared to the exchange J and supposing that the interlayer exchange I p and intralayer exchange I l can be either FM or AFM. The blue and green colors denote double degenerate magnon branches which have the same symmetry at k = 0. The double degenerate Goldstone modes (in green color) merge with the two lowest gapped branches with the gap at 5 cm -1 . The red color denote the four degenerate and almost flat-band modes along the (010) and (001) directions. Similar doubledegenerate flat-band mode is seen at 27 cm -1 . A detailed analysis of possible types of uniform exchange magnetic long-range order in Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 is presented in the Supplement. The calculations have been performed in linear spin wave (LSW) approximation with the help of the SpinW code The respective numerical analysis has been done for all four uniform structures which can be realized for different signs of interlayer (I p ) and intralayer (I l ) interchain ex-changes (see Supplement for details). We conclude that the structure with an AFM intralayer exchange I l > 0 and AFM interlayer exchange I p > 0 supports the development of an incommensurate magnetic order. A uniform exchange structure with ferromagnetic interlayer exchange I p < 0 and I l > 0 (Γ 2 phase) can be stable if the modulus of |I p | is above a certain threshold which is roughly one order smaller than the Fe1-Fe3 intrachain interaction. The uniform exchange magnetic structures with the ferromagnetic intralayer interchain exchange I l < 0 are always stable, irrespective of the sign of the interlayer exchange (Γ 1 phase and Γ 3 phase). Thus, in the following we will consider as a starting point the Γ 4 phase, with all exchanges positive, as a classical ground state of the system. The above mapping shows a distinct difference in the topology of the exchange patterns of the saw-tooth chain in Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 compared to a standard saw-tooth chain (∆ chain) with equal values of the exchange interactions between spine and vertex (e.g. for the case δ = J/2 and j = 0) 1-3 . One may check the existence of zero-energy flat-band modes in the classical limit for the isolated, non-interacting saw-tooth unit in Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 [see Fig. In the classical limit the spin wave spectrum of interacting saw-tooth units in Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 with I l , I p J is separated into several energy regions. It is dominated by the presence of a few high-energy SW branches and a large number of low-energy SW branches, which partially originate from formerly zero-energy flat-band modes. In contrast to conventional 3D antiferromagnets the spin waves from different energy regions do not overlap in kspace. The flat-band modes survive for the 2D and 3D structures of interacting saw-tooth chains with δ = 0. Note that for non-interacting four saw-tooth units in the crystallographic unit cell of Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 every mode will be fourfold degenerate. In the 2D ab layer of saw-tooth chains interacting through the interchain exchange I l the zero-energy flat mode survives along the (010) direction. In the 2D ac layer of saw-tooth chains connected through I p exchange along the (001) direction, the double-degenerate zero-energy flat-band mode exists in the (001) direction. These modes survive along the (001) direction even in the 3D case with both non-zero I p and I l exchanges, whereas zero-energy flat-band modes along the (010) direction are absent. The respective model spectrum is shown in Fig. The value of δ defines the activation energy of the formerly zero-energy flat-band modes. We find the four-fold degenerate SW at an energy of S E(E + 2I l ) at k = 0, where E = J/2-2j-δ+I p remains almost non-dispersive along the (010) and (001) directions under arbitrary values of 3D interchain couplings. The energetically highest four-fold degenerate modes split into two double degenerate modes under consideration of interlayer interchain coupling I p . We reveal that the splitting linearly depends on the value I p . The dispersion of high-energy modes in the Heisenberg approximation does not show any obvious sensitivity to the underlying incommensurate order. The observed two-magnon Raman bands contain an unusual combination of high-and low-energy magnon branches. The necessary symmetry conditions for twomagnon scattering in parallel aa polarization are fulfilled to obey such a contribution. Indeed, every four (out of sixteen) magnon branches have the same symmetry along (100) (010) and (001) directions in the Brillouin zone, and every set of branches with the same symmetry includes at least one high-energy branch and at least two low-energy branches. The specific saw-tooth structure allows two-magnon scattering in the non-diagonal ac polarization with the participation of two magnon branches of different symmetry. The quasi 1D exchange topology in Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 implies a very weak magnon dispersion perpendicular to the spine of chains that forms a high density of states for spin waves with energies close to the Γ point. We conclude that the energy scale of the two-magnon bands in Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 observed in our Raman data is given by magnon energies at the Γ point and not at the Brillouin zone boundaries as is realized in conventional 3D antiferromagnets. The anomalous narrow linewidth of the two-magnon bands, comparable with the phonon linewidth, can be explained by the flatness of spin waves contributing to the scattering process. Energies of the spin waves at the Γ point have been calculated analytically in the nearest neighbor Heisenberg approximation (see Supplement). Using this approach, we estimate the exchange constants of Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 : J = 75.84 cm -1 ; I p = 9.18 cm -1 ; j = 12.1 cm -1 ; I l = 10 cm -1 and δ = 3.77 cm -1 . Based on these exchange energies we estimate the Neel temperature T N = 103 -106 K, i.e., fully coinciding with the experiment. The restored spin wave spectrum of Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 is shown in Fig. These interaction constants with antiferromagnetic vertex-vertex interaction highlight the strong degree of frustration existing in Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 . At the same time they may provide an explanation of the instability of the fluctuating quantum dimer state. Indeed, a simple analysis of the experimental magnetic susceptibility shows that in the range between T C and 300 K the magnitude of χ exp (T ) lies far below χ CW (T ) [see Fig. Taking DM interaction into account should have a similar influence, even if J bb = J bv . As shown in Ref. In the saw-tooth spin-chain system Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 longrange magnetic order is established below T C = 105 K, as confirmed by anomalies in specific heat and magnetic susceptibility. Raman-active A g phonon modes show anomalies in linewidths and energies close to T C . The A g mode at 80 cm -1 , which constitutes the out-of-phase motion of the Fe ions from neighboring Fe layers, is es-pecially sensitive to the onset of 3D order. An anomalous increase of phonon intensities below T C points towards an increase of the electronic polarizability. We conclude an incommensurability of the magnetic 3D order in Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 which would give rise to electronic polarization in a crystal with space inversion symmetry. Excitations related to long-range magnetic order exist with polarization along the chain direction with a pronounced temperature dependence. We assign them to two-magnon signals. These excitations are strongly differentiated in energy with relatively small linewidth in contrast to a widely spread continuum which is expected from the high T C of this compound. We connect these features to the specific form of the one-magnon spectrum of the saw-tooth magnetic lattice with a set of dispersionless spin-wave branches. The minimal set of exchange coupling constants has been roughly estimated based on Raman data and results of linear spin-wave calculations. The onset of the incommensurate 3D magnetic order and the vanishing of the dimer quantum state in the highly frustrated title compound may result from the specific relations between given exchange interactions. We show that in the classical limit the one-magnon spectrum of Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 contains a few almost flat-band modes in the k y k z plane of k space. Single crystals of Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 were grown by the chemical vapor transport (CVT) technique. Fe 2 O 3 , FeCl 3 • 6H 2 O, and SeO 2 were mixed in the molar ratio 0.8 : 0.2 : 4 (about 1 g of total mixture weight) inside a dry argon filled glove box and loaded into a silica tube with ∼ 18 mm in diameter and 12.5 cm length. The tube was sealed under vacuum (about 50 mTorr) and loaded into a two-zone furnace. Both zones were heated to 300 • C for 24 h. Subsequently, the temperature in both zones was raised to 400 • C within 12 h. At the last step, the evaporation zone containing the starting mixture was heated up to 480 • C and the temperature gradient 480 • C / 400 • C was kept for 10 days. After cooling to room temperature, large needle-like dark brown crystals with up to 1 cm length were obtained in the deposition zone of the reaction tube. XRD experiments performed on a STOE IPDS diffractometer confirmed the resulting crystals as Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 . The unit cell constants are in a good agreement with those reported previously by Giester In order to assign the symmetries and eigenvectors of the observed optical phonon modes, we compute the Γpoint phonon modes by adopting shell-model lattice dynamical calculations implemented in the General Utility Lattice Program (GULP) package In Table To analyze the long range magnetic order that can be realized in Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 we introduce linear combinations of the Fourier-transformed spins s αn e -i k Rn of the Fe(i) sublattices. Here i = 1, 2, 3 enumerates the 4c (Fe1), 4d (Fe2) and 8e (Fe3) Wyckoff sites and the index α is the number of the associated Fe ion at the respective sites [for enumeration see Fig. 2 , L 2 , L (+) 1 must be directed along the a or b axis, respectively. However, both sets of possible order parameters Γ 5 or Γ 7 are in contradiction with our susceptibility data in which a ferromagnetic response has been detected simultaneously along the a direction, as well as a direction perpendicular to the a axis. Such a ferromagnetic response, at T close to the Neel temperature, is typical for the onset of an incommensurate order. Moreover, in our preliminary spin wave calculations the structure with both FM intralayer and interlayer interchain interactions does not show any incommensurate instability. Therefore, the antiferromagnetic order of Γ 3 -type with L as the main order parameters has to be excluded from our consideration. Furthermore, we proceed with the Γ 4 -type of antiferromagnetic order with both AFM intralayer and interlayer interchain interaction that results in an incommensurate instability along the a axis and the appearance of electronic polarizations. Our aim is to calculate the energies of the linear spin-waves in their explicit form at k = 0 to elucidate the exchange interactions responsible for the activation of the zero-energy flat band modes. Additionally, we want to emphasize the results of the numerical studies of the spinwave spectrum in Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 by a comparison with analytical results. In the Heisenberg approximation for 3D long-range order we expect 16 SW branches, two of them being Goldstone modes. As follows from our preliminary model calculations the development of any incommensurate order does not sufficiently influence the spectra of high energy spin-waves. Also the model calculations show the absence of dispersion of some spin waves along the (010) and (001) directions, in spite of accounting for the 3D interchain interactions [Fig. Based on the data of Table V, the magnetic Hamiltonian of Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 in the nearest-neighbor Heisenberg exchange approximations at k = 0 can be written in the form: ]- 3 L (2) Here we use the following notation: I l -intralayer interchain exchange between Fe3-Fe3 ions, I p -interlayer interchain exchange between Fe2-Fe3 ions. The intrachain interactions, as shown in Fig. We proceed with equations of motion for the Cartesian components of the permutation modes [Eqn. (1)] with the following linearization. We use the Γ 4 -type of antiferromagnetic uniform exchange order as a reference state to estimate energies of 14 non-Goldstone modes, or so-called exchange modes, at k = 0. In the Heisenberg approximation these energies do not depend on the direction of the order parameters. For simplicity we choose the ground state with the order parameters L αl ] after linearization decomposes into four independent blocks. Every block includes the y-and z-components of the permutation modes [Eqn. (1)] from two different IRPs. The linearization procedure dictates that the IRPs of the entangled Cartesian components [Eqn. (1)] in a given block Γ n , Γ m are subject to a rule Γ n ⊗ Γ m = Γ GS , where Γ GS is the IRP of the ground state (in our case Γ GS = Γ 6 ). The IRP content of the block defines the symmetry of respective modes. The blocks with IRP Γ 2 , Γ 5 and Γ 3 , Γ 8 include the z-and ycomponents of the main order parameters, respectively; therefore, the solution of the respective dynamic matrices must include the energies of the Goldstone modes which are zero at k = 0. The sets of equations in the Γ 1 , Γ 6 and Γ 4 , Γ 7 blocks describe only energies of exchange modes. The Γ 1 , Γ 6 set of equations has the form: (16,47) -(0) ≈ 54 cm -1 . The specific saw-tooth geometry, unlike a linear chain AFM, enables the scattering process in crossed polarizations. In the Loudon-Fleury formalism the Hamiltonian for twomagnon scattering has the form <ijαβ> ( e in r iαjβ )( e out r iαjβ )( s iα s jβ ), (6) where: e in , e out are polarizations of the incident and scattered light; i, j = 1, 2, 3 denote Fe sublattices; α, β are the numbers of the Fe ions in the respective sublattices; r iαjβ is the bond vector connecting nearest-neighbor iα and jβ sites. In Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 the spine-vertex bonds Fe1-Fe3 and Fe2-Fe3 have z-components with a length roughly equal to 0.86 of the Fe1-Fe2 bond along the chain direction. Therefore, from a lattice topology point of view, the xx-and xz Raman signals may have comparable intensity. The two-magnon scattering in xz-cross polarization probes a composite of the Γ 3 , Γ 8 and Γ 4 , Γ 7 types of magnons. The peak at 163 cm -1 can be assigned to the scattering on the combination of the "separate" magnons and one of the activated low energy magnons ω sep (0) + ω I-(0) = 163 cm -1 . Using the assignments given above of four two-magnon modes and the analytical solution of the equations M38 L 38 = 0 and M47 L 47 = 0 for magnon energies one can roughly estimate the five exchange parameters J, I p , j, I l , and δ in Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 . We additionally use the inequality j > I p as a condition that follows from the lengths of Fe3-O-Se-O-Fe3 (4.32 Å) and Fe3-O-Se-O-Fe2 (4.64 Å) pathways and the condition that the values of j and I p must have the same sign. The last two conditions remove the uncertainty in the types of possible magnon contribution into two-magnon signals. The restored constants in cm -1 are: J = 75.84; I p = 9.18; j = 12.1; I l = 10, and δ = 3.77. Here we take the value I l = 10 cm -1 as the lowest value at which the inequality j > I p is fulfilled. The magnon energies at Γ point in cm -1 are: ω Goldst (0) = 0 ω along the spine of chains is larger than the angle of the Fe3-O-Fe3 bonds in edge-shared octahedra connecting neighboring saw-tooth chains. In contrast, the cornershared Fe2-O-Fe3 intrachain interaction between vertex and spine Fe ions remains comparable with Fe1-O-Fe2 interactions. This hierarchy supposes that the 1D sawtooth chain is the main magnetic unit in Fe 2 O(SeO 3 ) 2 , and the interplane Fe2-O-Se-O-Fe3 exchange interaction should be responsible for the 3D long-range ordering.