We explore the influence of the nanoporous structure on the thermal relaxation of electrons and holes excited by ultrashort laser pulses (∼ 7 fs) in thin gold films. Plasmon decay into hot electronhole pairs results in the generation of a Fermi-Dirac distribution thermalized at a temperature Te higher than the lattice temperature T l . The relaxation times of the energy exchange between electrons and lattice, here measured by pump-probe spectroscopy, is slowed down by the nanoporous structure, resulting in much higher peak Te than for bulk gold films. The electron-phonon coupling constant and the Debye temperature are found to scale with the metal filling factor f and a twotemperature model reproduces the data. The results open the way for electron temperature control in metals by engineering of the nanoporous geometry. The optical excitation of electrons and holes at high energy levels in metal nanostructures has been the subject of considerable attention in the last decade Very recently, ab-initio calculations of all electron and phonon states of gold have been employed to confirm the above interpretation of ultrafast pump-probe spectroscopy in the case of spherical nanoparticles of 60 nm diameter in aqueous solution Hot electron plasmonics experiments have been mostly conducted on nanoparticles dispersed in solutions NPG NPG, which quantitatively explains both the longer time scales and the higher electron temperatures observed in our experiments. NPG samples were prepared by chemical dealloying from an Ag 0.67 Au 0.33 thin film following the procedure reported in Ref. In a simplified model of optical excitations of gold, the lowest-energy interband transition is the 5d-6sp transition at the L-point, which leads to the lowest-energy resonance in the dielectric function of gold. The spectral lineshape of this resonance is a Lorentz function centered at 2.5 eV Transient absorption experiments were performed with an ultrafast laser system based on a Yb:KGW regenerative amplifier operating at a repetition time of 20 μs. A home-built noncollinear optical parametric amplifier delivers excitation pulses with a bandwidth of 0.53 eV at a central energy of E p ∼ 1.65 eV as reported in Fig. Numerical evaluation of T e (t) and T l (t) dynamics is performed within the two-temperature model, in which energy relaxation to the lattice from the free carriers, heated by e-h pair thermalization via the fast electronelectron interaction, is mediated by the relatively slow electron-phonon interaction 3 eV, τ e,relax = 136 fs, τ p,relax = 1650 fs, E P = 1.65 eV In order to analyze the ultrafast temperature dynamics of NPG within the extended TT model, we scale all quantities of Eq.1 by f β , where β is the corresponding scaling exponent, as summarized in Table where n e is the microscopic electron density, m e is the electron mass, and τ (T e , T l ) is the total electron scattering time including electron-electron τ ee and electron phonon τ ep scatterings. Following Matthiessen's rule and assuming momentum-independent scattering, the effect of electron scattering at physical boundaries in NPG ligaments can be included in the model by considering an additional scattering time τ B = v F /d wire , where v F = 1.40 • 10 6 m/s is the Fermi velocity in gold In Eq.3 A and B are temperature-independent coefficients that in gold can be taken equal to A = 1.2 • 10 7 K -2 s -1 , B = 1.23 • 10 11 K -1 s -1 The second quantity of the TT model proportional to v s is the Debye temperature Θ D : where k D = (6πN a ) Using the scaling exponents of Table In Fig. In conclusion, the predictions of a geometrical scaling theory of nanoporous gold, concerning the reduced thermal capacitance, the weaker thermal link between electrons and phonons and the longer electron-phonon energy relaxation time if compared to bulk gold, could quantitatively account for the ultrafast temperature dynamics experimentally observed by pump-probe spectroscopy. On the basis of these results, higher electron temperatures and longer plasmon decay times can be engineered in gold nanostructures for future applications of hot-electron plasmonics.