In this work, we propose a design of acoustic metasurfaces in subwavelength scale enabling independent modulations of phase and amplitude. Each unit cell of the acoustic metasurface consists of simple conventional space-coiling structure added with an air layer, which can be analyzed as two equivalent slabs with non-dispersive effective parameters. The amplitude depends on the space-coiling structure regardless of the air layer, and the phase can be further adjusted by the air layer independent to the amplitude. The acoustic metasurface covers an entire phase change of 2 and amplitude change of one. We demonstrate an acoustic illusion effect by using the acoustic metasurface screen, which works well as a "full-control" discontinuous boundary to support phase and amplitude differences between the original and illusion patterns. The incident field of a point source is transformed into a target field of the point source scattered by an object with shadow area behind it. In the past decade, the emerging of metasurfaces Every unit cell with inertial micro-structures of a metasurface could provide phase delays along the surface, and it opens a new degree of freedom in phase modulation Due to the large acoustic impedance mismatch between the transmitted-AMs and air background, the transmission coefficient would be generally low Very recently, Ye tian et al. To achieve a FAM, we firstly briefly investigate the limitations of CAMs. We consider a CAM based on the popular space-coiling structure, as shown in Fig. and Here On purpose to break the FP binding, complex internal micro-structures are involved, making the AMs no longer regarded as homogeneous slabs in pervious works and respectively, with k the wave vector in air background. Because the total path l is kept before and after the compression, we have F eff eff k h k L kl  , and Eq. ( That means the amplitude F A is not affected by the air layer and only depends on the CAM slab. Once the CAM slab is given, the amplitude F A is determined regardless of the added air layer. In addition, if we apply In Case3, the parameters d , p and h are the same to those in Case2, but the total path l is shorten in order to offset the phase increasing in the air layer. The phase difference of the whole unit cell is kept as s and the impedance factor Q . In particular, when we break the FP binding, the possible range for combinations of phases and amplitudes will expand due to the additional choices after the breaking. For example, if the length of the CAM slab has two options of L and 0.57 h   as discussed in Case1 and Case2, the possible range will enlarge as shown in Fig. Based on that theory, we build a FAM, as shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. In conclusion, we propose a method to build FAM enabling simultaneous phase and amplitude modulations. The unit cells have subwavelength space-coiling structures with different lengths, and the FAM can be easily analyzed because of its simple structure. The FAM could cover an entire phase change of 2 and amplitude change of one simultaneously. In addition, the phase and amplitude can be adjusted independently. We further demonstrate an acoustic illusion effect by utilizing this FAM, which works well as a full-control discontinuous boundary to support phase and amplitude differences between the original and illusion patterns. The field of a point source is transformed to a scattered field with shadow areas behind an object. This illusion effect with complex scattered field cannot be represent by using the CAMs with phase modulation only. F ks   . It shows that the phase F  can be a function of the air layer length s independent to the amplitude F A . and 1 F A  at the FP resonance, respectively. We can see that the phase F  are no longer constants but as a function of s , and the amplitude 1 F A  can combine with phases other than m . On the other hand, when the phase is