We report on the high-temperature (350 K <T< 1000 K) thermoelectric properties of the ternary compounds LuNiSb (cubic) and LuNiSn (orthorhombic) and a composite material (LuNiSb)0.5(LuNiSn)0.5. The electrical conductivity in LuNiSn is metallic, while it is semiconducting-like in LuNiSb. The Seebeck coefficient reaches -5.5 μV/K at 700 K for the former compound and 66 μV/K at 607 K for the latter one. The composite sample (LuNiSb)0.5(LuNiSn)0.5 constructed from orthorhombic matrix with cubic inclusions combines the electrical conductivity of LuNiSn with the thermoelectric properties of LuNiSb. Nonetheless, no enhancement of the thermoelectric performance occurs for this material. Half-Heusler (HH) alloys, crystallizing in the cubic MgAgAs-type structure (space group F-43m, No. 216), are being widely investigated due to their promising potential for thermoelectric (TE) power generation applications. In particular, transition metal n-type stannides MNiSn and p-type antimonides MCoSb (M = Zr, Hf, Ti) have attracted tremendous interest in recent years The main goal of this work, which is a part of our broader study on TE materials, was to investigate thermoelectric properties of the HH antimonide LuNiSb In this paper, we report on the synthesis of the HH alloy LuNiSb, the stannide LuNiSn, and the composite (LuNiSb)0.5(LuNiSn)0.5as well as on the thermoelectric properties of these materials at temperatures 350 K <T< 1000 K. Polycrystalline alloys of LuNiSb, LuNiSn and (LuNiSb)0.5(LuNiSn)0.5 were prepared by arc-melting stoichiometric amounts of the constituent elements (Lu 99.9%, Ni 99.999 %, Sn 99.99 %, Sb 99.99 %) on a watercooled copper hearth. The samples were remelted several times in Ti-gettered argon atmosphere. The final mass losses were smaller than 1%. No further heat treatment was applied. For the sake of reproducibility study, two different samples of LuNiSb (hereafter labeled No. 1 and No. 2) were prepared. Sample characterization was performed at room temperature by means of powder X-ray diffraction using an Xpert Pro PANalytical diffractometer analysis with Cu K radiation. Quantitative Rietveld refinement was carried out using the Fullprof software to determine lattice parameters, average crystalline size d, and phase distribution. To calculate d, we used the microstructural analysis from Fullprof. Instrumental resolution file (IRF) of the diffractometer was obtained employing CeO2 as a calibration sample. Chemical composition and distribution of the constituent elements in the samples prepared were determined using a FEI Nova NanoSEM 230 FE-scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with a Genesis XM4 energy-dispersive spectrometer (EDS). Bar-shaped specimens for electrical transport studies were cut from the polycrystalline ingots using a wire saw. Electrical resistivity and thermoelectric power measurements were performed simultaneously in He atmosphere using a Linseis LSR-3 device. Pure platinum was adapted as a reference material. The estimated experimental uncertainties were 3% and 5%, respectively. The measurements were made in the temperature range 350-1000 K. The XRD patterns for all the investigated materials are presented in Fig. The lattice parameters of the alloys investigated are shown at Fig. The temperature dependencies of the Seebeck coefficient, S(T), measured for the four samples examined are presented in Fig. Using the measured (T) and S(T) data, the power factor, PF = S 2 /, can be calculated, and the results are displayed in Fig. We investigated the high-temperature (350 K <T< 1000 K) thermoelectric properties of LuNiSb, LuNiSn and the composite material (LuNiSb)0.5(LuNiSn)0.5. The half-Heusler alloy LuNiSb was found to exhibit a semiconducting-like resistivity and positive Seebeck coefficient. In turn, the orthorhombic compound LuNiSn was established to show a metallic conductivity with negative thermopower. The composite sample (LuNiSb)0.5(LuNiSn)0.5, constructed from metallic LuNiSn-like matrix filled with semiconducting LuNiSb-like inclusions of the size of about 10 m, appeared to exhibit metallic electrical resistivity and positive linear Seebeck coefficient. Nevertheless, this combination of the transport properties of LuNiSn and LuNiSb did not result in any increase of the thermoelectric power factor over that determined for the pure HH phase. Perhaps, a material with reversed microstructure pattern, i.e. HH semiconducting-like matrix and orthorhombic metallic inclusions with nanometric dimensions would possess better TE performance. Regarding the LuNiSb compound, we found out that despite preparing its samples in the very same manner and using the same equipment, the physical properties show strong sample dependence. The observed diverse structural and transport behaviors of as-cast (not annealed) specimens probably arise from slightly different stoichiometry, structural disorder, and/or strain effects 