Gradient plasticity theory proposed initially by Aifantis and co-workers has proven very useful in problems dealing with material heterogeneity and material instabilities. Although it has been used successfully in many applications by many authors, still some open questions remain unanswered. The modest goal of the present short note is to provide some thoughts on these open questions, providing a new interpretation of the gradient terms leading to a successful interpretation of both extrinsic and intrinsic size effect phenomena. The gradient theory of plasticity was proposed by Aifantis The modest goal of the present work is to discuss the physical meaning of the gradient terms introduced in the constitutive relations of gradient plasticity. After a short description of the gradient plasticity formulation, the form and physical meaning of the gradient terms is discussed and a new interpretation is provided in Section 2. With the proposed interpretation extrinsic and intrinsic size effects previously modeled by the gradient plasticity formulation are revisited in Section 3. A comparison with earlier works on scale-dependent constitutive relations is given in Section 4. Material heterogeneity consisting of the existence of inclusions, voids, defects, etc, manifests itself, e.g. in simple 1-D tests, through variations in the spatial distribution of strain. The equilibrium equation commonly used in such problems implies that a constant stress, i.e. the external stress 0 σ , is applied to every material point. This means that in the cases where the yield stress has not been exceeded, the possible spatial variations of strain are due to material heterogeneity, while if the yield stress value has been exceeded, they could be also due to localized plastic deformation. In both cases one could assume that the material is no longer homogeneous, considering plastic deformation a form of phase change. For ideal problems where material heterogeneity is not present, a simple stress-strain relation of the form , where the applied stress affects each material point producing the same amount of local deformation (local strain) would suffice to model the material behavior. In order to study problems in which material heterogeneity is present, non-local models have been proposed. Aifantis where   ε κ is the "homogeneous" stress, while the second and third terms of the rhs of Eq. ( In the following we will comment on the purpose of the introduction of the gradient terms and their sign, as well as on the physical meaning of the gradient coefficients 12 c , c . First of all, if one wants to model the spatial heterogeneity, he has to introduce in the constitutive stress-strain relation appropriate terms taking into account differences in the material's behavior. These terms should provide a local stress value at each material point enabling either to quantify and model the differences in the material response (spatial distribution of strain) or to "stabilize" the material's response smearing out the local strain differences. The two aforementioned cases can be realized through the use of Eq. ( e. with a "+" sign in front of the gradient terms, it can be thought of as a an equation modeling the "homogeneous" response   ε κ , i.e. trying to smear out the differences in local strain values. In the following we will consider the constitutive equation as shown in Eq. (3), but the discussion which will follow applies, of course, in both cases. The introduction of the first and the second gradient of strain in the constitutive relation is crucial since it provides information on the existence of strain differences, provides a quantification through the first gradient, as well as information on whether there is a local minimum (positive value) or maximum (negative value) in the strain distribution through the second gradient. This information is particularly useful when one needs to model the exact material behavior. In past works , where S is a stress-type quantity, e.g. the Young's modulus, the yield stress, the hardening modulus, etc. First we will deal with the possible physical meaning of the second gradient coefficient. Actually, as it can be seen from Eq. ( The second spatial derivative of strain in 1-D actually has the form As it can be seen from Eq. ( In the above relation a crucial point is the fact that this distance  tends to zero. This tendency to zero actually depends on the scale of observation of the problem at hand. It is dictated either by the resolution available or the resolution of interest. More specifically, it is related with the detail level with which the microstructure is examined and the resolution at which the strain can be measured. In a macroscopic formulation this distance could be of the order of millimeters, in a mesoscopic scale it could be of the order of nanometers, while in a nanoscopic formulation it could be, if possible, of the order of angstroms. Thus, this distance actually defines the shortest distance between two interfaces or material points, or the size of the vertices of a cubic representative volume element in 3-D that can be used to define a material element. This representative volume is thus a characteristic part of the material dictated by the resolution (scale) in which the constitutive quantities (stress, strain, etc) are measured, i.e. the part of the material for which information on the constitutive quantities can be available. There is a lower limit for the value of the distance  in a continuum formulation and this is the distance between the atoms of the respective material in the crystal lattice, i.e. the interatomic distance. This assumption is even more logical if one considers Following the finite differences scheme, an approximation of the limit in Eq. ( one could easily arrive to the following approximation which will be used as an approximation of the second spatial derivative of strain present in Eq. (3) in the following sections. When the resolution of the problem at hand is not at the atomic scale, but in the meso or macroscale, then the physical meaning of the gradient coefficient 2 c and the distance  remain the same. But in this case in order for the constitutive relation given in Eq. ( where L LL ε , ε are the first and second the spatial derivative of strain with the distance between the material points being equal to L. It should be noted at this point that the resolution L is the distance between material points that can be used in simulations for discretization of the problem at hand. Returning to Eq. ( As mentioned above, earlier the gradient coefficients were thought to be indirectly connected with "characteristic lengths" through relations of the form ch for the first and second gradient, respectively. As we have shown in the above discussion a characteristic length is entering the formulation of the model but not through the gradient coefficient. It enters through the gradients of strain and is actually the size of the representative volume element in the specific resolution L at hand; it is characteristic of the resolution of the problem or of the size of material heterogeneity dominating the specific scale of observation. If the scale of observation changes, then the value of this characteristic length should also be changed accordingly. This can easily be understood if one needs to model the same experiment in two different spatial resolutions (scales). The high resolution data contain more complete information than the data obtained using a lower spatial resolution. This difference in the available information leads to the use of a different characteristic length in the constitutive relation, i.e. a different value of the spatial resolution L. The constitutive relation given in Eq. ( In the next section we provide some examples of using Eq. ( The gradient plasticity model given by Eq. ( Morrison As mentioned above, the resolution L provided by the available experimental data is the smaller difference in the characteristic dimension of the specimens used. This macroscopic size in this case is the radius  of the specimens and, thus, the resolution L is considered to be L It is noted at this point that, as also the case with the work of Tsagrakis et al From the comparison between the predictions of the two formulations it is clear that they are equally able to predict the size effect present in Morrison's experimental data. But it should be noted that with using the model proposed in this work the experimental data can be modelled sufficiently well while the values of the gradient coefficients are not calculated through any kind of fitting. Only the value of the moduli and the observation of the respective resolution are needed for calculating their values. Richards Within the proposed formulation, the value of the gradient coefficient is calculated by the mild steel Young's modulus ( E 210  GPa) as well as the value of the problem's resolution L which in this case was the smallest difference between the values of h2 (the characteristic dimension of the specimens), i.e. L 1.25  mm. Using these values the gradient coefficient in this case is , and the predictions of the model are shown with the red curve in Fig. Again, the predictions are quite satisfactory, although the value of the gradient coefficient did not come from fitting the data. Comparison between the predictions of gradient theory (blue curve) and the formulation proposed in this work (red curve) on size effect data on yield stress in bending experiments of mild steel In contrast to the extrinsic size effects (dependence on specimen size) studied in the previous subsection, the proposed formulation can be applied in intrinsic size effects as well (dependence on specimen microstructure size). The most studied size effect of this category is the well known Hall-Petch behavior The gradient plasticity expression of Eq. ( In this case the resolution L is not identified with a macroscopic specimen dimension, but with the grain size d, leading to an equation of the form Equation ( which, by assuming that the yield stress is the stress value where the stress vs. strain graph departs from linearity (similar to the case where the yield stress is defined as the stress for leading to 0.2% plastic deformation), i.e. Assuming now that the yield stress of the homogeneous case is constant (not depending on grain size), Eq. ( λ , λ phenomenological constants that need to be determined by comparison of the predictions of Eq. In the case of nanocrystalline Cu In previous works by the author and co-workers where s is a scale factor and 0 s the total displacement. Equation ( The gradient terms of Eqs. ( In the above equation it is assumed that ε(x) has the form given in Eq. ( Evaluating the two gradient terms of Eq. ( which always holds true for s 2L   . This result means that the formulation of scale-dependent constitutive equations used earlier We have discussed the physical meaning of the gradient coefficient c entering the constitutive relations of gradient plasticity proposed by Aifantis A more rigorous treatment on the issues discussed herein is obviously needed, but this is beyond the scope of this short note which aims at providing a few thoughts answering the main questions initially raised pertaining to the theory of gradient plasticity proposed by Aifantis c is the force needed in order for the bond between two atoms to break, in other words the force that leads to plastic deformation. Thus, in the lowest possible resolution, the gradient coefficient 2 c will be considered in the next section equal to the force between the atoms of the material which acts as a cohesive force, i.e. the interatomic force.