Laser-induced breakdown has shown many potential applications in the various field of science and engineering. As the breakdown occurs in gas/aerosol, a rapid hydrodynamic expansion as shock (blast) wave initiated from the deposition location. The nature of the shock wave is one of the controlling factors in many physical processes; unfortunately, it's nature has still not been clearly understood. In this study, an error was found during the calculation of shock wave properties with the classical non-relativistic approach. The error in calculation was due to the initial relativistic propagation of high-temperature plasma. Initially, the plasma and shock wave travel together with higher acceleration up to the point of inflation, and in later time shock wave dissociate itself from the plasma. However, this accelerating effect is neglected in the earlier studies. To address the spontaneous accelerating and deaccelerating nature of the shock wave, the theoretical details of the relativistic approach of shock wave propagation is presented. Laser-induced breakdown (LIB) of air has recently attracted considerable interest due to its promising applications. For example, the interest in lasers for ignition and combustion under different conditions According to the available literatures In section II we briefly describe the experimental details, the equipment used in the experiments, and the theoretical details related to relativistic approach. In section III, the characteristics of the blast wave after a laser-induced breakdown are presented, and a few important properties of relativistic blast waves which make them amenable to approximation are discussed. Section IV is the conclusion. A schematic of the experimental setup consisting of a Qswitched Nd: YAG laser (Quantel EVG00200) with dual cavities was used to study the propagation of shock wave induced by laser spark is shown in Fig. To precisely capture the laser-induced breakdown phenomena, a reflect-type high-speed schlieren imaging system was used for the flow field visualization. Schlieren images were recorded with a high-speed ICCD camera (4 Quick E, Stanford computer optics), which was equipped with a Nikkor 55-200 mm f/4-5.6G ED VR II lens. The camera was operated at an exposure time of 100 ns, and the spatial resolution (78.125 μm/pixel) was determined by using a calibration target. A digital delay generator (BNC-745) of femtosecond accuracy was used to control the operation time of the camera and the laser system. The properties of shock wave induced by laser spark were calculated in many literatures from the classical Rankine-Hugoniot relationships Newton's Second Law, which we expressed by the equation, was stated with tacit assumption that mass (m) is constant. However, now we know that it is not true and the mass of a body increases with velocity (1) Here, in this case, is the mass at rest of either electron or heavy particles in the plasma, is the shock velocity and is the speed of light. Now, the momentum is still given by mv, but when we use the new m it becomes (2) Now let's see why the relativistic approach is needed for very fast expansion mechanism. During photoionization or IB process the electrons are colliding very fast with the heavy particles (approximately within nanoseconds). If before ionization the mass of the atom was at rest, and the mass of ion and electron was and respectively. Then after the ionization, when both ion and electron is moving very fast, and if we add both the mass together, the mass will not remain equal to the mass of an atom at rest, which is ( ). It is because the mass of ion and especially of electron might have enhanced over the mass when they were together and standing still. In the similar manner, the Lorentz transformation can be used for the velocity transformation and other related parameters for the behavior of relativistic hydrodynamic expansion. The energy-momentum 4-tensor T μν governs the behaviour of relativistic hydrodynamic expansion is given by, 1, 0 The following equations explicitly give the energy-momentum conservation, the particle number conservation and the equation of states (EOS), e P e P e P e P P P ; 0,1. 1 Where u s is the shock wave velocity, u p is the particle flow velocity, ρ is the mass density, and Γ is the specific heat ratio. The subscripts 0 and 1 denote the domains before and after the shock arrival. If the P is much smaller than ρc 2 , then, / s u c  1. Therefore, above equations (7-10), yield to classical Rankine-Hugoniot equations. The numerical detail of relativistic approach is beyond the scope of this paper but will be accommodated in future studies. . The sequence of physical events from energy deposition to shock wave propagation at different time after the energy deposition is shown in Fig. In Fig. CONCLUSIONS After the breakdown, the shock wave first accelerates with the very high-temperature plasma, and after reaching the point of inflection, it starts deaccelerating. The initial speed and temperature are so high that the classical Rankine-Hugoniot theory failed to predict the exact physical phenomena. In this study, the reason for failure when compared with the experimental result is explained. The reason for the discrepancy was identified as the faulty calculation of very fast shock wave expansion with the non-relativistic approach. Therefore, this study suggests the necessity of a relativistic approach with theoretical details, which can be used in the future study of the propagation of shock(blast) wave induced by laser spark. The relativistic theory predicts higher particle density for a given pressure condition during initial expansion of hightemperature plasma.