We demonstrate a laser-based underwater transfer of radio frequency clock signal with a phase compensation technique. With this frequency transfer scheme, a 100 MHz signal has been transferred over 5 m underwater link. Timing jitter power spectral density, timing fluctuations and instabilities were all measured to evaluate the quality of the transferred frequency signal. The experimental results show the root-mean-square (RMS) timing fluctuations of the transferred frequency signal over 5 m underwater link with and without phase compensation are 2.1 ps and 9.6 ps within 5000 s, respectively. The relative fractional frequency instabilities are on the order of 5 × 10 -13 at 1 s and 7 × 10 -16 at 1000 s for phase-compensated link, and 2 × 10 -12 at 1 s and 7 × 10 -15 at 1000 s for uncompensated link, respectively. The proposed frequency transfer scheme has a potential application that disseminating Cs and H-master clocks signal over the underwater transmission link since the stability of the transmission link is superior to these atomic clocks. In the last decades, the underwater wireless communication has attracted a remarkable attention as it is capable of providing a higher flexibility and cost-effectiveness than submarine optical fiber communication which can only be used in the data transmission between the static objects in the water In this underwater optical wireless communication, the optical signal is able to be transferred as far as tens or hundred meters. In the past years, the interest towards optical wireless transmission over underwater link has increased as it is capable of providing high data rates with low power over long-distance underwater link. Some prior works show that the high-speed wireless underwater transmission links with blue and green visible lasers have been achieved In this paper, a laser-based underwater transfer of a radiofrequency signal with a phase compensation scheme is demonstrated. In our underwater frequency transfer experiment, we disseminated a 100 MHz signal over a 5 m underwater link. The experimental results show that the RMS timing fluctuations of the transferred frequency signals with and without phase compensation are 2.1 ps and 9.6 ps in 5000 s, respectively; and the relative fractional frequency instabilities of the transmission links with and without phase compensation are on the order of 5 × 10 -13 at 1 s and 7 × 10 -16 at 1000 s, and the order of 2 × 10 -12 at 1 s and order of 7 × 10 -15 at 1000 s respectively. In order to transfer a radio-frequency signal from a transmitter to a receiver via an optical carrier over underwater link, the most convenient scheme includes three steps The three steps of the underwater transmission of optical signal presented above could introduce excess timing fluctuation and drift into the signal, resulting in the stability degradation of the original radio-frequency signal. However, the strong timing fluctuation and drift introduced by the water turbulence and temperature drift is much higher than that introduced by laser source and the photo-detection electronics. Therefore, for an underwater transfer of a radio-frequency signal in the water environment, the timing fluctuations and frequency instability of the transmission link is dominantly caused by the water turbulence and temperature drift rather than on the transmitter and receiver Figure Figure The frequency transfer experiment was conducted in a normal day. In the experiment, the two collimator were placed as close as possible on the transmitter to obtain an almost identical turbulence effect. The real photo of the underwater frequency transfer experiment is shown in Fig. 