Using the hybrid exchange-correlation functional within the density-functional theory, we have systematically investigated the structural and electronic properties of MO (M = Be, Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba, Zn, Cd) in binary rocksalt (B1), zincblende (B3) and wurtzite (B4) phases, including the structural parameters, bulk moduli, band gaps and deformation potentials. Our results agree well with the experimental data and other theoretical results, and give a better understanding of the relationship between the geometric and electronic structure. After calculating the band alignment, we find that in both the B1 and B3 structures, the valence band maximum (VBM) has an obvious decrease from BeO to MgO to CaO, then it goes up from SrO to BaO to ZnO to CdO. Moreover, the properties of the ternary alloys M x Zn 1-x O were studied through the application of the special quasirandom structure method. The critical value of the ZnO composition for the transition from the B3 structure to the B1 structure gradually increases from (Ca, Zn)O to (Mg, Zn)O to (Sr, Zn)O to (Ba, Zn)O to (Cd, Zn)O, indicating that (Ca, Zn)O can exist in the B3 structure with the lowest ZnO composition. These results provide a good guideline for the accessible phase space in these alloy systems. Low toxicity, stable quality and earth-abundance are the important criteria for choosing materials for practical devices. Oxygen is earth-abundant and it forms stable chemical bonds with almost all elements to give the corresponding oxides, which are generally stable in the ambient atmosphere and water. They are much safer than chalcogens and pnictogens, such as sulfur, selenium, arsenic and antimony. These advantages draw interest to oxides as safe and environmentally conscious materials. Oxide semiconductors, such as ZnO, Compound semiconductors with cubic B3 zincblende (F43m) and hexagonal B4 wurtzite structure (P6 3 mc), where each cation atom adopts tetrahedral coordination, usually have a direct allowed band gap. In this work, the electronic structure and phase stability of MO (M = Be, Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba, Zn, Cd) and related ternary alloy M x Zn 1-x O in the B1, B3 and B4 phases were investigated via densityfunctional theory calculations using hybrid exchange-correlation functional. The calculated lattice constants, relative total energies and band gaps agree well with the experimental data and other theoretical results. By analyzing the band-gap deformation potentials and band-edge alignment, we found that in both the B1 and B3 structures, the valence band maximum (VBM) has an obvious decrease from BeO to MgO to CaO, then it goes up from SrO to BaO to ZnO to CdO. The lattice mismatch, band-gap bowing parameter and formation energy of ternary alloy M x Zn 1-x O were also studied through the application of the special quasirandom structure method. The phase transition from the B3 structure to the B1 structure is predicted with decreasing of the ZnO composition. Our calculations were performed by using density functional theory (DFT) based on the planewave pseudopotential method, The bulk binary structures were each optimized to their equilibrium volume through minimization of the total energy and stress. The bulk moduli (B) and the pressure derivative of the bulk moduli (B ′ ) were obtained by fitting the energy-volume data to the Murnaghan equation of state. The band gap volume-deformation potentials (α V ) and the pressure deformation potentials (α P ) were obtained from the relations and respectively. As for the band alignments and alloy formation calculation, we only considered the cubic B1 and B3 structures, because the differences between B3 and B4 electronic structures are small. The calculated structural parameters and energy differences of the B1, B3 and B4 structures are listed in Table For each oxide in the B3 and B4 structures, the lattice constants are nearly the same, and the bulk moduli are almost identical. The B1 structure has relatively larger bulk moduli relative to the B3 and B4 structures because of its smaller volume. The stable phase for BeO and ZnO is the B4 structure. The energy differences between the B3 and B4 structures are 17 meV for BeO and 27 meV for ZnO, which are much smaller than those between the B1 and B4 structures, 984 meV and 224 meV, respectively. Due to the relatively larger energy difference between the B1 and B3 (B4) structures, other oxides steadily exist in the B1 structure. Our calculated structural properties and phase stability for all the oxides agree well with the experimental results and previous theoretical studies. Table The hydrostatic absolute deformation potentials of VBM and CBM are listed in Table In order to analyze the calculated natural band alignments for the B1 and B3 structures, we set the VBM of BeO to zero, see Fig. The heterostructural offsets of the stable phases of each oxide are illustrated in Fig. MgO. The same phenomenon can be found in other oxides, such as CaO, SrO and BaO. This is because that the relatively short bond length in the B1 structure enhances the interaction between the cation and the anion, which results in the expansion of the band gap and the reduction of the VBM compared with that in the B3 structure. The ternary random alloys M x Zn 1-x O formed by ZnO and other group II metal oxides were investigated in both the B1 and B3 structures. In our calculations, we constructed only one M x Zn 1-x O SQS with x = 0.5 for each oxide. The calculated structural and electronic properties are summarized in Table The calculated results can be found in Table We also calculated the band-gap bowing, b, which is used to describe the deviation away from the linear interpolation of the component band gaps. It was calculated according to the following equation, Table After obtaining the compositionally independent interaction energy (Ω) via setting the x = 0.5 in Eq. ( By optimizing the portion of the non-local Fock-exchange energy in HSE06 functional, the calculated band gaps are in good agreement with the experimental values (Table