We report a photoacoustic spectroscopy setup with a high-power mid-infrared frequency comb as the light source. The setup is used in broadband spectroscopy of radiocarbon methane. Due to the high sensitivity of a cantilever-enhanced photoacoustic cell and the high power light source, we can reach a detection limit below 100 ppb in a broadband measurement with a sample volume of only a few milliliters. The first infrared spectrum of 14 CH 4 is reported and given a preliminary assignment. The results lay a foundation for the development of optical detection systems for radiocarbon methane. Cantilever-enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy (CEPAS) is a versatile technique for spectroscopic sensing in gas and condensed phase. In the gas phase, CEPAS has been used in sensitive trace gas measurements, with detection limits down to ppt level and below The best known application for measuring the concentration of the radioactive 14 C isotope is carbon dating. Determining the 14 C/ 12 C-ratio can also be used to differentiate between biogenic and fossil emission, since in the latter the 14 C concentration is depleted The success with the optical 14 CO 2 detectors shows potential for the development of optical detectors for other radiocarbon compounds. Radiocarbon methane is a clear candidate for spectroscopic detection, as it is an important small molecule. Methane is the main component of natural gas and a potent greenhouse gas. Monitoring of the 14 CH 4 content can be used to determine the Figure Figure The gas sample was a mixture of concentrated 14 CH 4 (Quotient Bioresearch) and nitrogen. The total CH 4 concentration was about 100 ppm, with about 1 ppm of 14 CH 4 isotopologue. The gas lines and the CEPAS cell were flushed with nitrogen gas prior to measurements. The gas cell was also flushed briefly with the sample gas, before a static sample was placed into the PA201 cell for the measurement. The sample volume inside the cell is about 8 ml. The temperature of the cell was fixed to 25 • C. In addition to the photoacoustic spectrum, the spectrum of the fs-OPO is recorded with the same spectrometer, using an MCT detector (PVI-2TE-5, VIGO). The photoacoustic signal is proportional to the spectral power density, so the raw photoacoustic spectrum was divided by the Figure fs-OPO spectrum to cancel out the power dependence. Other effects to the spectral response, for example any frequency dependence of the photoacoustic sensitivity, were ignored, since they should be small when the measurement is done outside the resonance frequency of the cantilever microphone. A low resolution (1 cm -1 ) spectrum was used for the normalization, similarly to the procedure described in Figure Looking at the spectrum of the main isotopologue 12 CH 4 , the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), defined as the height of the highest peak in the R-branch over one standard deviation of the background noise, was 1300 at its best for a single scan without averaging. Since the concentration of 12 CH 4 is about 100 ppm, the noise equivalent detection limit is about 83 ppb. The spectrum has a weak broadband background feature, the magnitude of which follows approximately the spectrum of the fs-OPO. We believe that this is mostly due to absorption by the cell windows. The noise level within this background feature is about two times the noise level without a light source. Calculating the power spectrum of a symmetric interferogram introduces nonlinearity to the noise amplitude, which also results in a small positive offset throughout the recorded spectrum. Additional weak transitions, absent in the literature data of CH 4 or water, are visible in the spectrum. Figure Figure mode model The signal-to-noise ratio of some of the R-branch lines was high enough so that the position of the split line components could be estimated with a least-squares fit of the line shapes. The number and symmetry species of the component lines are the same as for 12 CH 4 and 13 CH 4 The lines of the P-branch of 14 CH 4 are weaker and therefore hard to assign convincingly. Moreover, the fs-OPO power spectral density was lower on the P-branch side. In an effort to help to identify the weaker lines in the P-branch, we fitted a quadratic polynomial to the line centers that we were able to determine from the R-branch. Ignoring the Coriolis splitting and centrifugal distortion, the R and P-branches of the band obey a simple quadratic formula The symbol ν is a position of a line, ν0 is the vibrational band center, B and B are the effective rotational constants for the excited and ground vibrational states, respectively, and the term 2B ζ accounts for the vibrational angular momentum of the excited vibrational state. When considering the R-branch, m is the rotational quantum number of the upper state. The line positions used in the fit were calculated as the centers of gravity of the component lines. The component lines of symmetry A, E and F were given weights of 1, 2 and 3, respectively, due to their degeneracy. The results obtained with the linear least-squares method are given in table In agreement with the fit, there is a clear Q-branch at about 3000 cm -1 , but it overlaps severely with the P(2) line of 12 CH 4 . With the assistance of the approximate line position calculated from the fit, some lines of the P-branch can be recognized in the spectrum. Since the Coriolis components are more separated in the P-branch, a measurement at higher pressure of 1 bar, and lower resolution of 0.05 cm -1 was performed, to obtain a slightly better SNR. However, we could assign only two lines of the P-branch. Usually the SNR was too low, or the lines overlapped with the strong 12 CH 4 spectrum. The P-branch lines assigned from the higher pressure spectrum are included in table In conclusion, we have demonstrated the advantage of employing a high power frequency comb in photoacoustic spectroscopy, allowing a broadband measurement with high sensitivity using a small sample volume of a few milliliters. We could reach a detection limit below 100 ppb. This is, to our knowledge, the lowest detection limit reached with FTIR photoacoustic spectroscopy up to this date, even when normalized by the measurement time. Due to a small sample volume, the OFC-CEPAS is well suited for broadband spectroscopy of samples with limited availability, such as the radioisotope sample we have used here. We have presented, to our knowledge, the first measurements of the infrared spectrum of 14 CH 4 . We have assigned the strongest lines of the ν 3 band of 14 CH 4 , which do not overlap with the lines of the main isotopologue. A pure sample without 12 CH 4 would lead to a more complete assignment of the 14 CH 4 spectrum, but such a sample was unavailable to us at this time. In any case, 12 CH 4 is the likely interference in most -0.0432(2) a Numbers in the parenthesis are one-standard errors in the least significant digits, as given by the least-squares fit. applications and our results should be of assistance in further development of optical methods for the 14 CH 4 detection, for example, when choosing appropriate single mode lasers for more sensitive and compact measurement setups. Funding. CHEMS doctoral school of University of Helsinki; Jenny and Antti Wihuri Foundation; the Academy of Finland (Grants 294752, 314363); European Metrology Research Programme (EMRP) project ENG54 "Metrology for Biogas". The EMRP is jointly funded by the EMRP participating countries within EURAMET and the European Union. b Symmetry label for the upper state c Numbers in the parenthesis are one-standard errors in the least significant digits, as given by the least-squares fit. a 