This paper reports a newly developed high current transformer-rectifier High-T c Superconducting (HTS) flux pump switched by dynamic resistance. A quasi-persistent current of over 1.1 kA has been achieved at 77 K using the device, which is the highest reported operating current by any HTS flux pumps to date. The size of the device is much smaller than traditional current leads and power supplies at the same current level. Parallel YBCO coated conductors are used in the transformer secondary winding as well as in the superconducting load coil to achieve high current. The output current is limited by the critical current of the load rather than the flux pump itself. Moreover, at over 1 kA current level, the device can maintain high flux injection accuracy, and the overall flux ripple is less than 0.2 mili-Weber. The work has shown the potential of using the device to operate high field HTS magnets in ultra-high quasi-persistent current mode, thus substantially reducing the inductance, size, weight, and cost of high field magnets, making them more accessible. It also indicates that the device is promising for powering HTS NMR/MRI magnets, in which the requirement for magnetic field satiability is demanding. High-T c Superconducting (HTS) Coated Conductors (CCs) have shown superior performance in the application of high field magnets Flux pumps are the kind of devices which can inject flux into a superconducting circuit without electrical contact. They can be used to power closed HTS magnets in quasi-persistent current mode, and could eliminate the drawbacks of using external power supplies. During this decade, several types of HTS flux pumps have been proposed. Hoffmann et al In terms of operating current, most of the reported results are at the level of 100 A. Recently Hamilton et al The secondary current and the load current are measured by open loop Hall effect current sensors. A picture of the two sensors and their calibrations is shown in Fig. The primary winding of the transformer was powered by a KEPCO-BOP 2020 power amplifier. The KEPCO is able to output a maximum current of 20 A and a maximum voltage of 20 V. The KEPCO was controlled by an NI-PCIe 6343 data acquisition (DAQ) card which can output programmable analogue signal from LabVIEW. The KEPCO worked in current mode, in which the output current is proportional to the input signal. The two switching magnets are powered by an EP4000 audio amp. The audio amp has two output channels. Each channel powered one of the magnets. The EP 4000 was also controlled by a programmed analogue signal from the DAQ. The switching magnetic fields were not recorded. This is because the air gaps of the magnets are not homogeneous so it is difficult to exactly determine the field value. Both the secondary current and the load current signals were acquired by the DAQ card at a sampling rate of 1 kHz. In this paper, during all measurements the superconducting circuit was immerged into liquid nitrogen at 77 K. The operation of the flux pump is similar to that described in our previous work We pursued the highest pumped current the device could output. The power supply for the switching magnets was adjusted to maximum. The load current curve is shown in Fig. To maintain a quasi-persistent current operation, we reduced the output current of the device. This was achieved by adjusting the phase angle between the switching field and the transformer secondary current; so that the switching field was misalign with the peak of the secondary current. The charging curves under two different magnitudes of switching field are shown in Fig. Considering that the load inductance is less than 10 μH. The flux ripple at 1100 A is less than 0.2 mWb at 1100 A, and it is less than 0.1 mWb at 650A. There are several sources of the current ripple. The first is from the current decay. Within each cycle of the secondary current, there is a flux pumping stage and a decay stage, as shown in Fig. This part of magnetic field oscillation is proportional the load current I L , the load loop resistance R L , and the decay time period ΔT 2 . The load resistance R L is mainly contributed by the joint resistance at lower load current level. At higher load current level, it is largely affected by flux creep and external oscillating magnetic fields The third source of field ripple comes from the mutual induction between the transformer secondary loop and the load loop. Although we used a bifilar structure to minimize the mutual inductance, the mutual induction cannot be totally eliminated. The secondary current induced ripple in the load current has been shown in Fig. In this paper, we developed and tested a high-current transformer-rectifier HTS flux pump prototype. The device managed to output a quasi-persistent current of over 1 kA, which is the highest flux pumped current in an HTS magnet ever reported. In the prototype, we exemplified the feasibility of using parallel high current tapes as the transformer secondary, and parallel coils as the load to achieve high current. The result also shows that the dynamic resistance switched transformer-rectifier flux pump is scalable, and could be an ideal candidate for generating ultra-high current for compact high field HTS magnets. Moreover, at high load current level the device can maintain satisfactory field stability. The raw data have shown that at 1 kA current level, the total flux ripple in the load is less than 0.2 mWb. Although this field stability has already been satisfactory for the 1ppm requirement of MRI/NMR, it could be substantially improved if we properly design and manufacture the circuit and develop effective feedback control algorithms.