The influence of room-temperature annealing on the parameters of the basal-plane electrical resistance of underdoped YBa2Cu3O 7-δ and HoBa2Cu3O 7-δ single crystals in the normal and superconducting states is investigated. The form of the derivatives dρ(T )/dT makes it possible to determine the onset temperature of the fluctuation conductivity and indicates a nonuniform distribution of the labile oxygen. Annealing has been revealed to lead to a monotonic decrease in the oxygen deficiency, that primarily manifests itself as a decrease of the residual resistance, an increase of Tc, and a decrease of the Debye temperature. Improving the stability of electronic transport characteristics is one of the most crucial applications-oriented problems in the contemporary physics of high-T c superconductivity. This problem is especially crucial for the most manufacturable and commonly used high-T c compounds from the so-called 1-2-3 system ReBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ (where Re = Y or other rare earths) The presence of a labile component (oxygen) in these compounds often leads to a non-equilibrium state which can easily be induced by application of high hydrostatic pressure Accordingly, in this work an analysis of the basalplane conductivity in underdoped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ and HoBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ single crystals is performed in both, the normal and superconducting states. It is aimed at elucidation of the effect of annealing on the labile oxygen distribution, fluctuation conductivity, and charge carriers scattering in the normal state. The ReBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ single crystals (Re=Y, Ho) were grown by the solution-melt technique in a gold crucible as in Refs. For reduction of the oxygen content the samples were annealed in an oxygen atmosphere at 680 • C, 690 • C (YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ ) and 600 • C (HoBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ ) for 2-3 minutes. Once annealed the samples were quenched to room temperature within 2-3 minutes, mounted on the holder, and cooled down to liquid nitrogen temperatures within 10-15 minutes. All measurements were done while warming the samples up. For investigations of the effect of room-temperature annealing, after the first measurement of ρ(T ), the samples were kept at room temperature for several hours and the measurements were repeated. The final series of measurements was done after a roomtemperature annealing of the samples for 5 days. A. Influence of defects on the fluctuation conductivity and phonon scattering In our works Equation (1) describes the experimental curve ρ ab (T ) very well, refer to Fig. In particular, at high temperatures the experimental values ρ ab (T ) and dρ ab (T )/dT turn down from the approximation by Eq. ( The approximation parameters for Eq. ( According to Eq. ( In inset (b) of Fig. In Table tion conductivity T f luct on the residual resistivity. The resulting dependences are displayed in Fig. In Fig. In the inset to Fig. The changes of the Debye temperatures, which also decreases with decreasing ρ 0 , are in line with the discussion above. Since ∆θ/θ ≈ -α∆V /V + βδf /f (∆V is the change of the volume of the unit cell and ∆f is the change of the force constants), the primary changes of θ at the crossover from the optimal doping to a large oxygen deficiency are largely stipulated by the increase of the force constants, that is associated with the deformation of the phonon spectrum. As is known Maxima in dρ/dT in the vicinity of the superconducting transition can be described as 53 where T ci and w i characterize, respectively, the temperature of the superconducting transition in the i-th region and its width (the width of the maximum in dρ/dT at half height amounts to ∆T c0.5i ≈ 3.5w i ). Further, ρ i ≈ const is the normal-state resistivity of the i-th region just above the superconducting transition. The parameters of the maxima in dρ i (T )/dT according to Eq. ( One sees that with decreasing ρ 0 , that is with a decrease of the degree of disorder of the sample, both T ci increase up to the values typical for optimally doped samples. This means that in the course of annealing the oxygen content increases and tends to its optimal value. We believe, this process is stipulated by the coalescence of clusters of oxygen vacancies in the sample, which in the very end should disappear after going out onto the crystal surface The conducted analysis of the temperature dependence of the basal-plane resistance of HoBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ and YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ single crystals in the normal and superconducting states allows us to conclude the following: The behavior of dρ(T )/dT in the normal state attests to the charge scattering on phonos and defects. In the superconducting state, the presence of several derivative maxima dρ(T )/dT indicates an inhomogeneous oxygen distribution. The sharp minimum in dρ(T )/dT points to the onset of the fluctuation conductivity. The scattering parameters in the normal state, the fluctuation conductivity range and the characteristics of the superconducting state correlate with the residual resistivity ρ 0 . For δ < 0.5 the residual resistivity is determined by the oxygen index. . Heat processing, the approximation parameters for ρ ab (T ) in the normal state by Eq. (