ABSTRACT: Finding proper electrocatalysts capable of efficient catalyzing both ORR and OER is of great importance for metal-air batteries. With increasing inclination towards structural and flexible devices, developing a high-performance self-standing air-cathode is highly demanded and challenging, as most of oxygen catalysts are powder and need to be further processed. Here, we construct highly bifunctional air catalyst from macroscopic CNT fibers (CNTf) through direct CVD spinning followed by hydrothermal method. The electrocatalytic properties of the samples were tuned by altering nitrogen-doping and defect densities readily adjusted at different hydrothermal reaction temperatures. The treated CNTfs showed excellent bifunctional activity (ΔE=Ej=10-E1/2=0.81 V) and demonstrated exceptional performance as carbon-based self-standing air-cathodes in liquid and solid-state rechargeable Zn-air batteries, with high capacity of 698 mAh•g -1 and ultrahigh energy density of 838 Wh•kg -1 . The rechargeable Zn-air batteries exhibit a low discharge-charge overpotential and excellent stability. This work provides novel simply achieved self-standing air electrodes with exceptional performance for structural Zn-air batteries. Keywords: CNT Fiber; Electrocatalysis; Nitrogen Doping; Self-standing air-cathode; Rechargeable Zn-air Battery; Solid-state Battery. Tied to the indiscriminate use of fossil fuels, increasing global warming is surely one of the most serious concerns of our century. The Paris climate agreement, signed in December 2015, is proof of the necessity to tackle this issue by reducing emissions. On the other hand, rapid development of portable electronic devices and stationary applications with high energy density requirements urge researchers to develop sustainable compact power sources. Clean energy technologies such as metal-air batteries and fuel cells are promising alternatives for above-mentioned applications. Many non-precious metal chemistries (e.g. metal oxides or metal sulfides) In practice, electrocatalysts (usually as a powder) must be coated on conductive substrates (e.g. metallic mesh, carbon cloth or paper) and then treated to minimize electrolyte loss. In the case of carbon-based catalysts, utilizing carbon cloth/paper substrates is of more interest due to their lightweight and flexible character. However, these carbon scaffolds do not possess high surface areas or active sites for oxygen reactions, resulting in depressed surface and mass activity. These factors highlight the importance and attraction of fabricating a 3D self-standing carbon framework on which the active sites are generated which can be used in structural devices. Conversely, this work presents a facile hydrothermal method to engineer defects and doping sites of self-standing CNTfs in a one-step process. The treated fibers play a dual role of providing a 3D self-standing current collector that acts as gas diffusion layer as well as active electrocatalyst sites. This unique characteristic enables these materials to serve as ultralight self-standing air-cathodes with excellent bifunctional catalytic performance towards ORR and OER. This not only simplifies the electrode fabrication process but also removes the necessity of binders, carbon supports or any other additives and makes them ideal air-cathodes for structural devices. The CNT fibers were fabricated by high-throughput direct CVD spinning, collected as a unidirectional fabric, and finally treated through a facile hydrothermal reaction with urea as the N source. The N-content and defect concentration in carbon structure were readily tuned by altering the treatment condition (e.g. hydrothermal temperature; methods can be found in details in Electronic Supplementary Information, ESI †). The morphological features of the pristine and treated CNTfs were examined by transmission electron microscopy (Figure Figure Moreover, the N-CNTf-170 sample exhibited the most positive onset potential (0.85 V) and highest current density (1.28 mA•cm -2 ). This is consistent with results obtained from XPS in which N-CNTf-170 sample has a high concentration of pyridinic nitrogen and superficial defects. Ndoping increases the density of states near the Fermi level, especially in the case of pyridinic nitrogen, thus facilitating the electron transfer from carbon to O2 σ* antibonding orbitals. Polarization curves of different samples at various rotation rates ranging from 400 to 2300 rpm are shown in Figure 2.87 in pristine CNTf), suggesting that the N-CNTf-170 sample dominantly catalyzes the ORR through a 4e pathway just as the commercial Pt-based catalyst. Although there is no consensus on the role of defects, edge plane sites and heteroatom doping on the ORR mechanism, the ne obtained suggests that the reaction proceeds likely through a two successive 2e or a pseudo-4e pathway (see ESI †). As seen in XRD, the pattern was remained almost unchanged except that the peak intensities decreased and they are slightly broadened in comparison with the fresh sample, revealing slightly decreased crystallinity after ORR. Just as the ORR is important during discharge, OER is crucial for charging of the metal-air batteries. Accordingly, the electrocatalytic activity with respect to the OER was measured by LSV over a potential range of 1.3 to 1.75 V (Figure The observed onset is comparable to that of the benchmark RuO2-VC (~1.49 V). In addition, the N-CNTf-170 sample displayed much higher current density in comparison with RuO2-VC. At 1.59 V (an overpotential of only 360 mV) the current raises to 10 mA•cm -2 , showing the promising OER catalytic properties of the sample (compared to 1.62 V for commercial RuO2-VC catalyst). The superior performance of N-CNTf-170 sample as an efficient OER catalyst can be further gleaned from much a smaller Tafel slope of 94 mV•dec -1 (e.g. against 102 mV•dec -1 for benchmark RuO2) at low over-potentials (Figure A schematic illustration of the battery and the reaction mechanism during discharge is shown in Figure In summary, CNT fiber fabrics were easily treated via a hydrothermal route in order to tune their nitrogen doping and defect density. The optimized samples possess high concentrations of pyridinic nitrogen and sp 3 carbons, resulting in excellent ORR/OER bifunctional catalytic activity. The treated samples were successfully employed as self-standing air cathodes in rechargeable liquid Zn-air batteries with a high OCP of 1.36 V, a stable discharge voltage of 1.2 V and a high energy density of ~838 Wh•kg -1 . Moreover, the sample was integrated into a rechargeable highperformance solid Zn-air battery. Accordingly, we believe that the present communication provides a novel concept of doping and defect engineering of carbon fabrics, which we feel can be employed for further development of advanced self-standing air cathodes for structural metal-air batteries.