We demonstrate a new approach for dynamically manipulating the optical response of an atomically thin semiconductor, a monolayer of MoSe2, by suspending it over a metallic mirror. First, we show that suspended van der Waals heterostructures incorporating a MoSe2 monolayer host spatially homogeneous, lifetime-broadened excitons. Then, we interface this nearly ideal excitonic system with a metallic mirror and demonstrate control over the exciton-photon coupling. Specifically, by electromechanically changing the distance between the heterostructure and the mirror, thereby changing the local photonic density of states in a controllable and reversible fashion, we show that both the absorption and emission properties of the excitons can be dynamically modulated. This electromechanical control over exciton dynamics in a mechanically flexible, atomically thin semiconductor opens up new avenues in cavity quantum optomechanics, nonlinear quantum optics, and topological photonics. The optical properties of resonant quantum emitters and materials can be controlled via judicious engineering of their local electromagnetic environment Radiative properties of two-dimensional (2D) excitons-bound pairs of an electron and a hole -can be drastically modified by placing them above a mirror Depending on the phase of the reflected light relative to the directly emitted light, the interference can be constructive, which leads to enhanced emission and a shortened radiative lifetime of the excitons, or destructive, which prolongs the radiative lifetime. While similar effects have been observed for individual dipolar optical emitters, such as atoms The experimental realization of this conceptually simple phenomenon imposes stringent requirements on the excitons. First, excitons should exhibit excellent spectral and spatial uniformity and coherence, since any disorder and nonradiative losses suppress the interference Figure The suspended TMD heterostructures with narrow, spatially homogeneous exciton transitions enable in-depth interrogation and control of the exciton properties. First we measure the absorption and PL spectra of the heterostructure as a function of gate voltage (Vg) applied between the graphene and the MoSe2 monolayer (Figs. Next, we realize a graphene/hBN/MoSe2/hBN/graphene heterostructure suspended above a metallic substrate by first depositing a gold layer inside the trench before transferring a heterostructure over it. The metal layer functions both as a mirror and as a local electromechanical gate. We apply a voltage (VB) between the mirror and the bottom graphene layer to control their separation (z), as shown in Fig. MoSe2 device, D2, measured at two different VB. In this device, the trench depth is slightly larger than half the wavelength of the excitonic transition. The PL intensity from the region suspended above gold (enclosed by the dashed line) decreases dramatically as we change VB from 0 V to -150 V, whereas the intensity from the on-substrate region remains the same. We note that we observe the same effect in the PL intensity when we apply positive VB, as expected for the electromechanical effect, and we therefore only discuss the system's response under negative VB in the following sections. Figures The absolute reflectance spectra of D2 at the center of the suspended region exhibit a similar trend (Figs. The VB-dependent modification of the reflectance and PL properties of suspended heterostructures can be qualitatively understood in terms of the aforementioned interference effect between the field directly emitted by excitons and the field that is reflected by the mirror. By changing the distance z between the TMD and the mirror with the applied voltage VB, we vary the relative phase between the two components, thus modulating the radiative emission rate of excitons. The interference is destructive (constructive) and the radiative lifetime prolonged (shortened) if the distance between the TMD and the mirror is close to an even (odd) integer multiple of λ/4, where λ is the wavelength of the exciton transition (the exact distances depend on the skin depth of the metallic mirror and the dielectric environment Additional control experiments further support this interference picture. First, the VBdependent PL spectrum from the suspended region without the bottom mirror shows only an exciton energy shift but not the change in the PL intensity nor the linewidth (Fig. S5 To gain a more quantitative insight, we model the total reflectance of our device using a master equation describing the exciton dynamics The z-dependence of linewidth in Fig We note that factors not considered by the model, such as curving of the heterostructure membrane and gate-dependent refractive index of graphene, prevent us from reliably distinguishing the pure dephasing from nonradiative rate Because our suspended heterostructure exhibits an intrinsic mechanical resonance, we can perform optical measurements while driving the membrane's mechanical motion with an AC voltage. First, we characterize the motion of the heterostructure via interferometry using an offresonant continuous-wave laser while varying the frequency of the AC drive to the metal gate, VB. The device D3 exhibits a fundamental mechanical resonance frequency f = 17.97 MHz with a quality factor of ~650 under a 0.5 V peak-to-peak AC voltage (inset, Fig. The maximum deflection of the heterostructure under resonant AC drive can be much larger than that under DC drive with the same voltage amplitude. Thus, we can utilize the mechanical resonance to induce a more significant change in the radiative properties of excitons. Figure Suspended heterostructures based on atomically thin semiconductors feature mechanical, electrical, and optical degrees of freedom that are intertwined, and open up a plethora of new applications. Owing to the excellent optical coherence demonstrated in this work, as well as the mechanical degrees of freedom, suspended heterostructures represent an attractive platform for exploring the interaction between electromagnetic radiation and nanomechanical motion The demonstrated reduction in the total linewidth (down to ~0.8 meV in Fig. S8 