In situ high-pressure Brillouin light scattering experiments along loading-unloading paths are used to investigate the compressibility of vitreous silica. Below 9 GPa, the equation of state obtained from the sound velocities corrected for dispersion agrees with volume measurements. Conversely, huge anelastic effects are observed in the range 10-60 GPa, unveiling the reversible transformation from the fourfold-coordinated structure to the sixfold one. The associated density changes correlate with the average Si coordination number. Decompression curves from above 20 GPa reveal abrupt backward coordination changes around 10-15 GPa and significant hysteresis. Contrary to common wisdom, the residual densification of the recovered silica samples can be figured out from changes in elastic properties along pressure cycles, ruling out a plastic description of the latter process. Changes in the structure of network-forming glasses occur in response to applied pressure P . Moreover, different amorphous states with distinct short-and/or intermediate-range orders as well as contrasting physical properties can be produced following separate thermomechanical paths. Even if these phenomena, termed polyamorphism, have been extensively studied during the last decades, their complete understanding still remain an ongoing challenge. It relates to the difficulty in carrying out conclusive experiments at high P . Beyond physics of the amorphous state, a comprehensive knowledge of polyamorphism has significance for the development of new functional glassy materials, particularly if novel high-pressure forms are recoverable to ambient conditions Vitreous silica (v-SiO 2 ) is the archetypal tetrahedral network-forming glass whose behavior under pressure is of long-standing interest due to its primary importance as the analog material of silicates in geophysics Beyond structural studies, investigations of the thermodynamical and relaxational properties have proven to be enlightening. For instance, sound velocity measurements have revealed the anomalous negative pressure derivatives of elastic moduli at low P High pressures were generated using Chervin-type diamond anvil cells (DAC) with cullets of 400 μm diameter. Samples of about 50×50 μm 2 were made from a 15 μm thick polished plate of Tetrasil SE fused silica ([OH] 100 ppm). They were each loaded in a chamber of 150 μm diameter drilled in rhenium gasket together with ruby-spheres to measure the pressure where ρ is the density. Compression-decompression cycles reaching various maximum pressures P m extending up to nearly 30 GPa have been carried out. As expected, the results found upon compression for both LA and TA velocities, shown as blue circles in Fig. We will focus our analysis on the quantity ρχ where χ = K -1 is a compressibility. This quantity is actually of prime interest since it gives the infinitesimal density variation δρ associated with a pressure variation k , where k is a direct measure of an apparent density variation δρ e ≤ δρ related to elastic and frequency dependent viscoelastic processes, For a continuous v k (P ) function, δρ e can always be calculated and does not require knowledge of ρ. The cumulative sum of the δρ e is an apparent density increase ∆ρ e as a function of P . For an elastic solid, χ e = χ 0 and δρ e = δρ so that the pressure dependence of the density can be straightforwardly obtained iteratively using Eq. 2, starting from the known density ρ 0 at a pressure P 0 We start our analysis by focusing on the low P part of the compression. Fig. the anharmonic interactions with thermal vibrations Even corrected from the dynamical effects discussed above, the v k values obtained for P 10 GPa lead however to a compressibility χ e which remains much smaller than χ 0 . This is shown in Fig. [13] at the highest P (blue lozenges). These values can be compared to the static ones, ρχ 0 = ∂ρ/∂P , calculated using densities from literature Two compaction processes can be invoked to explain the difference between the two compressibilities: i) vol-ume non-conservative plastic flow processes which upon decompression would lead to a residual densification. ii) slow relaxation processes appearing frozen in at the high BLS frequencies, and thus hardening the network, which could result from structural transformations existing in this P range. The two mechanisms can exist side by side and it is a priori impossible to estimate them separately from the data plotted in Fig. which relates to the compaction missing in the measured ρχ e . The cumulative sum ∆ρ c (P ) of the latter quantity is reported in the inset in Fig. An increase in density of about 1 g cm -3 is obtained for this contribution. We notice that this value is about twice as high as the known maximum residual densification observed in vitreous silica, i.e. 0.45 g cm -3 , thus confirming the presence of slow relaxational mechanisms. The mean Si-O coordination number as a function of P from recent diffraction experiments They almost increase at the same rate, strongly suggesting that ∆ρ c (P ) originates solely from the progressive transformation from the fourfold-coordinated structure to the sixfold one, rather than from plastic flow. We now turn to the unloading part of the cycles for P m 10 GPa. Comparing the decompression curve from P m = 28.6 GPa (pink left triangles in Fig. ics simulations Finally, we address the issue of the residual densification. As shown in Fig. It is remarkable that, even if slow anelastic effects prevent obtaining the EoS from sound velocities using Eq. 2, the residual densification can be figured out from the latter. This reveals that the underlying process does not relate to volume non-conservative plasticity but rather to continuous changes in the elastic properties of silica along the compression-decompression cycle. It is interesting to note that residual densification, often called permanent densification, is however reversible at room temperature over periods of several years, showing the metastable character of the residual densification Summarizing, we show that the large difference between the static compressibility and that extracted from BLS experiments can be used to monitor the pressure window where slow structural rearrangements occur in vitreous silica. The associated compaction rate upon compression is quantified and successfully compared to the Si-O average coordination number. Out of this pressure window, vitreous silica behaves almost elastically and the equation of state can be recovered from the sound velocities corrected from dispersion effects, significant at low pressure. Besides, this transformation displays a significant hysteresis. Finally, we find out that the large difference observed in the sound velocity data along the loading-unloading path does account for the residual densification of the recovered silica samples. This reveals that the underlying process does not relate to vol-ume non-conservative plasticity but rather to continuous changes in the elastic properties. More generally, this work also shows that complete pressure cycles certainly deserve more attention and that precise density and sound velocity measurements, when combined, give fundamental insights into pressureinduced transformations in glasses. That would be definitely interesting to address the case of v-B 2 O 3 or v-GeO 2 for example. For the latter, there are indications that polyamorphism with coordination numbers higher than six occurs above 30 GPa This work was supported by the French National Research Agency programs MECASIL ANR-12-BS04-0004-03 and PIPOG ANR-17-CE30-0009.