Experimental evidence for a transient enhancement of the superconducting critical temperature in presence of an intense THz or IR pump pulse was ascribed to nonlinear phononics effects. Here I introduce a simple phenomenological Ginzburg-Landau model of this phenomenon, to explore further consequences and possible experimental tests of this interpretation. Upon cooling below T c in the absence of THz pumping, both an abrupt softening of a Raman-active mode frequency and a spontaneous lattice distortion, growing linearly with (T c -T ), are predicted to occur. Numerical estimates for Y Ba 2 Cu 3 O 6+x indicate that the frequency softening should be easily observable, whereas the lattice distortion may be too small. Comparison with Raman experiments for Y Ba 2 Cu 3 O 6+x is far from conclusive; however very large (up to 18 %) phonon frequency softening below T c , with behaviour strikingly similar to the predictions of the present model, was observed over 20 years ago in HgBa 2 Ca 3 Cu 4 O 10+x ; its explanation has been controversial. Light induced superconductivity was never investigated in this material and it may be of interest to explore if it is present and connected, via the mechanism discussed here, to the observed anomalous phonon behaviour. The purpose of this note is to explore further possible experimental tests for the nonlinear lattice dynamics explanation in terms of harmonic oscillator eigenfunctions for scaled oscillator coordinates, and, for the coordinate Q, with a displaced oscillator coordinate; the scaling and displacement terms a, a IR and b can be determined variationally or within a SCF approach for a given value of a 1,2 . N is a normalization constant. When the Q lattice coordinate is pushed to an off-equilibrium value by excitation of the infrared mode by a pump pulse, evidence that could indicate a transient state with a substantial increase of T c If a given phononic coordinate affects the electronic states at the Fermi energy and considerably modifies T c , as argued in Ref To this aim, we adopt a very simple-minded Ginzburg-Landau description of the superconducting transition In the phenomenological Ginzburg-Landau theory, the free-energy per unit volume of a superconductor in the vicinity of T c is written as a functional of the order parameter Ψ; in the simplest case of a uniform superconductor without external fields, it takes the form: where the coefficients a, b are positive. Looking for a minimum of this functional as a function of | Ψ | one immediately finds | Ψ |= 0 for T > T c , and, for T < T c the value The free energy value corresponding to this minimum (the condensation energy) is evaluated plugging Eq. ( It can be argued that this mean-field type of formulation is oversimplified for the cuprates, with their short coherence length, and their symmetry lower than cubic. But for the sake of simplicity we shall stick to this description. The observation of very similar phenomena in totally different compounds, such as K 3 C 60 Here, the first term on the right-hand side is the elastic energy (per unit volume) corresponding to the lattice distortion, with ρ being the number density of deformed bonds and k = m * ω 2 the product of effective mass and square frequency of the Q mode. The second term expresses an increase of the critical temperature to T c + Θ c (Q), when Q is nonvanishing. The function Θ c (Q) reflects the complex physics that leads to a T c enhancement in a distorted lattice. According to the arguments in ref. This restriction certainly does not apply to the situation described in ref. In order to make progress we make a linearization assumption for Θ c (Q) i.e. assume that in some range of Q (remember that Θ c (Q = 0) = 0), where c is a coefficient to be determined. This is very likely the case for a sufficiently small Q range (the exception being if, for some reason, (∂Θ c /∂Q) Q=0 vanishes). Within this assumption Eq. ( Additional support for this form of the free-energy functional comes from the discussion of the coupling of the strain tensor to the superconducting order parameter by Joynt and Rice If a certain value of Q = 0 is imposed by the external THz pump, we can minimize the free-energy as in the previous case and get: and Comparing to the Q = 0 case, one finds: or equivalently: 3 Consequences in the absence of external pump pulse In this Section we shall consider the situation in which no external pump is present, to examine whether the F min (T, Q)), Eq. ( because in the opposite case both the quadratic and the linear term in the r.h.s. of Eq. ( In terms of c 2 max , it is easy to express the softening of the bare frequency ω as a function of c in the form: In the case that c is below this limit, corresponding to a softening of the phonon mode (reduction of the spring constant), it makes sense to minimize Eq. ( and therefore This can also be cast in an appealing form in terms of c max : The corresponding free-energy value is, after some simple algebra: It is therefore easy to see that, provided Eq. ( 1. A softening of the phonon frequency (reduction of the "spring constant" in Eq. ( 2. A spontaneous distortion from Q = 0 to Q min (T ) given by Eq. ( Questions to address are whether the simple-minded treatment adopted here can lead to credible predictions, and whether the size of the predicted effects is possibly leading to observable effects. In order to explore the latter, one needs to establish numerical values of the model parameters in a realistic case. According to Ref. (Note that this purely indicative estimate of m * ω 2 is unchanged for a different, Orelated phonon mode, if the effective mass is reduced by a factor 4 (from Cu to O) and the frequency is increased by a factor of 2). The density of Cu pairs facing each other across a bilayer in the ortho II structure of YBCO is one pair in a volume corresponding to 3.827 × 3.893 × 11.699 Å3 In order to obtain the value of the parameter a 2 /2b, which determines (together with the linearization coefficient c) the phonon softening, Eq. ( Experimental determinations of the specific heat jump at T c are found in the literature. For Y Ba 2 Cu 3 O 6.5 Loram et al. whereas Wühl et al. To compare these two results it is useful to note that 1gram-atom ≡ 1/(12+x)moles in Y Ba 2 Cu 3 O 6+x So an average gives an estimate of 8mJ/(moleK 2 ). The critical temperature of Y Ba 2 Cu 3 O 6.5 is about 50K, and from Wikipedia Now all the ingredients are there to determine the numerical value of c max . One obtains: or c max 3.8 × 10 11 K/cm. With the help of Eq. ( The question whether these are observable effects is difficult to answer in the absence of a reasonable way to estimate the parameter c. If we take, on purely dimensional grounds, the ratio of the inferred increase of the critical temperature (250K) and the measured elongation of the intralayer distance under strong T Hz excitation, 2pm Coming to the Raman experiments on YBaCuO in the literature, a thorough study is reported by Limonov et al. in Ref. So the situation for YBaCuO is not encouraging, as far as comparison of the present paper with experiments is concerned. The mode identified by Mankowsky et al. in Ref. Interestingly, experiments on cuprates with more than two layers, in particular HgBa 2 Ca 3 Cu 4 O 10+x [28] that a Raman active A 1g mode arises from collective spin excitations, Gallais et al. As far as Bi 2 Si 2 Ca 2 Cu 3 O 10+x is concerned, however, Hu et al. In this paper an attempt was made to explore possible experimentally verifiable consequences of the non-linear phononics interpretation of the phenomenon of light induced superconductivity. On the basis of a simple Ginzburg-Landau free-energy description, an abrupt softening below T c of one (or more) Raman active phonon(s) was predicted. Inserting reasonable values for YBCO, it was concluded that the effect should be observable in this material. Comparison with existing experiments cannot be claimed to support this prediction, at least for the phonons that are identified as directly related to the T c enhancement. Observed phonon softenings in Bi (2223) and Hg (1234) cuprates with 3 or 4 Cu -O layers are on the other hand quite similar to those predicted here. However, a recent search for light induced superconductivity in Bi (2223) gave a negative result On the basis of the presently existing data, the nonlinear phononics explanation cannot be directly and unambiguously supported by the arguments presented here. It may be of interest to explore the observability of a light induced enhancement of T c in Hg (1234) and in general to extend the search for the specific phonon modes driving this spectacular phenomenon. 