The acoustic performance of a new type of fibre-less sound absorber, the Micro-Grooved Element (MGE), is studied in this paper. The transfer impedance and the absorption coefficient of micro-grooved and Micro-Perforated Elements (MPEs) are measured, modelled and compared. A MGE is a double layer element that involves inlet/outlet slots and facing micro-channels engraved onto the mating surface of the layers. The main advantage of these elements is that, by means of a simple technological process, thin micro-channels with depth of less then 100μm can be easily engraved. This allows the MGEs exhibiting higher absorption coefficients compared to traditional MPEs with 300-700μm diameter of perforations. Moreover, due to the presence of surfaces surrounding the micro-channels, the MGEs show reduced resistance when exposed to high level of sound excitation. In this perspective, the performance of a MGE is more stable than the one of a MPE provided with the same porosity. A number of different MGEs with varied internal geometries has been tested at different excitation levels. The acoustics of the micro-channels is treated in details, the impedance end corrections are determined and the non-linear effects are accounted for. The linear behaviour of MGEs is described by adapting the models for slit-shaped perforated elements (SSEs). The quasi-and non-linear behaviours are expressed as a function of the Shear number and Strouhal number by curve fitting the experimental results. The recent trend in applied acoustics has seen gradual reduction of the use of fibrous materials and foams, especially in applications where the deterioration of these materials and the consequent pollution of the surrounding media is unwanted. Typical examples are HVAC systems The strongest impulse to the diffusion of the fibre-less absorptive elements in the last two decades has been given by the advent of the micro-perforated elements MPEs a consequence, the dissipation of the acoustic energy is highly enhanced by means of the viscous losses within the apertures. In substitution to the circular apertures, micro-slits with rectangular apertures can be utilized too Improvement of the absorption coefficient has been documented when the MPEs are utilized in combination with partitioned back cavities Manufacturing costs have been reduced by using different designs of the apertures, such as punched slit-shaped irregular apertures In this paper, the acoustic mechanism of a new type of fibre-less acoustical absorber, the Micro-Grooved Element (MGE), is described. The acoustic performance is experimentally characterized in terms of transfer impedance and absorption coefficient. A complete model of the MGEs is developed by adapting the formulation for slit shaped apertures, by including the end corrections of the microchannels and by relating the non-linear effects to the excitation amplitude and to the thickness of the oscillating viscous boundary layer. Presented for the first time in 2012 As known from the literature, the non-linear effects exhibited at high level of sound excitation strongly affect the performance of the MPEs, In case of MGEs the presence of surfaces surrounding the micro-channels and parallel to them, results in reduced acoustic resistance when these absorbers are exposed to high pressure levels. This implies that the acoustic performance of MGE, at varying the acoustic excitation, is more stable than the one of MPE provided with the same porosity. However, the techniques described in Future studies are planned where the response modelling and the evolutionary optimization tech-Postprint of the paper: F. Auriemma, "Acoustic performance of micro-grooved elements", Applied Acoustics 122 (2017) 128-137, doi:10.1016/j.apacoust.2017.02.019. niques are used to reduce the non-linear effects in a wider range of sound excitation levels When the acoustic waves pass through an intervening porous slab there is a net flow through it. If ûa and ûb are the particle velocities in front and at the back of the surface respectively, assuming the velocities û = ûa = ûb is a good approximation if the pore volume per unit slab area is substantially less than 1 4 wavelength Here pa and pb represent the complex acoustic pressure amplitudes at the front and back sides of the slab. Dividing both sides by û, and making use of the definition of specific acoustic impedance on a surface S 0 as the ratio between the complex amplitudes of the acoustic pressure and the particle velocity measured on S 0 , Z s 0 (ω) = ( p ûin ) S 0 , yields: In case of MGE the slab of material is constituted by an inlet layer In , an outlet layer Out and a number of micro-channels Ch located on the mating surface of the two layers. In this case, the Eq. ( Where Z tr-In , Z tr-Ch and Z tr-Out represent, respectively, the transfer impedances of the inlet layer, microchannels and outlet layer considered separately. For a perforated slab provided with several apertures, if Z tr-s is the transfer impedance of a single aperture, then the transfer impedance of the entire element is Z tr = Z tr-s σ, where σ is the panel porosity. Z tr is a complex quantity, i.e. Z tr = R + iX, where the real part R (or resistive component) is referred to as transfer resistance and the imaginary part X (or reactive component) is typically named transfer reactance. The transfer impedance and its components are usually normalized with respect to the air properties ρ 0 c (ρ 0 is the air density ≈ 1.18kg m 3 at standard temperature and pressure and c is the speed of sound) and are here indicated with z tr , r and χ. Samples studied in this work are listed in Table1. Several methods for the determination of the transfer impedance of these elements can be found in literature, Here, conventionally, the x-directions are oriented outward the test object (see Figure Postprint of the paper: F. where p1 and p2 are the amplitude components of the acoustic pressure in in the positions Mic.1 and Mic.2 (or Mic.1 and Mic.3). In correspondence of the test section, x = -L, so that: At this point it is straightforward to compute the transfer matrix T of the test object, In Eq. 10, pa and pb are the acoustic pressures on the two sides of the sample and qa , qb are the volume velocities at the same locations ( qa = ûa A, qb = ûb A, being A the sample area). It can be easily shown that, under the assumption of constant particle velocity across the sample, T 11 = 1, T 21 = 0, T 22 = 1 and T 12 = ( p1 -p2 ) q, where q = qa = qb . By multiplying T 12 by the sample area A, the transfer impedance is computed. When a thin acoustic element is coupled with a back cavity, the transfer impedance of the panel and the cavity impedance Z cav form a series impedance Z tot = Z tr + Z cav . The cavity impedance can be expressed as Z cav =j cot (w l l), where w l is the wavelength and l is the cavity length. Finally, the reflection and the absorption coefficients can be computed as follows: Postprint of the paper: F. Auriemma, "Acoustic performance of micro-grooved elements", Applied Acoustics 122 (2017) 128-137, doi:10.1016/j.apacoust.2017.02.019. During the tests performed for the present study, the transfer function H ei = p i e between the acoustic pressure p i at the microphone i and the loudspeaker electric signal e is recorded. As a consequence, through the Eq.9 it is possible to carry out the transfer function of the particle velocity at the panel inlet cross section: In the Eq. 13, H e+ and H e+ are the measurable quantities In order to get the amplitude of the particle velocity, which is needed for the non-linear characterization of the samples. the auto spectrum of the voltage e, S ee , can be used, being the auto-spectrum of a sine wave signal equal to 1 2 of the squared amplitude of the signal. As a consequence, the absolute value of the particle velocity is where K [V/Pa] is the calibration factor of the microphones, needed to convert the electric signals of the microphones into the corresponding pressure values. The experimental work presented in this paper has been performed in the acoustic laboratory of Tallinn University of Technology (TUT). In Figure A MGE is a fibre-less acoustic absorbers constituted by two slotted layers and a number of internal micro-channels generated when the layers are mated. In the MGE the sound waves enter the element via the slots of the first layer (inlet) and are forced to travel the network of micro-channels where the energy dissipation is primarily expected to take place. Eventually, the sound waves propagate out of the element via the slots at the second layer (outlet) (see Fig. In the specific case of Fig. In the configurations shown in Fig. In particular, the diameter of the micro-perforations is analogue to the depth of the micro-channels (both will be indicated s d). Moreover, it is straightforward to understand that the width of the stripes (at the inlet) and of the slots (at the outlet) determine the length of the micro-channels, t. It will be shown in Sec.4 that the geometrical features of the MGEs can be utilized to design simple acoustic elements with absorptive properties superior to MPEs with perforation diameters of ≈ 300 -Postprint of the paper: F. Auriemma, "Acoustic performance of micro-grooved elements", Applied Acoustics 122 (2017) 128-137, doi:10.1016/j.apacoust.2017.02.019. 4 LINEAR BEHAVIOUR 700μm. The acoustic absorber presented in this paper shares several geometrical similarities with the double panel absorber presented by Randeberg in A conclusive note in this paragraph is about the possibility of designing MGEs deprived of grooves, where the micro-channels are generated by simply spacing apart inlet and outlet layers which are not any more in contact. It is possible to use piezo-electric actuators which vary the gap between the layers according to the performance sought. According to Eq.( However, this study is focussed on MGEs provided with layer thickness of ≈ 0.5mm, for which it is safe to write: Z MGE ≈ Z Ch . In the linear regime, the dissipation of the acoustic energy mainly occurs in the viscous layers within the micro-channels, due to the viscosity of the fluid and the presence of solid walls. The thickness of the oscillating viscous layers is expressed by the Stoke number, δ v = μ ωρ 0 , with μ is the air viscosity For MPEs and MGEs, d in Eq. 17 is the diameter of the perforations and the depth of the microchannels respectively. For low enough excitation amplitudes, the amplitude of the particle velocity frequency components (û) and the amplitude of the acoustic pressure frequency component ( p) are linearly dependent and the transfer impedance is calculated as a function of the perforation geometry and frequency only. This is the case treated in this paragraph. The linear transfer impedance can be seen as Z Lin = Z int + Z ext , where Z int is the internal part, and Z ext the external part of the impedance, due to phenomena which take place within and outside the apertures respectively. In case of MPEs, both contributions have been modelled by Crandall first where t is the length of the micro-channels and j the imaginary unit. In general, for the small apertures or low frequencies, the loss mechanism described by Eq.( The motion of the air outside the apertures affects both the dissipative and inertial part of the overall transfer impedance, thus end-corrections for both the real and the imaginary parts of the transfer impedance must be introduced. From the experimental point of view a methodology which particularly fits to MGEs has been utilized to measure the external part of the transfer impedance. Ingard For two ends of a narrow tube the total resistance is 2R s , hereby the end resistive correction proposed by Maa for slit shaped holes where α = 2, 4 for rounded and sharp shaped apertures respectively In Eq. 21 X ext = χ ext ρ 0 c = R (Z ext ). In case of MGE samples examined here, the edges of the microchannels are characterized by the presence of 13μm chamfer (see where c 1 = 5.08, c 2 = -1.45 for apertures with millimetre apertures (as stated in In Fig. The choice α = 2 in Eq. 20 could lead to the conclusion that the edges of the micro-channels are rounded. However, due to the the small value of the chamfered length, it seems to be more reasonable to consider the edges as almost sharp and the presence of the surfaces s ′ and s ′′ (see Fig. For slit-shaped apertures Maa Postprint of the paper: F. Auriemma, "Acoustic performance of micro-grooved elements", Applied Acoustics 122 (2017) 128-137, doi:10.1016/j.apacoust.2017.02.019. where For an entire MGE, the normalized external part of the transfer reactance becomes: In where X ext = I (Z ext ). The following expression is given in For micro-channels the following equation fits well: Fig. In Fig. It must be pointed out that typical MPEs have diameters ≈ 300 -700μm, porosities ≈ 1 and thickness t ≈ 0.5mm. Aperture diameters smaller than ≈ 300 -400μm accompanied by higher porosities can be technologically demanding, as for the case described in It will be shown in the following section that the presence of the surface s ′ and s ′′ ahead and at the bottom of the micro-channels respectively (see Fig. The non linear behaviour of MGEs presents unique aspects due to the internal geometry of these elements. In order to analyse it, several samples have been tested in presence of different levels of sound excitation. As known from literature, this behaviour occurs for Strouhal numbers Sr ≪ 1, i.e. when the particle displacement is much larger than the aperture size. In these conditions, and for circular apertures, Cummings and Eversman proposed the following relationship where C vc = ṁ A √ 2ρ 0 ∆p is the discharge coefficient of the orifice, related to the vena contracta, i.e. the reduction of the diameter of the flow stream within the orifice. However, the transition form the linear regime, which occurs for Sh=O(1), is not sudden, but an intermediate, almost linear regime can be detected as Sr > 1. In this case, Disselhorst et al. presented in where R NL = [R (Z) -R (Z Lin )] and X NL = [I (Z) -I (Z Lin )] being Z the acoustic impedance of the samples in quasi-linear and non-linear regimes. In the present investigation, the same methodology is applied to the MGEs and, by curve fitting the experimental results normalized as in Eq.s 32 and 33, a generalized expression of the transfer impedance of the MGEs for the non-linear and quasi-linear regimes is provided. To this aim it is necessary to have a good estimation of the discharge coefficient. C vc for sharp edged circular perforations is ≈ 0.611, as shown in The discharge coefficients of the rectangular micro-channels in MGEs have been computed by performing a steady state CFD simulation where the pressure at inlet and at the outlet were imposed. The steady state assumption obviously represents an approximation because the actual flow through the orifice is alternating during successive acoustic half-cycles. The solver utilized is COMSOL Multiphysics R and the meshes, as shown in Fig. By using the normalizations in Eq.s 32 and 33 the results in Fig. The following expressions for MGEs have been found by curve fitting the values in Fig. Postprint of the paper: F. too. However, by comparing Fig. As a conclusive note, the MGE samples have been tested also in presence of random noise, in the frequency range [100, 3700] Hz and at different levels of sound excitation. In order to model the acoustic behaviour of MGE in these conditions, the following fictitious velocity can be defined where the sum is calculated from the first (F s ) to the final (F f ) frequency of the spectrum and ũ is the rms of the particle velocities within the apertures. By using u * instead of u in the definition of Sr (Eq.17 ) and in the normalization Eq.32, the resistive part of the non-linear transfer impedance, measured in presence of random noise excitation, can be still expressed by using the Eq.34. In fact, the normalized resistance obtained by using single tones and particle velocity u and the normalized resistance obtained by using random noise and the velocity u * , collapse well in Fig. However, the normalization Eq.33 does not include explicit dependence on the particle velocity. Thus, in order to use Eq. 35, u * must be used instead of u to compute Sr and the following normalization must be used to express the reactance: Fig. The ideal requirement in micro-perforated element of having infinitely small and short apertures, while still preserving adequate porosity, sufficient mechanical properties and cost effective manufacturing process, is targeted by micro-grooved elements. By means of two mating layers obtained with basic production technology, it is possible to generate a number of micro-channels with depth in the order of 100μm and length of 200μm, thus providing high acoustic performance. The thickness of the layer is responsible for mechanical properties and has a minor effect on the acoustic performance. In the linear regime, the micro-channels act as slit shaped apertures with reduced resistive endresistance. The absorption coefficient of a micro-grooved element provided with ≈ 3 micro-channels per square centimetre with depth 95μm and length 200μm, is ≈ 10% higher than the absorption coefficient of a micro-perforated element with ≈ 22 holes per square centimetre with 300μm diameter of perforation and thickness of 500μm. The reactive end-correction of MGE has been described by extending to sub-millimetre apertures the formulation provided in literature for over-millimetre apertures. Compared to micro-perforated element, the quasi-and non-linear behaviour of micro-grooved element is characterized by reduced variation of the resistive transfer impedance at increasing the sound excitation levels. Thus, more robust acoustic performance is exhibited. A semi-empirical approach, obtained by curve fitting the normalized experimental data, has been used to describe the non-linear transfer impedance of micro-grooved element as a function of Shear number, Strouhal number and discharge coefficient. By properly defining a fictitious particle velocity within the apertures, the same formulationoriginally developed for pure tone excitation -has been extended to the case of random excitation noise. The author would like to acknowledge Tallinn University of Technology Development Found, object SS346, for the financial support.