We demonstrate a method to monolithically integrate nanowire-based quantum dot single photon sources on-chip using evanescent coupling. By deterministically placing an appropriately tapered III-V nanowire waveguide, containing a single quantum dot, on top of a silicon-based ridge waveguide, the quantum dot emission can be transferred to the ridge waveguide with calculated efficiencies close to 100%. As the evanescent coupling is bidirectional, the source can be optically pumped in both free-space and through the ridge waveguide. The latter configuration provides a self-contained, all-fiber, single photon source suitable as a plug-and-play solution for applications requiring bright, on-demand single photons. Using InAsP quantum dots embedded in InP nanowire waveguides, we demonstrate coupling efficiencies to a SiN ridge waveguide of 74% with a single photon purity of 97%. The integrated photonics platform has been identified 1 as the most practical way to realize quantum technologies in the near-term 2 . Critical to its widespread implementation is the design and integration of scalable quantum light sources Efforts to develop monolithically integrated sources include quantum dots coupled to ridge In this work we propose a hybrid integration method based on the evanescent coupling of a nanowire waveguide mode excited by a single quantum dot to an underlying ridge waveguide. Nanowire waveguides with wellcontrolled tapers A schematic of the device is shown in Figure In Figures A scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of a fabricated device prior to the top SiO 2 coating is shown in Figure A photoluminescence (PL) spectrum from the source using cw excitation is shown in Figure Figure Since the evanescent coupling is bidirectional, the nanowire quantum dot can also be excited by pumping into the SiN waveguide. Figure In conclusion, we have demonstrated a hybrid integration method where single InAsP quantum dots can be placed anywhere within a silicon-based integrated pho-tonic circuit and employed as a scalable single photon source. The method allows for pre-selected single quantum dots, epitaxially grown within InP nanowire waveguides, to be transfered and placed, at will, on SiN ridge waveguides. The tapered index profile of the nanowire, defined during growth, is used to evanescently couple to the waveguide system. The quantum dot photoluminescence can then be efficiently routed into the ridge waveguide and time-correlated measurements confirm the single photon nature of the coupled emission collected at the ridge waveguide facet. Measured coupling efficiencies were 74%, whilst numerical studies predict values close to 100% for an optimized nanowire taper geometry. Finally, we demonstrated that optical pumping and collection of the resulting quantum dot emission can be performed from the same ridge waveguide, allowing for attractive fiber-coupled solutions for plug-and-play applications using fixed, V-groove-type waveguide-fiber alignment techniques Fabrication: The dielectric films SiO 2 and SiN were deposited using plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) using SiH 4 chemistry. Gold alignment marks were defined on the first SiO 2 layer using e-beam lithography and lift-off. The SiN waveguides were defined after nanowire transfer using e-beam lithography and dry etching and positioned under the nanowires using the alignment marks. See Supplementary Information for additional details on device fabrication. Optical Measurements: Optical studies were per-formed in a fiber-coupled continuous flow helium cryostat at 4K. Free-space laser excitation was directed normal to the nanowire through a 50X microscope objective (N.A. = 0.42). Excitation through the SiN waveguide was performed through a cleaved 780-HP fiber aligned in an endfire configuration to the waveguide facet at the sample edge. Excitation was above-band using both cw (λ = 632.8 nm from a HeNe laser) and pulsed (λ = 790 nm from a Ti-Sapphire laser, pulse width of 1.2 ps, repetition rate of 80 MHz). Collection was through the same fiber and dispersed using a 0.5 m grating spectrometer and detected using a liquid-nitrogen cooled Si CCD for PL or filtered using a tunable FBG (100 μeV resolution) and detected using two Si APDs (675 ps timing jitter) for g 2 (τ ) measurements. Modeling g 2 (τ ): Our stochastic model of the excitonic emission process includes excitonic excitation due to a continuous chain of pump pulses with given period, followed by exciton emission with fitted lifetime and detection probability. Exciton re-excitation after a particular pulse due to the decaying band-edge carrier population was also included via a competition between carrier recombination time and dot occupation time. A secondorder correlation curve, g 2 (τ ), was generated by binning the resulting exciton emission times until a desired number of detection events was obtained. The calculated g 2 (τ ) curves were convolved with the measured detector response time of 675 ps to compare with experiment. This work was supported by the Canadian Space Agency.