We study the vortex bound states in three dimensional (3D) superconducting Dirac semimetals with time reversal symmetry. Assuming two Dirac points on the kz-axis and bulk s-wave superconductivity, with a quantum vortex line parallel to the z-direction, we find that the superconducting vortex line has a robust quasi-1D nodal phase. The nodal phase stems from the symmetry protected Dirac points in the normal state bands, and it can be characterized by a topological index (ν; n) at kz = 0 and kz = π, where ν is the Z2 topological invariant for a 0D class-D system and n is the Z topological invariant for a 0D class-A system according to the Altland-Zirnbauer classification. Based on the topological index, we find that vortex end Majorana zero mode can coexist with the quasi-1D nodal phase in certain kinds of Dirac semimetals. The influence of the symmetry breaking perturbations on the quasi-1D nodal phase is also analyzed. Finally, we discuss the possible material realization of such nodal vortex line state. Introduction.-Vortex bound states (VBSs) in superconducting topological materials have received great research interests in the past decade Besides the TIs In this letter, we study the VBSs in superconducting DSs with TRS, and develop a general theory to describe the topological VPTs. Generally, 3D DSs can be classified into topo-logically trivial and nontrivial ones according to the Z T I 2 topological index in the time reversal invariant (TRI) planes in the 3D Brillouin zone We give a general description for the problem at first. For a 3D SC which has s-wave spin-singlet superconductivity, its Hamiltonian in the basis has the following form where only the indices for the spin and Nambu spaces have been preserved. In the equation, ∆ is the superconducting order parameter which takes the form ∆ 0 iσ 2 in the spin space, μ is the chemical potential, and H 0 (k) is the normal state Hamiltonian. If a single quantum vortex goes through the SC along the z-direction, the superconducting order parameter ∆(r) in the real space is transformed into ∆(r)e iθ , where r = x 2 + y 2 and θ is the polar angle We start with the nontrivial DS, whose normal state Hamiltonian reads as where Σ ij = τ i σ j , and τ i and σ i (i = 0, 1, 2, 3) are the Pauli matrices representing the orbital and spin degrees of freedom. Remarkably, this Hamiltonian is equivalent to the k • p model for Cd 3 As 2 We set the parameters as {t, t 3 , t , t 3 , m} = {1.0, 0.5, 1.0, 1.0, 2.2} to derive a TDS state, where H (1) 0 has a band inversion at the Γ point and two Dirac points at ±Q = (0, 0, ±k c z ), where k c z = arccos 0.4. We obtain the VBSs by diagonalizing the Hamiltonian directly. We first focus on the gap-close-reopen process at the TRI momenta, and find that such a process occurs at k z = 0 at μ c = 0.71, while it never happens at k z = π, as shown in Fig. Then, we turn to the trivial DS whose normal state Hamiltonian reads as Compared to H (1) 0 , the above Hamiltonian have the same symmetry group and its basis also consists of two Kramers' doublets with J z = ± 1 2 and J z = ± 3 2 , but the two Kramers' doublets have the same parity here. Therefore, the IS operator has the form I = Σ 00 and the matrix form of the other symmetry operators maintain the same in this case. We set all the parameters the same as that in H (1) 0 , leading to that H (2) 0 has the same band inversion and Dirac points with H (1) 0 . However, since the band inversion occurs between two Kramers' doublets with the same parity, H (2) 0 describes a trivial DS General theory.-We develop a general theory to account for the different vortex line phases in the two kinds of DSs with intrinsic s-wave superconductivity. We begin with the vortex line at k z = 0/π. Since the PHS preserves at the TRI momenta, the vortex line can be viewed as a quasi-0D system belonging to the class-D of the AZ classification at k z = 0/π. The topological index for such a 0D system is Z 0D 2 , which characterizes the fermion parity of the system. A gap-closereopen process in such a 0D system means a topological phase transition, namely a topological VPT. In the normal state, H (1) 0 describes a 2D TI (NI) in the k z = 0 (k z = π) plane, while H (2) 0 describes a 2D NI (NI) in the k z = 0 (k z = π) plane. As we shall show, there is a correspondence between Z 0D 2 and Z T I 2 in the weak pairing limit. We begin with a 2D TI without superconductivity and set the chemical potential in the insulating gap. If there is a π-flux, the ground state of such a finite-size 2D TI is doubly degenerate , while it only has nontrivial ν+i⊕-i for -μc < μ < μc in (g). The topologically nontrivial ν+1 in (i) can lead to vortex end MZM even though the whole vortex line is nodal, and (f) shows the density of states (DOS) at the end of the vortex line when μ = {-0.2, -0.1, 0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.35}. (h) and (j) show the low-energy spectrum of the vortex line in different rotational subspaces (represented by different colors) as a function kz at μ = 0.44 for the nontrivial DS and μ = 0.20 for the trivial DS respectively. Obviously, the nodal points on the kz-axis is attributed to states form the H+i and H-i subspaces. (e) shows the distribution of the eigenfuction in the xy-plane corresponding to the zero mode on the kz-axis in (h) and (j). In the calculation of (f) the lattice size is taken as 14 × 14 × 26, while for other figures the lattice size in the xy-plane is 24 × 24. The SC order parameter is set to be ∆0 = 0.2 and the vortex size is supposed to be infinite small. Without special instructions, the lattice and SC parameters in the following calculations are all the same with that in Fig. the fermion parity of the quasi-0D vortex system must be odd, namely the quasi-0D system is Z 0D 2 nontrivial. Therefore, a correspondence between Z 0D 2 and Z T I 2 is established, when the chemical potential is in the gap of the TI. Based on the above argument, it can be straightforwardly concluded: the vortex line corresponding to the DS in H (1) 0 must go through odd (even) times of VPTs at k z = 0 (k z = π), while it must go through even (even) times of VPTs at 0 , if the chemical potential is tuned from in the insulation gap to infinite large, since the system is always topologically trivial if the chemical potential is infinite large. This is consistent with the numerical results. However, we can not tell whether the vortex line is full-gap or not from the Z 0D 2 topological invariant. Recalling that DSs are always protected by some rotational symmetry and the vortex line along the rotational axis does not break the rotational symmetry, we can also classify the superconducting vortex line according to the rotational symmetry where C 4z is the matrix form of the C 4z -rotational operator in the normal state, i and j are the site index in the xy-plane which are related with each other by the C 4z -rotational symmetry, and the phase factor e ±iπ/4 stems from the U (1) gauge field of the quantum vortex line. Obviously, the magnetic flux transforms the eigenvalues of the C 4z -rotational symmetry from e i(2m-1)π/4 to e imπ/2 , where m is an integer. Straightforwardly, the superconducting vortex line system can be decoupled into four subspaces according to C vortex 4z where the subsripts are the four eigenvalues of the C 4zrotational symmetry. We can analyze the topological property in each subspace at k z = 0/π. Considering that the PHS is an anti-unitary symmetry, the four subspaces can be classified into two categories. For the two subspaces with real (imaginary) eigenvalues, the PHS preserves (breaks) within each subspace. Therefore, H +1 and H -1 (H +i and H -i ) belong to the 0D class-D (class-A) of the AZ classification at the time reversal invariant momenta where ν = 1 (ν = -1) corresponds to the topological trivial (nontrivial) state. (ii where α stands for the four eigenvalues of the C 4z -rotational symmetry, the vortex line must have a nodal phase. (iii) The change of ν +1 (ν -1 ) has no influence on the N +1 (N -1 ), while in the H +i ⊕ H -i subspace the Z 0D 2 and Z 0D topological invariant has the relationship (iv) At k z = 0/π, the Z 0D topological invariant is still welldefined while the Z 0D 2 topological index is no longer welldefined. Therefore, the VPTs in the H +i ⊕ H -i subspace at the time reversal invariant momenta can evolve into a 1D nodal phase, while the VPTs in the the H +1 and H -1 subspaces merely emerge as an accidental nodal point in the superconducting vortex line. Straightforwardly, it can be inferred that if both ν +1 (ν -1 ) and ν +i⊕-i are topologically nontrivial, there can exist rotational symmetry protected vortex end MZM even though the whole system is gapless. The analysis can be directly applied to the above trivial and nontrivial DSs. Since there is no band inversion at k z = π for both of the DSs, the Z 0D topological invariant are all the same in the four subspaces. Therefore, we can use the following topological number at k z = 0 to characterize the nodal vortex line phase For any Q = 0, there will be Q pairs of nodal points on the k z -axis. In our calculations, we find that the VPT at μ c (μ 2 c ) at k z = 0 for the nontrivial (trivial) DS changes Q from 0 to 1, leading to that there must be a nodal vortex line phase with one pair of nodal points on the k z -axis where the first term originates from the rotation of the space, the second term 1 2 (κ -Σ 33 )Π z is the intrinsic angular momentum of the system which is determined by the basis of the Hamiltonian, while the third term stems from the quantum vortex line. Here, Π i are the Pauli matrices defined in the Nambu space. There is a key difference between the DSs and the STIs: κ turns out to be 0 (1) for the STI (DSs), which results from the fact the band inversion in a 3D STI (DS) always occurs between two Kramers' doublets with the same (different) J z . Effect of perturbation.-We consider the effect of symmetry-breaking perturbations on the topological VPTs in this part. We first analyze the perturbations which break the IS but does not break the rotational-symmetry. This kind of perturbation lifts the band degeneracy in the spin degree of freedom, but it has no effect on the Dirac points Then we turn to perturbation which breaks the rotational symmetry. Such kind of perturbation can gap out the Dirac points, and the nontrivial DS will be broke into a STI. Correspondingly, the nodal vortex line will be broke into a fullgap topologically nontrivial phase, as shown in Fig. (2) 0 , the condition is complicated. However, there is a interesting case: if the D 4h point group is broken into D 2h , the DS is broke into a TCI state with nonzero mirror Chern number protected by the mirror symmetry parallel to the k z -axis Discussion and conclusion.-In summary, we take the DSs protected by the C 4z -rotational symmetry as instances to study the VBSs in 3D superconducting DSs with TRS. We find that there is a robust quasi-1D nodal phase in the vortex line, if the DS can be doped to be s-wave superconducting. The nodal vortex line phase is protected by the C 4z -rotational symmetry and it stems from the symmetry protected Dirac points in the normal state bands. We also develop a topological index (ν; n) to characterize the nodal vortex line phase, where ν is the Z 2 topological invariant for a 0D class-D system and n is the Z topological invariant for a 0D class-A system according to the AZ classification. Based on the classification, we find that the vortex end MZM can exist even in a gapless vortex line, and such a state can be realized in the trivial DS case. The influence of the symmetry breaking perturbations on the VBSs is also discussed, and we find that the vortex line can be broken into a topologically nontrivial full-gap state with vortex end MZMs for both the trivial and nontrivial DSs. The conclusions can be extended to general DSs with C n -rotational symmetry (n > 2), and the analysis in the text is also suitable for 3D TIs where we have write k in the polar coordinate system, k 2 = k + k -, and a and b are the corresponding normalization coefficient. The Berry phase on the FS can be figured out Straightforwardly, we can conclude that: if m/t > 0, φ can never reach π (mod 2π); if m/t = 0, φ equals to π at the limit k = 0; if m/t < 0, φ vanishes at the limit k = 0, and it reaches π when m + tk 2 is zero. Obviously, only the case corresponding to a band inversion at the Γ point robustly has a chemical potential, at which the Berry phase on the FS can reach π. The Hamiltonian describing the trivial DSs protected by the C 4 rotational symmetry have the form in which the basis is x -k 2 y )σ x + 2αk x k y σ y , where we have set β = 0 to make the system has continuum rotational symmetry, and solve it The Berry phase on the FS can also be calculated From Eq.C6, it can be worded out easily that when 3m 2 (k) = α 2 k 4 , the Berry phase on the FS is π. It should be mentioned that, to make sure that the vortex line is topologically trivial when the chemical potential is infinite large, we need to consider high-order terms in m(k), for instance m(k) = m + tk 2 + k 4 . To make a band inversion at the Γ point, we set m/ < 0. It is easy to figure out that, the above equation have 2 + 2n (n ≥ 0 and is a integer) solutions, namely the corresponding vortex line has even number of VPTs at k z = 0, which is consistent with the results in the main text. Fig. The nontrivial DSs protected by the C 3 rotational symmetry have the following general Hamiltonian where the basis is For the C 3 -case, we can not decouple the Hamiltonian in the k z = 0 plane since there is no mirror symmetry perpendicular to the z-axis. However, we can generally calculate the SU (2) Berry phase on the FSs. We first solve H 3T and achieve its eigenfunctions for the conduction bands as follows We can get the SU (2) Berry phase on the FSs as in which i, j are the indexes for the eigenfunctions of the conduction bands. The corresponding trivial DSs protected by the C 3 rotational symmetry have the Hamiltonian in which the basis is Similarly, we can solve the above Hamiltonian The SU (2) Berry phase on the FSs are Compare Eq.C9 and C12 with Eq.C3 and C6, we can find that the results are quite similar. Therefore, we can conclude that the DSs protected by the C 3 rotational symmetry have similar VPTs with the C 4 case when k z = 0. It should be mentioned that, we can calculate the SU (2) Berry phase analytically here, since the off-diagonal terms of the non-Abelian Berry connection are zero at each k on the integral path, namely i|∇ k |j = 0 for i = j. The DSs with linear Dirac points protected by the C 6 rotational symmetry can be classified into two classes according to its baiss. We compare the DSs with the STIs in two aspects: (i) the Berry phase on the FS, and (ii) the spectrum of the bound states in the superconducting vortex line. a. Berry phase on the FS Since H T I has band inversion at the Γ point, we first calculate the Berry phase on the FSs in the k z = 0 plane. Similar to the DS case, we can decouple the Hamiltonian according to the mirror symmetry perpendicular to the k z -axis M z , and consider the reduced Hamiltonian in the mirror +i subspace, H re T I = m(k)σ z + Ak x σ x + Ak y σ y , which can be solved as The Berry phase on the FS is Obviously, it has similar results with the DS case and we can not tell the difference between the VPTs in the two kinds of systems. As analyzed in the main text, the VPT occurs at the topological phase transition points of the normal state band structures. In the following, we focus on the vortex bound states at the topological phase transition point of the normal state band structures when μ = 0 for the superconducting DS and STI. Since the mirror symmetry M z is always true no matter there is a vortex line or not, we can decouple the superconducting Hamiltonian according to M z . In the following, we only consider the mirror +i subspace, for the sake that the particle-hole symmetry (PHS) P transforms the mirror +i subspace into the -i subspace. We first consider the superconducting Hamiltonian without vortex lines, and find that if we choose the gauge properly, both the superconducting DS and STI have the same Hamiltonian in the mirror +i subspace where the basis is for the DS. Notice that Eq.D4 is exactly the form of the 3D Dirac equation. If a infinite small quantum vortex line is added (we set the vortex line along the +z-direction for the STI and -z-direction for the DS, the two systems still has the same Hamiltonian under the gauge in Eq.D4), we can solve the system in the real space and it is easy to figure out that the above Hamiltonian has a zero mode, whose eigenfuction is φ 0 (r) = e -r 0 |∆(r)/A|dr (0, 0, sgn(A∆)i, -sgn(A∆)i) T . With the gauge in Eq.D4, the VPT points for both the DS and STI cases share the same eigenfuction in Eq.D6. Therefore, it seems that the vortex line in a doped superconducting STI and DS should have similar topological properties, which conflicts with the numerical results apparently. To solve the contradiction, we need to consider the physical meaning of Eq.D4. In the field of particle physics, it is well known that Eq.D4 describes a Dirac fermion and the vacuum is always isotropic. In condensed nontrivial DS case in the main text as a function of the chemical potential μ at kz = 0.3π, is shown in (a). Obviously, it reaches ±π at μc = 0.50. When a rotational symmetry breaking term t sb sin kzΣ11 is added, the DS becomes a STI. In this case, the SU (2) Berry phase on the FSs as a function of μ at kz = 0.3π, is shown in (b). Clearly, the SU (2) Berry phase can never reach ±π in (b). We take t sb = 0.03 in the calculation, and all the other parameters are the same with that in the main text. matter physics, Eq.D4 describes a Dirac fermion like quasi-particle, however, the "vacuum" here is not always isotropic. This can be well illustrated by constructing the angular momentum operator of Eq.D5 where I 4 is the identity matrix, κ is the angular momentum of the "vacuum", and Lz -κI 4 is the angular momentum of the Dirac fermion. Obviously, the zero mode in Eq.D6 has angular momentum 0 if the "vacuum" is not take into consideration. However, by analyzing the basis of Eq.D4, it is easy to find that the "vacuum" in the STI (DS) case carries an angular momentum of 0 (1), which means that the L z of the zero mode is 0 (1) for the STI (DS). Recalling that the PHS transforms the mirror subspace with eigenvalue +i into the -i one, we immediately know that there is a zero mode with angular momentum 0 (1) in the mirror -i subspace for the STI (DS). Based on the above results, it can be straightforwardly concluded that the the zeros modes must be in the H +1 (H +i ⊕ H -i ) subspace for the STI (DS) case if the continuum rotational symmetry is broke into the C 4z one, which is consistent with the numerical results in the main text. Then, we turn to the k z = 0 case, and we consider the Berry phase on the FSs and the vortex bound states similarly. a. Berry phase on the FS Generally, there is a key difference between the STIs and DSs: a 3D STI merely has band inversions at the time reversal invariant points in the Brillouin zone (BZ), while a DS has band inversions at each k-point in between the two Dirac points. Specifically, the STI in Eq.D1 merely has band inversion at (0,0,0), while the DS in Eq.C1 has band inversion at each (0, 0, k z ) for |k z | < m t3 . It is easy to figure out that, the term αk z Σ 13 acts as a mass term which prevent the band inversions at k z = 0, while such a term is forbidden by symmetries in a DS. This results in that, the SU (2) Berry phase on the FSs in a given k z = 0 plane can never reaches π for STIs, while it can be realized at some critical chemical potential in each |k z | < m t3 plane for the DSs. We have checked this numerically based on the Z DS 2 nontrivial DS in the main text, as shown in Fig. Since the mirror symmetry M z no longer exists at k z = 0, it is not easy to get the vortex bound states analytically. However, we can understand the problem in another way. The Hamiltonian for a general SC in the basis Ψ † (k) = (c † ↑ (k), c † ↓ (k), c ↓ (-k), -c ↑ (-k)) has the form where H 0 (k , k z ) is the normal state Hamiltonian and μ is the chemical potential. Apparently, k z can be renormalized into the coefficients in the Hamiltonian and H sc has no essential differences between the k z = 0 and k z = 0 case. Therefore, the Berry phase criterion must also be true when k z = 0, which means that the DSs must have VPTs at each k z -point in between the two Dirac points while the STIs has no robust VPTs at k z = 0. Since the Z 0D 2 topological invariant is no longer well defined at k z = 0, the VPTs must corresponds to a change of the Z 0D topological number in the main text. On the other hand, as the topological property is always protected by a finite energy gap, a small perturbation which does not break the symmetry of the system can not lead to a topological phase transition. As a result, the VPTs at k z = 0 and k z = 0 must occur in the same subspace of the rotational symmetry. Specifically, the VPT at each |k z | < m t3 for the DS in Eq.C1 is attributed to two states with angular momentum +1 and -1, and this contribute a robust nodal phase. For the STI in Eq.D1, since the VPT is contributed by two states with angular momentums 0, they can hybridize with each other at an arbitrary k z and this results in a full-gap phase in general. It can be inferred from the above analysis that, the energy spectrum of the vortex line in doped superconducting STIs are always full-gap, since the VPTs must occur in the subpace with angular momentums 0. This stems from the fact that, the basis of a STI must contain two Kramers' doublets with the same angular momentum. Based on the above analysis, we summarize the possible topological VPTs in doped superconducting DSs with C n -rotational symmetry in Table .II. In the calculations, we start from the DSs with continuum rotational symmetry and treat the warping terms which break the continuum rotational symmetry into C n -rotational symmetry as perturbations.