In this paper, we introduce and study parallel-plate waveguides formed by two penetrable metasurfaces having arbitrary isotropic sheet impedances. We investigate guided modes of this structure and derive the corresponding dispersion relations. The conditions under which transverse magnetic and transverse electric modes can exist are discussed, and different scenarios including lossless (reactive) metasurfaces, gain-and-loss sheets and extreme cases are under general consideration. Resonant and non-resonant dispersive sheets and corresponding extreme cases are investigated. Our theoretical results are confirmed with fullwave simulated results considering practical realizations of the proposed parallel-plate waveguide which exploit two frequencyselective surfaces. Finally, the obtained theoretical formulas are applied to study the dispersion diagrams for waves along resonant sheets at different distances between the two identical or different metasurfaces. We hope that this study is useful for future applications at both microwave and optical regimes. W AVEGUIDES serve as enabling components in mi- crowave and optical technologies, transferring electromagnetic energy and signals over a distance Surface waves along impedance boundaries are well understood, as well as waves in closed waveguides with impedance walls. However, there is not enough clear view on what happens if we bring two thin penetrable sheets close to each other and form a waveguide this way. In the limit of zero or infinite sheet impedance we come to the trivial special cases of parallel-plate waveguides bounded by perfect electric conductor (PEC) or perfect magnetic conductor (PMC) boundaries. Here we are interested in the general case when the two sheets are penetrable and can be characterized by dispersive and X. Ma is with the Department of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University, 710129 Xi'an, China, and the Department of Electronics and Nanoengineering, Aalto University, P.O. Box 15500, FI-00076 Aalto, Finland (e-mail: maxin1105@nwpu.edu.cn). M. S. Mirmoosa and S. A. Tretyakov are with the Department of Electronics and Nanoengineering, Aalto University, P.O. Box 15500, FI-00076 Aalto, Finland (e-mail: mohammad.mirmoosa@aalto.fi and sergei.tretyakov@aalto.fi). resonant sheet impedances. The goal of this paper is to study such waveguides and derive the general dispersion relations and find the field distributions corresponding to different allowed polarizations. From one side, this kind of waveguide is similar to the parallel-plate waveguide which is consisting of two metal plates (the energy is fully confined inside the waveguide). However, from another side, it is also similar to the classical dielectric slab waveguide which is based on the total internal reflection. Notice that the impedance of the sheets is arbitrary and can be lossy and active as well. The paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we introduce our novel structure operating as a waveguide, and in Sections III and IV, the dispersion relation is derived for transverse magnetic (TM) and transverse electric (TE) polarizations, respectively. Section V shows simulated results which correspond to a practical realization based on patch or grid inclusions, and confirms our theoretical results regarding dispersion relations. Section VI discusses and illustrates different resonant scenarios for symmetric and asymmetric cases. Finally, Section VII concludes the paper. The proposed and studied parallel-plate waveguide is shown in Fig. Under the above assumptions, there is a possibility to decompose the fields into two polarizations: The transverse magnetic polarization (TM waves) and the transverse electric polarization (TE waves). The polarization is defined with respect to the propagation direction. According to Fig. Note that in this study, the medium between the sheets is assumed to be air, as mentioned earlier. In the following sections, we show that such assumption prominently affects the wave vector (specifically, the real and imaginary parts of the transverse component of the wave vector) between the sheets. However, in most practical realizations, there is a substrate between the sheets whose relative permittivity can be different from unity. From this point of view, it will be interesting to investigate how controlling the relative permittivity of the substrate may result in controlling the field distribution and, generally, the propagation of guided waves. We hope to report on this investigation in near future. In addition to the above assumption about the substrate material, here we consider only electric sheets. In other words, the sheets support only electric surface currents. Using duality, it is possible to find the corresponding solutions for the case of magnetic sheets supporting magnetic surface currents. In future, it can be also interesting to investigate waves along magneto-electric sheets supporting both electric and magnetic currents and exhibiting bianisotropy. In this section, we study guided modes of TM polarization, when the longitudinal component of the magnetic field vanishes. Solving the Helmholtz equation, we can write for modes bound to the waveguide for the field inside the waveguide and for the outside space. Parameters E e , E o , A and B are unknown coefficients which must be found later. Here, β is the phase constant and α corresponds to the attenuation of the field outside of the waveguide. Since the material inside and outside the waveguide is assumed to be the same (free space), we conclude that h = -jα. This is important because it shows that the transverse component of the wave vector inside the waveguide is also purely imaginary. As we will see later, this property restricts the number of modes to four, in contrast to closed waveguides which can support infinitely many propagating modes. Expressing the other components of the fields via the longitudinal component, we have and Knowing that the electric field (its tangential component) is continuous at the surfaces y = d/2 and y = -d/2, we can find the unknown coefficients for the amplitudes A and B. However, for finding the dispersion relation we use the boundary condition related to the discontinuity of the magnetic field: in which Z i = Z 2 is the sheet at y = d/2, and Z i = Z 3 denotes the sheet impedance at y = -d/2. In the above equation a n is the normal unit vector to the sheet plane and E t represents the tangential component of the electric field which is continuous across the impedance sheets. Here, we assume that the sheets are supporting only electric surface currents. After some algebraic manipulation, we find that   cosh(αd/2) + j Z2ω 0 α e αd/2 Z2ω 0 α e αd/2 -j sinh(αd/2) cosh(αd/2) + j Z3ω 0 α e αd/2 -Z3ω 0 α e αd/2 + j sinh(αd/2) Equating the determinant of the square matrix to zero, we find the dispersion relation: The left-hand side of the above equation is purely real while the right-hand side is complex-valued. Therefore, the imaginary part of the right-hand side should vanish. Let us assume that Z 2 = R 2 + jX 2 and Z 3 = R 3 + jX 3 . It is easy to see that there are two cases in which this imaginary part vanishes. The first case corresponds to reactive sheets where R 2 = R 3 = 0. In this case, the dispersion relation can be simplified as The second case is when the structure has balanced gain and loss. In other words, one sheet is resistive and the other one in active such that R 2 = -R 3 . However, this requirement is not sufficient for having real positive solutions for the attenuation constant. In addition, the reactive components of the sheet impedance must be also equal, i.e. X 2 = X 3 = X. This means that both sheets must be either inductive or capacitive. We write the dispersion relation for this case as As a check, we see that in the limiting case of PEC boundaries (R, X → 0) we come to the solution α = ±jπm/d, where m = 0, 1, 2, . . . . Importantly, while closed waveguides have an infinite (countable) number of modes, as soon as the walls become penetrable, we end up with only four or two guided-mode solutions. The relation Z 2 = -Z * 3 reminds the well-studied parity-time symmetric systems, usually defined in terms of such relation for the permittivity. In the following, we discuss this issue and show that the sheets must be obligatorily inductive in order to allow a guided-mode solution. A. Reactive metasurfaces Equation ( As is clear from the above expression for the angular frequency, we can distinguish four different scenarios. Two scenarios are associated with X 2 > 0 while n < 0 or n > 0, and the other two correspond to the negative X 2 . It can be shown that when two sheets are inductive (X 2 and n > 0), there are always two TM-polarized modes. However, if one sheet is capacitive and the other one is inductive (n < 0), the above equation tells that only one TM mode exists which can propagate along the structure and is bounded at the sheets. Finally, when both sheets are capacitive (X 2 < 0 and n > 0), there is no guided TM mode. These conclusions are in agreement with the fact that a single inductive surface supports TM surface waves and single capacitive surface supports TE surface waves Here we will discuss two extreme scenarios. The first scenario assumes that the surface impedance of one of the metasurfaces is infinite, which corresponds to surface modes at only one metasurface Let us first investigate guided modes along one penetrable reactive sheet. In the general solution, we require that the impedance of the other sheet is infinite (i.e. open circuit). From 1 Since the sheet reactance of any passive metasurface is always dispersive, the results obtained under this assumption can be used only at a given frequency (calculating the propagation constant at a certain frequency, one should substitute the reactances of the sheets at this frequency). the dispersion relation Only when the denominator of ( Since for surface-bound modes α > 0, X 2 should be obligatorily positive. If X 2 is a negative reactance, the attenuation constant α should be negative as well to keep ω positive, which means leaky waves. As expected, a TM surface wave can be support by an inductive surface for single-metasurface waveguide. Note that solution (13) differs from the solution for an impenetrable reactive boundary Based on the dispersion relation, the phase velocity of surface waves along single sheets can be obtained: where η 0 represents the free-space intrinsic impedance (η 0 = μ 0 / 0 ) and c is the speed of light. The phase velocity of surface waves is slower than velocity of light, and inversely proportional to X 2 . The frequency ω of the second mode goes to zero meaning that this mode which should be bounded by the second sheet (y = -d/2) vanishes because of the absence of the second sheet. The other scenario corresponds to n approaching zero in From the first equation of ( Here, we study guided modes of TE polarization, with zero longitudinal component of the electric field. Similarly to the TM polarization, we can express the longitudinal component of the magnetic field as The above expression corresponds to the field inside the waveguide. However, the field outside must attenuate, and is written as following: where α is real and positive. The other components of the fields can be readily obtained from H z : and By imposing continuity of the tangential electric field and discontinuity of the magnetic field (( jξ -ωμ0 αZ2 cosh(αd/2) -ξ -j ωμ0 αZ2 sinh(αd/2) jξ -ωμ0 αZ3 cosh(αd/2) ξ + j ωμ0 αZ3 sinh(αd/2) = 0, 0 (e -2αd -1) = 0, (21) that is rather different from and One can show that if R 2 and R 3 are not zero, there is only one possibility to have a positive real attenuation constant satisfying both ( According to Assuming that Z 2 = jX 2 and Z 3 = jX 3 , (23) reduces to Let us write X 3 = nX 2 , where n can take any real value. Using this notation, the angular frequencies at which TE modes propagate along the waveguide can be calculated as (25) In this equation, the expression under the square root on the right-hand side is always non-negative resulting in two real solutions for the angular frequency. However, only positive solutions are acceptable for ω. According to As mentioned above, if the two sheets are capacitive, there are two modes. Interestingly, one of those modes suffers from a cut-off frequency at which the attenuation constant α approaches zero. Using Here, similarly to the previous section, we study the two extreme scenarios for the TE polarization. The first and the second scenario correspond to the infinite and zero surface impedance of one of the sheets, respectively. Using the same method as we applied for the TM polarization, we assume that n is approaching infinity in The first mode which should be bounded to the second sheet (y = -d/2) disappears because of the absence of the second sheet. The second solution is proportional to αX 2 which indicates that reactance X 2 should be always negative to ensure that ω > 0. The explanation is that only capacitive surfaces can support TE surface waves. The other scenario is realized when n approaches zero in It can be found that as n tends to zero, one of the modes disappears, and the other mode can be controlled by the sheet impedance X 2 and the distance between the two sheets (d). Interestingly, the existing mode suffers from a cut-off where the attenuation constant α approaches zero. The cutoff frequency can be expressed as When n is approaching zero from the negative side, there is only one supported mode, and its dispersion relation is given by the second equation of Figure In the following, the emphasis is placed on most practical cases, that is, dispersive impedance sheets. According to the resonance property of sheets, the investigated structures are divided into two categories, which are non-resonant and resonant impedance sheets, respectively. Different structures corresponding to the property of impedances in each category are listed in Table Previously, we have studied the propagating modes assuming some fixed values of the sheet impedances. Here we look at the dispersion curves for metasurfaces with realistic frequency dispersion of surface reactances. First we consider capacitive and inductive sheets, that is, assume that the sheet reactances are far from resonances. Actual implementations correspond, for example, to dense meshes of metal strips for inductive sheets and complementary arrays of small metal patches for capacitive metasurfaces. This configuration is illustrated in Fig. Analytical expressions for the sheet impedances of inductive grid and patch-array are well known for TE polarization. Here, D I and D C are the periods of the strip grid and the patch array, respectively, s is the strip width, and g is the gap between two patches, as shown in Fig. When a parallel-metasurface waveguide is formed by two inductive sheets, the waveguide supports only TM-polarized waves. Denoting by L 2 and L 3 the surface inductances of the sheets, we write the impedances of two sheets as Z 2 = jωL 2 and Z 3 = jωL 3 . Substituting Z 2 and Z 3 in (8), the dispersion relation becomes Similarly to two inductive layers, the dispersion relations of the parallel-metasurface waveguide formed by two capacitive layers can be obtained writing Z 2 = 1/jωC 2 and Z 3 = 1/jωC 3 . Substituting Z 2 and Z 3 in ( One of the modes has a cut-off at When a parallel-metasurface waveguide consists of one inductive grid and one capacitive grid, replacing Z 2 = jωL and Z 3 = 1/(jωC) in ( for the TM polarization and for the TE polarization. For this polarization, there is a cut-off frequency which is estimated as In order to examine the accuracy of the results, analytical results and numerical simulations are compared in Fig. Recently, parallel arrays of reactive sheets have been proposed for realization of exotic reflection/transmission properties. Such structures to some extent resemble realizations of bound states, and of interest for invisibility and cloaking applications Figure In recent work Here, we study propagation along two effectively resonant sheets in which the impedance can be the realized by a series connection or a parallel connection of sheet reactances and provide physical insight into the behavior of surface waves when the distance between the sheets is very small. Since we have two sheets, there can be three specific scenarios as illustrated by Fig. , respectively. For each scenario, two different cases need to be considered: Asymmetric and symmetric. In the symmetric case the sheets are the same (Z 2 = Z 3 ), while in the asymmetric case, the two sheets possess different impedances (Z 2 = Z 3 ). The waveguide consists of two sheets in which the impedances exhibit series resonances. We write the sheet impedances as Z 2 = jωL 2 + 1/jωC 2 and Z 3 = jωL 3 + 1/jωC 3 . Substituting Z 2 and Z 3 in ( As mentioned above, two TM modes can survive within the structure and both of them have cut-off frequencies which we denote as f cut-off = f 2 and f cut-off = f 3 . These modes are dramatically different from the non-resonant scenario (discussed in Section V) which have no cut-off frequency for two inductive sheets. The dispersion relations for TE polarization reads: For this polarization, two proper solutions can be obtained. Notably, one of the TE modes suffers from a cut-off frequency which relates to the distance between the two sheets and can be calculated by: As an example, 6 GHz is chosen as the resonance frequency of both impedances (f 2 = f 3 = 6 GHz), in which L 2 = 6 nH, C 2 = 0.11727 pF. For two different impedance sheets, the resonance frequency of one sheet is set to 10 GHz (f 2 = 6 GHz, f 3 = 10 GHz). In this case, we assume that L 2 = 6 nH, C 2 = 0.11727 pF, L 3 = 6 nH, and C 3 = 0.042217 pF. The analytical results for different distances are shown in Fig. Regarding the case of symmetric sheets separated by d = λ 6GHz , two TE modes exist below the resonance frequency, while two TM modes can propagate above the resonance frequency, since here both sheets are inductive. The two TE (or TM) modes have approximately the same phase velocity in the symmetric case. Interestingly, decreasing the distance results in separation of two TE (or TM) modes in which one of them "rotates" in the direction closer to the resonance frequency. The limit of d → 0 leads to the existence of only one TE and one TM mode. Note that if the distance between the sheets becomes comparable or smaller than the period of the structures forming the sheets, the homogenized models of the two metasurfaces in terms of their sheet impedances become not enough adequate due to significant coupling between the sheets via evanescent fields of structural inhomogeneities. More advances analytical models or full-wave simulations are needed in this case. In order to get better physical insight into the behavior of surface modes, Fig. For the TM modes, the surface currents on the two sheets flow along the z-axis which is the direction of surface wave propagation. The phases of surface currents are quite different from that of the TE modes, albeit the symmetric magnitude of surface current. As it is shown in Fig. When the distance is exactly zero, f mix is the same as the cut-off frequency of the TE mode, which can be easily obtained by comparing (40) with (41). Practically, there is a very narrow stop band at the new resonance frequency (f mix ) for surface waves (in the region where the propagation factor for the TM wave is very large but TE waves still cannot propagate). The dispersion curves for the extreme case are illustrated in Fig. Clearly, the case of symmetric sheets corresponds to a special case of the asymmetric sheets. In the limit of zero d, the first TM mode and second TE mode of the symmetric structure are compressed to one resonance frequency, because The waveguide consists of two meatsufaces in which the impedances are parallel connections of reactances, expressed by Substituting Z 2 and Z 3 in ( For this polarization, there is no cut-off frequency. The dispersion equation for the TE polarization reads When Z 2 = Z 3 , the cut-off frequency for this polarization is As an example, we assume 6 GHz as the resonance frequency of the symmetric structure, in which L 2 = L 3 = 1 nH, C 2 = C 3 = 0.7 pF, while f 2 = 6 GHz and f 3 = 10 GHz are the values for the asymmetric structure where L 2 = 1 nH, C 2 = 0.7 pF, L 3 = 1 nH and C 3 = 0.25 pF. Figure Similarly to the first scenario, the field is bounded at the symmetric sheets. When the distance between the two sheets is large, the field amplitude is minuscule after a certain distance from the interface in the structure. The fields at two sheets couple with each other when the distance is small. When the two sheets get close to each other, only the in-phase TM mode can propagate along the z-axis. For the TE polarization, only the out-of-phase mode is supported. Figure The symmetric structure is a special case of different impedance sheets when L 2 = L 3 and C 2 = C 3 . It can be discerned from the above equation that f mix of the symmetric structure is equal to f 2 . The dispersion curves for the extreme case are illustrated in Fig. In this scenarios, the waveguide under study consists of one series-connection metasurface and one parallel-connection metasurface. We use the notations Z 2 = jωL 2 + 1/jωC 2 and Z 3 = jωL 3 /(1 -ω 2 L 3 C 3 ). Substituting Z 2 and Z 3 in ( It is worth noting that for this polarization, one of the modes has a cut-off frequency which we denote as f 2 . The dispersion equation for the TE polarization reads: For this polarization, the modes suffer from cut-off at In this paper, we have introduced a novel waveguiding structure, formed by two penetrable metasurfaces which can have arbitrary impedance properties, for the purpose of guiding the electromagnetic energy and realizing various resonant regimes. We have theoretically studied possible guided modes and derived the dispersion equations. We have shown that in general there are two propagating modes with transverse magnetic (TM) or transverse electric (TE) polarizations which attenuate outside the structure. The polarizations of those modes depend on the sheet impedances of the metasurfaces. If both metasurfaces are inductive, two modes with TM polarization can propagate along the structure. In the case of two capacitive metasurfaces, the two modes have the TE polarization. Both polarizations can simultaneously contribute to transferring power if one metasurface is inductive and the other one is capacitive. Furthermore, we have investigated the extreme scenarios when the ratio between the surface reactances of the two metasurfaces goes to infinity or approaches zero. We have clearly shown how the dispersion digram of the modes changes as the ratio goes to the extremes. Additionally, we have studied the gain-and-loss waveguide structures in which one metasurface is lossy and the other one is active. In this scenario, both metasurfaces must have equal loss and gain, and the reactive parts of the impedance surfaces must be equal to each other. That is, only parity-time symmetric arrangements support guided waves. Finally, we have considered practical realizations of our proposed waveguides doing full-wave simulations of dispersion diagrams. The simulated results are in good agreement with the theoretical results, which confirms our theoretical findings. The found possibilities to realize modes with nearly flat dispersive curves (modes having arbitrary wavenumbers at a given frequency) are promising for applications in near-field superlenses. 