The effects of spin-orbit coupling and symmetry breaking at the interface between a ferromagnet and heavy metal are particularly important for spin-based information storage and computation. Recent discoveries suggest they can create chiral spin structures (e.g. skyrmions), which have often been identified through the appearance of the bump/dip features of Hall signals, the so-called topological Hall effect (THE). In this work, however, we have present an unusual anomalous Hall effect (UAHE) in Mn x Ga/Pt bilayers and demonstrated that the features extremely similar to THE can be generated without involving any chiral spin structures. The low temperature magnetic force microscopy has been used to explore the magnetic field-dependent behavior of spin structures, and the UAHE as a function of magnetic field does not peak near the maximal density of magnetic bubbles. The results unambiguously evidence that the UAHE in Mn x Ga/Pt bilayers shows no correlation with chiral spin structures but is driven by the modified interfacial properties. The bump/dip features of Hall signals cannot be taken as an unambiguous signature for the emergence of chiral spin structures, and a wealth of underlying and interesting physics need explored. *Corresponding author: *kkmeng@ustb.edu.cn *yjiang@ustb.edu.cn Interface-driven magnetic effects and phenomena associated with spin-orbit coupling (SOC) and intrinsic symmetry breaking at interfaces are at the forefront of condensed-matter physics research x y m m m       , which is closely related to the definition of topological number (3). However, the above real-space Berry phase picture is valid only if the exchange coupling between electrons and local magnetization is strong (adiabatic approximation), while it fails in the weak coupling regime (non-adiabatic approximation) since the electrons fail to adjust their spin to the local magnetization and the spin-flip processes are activated In For this study, we prepared magnetic bilayers of Mn x Ga 6 nm/Pt 5 nm (x=1.0, 1.25, 1.55) and a reference sample of Mn x Ga 6 nm/Al 5 nm (see also Materials and Methods). The 1-nm-thick Mn x Ga films were firstly grown on 100-nm-thick GaAs buffered semi-insulating GaAs (001) substrates at 70°C by molecular-beam epitaxy with controlling the flux of Mn and Ga atoms. Then the films were annealed at 300 °C for 1 min, and other 5-nm-thick MnGa films were continued to be grown at 300 °C after the annealing. Finally, the films were transferred to the magnetron sputtering system immediately through a lower vacuum chamber, and is the residual resistivity induced by impurity scattering The slope b of the Mn x Ga/Pt bilayers is similar to that in the Mn x Ga/Al bilayers with the same Mn component x, indicating the same intrinsic nature of the Mn x Ga films. In the low temperature limit, there are large positive deviations, which should be ascribed to the increase of A  since XX  decreases monotonically with decreasing temperature and then approaches a constant due to weak Kondo effect The upturn of A  is an indicative of the onset of large extrinsic skew scattering due to the strong SOC of impurities. The temperature dependence of  has been shown in interfacial SOC is only introduced in Mn 1.55 Ga/Pt bilayers, which will profoundly modify both the magnetic and transport features. In the presence of interfacial DMI induced by strong SOC, the domain wall configuration in the Mn 1.55 Ga/Pt bilayers may be in Né el type with fixed chirality , where P is the spin polarization of charge carriers and determined to be 20% according to the band structures, eff B the fictitious magnetic field, 0 he   the flux quantum, and T n  the density of chiral spin structures Obviously, it reveals large discrepancy as compared with the MFM results, indicating the AHE in Mn x Ga/Pt bilayers should be much more involved. Large discrepancy between MFM and transport features has also been found at With further decreasing the magnetic field to -1.0 T that is at around the coercivity, many isolated bubble-like magnetic domains in a typical size of ∼50-200 nm have been observed, while the value of XY   has approached to be zero. By the way, the same MFM measurements have also been carried out in the Mn 1.55 Ga/Al bilayers at . A similar magnetic field-dependent MFM result has also been found in the Mn 1.55 Ga/Al bilayers, while there are no bump/dip features of Hall signals Although the THE signal arises from the chiral spin structures in magnetic multilayers, we note that the appearance of the bump/dip features of Hall signals alone is not an unambiguous evidence. In the following discussion, the additional Hall signals in the Mn x Ga/Pt bilayers have been termed as UAHE, which should be strongly related to the strong interfacial SOC. To further investigate the modified interfacial properties, the Mn 2p x-ray-absorption spectroscopy (XAS) spectra were recorded at room temperatures in the Total Electron Yield (TEY) mode by measuring the drain current of the electrically isolated sample as shown in Fig. Though the Pt has high spin susceptibility originating from the large stoner exchange parameter, a very small magnetic moment in Pt is considered to be induced at the interfaces Consequently, the evolution of the electronic structure due to modulated magnetic states at the interfaces will generate significant momentum-space Berry phase contributions to the AHE at finite temperature. At high magnetic field, only the ferromagnetism will be induced and dominate the AHE. As the magnetic field decreases, the antiferromagnetism becomes increasingly evident and results in a modifed momentum-space Berry curvature at the interface. This also explains why the largest UAHE have been found at around zero magnetic field, where the antiferromagnetism may be the strongest. The phenomenon may also depend on the surface roughness of Mn x Ga, since the largest UAHE has been found for x=1.0, which also shows the largest surface roughness Finally, we want to mention another role of the strong interfacial SOC introduced by Pt. It is known that, in materials with heavy elements, the band inversion can be induced since the strong SOC can split the p band by a large enough magnitude to flip the s-p band structure, leading to a topological insulator The chiral anomaly is predicted to occur in Weyl metals since the conservation of chiral charges is violated in the case of a parallel magnetic and electric field, resulting in a negative longitudinal MR in the Mn 1.25 Ga/Al bilayers as increasing  reflecting the anisotropic magnetoresistance of the single Mn 1.25 Ga layer as shown in our previous work In conclusion, we have discussed the origin of interface-driven UAHE in the Mn x Ga/Pt bilayers, which was distinguished from the THE related to chiral spin structures. Low temperature MFM results indicate that the additional Hall signals as a function of magnetic field does not peak near the maximal density of magnetic bubbles. We firmly demonstrates that the bump/dip features of Hall signals in FM/HM heterostructures cannot be taken as an unambiguous signature for chiral spin structures, and it should be treated discreetly since a wealth of underlying and interesting physics are often regrettably missed. It further demonstrates that an extraordinary range of unanticipated phenomena is expected to emerge from the interfaces, exciting new scientific results and functionality for future research. 