We show that the multicomponent meson systems can be described by chiral perturbation theory. We chiefly focus on a system of two pion gases at different isospin chemical potential, deriving the general expression of the chiral Lagrangian, the ground state properties and the spectrum of the low-energy excitations. We consider two different kinds of interactions between the two meson gases: one which does not lock the two chiral symmetry groups and one which does lock them. The former is a kind of interaction that has already been discussed in mutlicomponent superfluids. The latter is perhaps more interesting, because seems to be related to an instability. Although the pressure of the system does not show any instability, we find that for sufficiently strong locking, the spectrum of one Bogolyubov mode becomes tachyonic. This unstable branch seems to indicate a transition to an inhomogeneous phase. Cold hadronic matter is an interesting playground for a deep understanding of the properties of the strong interaction. At asymptotic baryonic densities the liberated quarks Among the various proposed models, it is worth mentioning the Nambu-Jona Lasinio (NJL) model A systematic analysis of hadronic matter can be obtained by effective field theories The thermodynamic and low-energy properties of mesons at nonvanishing μ I have been studied using the χPT in many different works Including the next-to-leading order (NLO) χPT corrections, it is possible to include interactions that do not lock the two chiral groups. This type of interaction is akin to the one typically discussed in ultracold atoms systems and indeed in this case we obtain results similar to those of multicomponent Bose gas The present paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we report known results for meson systems in χPT. This is useful to fix the notation and for comparison with the multicomponent meson system. In Sec. III we generalize the χPT Lagrangian to two meson gases, introducing the leading interaction terms. In Sec. IV we analyze the effect of one of the possible interaction term leading to chiral locking. In Sec. V we consider the χPT term that does not lock the two chiral groups. We conclude in Sec. VI. A number of results are collected in the Appendices. In the Appendix A, we report the low-energy excitations of a single-component pion gas. In the Appendix B, we discuss the low-energy corrections to the mean-field thermodynamic quantities arising from the vacuum energy of the Bogolyubov modes. The χPT description of the single meson gas is based on the global symmetries of massless QCD, with N f the number of flavors. The meson fields are collected in the Σ field, transforming under G as where where the mass matrix, M , and the so-called pion decay constant, f π , are the low energy constants (LECs) that cannot be fixed by the symmetry group G and must be determined in some other way. The χPT Lagrangian is constructed assuming that the mass term does not break the global symmetries, thus that M transforms as Σ. Then, the locking of the chiral rotations to the vector SU (N f ) V group is induced by the vev of M , see for example the discussion in where the isospin chemical potential, μ I , is introduced as the time component of a vector field. Note that the covariant derivative does not include the baryonic chemical potential, μ B , because mesons do not have a baryonic charge. A useful parameterization is where the radial field, ρ, and the unit vector field, φ, encode in a nontrivial way the three pion fields. By this parameterization, the LO χPT low-energy Lagrangian takes the form obtained in where is the potential and the control parameter is γ = μ I /m π . For |γ| > 1, the pion condensed phase is favored Therefore, in the broken phase the meson field vev is given by where n is a unit vector associated to the residual O(2) symmetry of the vacuum. The pressure and the isospin number density in the broken phase are respectively given by leading to the O(p 2 ) equation of state Close to the phase transition point, γ 1, the system is dilute and it is possible to expand the pressure P and the energy density ǫ, as a function of the isospin number density n I . If we define the adimensional isospin density n = n I /(f 2 π m π ), we can expand the control parameter as which is meaningful expansion for n ≪ 1. The pressure can then be expanded as follows where the leading term is the mean-field expression of the pressure of a boson system with coupling g 0 = 1/4f 2 π . This is indeed the correct expression of the coupling close to the phase transition, see Eq. (B2) and the discussion in the Appendix A. The energy density is instead given by which takes into account the energy associated to the mass of the pions. Note that the above expressions are obtained in the mean-field approximation, meaning that the low-energy fluctuations have not been included. Indeed, the order n 3 I corrections are determined by the χPT Lagrangian and not by the contribution of the Bogolyubov modes. The vacuum contribution of the Bogolyubov modes is considered in the Appendix B, and is much smaller than the leading mean-field contribution. However, it can play an important role in a multicomponent gas, as we will see below. We now generalize the discussion of the previous Section to a system with two mesonic gases. In the second quantization formalism we assume that two meson systems with densities n 1 and n 2 are described by the fields Σ 1 and Σ 2 . As for the single meson gas discussed in the previous Section, we use the global symmetries for constructing the χPT Lagrangian. As a starting point we consider the noninteracting case with symmetry group where is the chiral group of the Σ a field. For simplicity, we will mainly treat the system in which the two meson gases correspond to two fictitious pion systems, paving the way for the discussion of the simultaneous condensation of pions and kaons. In other words, we assume that in the noninteracting case the fields Σ 1 and Σ 2 transform independently under two chiral groups as where The most general O(p 2 ) chiral Lagrangian invariant under these symmetries is where f 1π and f 2π , as well as the matrices M 1 and M 2 , are the low energy constants (LECs) of the system. As for a single meson system described by the Lagrangian in Eq. ( for a = 1, 2. We now introduce the interaction between the two gases. Before doing that, let us first recall that under G a the covariant derivative transforms as the Σ a fields, that is and therefore the two covariant derivatives are independently rotated. Let us now consider the possible interaction terms. If we add to the noninteracting Lagrangian the term it locks the two chiral groups, leaving only the diagonal chiral rotation unbroken. In principle, the k coefficient is a number that depends on the interaction strength between the two chiral fields and, as any LEC, it is independent of the isospin chemical potentials. Remarkably, the interaction Lagrangian in Eq. ( which indeed locks chiral rotations. However, if one of the two fields vanishes, from Eq. ( Then the term in Eq. ( with n > 0 is not allowed. For a similar reason the mass-like terms are not allowed, unless n = 0. If one wants to preserve the G group, then one has to consider the O(p 4 ) terms. At this order, there are only two derivative terms coupling the two meson systems that do not lock the two chiral groups: where L1 and L2 are two LECs analogous to the standard L 1 and L 2 of O(p 4 ) χPT As an aside, we note that in principle one may consider more complicated intra-species interaction terms, like with k μν a Lorentz tensor and a G singlet. This kind of interaction term somehow generalizes Eq. ( In the following, we will discuss the effect of the interaction terms in Eq. ( To gain insight on the system described by Eqs. ( where the first term, respectively the second term, describes the propagation and self-interactions of the fields of the subset 1, respectively 2. The third term mixes the two fields and induces the locking between the two subsets. If it were absent, that is for k = 0, there would be no interactions between the two sets. For subsets made of identical particles there must exist a way of reshuffling them. Since , any reshuffling can only correspond to a rotation transforming the Lagrangian in Eq. ( To maintain the Lagrangian invariant we have to take k = 0 or, more interestingly, k = 1. Indeed, in the latter case where ), and therefore f1π f2π = f 2 π cos 2θ. Note that one cannot identify faπ with the pion decay constant of the pions in the subset a, because the fields are mixed by the interaction terms. If one takes k = 1, the O(2) symmetry in Eq. ( which is a generalization of the standard nonlinear expression of the pion fields. Therefore, the expression in Eq. where f a are a generalization of the pion decay constant. Note that the propagating degrees of freedom are obtained by diagonalizing the quadratic Lagrangian. Including the mass terms, formally considering the vevs of the fields M a in Eq. ( where we have assumed that the two fields have different mass parameters, m 1π and m 2π . These parameters have to be interpreted as LECs for the coupled system and correspond to the pion masses only in the k = 0 case. The actual masses can be obtained by the dispersion laws where the masses are given by ) for k = 1, and equal to the "reduced mass" for k = 1. From the above expressions it is clear that the interaction term in Eq. ( In spite of this relevant difference and considering that the locked theory in Eq. ( To elucidate the mechanism underlying the locking instability, and its possible resolution, let us consider a simple system consisting of two scalar bosons with a locking term with a manifest discrete Z 2 × Z 2 symmetry for k = 0. This symmetry corresponds to the transformations φ 1 → -φ 1 and φ 2 → -φ 2 , separately. For k = 0 the two discrete symmetries are locked, with the only remaining Z 2 symmetry corresponding to φ 1 → -φ 1 and φ 2 → -φ 2 , simultaneously. This simple system becomes unstable for k > 1, because one of the two eigenmodes has an imaginary mass. One possible solution of the instability corresponds to the realization of an inhomogeneous phase. Let us give an heuristic argument in favor of the inhomogeneous phase. If we assume that one component is realized in the volume V 1 and the other in the volume V 2 , then the action can be written as where S a with a = 1, 2 are the actions of the free scalar fields. The effect of the interaction term is only relevant at the interface, S 12 , of the two volumes. In other words, in the inhomogeneous phase the interaction Lagrangian L int has only support at the interface and therefore the dispersion laws of the field φ 1 , respectively φ 2 , in the volumes V 1 , respectively V 2 , are not tachyonic. We now consider the effect of the isospin chemical potentials for the two pion gases. Including them, the Lagrangian reads where the covariant derivatives are given in Eq. where ρ a are the two radial fields and n a are two unit vectors. Upon substituting Eq. ( where γ a = μ a /m aπ and the last term on the right hand side originates from the locking term, which explicitly breaks the G symmetry to the diagonal group, G D The interesting aspect is that the potential depends on the relative angle between n 1 and n 2 . In the ground state the two unit vectors are locked to be aligned, if the isospin chemical potentials have equal signs, or anti-aligned, if the isospin chemical potentials have opposite signs. We can clearly restrict the analysis to the case in which both isospin chemical potentials are positive and aligned. Since the vevs of the two fields are not independent but tend to align, it is clear that the condensation of one field favors the condensation of the other; we will discuss this effect in detail below. From the above expression it is also clear that the system has two NGBs for k = 0, corresponding to the two independent oscillations of the unit vectors, but only one NGB for k = 0, corresponding to the locked oscillations of the two fields. The second mode is massive and corresponds to a pseudo NGB. At the transition to the broken phase, where both gases condense, we can expand with ǫ a ≪ 1. Upon replacing this expression in the stationary condition for the potential, we obtain signaling that the condensation of one gas is deeply related to the condensation of the other: as soon as, say, ǫ 1 > 0, it follows that ǫ 2 > 0. The formation of one superfluid necessarily makes the other gas superfluid by a simultaneous condensation (SCO) mechanism. Upon solving the above system of equations, we easily obtain that the SCO happens for corresponding to the curve, C on the (γ 1 , γ 2 ) plane depicted in Fig. γ 1 = γ 2 = γ case. Since the two isospin chemical potentials are equal, it follows has that ρ1 = ρ2 = ρ, and the transition happens for γ 2 = 1/(k + 1). Therefore, with increasing values of k, the transition to the SCO phase happens at lower values of γ. One may naively think that increasing k would lead to a system that becomes superfluid for arbitrary values of the isospin chemical potential. As we will see below, this is not the case, because for k > 1 an instability in the low-energy spectrum is triggered. In general, close to the transition curve, C, one can expand the pressure as where γa ∈ C and are the susceptibilities. Upon expressing the isospin chemical potential in terms of the number densities, we obtain where the coupling constants are given by where , with L ab > 0. It turns out that the equality corresponding to the case For non relativistic distinguishable and dilute superfluid bosons, the equality in Eq. ( The low-energy excitations of the multicomponent system can be determined studying the fluctuations of the radial com-ponent and of the Bogolyubov modes. We shall employ the same formalism developed in In the broken phase, the system has two radial excitations, χ 1 and χ 2 , corresponding to the fluctuations around the corresponding vevs: where it is assumed that χ a ≪ ρa . Upon substituting the above expression in Eq. ( where The corresponding dispersion laws are given by thus the two modes have non-negative masses and are stable for any value of k. On the transition region to the BEC phase M 12 = M 1 M 2 , and one of the radial modes becomes massless. The stability in the radial modes for any value of k is clearly a manifestation of the result obtained in the previous Section, that the pressure close to the transition region is positive defined. Neglecting the radial excitations, thus taking ρ 1 ≡ ρ1 and ρ 2 ≡ ρ2 , one has the following low-energy Lagrangian where and with L 2 given by a similar expression, while stems from the locking term. The unit vectors fields φ1 and φ2 describe the two angular fluctuations of the condensates and can be parametrized as follows φ1 = (cos α, sin α) and φ2 = (cos θ, sin θ) , where we have not included the terms and leading to interactions and total derivatives. The Lagrangian in Eq. ( corresponding to the massless NGB and the massive pseudo NGB, respectively. The propagation velocity of the NGB is equal to 1, however integrating out the radial oscillations would lead to a propagation velocity equal to the speed of sound, see We now consider the interaction terms that do not lock the two chiral groups. Upon expanding the Lagrangian given by Eqs. ( where we have assumed the two gases have unequal masses and decay constant parameters. Unlike the locked case in the previous Sections, now the tree-level potential is independent of the the relative orientation of the two condensates, indeed it does not depend on n 1 • n 2 . In other words, the potential does not break the degeneracy of the two vacua and the two condensates vectors n 1 and n 2 can independently rotate. This is a manifestation of the fact that the interaction term does not lock the two chiral groups and thus the system has two NGBs. Considering L1 + L2 ∼ 10 -3 , as typical for O(p 4 ) corrections (see for example In Fig. In order to infer the effect of one superfluid on the other, we consider the case in which one of the two superfluids is formed, say the superfluid 2, and we seek the critical value γ 1,c for the onset of the condensation of the superfluid 1. At the leading order in the intra-species interaction, we find that the condensation onset for the first species obeys the equation γ 2 1,c = 1 -8( L1 + L2 ) which is depicted in Fig. We have discussed multicomponent meson superfluids in the χPT framework. We have derived the relevant χPT Lagrangian restricting most of the analysis to the global symmetry group given in Eqs. ( The Lagrangian term in in Eq. ( The Lagrangian term in Eq. ( The present work can be extended in different ways. As already anticipated, it paves the way for the discussion of a two-component system of pions and kaons. We plan to develop this study shortly. It would also be interesting to realize the locking instability in two-component ultracold atoms system. in terms of the Bogolyubov field α. Thus, up to the fourth order in the fields, the mixed interaction terms are with the couplings given by: where the first subscript indicates the total number of fields and the second one the number of α fields. The quadratic Lagrangian can be written as where the mixing term allows oscillations between the radial and the angular fields. Integrating out the radial fluctuations one obtains the massless, phonon-like, dispersion law where describes the pressure oscillations propagating at the sound speed. Alternatively, one can diagonalize the quadratic Lagrangian, obtaining the dispersion laws where which agree with the expressions reported in Close to the phase transition to the broken phase, the pressure of the single-component pion gas can be approximated with the expression in Eq. where M = μ I , and where g 0 = 1/(4f 2 π ) is the coupling constant at the phase transition point. The LHY correction to the pressure close to the phase transition point is given by ǫ GP,LHY = M 3/2 15π 2 (g n I ) 5/2 ∝ m 4 π n 5/2 , (B3) with the particular dependence on n indicating that this is a nontrivial effect beyond mean field. The LHY contribution is the first one in the series expansion na 3 , where a = gM/(4π) is the s-wave scattering length. Close to the transition point and using the values of the coupling constant and of the mass of the GP expansion, we find that na 3 ≪ 1 that means the diluiteness condition for any γ ∈ For a general evaluation of he LHY correction in the χPT context, we consider the vacuum contribution of the NGBs where E ph = c s p is the dispersion law of the NGBs obtained integrating out the radial fluctuations, see Eq. (A16). The hard cutoff, Λ, takes into account that the NGBs describe the lowenergy fluctuations below the mass scale, m χ , of the radial field, see Eq. (A3). Taking for simplicity Λ = m χ , considering the expression of the speed of sound in Eq. (A17), and that, close to the phase transition, γ ≈ 1 + n/4, see Eq. ( Generalizing the previous discussion to the two-component pion gases with the interaction term in Eq. ( 