Microscopic origin of the ferromagnetic (FM) exchange coupling in two Cr trihalides, CrCl 3 and CrI 3 , their common aspects and differences, are investigated on the basis of density functional theory combined with realistic modeling approach for the analysis of interatomic exchange interactions. For these purposes, we perform a comparative study based on the pseudopotential and linear muffin-tin orbital methods by treating the effects of electron exchange and correlation in generalized gradient approximation (GGA) and local spin density approximation (LSDA), respectively. The results of ordinary band structure calculations are used in order to construct the minimal tight-binding type models describing the behavior of the magnetic Cr 3d and ligand p bands in the basis of localized Wannier functions, and evaluate the effective exchange coupling (J eff ) between two Cr sublattices employing four different technique: (i) Brute force total energy calculations; (ii) Second-order Green's function perturbation theory for infinitesimal spin rotations of the LSDA (GGA) potential at the Cr sites; (iii) Enforcement of the magnetic force theorem in order to treat both Cr and ligand spins on a localized footing; (iv) Constrained total-energy calculations with an external field, treated in the framework of self-consistent linear response theory. We argue that the ligand states play crucial role in the ferromagnetism of Cr trihalides, though their contribution to J eff strongly depends on additional assumptions, which are traced back to fundamentals of adiabatic spin dynamics. Particularly, by neglecting ligand spins in the Green's function method, J eff can easily become antiferromagnetic, while by treating them as localized, one can severely overestimate the FM coupling. The best considered approach is based on the constraint method, where the ligand states are allowed to relax in response to each instantaneous reorientation of the Cr spins, controlled by the external field. Furthermore, the differences of the electronic structure of Cr trihalides in GGA and LSDA, and their impact on the exchange coupling are discussed in details, as well as the possible roles played by the on-site Coulomb repulsion U . Cr trihalides, CrX 3 (where X = Cl, Br, or I), and other van der Waals compounds with the rhombohedral structure have attracted recently much attention due to discovery of two-dimensional (2D) ferromagnetism Regarding the second issue, the ferromagnetism of Cr trihalides is basically a bulk property. For instance, bulk samples of CrBr 3 and CrI 3 are known to be ferromagnetic with the Curie temperature of 33 K and 68 K, respectively Then, why are Cr trihalides ferromagnetic? An easy answer would be the following: Cr is trivalent, located in the octahedral environment, and the Cr-X-Cr angle is close to 90 • . Therefore, the Cr-Cr coupling is expected to be ferromagnetic according to Goodenough-Kanamori-Anderson (GKA) rules Another important issue is how these GKA rules work in practical first-principles calculations based on density functional theory (DFT), and how to map properly this or any other theory of interacting electrons onto effective spin model and not to lose the contributions that can be responsible for the GKA rules In this respect, it is interesting to note that CrBr 3 was indeed regarded as a rare example of materials (together with CrO 2 ) where ferromagnetism arises from the direct exchange interaction There is quite a common tendency in the electronic structure calculations: if (typically due to additional approximations) such calculations underestimate the FM coupling, the missing effect is ascribed to the direct exchange (n and m being total electron and spin magnetization density, respectively). Thus, at each point, the xc energy is given by n and m at the same point, which is the definition of locality of the LSDA functional. However, n and m can be equivalently expanded in terms of a complete set of localized Wannier functions for the occupied states It turns out that the best considered approach is to fully relax the ligand states for each instantaneous configuration of the Cr spins: it correctly describes the FM coupling, both in CrCl 3 and CrI 3 , and yields the effective exchange coupling constant comparable with results of brute force total energy calculations. We will show how this problem can be efficiently solved in the framework of self-consistent linear response theory The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we will describe our method based on construction and analysis of the minimal tight-binding type models for the Cr We use the R3 structure for both CrCl 3 and CrI 3 (shown in Fig. Corresponding electronic structure, obtained for the FM state, is shown in Fig. the dp one, which explicitly includes the 3d states of Cr as well as the p states of the ligand atoms, and the pure d one, consisting only of the Cr 3d states. Nevertheless, in CrI 3 , due to the additional upward shift of the I 5p states, the ↑-spin Cr t 2g band merges into the I 5p one. Therefore, in this case we are able to consider only the more general dp model. The electronic structure of CrCl 3 and CrI 3 obtained in the QE method is in excellent agreement with the results of previous GGA calculations Next, we construct the Wannier functions spanning the subspace of the Cr 3d and ligand p bands and define the model dp Hamiltonian, Ĥ↑,↓ = [H ab ij ] ↑,↓ , separately for the majority (↑) and minority (↓) spin states, as the matrix elements of the original LSDA (GGA) Ĥ↑,↓ , is shown in Fig. which is totally ignored in ASA. Furthermore, this asphericity is additionally amplified in GGA (in comparison with LSDA). The spin splitting of the ligand p levels is small in comparison with the crystal field splitting within each projection of spin. The latter effect is again larger in the QE calculations. mainly from the hybridization of the transition-metal 3d states with the ligand p states Nevertheless, the structure of the atomic Cr 3d levels remains quite different in LMTO and QE (MLWF). As we shall see below, this difference strongly affects the behavior of nearest-neighbor (nn) exchange interactions. As expected, the transfer integrals become more long-ranged in comparison with the ones in the dp model In this Section we explore abilities of different models and techniques for the evaluation of interatomic exchange interactions in CrCl 3 and CrI 3 . Our ultimate goal is to elucidate the microscopic origin of the FM coupling in these compounds and we will show that the problem is indeed very nontrivial. The basic idea is to map the total energy difference associated with the reorientation of the Cr spins onto the model where e i is the direction of spin at site i, and J j is the corresponding exchange coupling between (central) site i and the one located at the lattice point i + j. Unless specified otherwise, we will concentrate on the behavior of the effective coupling between two Cr sublattices I and II (see Fig. The most straightforward estimate for J eff is to use the total energy difference between the J eff = ∆E/3 = 7.12 and 11.64 meV. This result clearly indicates that the coupling is indeed ferromagnetic and stronger in the case of CrI 3 . Thus, this result can be used as a reference for other models and approximations. The first model we consider is based on the Green's function method where Ĝ↑,↓ 0i (ε) = [ε -Ĥ↑,↓ ] -1 0i is the one-electron Green function between sites 0 and i, ε F is the Fermi energy, and Tr L denotes the trace over orbital indices In principle, Eq. ( Since the dp and d models provide qualitatively similar results and encounter the same problem for CrCl 3 (J 1 > 0 in LMTO, while J 1 < 0 in QE), it is convenient to start our analysis with the simplest d model. An analytical expression for J 1 can be found by employing superexchange theory where , and ∆ is the intraatomic energy splitting between the t 2g and either e g (te) or t 2g (tt) levels with the same (↑↑) or opposite (↑↓) directions of spin. Then, it is clear that smaller ∆ ↑↑ te and larger ∆ ↑↓ te in LMTO (see Fig. In comparison with Eq. ( Then, why does not this problem occur in CrI 3 ? Regarding the intraatomic level splitting, the situation is pretty much similar in CrCl 3 and CrI 3 (see Fig. In order to further elucidate the impact of the electronic structure on interatomic exchange interactions in CrCl 3 and CrI 3 , it is instructive to consider the band-filling dependence of J 1 , which is again calculated using Eq. ( Nevertheless, the interaction with unoccupied states makes in ferromagnetic, both in LMTO and QE calculations. Parameters of the main exchange interactions, spreading up to six nearest neighbors (see Fig. TABLE First, we note that the expression (3) suffers from a systematic error: although it follows from the magnetic force theorem, which allows us to replace the total energy change by the change of single-particle energies, it formally violates this theorem. The magnetic force theorem can be proven if a certain rotation of the xc field bi → ↔ R θ i bi rotates the spin magnetization by the same angle: mi → ↔ R θ i mi . Note that in these notations, bi is the vector bi = ( bx i , by i , bz i ), where each of its components is the matrix in the Wannier basis, while ↔ R θ i is the 3 × 3 tensor acting on bx i , by i , and bz i . Then, since the xc energy is invariant under spin rotations, the total energy change is described by the single-particle part given by Eq. ( Namely, let b be the column vector composed of bi at different sites of the unit cell (including ligands), ( b) T = ( . . . , bi , . . . ), and m be a similar vector for the magnetization. Then, knowing the x component ( m x ) T = ( . . . , θ i mz i , . . . ) of the rotated magnetization, one can find the constraining field h = ( h x , 0, 0), which reproduces m x , using the linear response theory as h x = R ↑↓ -1 + R ↓↑ -1 m x -b x , where R ↑↓ and R ↓↑ are the matrix elements of the response tensor, whose explicit expression can be found in Ref. In order to obtain J eff , we first consider the magnetic configuration shown in Fig. where the prefactor 1/3 takes into account three nn bonds in the xy plane. The obtained energies are shown in Fig. The constrained energy reveals perfect quadratic dependence on the angle θ. Moreover, after enforcing the magnetic force theorem, Eq. ( In the following, we will show that the reason is related to a very fundamental problem of how to treat the contribution of ligand sites to the exchange coupling between Cr sites. of canted spin configurations, as obtained in the QE (MLWF) method for CrCl 3 (left) and CrI 3 (right). The "rigid" constraint is based on Eq. 6, where the magnetization density is constrained at all sites, including the ligands, in order to fulfil the magnetic force theorem. "A" and "F" correspond to the antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic rotations of the Cr spins, as shown in Figs. The difference between the QE (MLWF) and LMTO data are quite expected: the values of local magnetic moments depend on the crystal-field splitting, which is very different in QE and LMTO, as was discussed above (see Fig. Moreover, Fig. The simplest correction to J A eff can be obtained by noting that, besides the interaction between the Cr spins, it also includes interaction with the FM background of the ligand spins. The latter can be corrected by considering the "ferromagnetic" rotations, where the spins in both Cr sublattices are rotated by the same angle θ (Fig. ∂(2θ) 2 describes the interaction with the FM background of the ligand spins, and the proper coupling between Cr spins can be found as J eff = J A eff -J F eff . All these parameters are listed in Table Then, what is wrong and what is missing in the corrected Green's function theory, described by Eq. ( Therefore, as the next step, we explore the opposite strategy by assuming that all magnetic variables are restricted by the Cr sites, while the ligand magnetization simply follows the Cr one as any other electronic variable. Namely, like in the constraint formalism, we rotate the Cr spins by applying the external field h = ( h x , 0, 0). The rotated configuration of the Cr spins is the same as in Fig. Furthermore, each ĥi is constant in the space of orbital variables, h ab i = h i δ ab (δ ad being Kronecker delta), and acts only at M i , while other degrees of freedom are found from the self-consistent solution of Kohn-Sham equations. In principle, this is well known numerical technique, which is widely used in electronic structure calculations First, we approximate the xc energy in LSDA (GGA) as where Îi is taken in the matrix form in order to describe asphericity of the xc potential. The corresponding xc field, bi = 2δE xc /δ mi , at site i is given by bi = -1 2 mi Îi + Îi mi . By applying this equation for bz i and mz i , obtained in collinear calculations for the FM state, one can find the Stoner matrix Îi (see Appendix B). We need this step in order to include self-consistency effects for noncollinear magnetic structures, like the one shown in Fig. Namely, by introducing the rank-4 tensor I = I abcd with I abcd = -1 2 I bc δ ad + I ad δ bc , Eq. ( where R α is related to spin-dependent elements of the response tensor as Finally, using δ m one can find the canting angle θ and evaluate the effective coupling constant J eff from Eq. Microscopic origin of FM coupling in quasi-2D van der Waals compounds CrX 3 (where X = Cl and I) was investigated on the basis of ab initio electronic structure calculations within density functional theory. Although FM coupling in CrCl 3 and CrI 3 is formally expected from GKA rules for the nearly 90 • Cr-X-Cr exchange path, the realization of this rule in DFT calculations is somewhat nontrivial, which requires special attention in the selection of practical methods and approximation for calculations of interatomic exchange coupling. In the considered Cr trihalides, the ligand states play a crucial role in the origin of FM coupling. However, the value of the exchange coupling strongly depends on "philosophy" of how these ligand states should be treated, which is traced back to fundamentals of adiabatic spin dynamics. To certain extend, the exchange coupling depends on the approximation, which is used for the exchange-correlation potential and whether it is treated on the level of LSDA or GGA. We have revealed the microscopic origin of this difference, which is mainly related to the intraatomic Cr 3d level splitting. More importantly, this coupling depends on the approximations used for the ligand states. Depending on the approximation, each of which has certain logic behind, the interatomic exchange coupling can vary from weakly antiferromagnetic to strongly ferromagnetic. The best considered approximation, which is consistent with brute force total energy calculations, is to explicitly include the effect of ligand states, but to treat them as electronic degrees of freedom and allow to relax for each instantaneous change of the directions of Cr spins. This strategy can be realized in constrained total energy calculations with the external magnetic field, which can be efficiently treated in the framework of self-consistent linear response theory. of constrained random-phase approximation (cRPA), as described in Ref. Then, the model (A1) can be solved in the mean-field Hartree-Fock approximation and the exchange parameters evaluated using Eq. (3) In CrCl 3 all interactions are antiferromagnetic. Therefore, the FM order is clearly unstable, both in and between the xy planes. At the first sight, the situation in CrI 3 looks somewhat better: at least, the nn coupling J 1 remains ferromagnetic. However, closer analysis shows that J 1 is counterbalanced by other AFM interactions, particularly J 3 and J 6 in the xy plane as well as J 2 between the plane. For instance, the parameter i J i , which is the measure of Curie temperature in the mean-field approximation and also the Curie-Weiss temperature, appears to be negative. Therefore, the FM state is unstable also in CrI 3 , should provide a good starting point for the analysis of magnetic properties of these compounds, at least on a semi-quantitative level. To certain extent, large t 2g -e g splitting in QE calculations, based on GGA, mimics the effect of small on-site Coulomb repulsion U. A similar conclusion has been reached recently for CrO 2 , which is another important FM compound, in the joint experimental-theoretical study combining soft-x-ray angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy and first-principles electronic structure calculations For further analysis, it is convenient to use the representation, which diagonalizes Î. The results are summarized in Fig. 