On the Effect of Low Temperatures on the Maximum Output Power of a Coherent Erbium Doped Fiber Amplifier Julien Le Gouët, Jérémy Oudin, Philippe Perault, Alaeddine Abbes, Alice Odier, and Alizée Dubois Abstract-The influence of low temperatures on the performance of a high-power single-frequency fiber laser amplifier is evaluated with a numerical simulation. Cooling the fiber can allow to take advantage of both higher damping of the acoustic waves in the silica glass, and higher laser efficiency. We first report on the measurement of the stimulated Brillouin scattering (SBS) threshold in a silica fiber as a function of the temperature from 300 K down to 77 K. We then present the measurements of small-signal absorption and gain spectra of an erbium doped alumino-phosphosilicate fiber, at room temperature and liquid nitrogen temperature. Based on these data, we derive a numerical study of the combined effects of cooling on the SBS threshold and the amplifier efficiency, and conclude on the interest of this technique for SBS limited high power Er doped fiber amplifiers (EDFA). The temperature increase caused by the pump laser in the fiber core is also addressed. Index Terms-Stimulated Brillouin scattering, erbium, fiber amplifier, liquid nitrogen temperature A MONG the countless types of lasers, high power sources with single frequency and single spatial mode emission have numerous applications. The amplification of coherent pulses (longer than 100 ns) up to the kW peak power range allow the long distance optical measurement of wind velocity For the best compactness and robustness, these systems are preferably based on fiber coupled laser sources, which are amplified in rare-earth doped optical fibers. As it is wellknown, for coherent sources with spectral linewidth narrower than 10 MHz, the maximum power in fibers is limited by the stimulated Brillouin scattering (SBS) Another degree of freedom is the influence of low temperatures on the attenuation of the acoustic waves in silica glass. This effect has been analyzed since the 50's Cooling the fiber has the other well-known effect of improving the efficiency for lasers based on rare earth doped crystals The aim of this article is to study the influence of low temperatures on the maximum output power of a typical single-frequency EDFA. This study is based on two measurements between room and liquid nitrogen temperatures: the SBS linewidth and threshold power in a passive fiber, and the spectra of absorption and gain of an erbium (Er) doped singlemode fiber. To our knowledge, this is the first study about the combined effects of SBS linewidth and amplifier efficiency on the maximum reachable power at low temperature. As a brief state of the art of the cryogenic cooling of optical fibers, we can mention several applications. In passive single-mode fibers, the spectral shift and width of the SBS spectrum are considered to monitor the thermal stability of superconductor magnets cooled down to a few Kelvins, such as those used at the LHC in CERN or in ITER In the following, we first present the measurements of the SBS threshold in a passive single mode fiber as a function of the temperature. Then we report our measurements of the small-signal interaction spectra (absorption and emission) on a single-mode Er:Yb doped alumino-phosphosilicate fiber The basic idea of this work stems from a well-referenced variation of the hypersound attenuation in amorphous media as a function of the temperature In the case of standard silica optical fibers, the acoustic wave is generated at approximately 11 GHz for a 1.5 μm signal wavelength For a single-frequency signal, with a spectral linewidth small compared to the SBS linewidth, the SBS small-signal gain writes as: where n is the core refractive index, c the velocity of light in vacuum, λ s the wavelength of the optical signal field, v ac the acoustic waves velocity in the glass core, γ e is the electrostrictive coupling constant and ρ 0 the mean value of the glass density where A ao is the acousto-optic area We first measure the SBS linewidth as a function of the temperature, as reported in previous works The measurement of the SBS linewidth as a function of T is displayed on Figure If the linewidth ∆ν B is the only parameter that varies significantly with temperature in the SBS gain expression (see eq. ( The method for this measurement is straightforward: an acousto-optic modulator generates laser pulses from the 1545 nm laser diode, with a pulse duration of 400 ns and a repetition rate of typically 20 kHz. A two-stage EDFA can raise the injected peak power at the level of the SBS threshold in the 10 m SMF. The input peak power can be modified finely by tuning the repetition rate. The output pulse shape is monitored on a photodiode with a rise time of 10 ns. We define the empirical SBS threshold by the input power required to generate a noticeable dip of about 10% of the peak power. The relative error of this measurement is lower than 10%. From Figure The SBS threshold variation with temperature can be confirmed by measuring the backscattered power as a function of the input power. The setup here is a direct measurement of the Stokes wave power, at the output of the optical circulator in the previous setup (Fig. For each curve, two regimes can be identified, corresponding to the spontaneous and undepleted stimulated Brillouin scattering. For 300 K, the spontaneous regime does not appear clearly, as the backscattered power is too close to the noise floor of the OSA. For 77 K it appears as the first section, for P peak input < 10 W. The regime of undepleted stimulated Brillouin scattering appears for P peak input 5 W at 300 K, and for P peak input 10 W at 77 K. In this regime, the curves can be fitted with a power function: As indicated by the parallelism of the curves at 77 and 300 K, the exponent b is identical for both curves (b = 13.5 ± 0.5). For the amplitude coefficients, the fits yield a 300 = (1.8 ± 0.1).10 -16 and a 77 = (5.1 ± 0.4).10 -20 . The SBS threshold power corresponds to the incident power P th that induces the backscattering of some arbitrary fraction η th = P Stokes /P th of this input power. Hence, the criterion η th can be chosen differently, for example if the the setup under study is more or less sensitive to the backscattered power. Given the expression (4) used to fit the data, the fraction η th can be expressed as: which yields for the ratio of the SBS threshold powers at 77 and 300 K: Given the relation 2 between the threshold power and the SBS gain, we deduce that g B is 80% lower at 77 K than at room temperature. The result of this quantitative measurement is identical to the ratio obtained with the empirical determination of the SBS threshold (see Fig. The efficiency of a rare-earth based laser is known to increase at low temperatures, thanks to the redistribution of the excited state populations in the Stark sub-levels that are closer to the zero-phonon line (about 1.53 μm for Erbium in usual silica glasses). For signals at longer wavelengths, the absorption cross-section is strongly reduced, and the effective electronic structure corresponds to a four-level system The Al:P host has attracted a lot of interest in view of Erbium:Ytterbium codoping in silica fibers As a first confirmation of this guess, we evaluated an important parameter in a higly doped fiber: the fraction 2k of Er ions in pairs among the total population. A common method consists in measuring the ratio of non-saturable and smallsignal absorptions at the peak wavelength λ peak for absorption and gain, using the expression derived in where α Er (λ, T ) and g * Er (λ, T ) are respectively the absorption and gain spectra at a given temperature (see Fig. The absorption and gain spectra of this fiber were then measured at 300 K and 77 K (see Fig. The gain spectra were obtained by measuring first the backpropagating fluorescence from a sample pumped in the core at 980 nm through a wavelength division multiplexer (WDM), and correcting from the WDM transmission. The sample was short enough (about 1 cm) to guarantee a full population inversion over its length. This was confirmed by comparing with the spectra obtained for shorter lengths. Then to convert the relative emission spectrum into an absolute gain spectrum, we measured the small-signal gain g * Er at λ peak = 1535 nm. This was done by injecting a signal seed of about 10 μW and measuring the output signal power for various fiber lengths, with the same requirement of full population inversion. The values obtained are g * Er (λ peak ) = 45 ± 1 dB/m at 300 K, and g * Er (λ peak ) = 76 ± 4 dB/m at 77 K. The resulting gain spectra are displayed on Fig. As expected, according to the Boltzmann statistics, at 77 K the populations of the various sub-levels thermalize to lower energy levels. The number of ions in the lower sublevels of the ground state 4 I 15/2 increases, corresponding to an increase of the absorption close to the zero-phonon line and a decrease at longer wavelengths. Similarly, for an optically pumped ion, the population of the highest sublevels of the excited state decreases, hence reducing the gain at shorter wavelengths. The interaction spectra measured above, together with the SBS threshold, are the only parameter that are expected to change notably with the temperature. The laser transition lifetime is another important model parameter, but its value does not vary significantly between 300 and 77 K Our simulation program uses the common 4th order Runge-Kutta algorithm to solve the propagation and rate equations along the fiber The erbium laser transition is considered as a homogeneously broadened two-level system. This program has been validated by numerous comparisons to experimental results, in various configurations (cw or pulsed regime, core pumped Er or clad pumped Er:Yb fibers...), and yields relative errors lower than 20% with respect to the output signal and residual pump powers The fiber considered here is an LMA fiber with Er:Yb codoping in the same Al:P host as described above, with an absorption of 80 dB/m at λ peak and 300 K, injected with a cw signal P sig = 1 W at λ sig = 1560 nm and pumped at λ pump = 1535 nm. The fraction of ions in pairs can be scaled from the value reported above (2k = 1.6% for 46 dB/m), so we consider 2k = 3%. The effect of the pairs on the efficiency is modeled in a simple way: the powers involved are much higher than the saturation power at both λ pump and λ sig (about 3 mW and 20 mW respectively), so the attenuation induced by the ion pairs is essentially constant along the fiber and can be identified to the non-saturable absorption (see eq. ( The values of the non-saturable absorption calculated at λ pump and λ sig , at 300 and 77 K, are listed in Table The model is first used to calculate the longitudinal evolution of P pump (z) and P sig (z). We then use eq. ( As an example, for an injected pump power of 400 W, we show on Fig. In addition, the SBS gain of a passive silica fiber is 80% lower at 77 K than at room temperature (see eq. ( The figure We also consider the case of an EDFA at 300 K with the SBS gain value of 77 K, in order to compare the distinct influence of the sole SBS gain reduction only and of the fiber cooling. By reducing the SBS gain by 80%, the output power is improved by a small amount (20% for a 400 W pump power). This shows that the cold fiber efficiency is the most determining contribution in the improvement of the output power. In addition, let us note that the experimental techniques allowing the SBS gain reduction (high doping, fiber strain, signal broadening, etc) could also be applied at low temperature, increasing again the maximum output power. As argued in the beginning, we find that cooling the fiber can bring together the two benefits of higher SBS threshold and higher amplifier efficiency. For all the points calculated, the amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) at the fiber input and output was negligible. One could be concerned about the heat generated by this high power setup in the fiber core, which could increase the temperature. We show that there is no such limitation, thanks to the low quantum defect between pump and signal: most of the pump energy is converted into signal. We assume here that the main contribution to the heat would come from the non-radiative decay of the pump laser. Considering the same example presented previously (see Fig. To convert this heat load into a quantitative temperature increase in the fiber core, the fiber is modeled with a finite element method. We consider that the fiber is cooled in a standard cryogenic setup, like the widespread Stirling machines used for infrared detectors. The system can be described as the succession of layers. The Er doped silica core is surrounded by a silica clad, with basically the same thermal properties. A cladding of acrylate polymer protects mechanically the silica fiber. Then the fiber is glued with epoxy between two copper plates. The successive stages of thermal contacts are supposed faultless. The thickness of each layer is reported in Table As can be seen on Fig. Taking advantage of the well-referenced effects of cryogenic temperatures on both phonon lifetime and on laser efficiency in silica fibers, we present the first study of their combined advantage for the performance of a single-mode and singlefrequency Er-doped fiber laser amplifier. The SBS threshold power is found 80% higher at 77 K than at 300 K. At the same temperatures, we report the measurement of the absorption and gain spectra of the 5 I 13/2 -5 I 15/2 laser transition of erbium, in a Er:Yb codoped alumino-phosphosilicate host. These data are used in a numerical simulation of the signal amplification at 1560 nm in the same type of fiber, clad pumped at 1535 nm, with a pump power up to 400 W. In the pump limited regime, the amplifier at low temperature is 60% more efficient. In the SBS limited regime, given the higher SBS threshold power at 77 K, the amplifier can reach a power more than twice higher than at room temperature. Let us note that the cryogenic cooling can be combined with a number of other methods of SBS rejection, such as fibers with large mode area, low Brillouin gain (anti-guiding profile for acoustic waves), strain gradient, or signal frequency broadening... This paper demonstrates the interest of cooling the fiber, so the experiment should be tested in a configuration similar to that suggested here. In a longer term perspective, our work also illustrates the interest of understanding and using the physical properties of non-usual amorphous hosts for improving the performance of rare-earth doped fibers, notably in laser amplifiers. Historically, silica fibers have been used for EDFA because of their immediate compatibility (fabrication, splicing...) with the low absorption fibers used for longdistance telecommunications. Since this technological leap, many other glasses or doping methods were investigated Alaeddine Abbes Alaeddine Abbes received the M.Sc. degree in Optoelectronics and Microwave Engineering in 2017, from the University of Montpellier. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree on the development of a compact, low-cost, highly tunable, highly coherent and powerful terahertz (THz) sources based on photomixing using VeCSEL (Vertical-external-Cavity Surface-Emitting-Laser) technology from the Institut d'Électronique et des Systèmes, Montpellier, France. He current research interests include THz generation and detection, THz optoelectronic generation using photoconductors and photodiodes, THz antenna, and semiconductor lasers. Alice Odier Biography text here. Alizée Dubois Biography text here.