The existence of band gaps in Mott insulators such as perovskite oxides with partially filled 3d shells has been traditionally explained in terms of strong, dynamic inter-electronic repulsion codified by the on-site repulsion energy U in the Hubbard Hamiltonian. The success of the "DFT+U approach" where an empirical on-site potential term U is added to the exchange-and correlation Density Functional Theory (DFT) raised questions on whether U in DFT+U represents interelectronic correlation in the same way as it does in the Hubbard Hamiltonian, and if empiricism in selecting U can be avoided. Here we illustrate that ab-initio DFT without any U is able to predict gapping trends and structural symmetry breaking (octahedra rotations, Jahn-Teller modes, bond disproportionation) for all ABO3 3d perovskites from titanates to nickelates in both spin-ordered and spin disordered paramagnetic phases. We describe the paramagnetic phases as a supercell where individual sites can have different local environments thereby allowing DFT to develop finite moments on different sites as long as the total cell has zero moment. We use a recently developed exchange and correlation functional ("SCAN") that is sanctioned by the usual single-determinant, mean-field DFT paradigm with static correlations, but has a more precise rendering of self-interaction cancelation. Our results suggest that strong dynamic electronic correlations are not playing a universal role in gapping of 3d ABO3 Mott insulators, and opens the way for future applications of DFT for studying a plethora of complexity effects that depend on the existence of gaps, such as doping, defects, and band alignment in ABO3 oxides. Transition metal oxide perovskites ABO3 with a 3d transition metal atom substituting the B site exhibit intriguing metal vs insulator characteristics as well as different forms of magnetism across the series both in their high-temperature (HT) spin-disordered paramagnetic (PM) phases and/or in the low-temperature (LT) spin-ordered phases Whereas Density Functional Theory (DFT) has been shown to be able to address numerous physical effects in such oxides, including ferroelectricity 10 , catalysis However, the DFT calculations in such demonstrations of failure To examine if the explanation of gapping requires an explicit Hubbard U, we have performed DFT calculations on several popular ABO3 perovskite oxides with d fillings from 1 to 8 electrons, using (unlike previous DFT+U calculations of e.g. Ref. Unlike these publications we do not just study how SCAN functional behaves with ternary oxides on gaps, structural features or electron localization, but we tackle a different problem: is the Mott-Hubbard model required to capture trends in gapping, structural motions or magnetic moments in ABO3 materials? Here we show that (i) DFT, without any U parameter but with an exchange-correlation functional better representing self-interaction errors, is sufficient to explain trends in properties of ternary ABO3 oxides in both LT spin-ordered and HT PM phases; (ii) since DFT-no-U and its static mean-field treatment of electron interactions are largely sufficient to produce insulation, ABO3 oxide perovskites may certainly be complicated but they are not necessarily strongly dynamically correlated and (iii) thus, gapping in such specific cases may not sweepingly obey the celebrated Mott-Hubbard explanation of formation of two electron sites which depends on the existence of d like band edges and on interelectronic repulsion exceeding band width, neither of which are needed in the current explanation . However, our results do not imply that if DFT works for a material, then all forms of correlations do not play a role. We have performed DFT Ref. increase in the band gap when going from rare-earth titanates (d 1 ) to rare-earth vanadates (d 2 ) in agreement with experimental observations Magnetic moments: Our calculations provide magnetic moment values that are comparable to experimental quantities available in literature (see Figure The energy gain in forming local moments is given by the total energy difference ENM -EAFM. As the number of unpaired 3d electrons increases, we see that this energy strongly increases, signaling the large energy gain obtained by forming local magnetic moments, and thus the irrelevance of the NM ansatz (Fig. It is interesting to analyze the electronic localization of the d electrons in those perovskite oxides that are believed to be strongly dynamically correlated systems (d 1 , d 2 , d 4 and d 7 materials for instance). We report in Figure To understand the role of JT and bond disproportionation motions on the gap opening, we use as a starting configuration a high symmetry Pm-3m phase and then apply to it successively all displacement modes appearing in the ground state AFM structure (i.e. O6 rotations, antipolar displacements of ions). We then freeze the JT or Boc modes and compute the potential energy surface vs amplitude of the modes for NM, AFM and PM solutions in LaMnO3 (Q2 + mode), LaVO3 (Q2 -mode) and YNiO3 (Boc mode). This protocol has been used in Ref. to non-zero amplitude of JT and Boc modes. We conclude that DFT without an interelectronic U can stabilize these previously believed to be "correlation-induced lattice distortions" So far, we have shown the ability of the SCAN functional to capture the formation of basic physical quantities (e.g. band gap, magnetic moments, structural motions) of ABO3 materials upon various d fillings. We may now question the ability of this functional to reproduce physical trends within series showing isoelectronic configurations. The case of SrVO3: For instance, SrVO3 (d 1 ) display a paramagnetic metallic state at all temperature while the isolectronic rare-earth titanates RTiO3 exhibit insulating states. We have explored the paramagnetic state of SrVO3 using the constrained magnetic approach proposed by Franchini et al This discrepancy could result from an exaggerated electron localization in SCAN that contributes to (i) bond disproportionation and (ii) Ni magnetic moments substantially larger in SCAN-no-U (QBoc=0.17 and 0.15 Å, μNiL=1.41 and 1.35 μB for R=Y and Pr, respectively) than in GGA+U calculations (QBoc=0.14 and 0.11 Å, μNiL=1.26 and 1.17 μB for R=Y and Pr, respectively) of Refs. We have shown that a DFT using a functional without on-site correlation energy U but better amending self-interaction errors captures the basic properties of 3d electron transition metal oxide perovskites namely band gap, magnetic moments, relative B-d to O-p levels positions and all structural features, by using a polymorphous representation allowing energy lowering formation of (i) magnetic moments, (ii) atomic displacements and octahedral rotations, and (iii) breaking of crystal field symmetry of partially occupied orbitals. We further show that lattice distortions including, Jahn-Teller and bond disproportionation modes, are captured by single-determinant, mean field DFT without U parameter suggesting that dynamic correlations are not the universal controlling factor here. Success of DFT for a given case does not exclude the existence of other forms of correlation. Furthermore, the success of DFT does not imply Coulomb interactions are not important, because DFT certainly includes (mean field like Hartree) Coulomb interaction. However, this is very different than the highly complex treatment of non-mean field Hubbard like U interaction term in the Hubbard Hamiltonian. The latter effect is excluded in the much simpler present calculation which still provides good and material-specific results. ) Energy difference (in meV/f.u) between spin polarized and N-DFT (NM) solution, band gap Eg (in eV), magnetic moment M3d (in μB) associated with the B cation and amplitudes of distortions (in Å) associated with