Point defects can have significant impacts on the mechanical, electronic and optical properties of materials. The development of robust, multidimensional, high-throughput and large-scale characterization techniques of defects is thus crucial, from the establishment of integrated nanophotonic technologies to material growth optimization. Here, we demonstrate the potential of wide-field spectral single-molecule localization microscopy (spectral SMLM) for the determination of ensemble spectral properties, as well as characterization of spatial, spectral and temporal dynamics of single defects in CVD-grown and irradiated exfoliated hexagonal boron-nitride (hBN) materials. We characterize the heterogeneous spectral response of our samples, and identify at least two types of defects in CVD-grown materials, while irradiated exfoliated flakes show predominantly only one type of defect. We analyze the blinking kinetics and spectral emission for each type of defects, and discuss their implications with respect to the observed spectral heterogeneity of our samples. Our study shows the potential of widefield spectral SMLM techniques in material science and paves the way towards quantitative multidimensional mapping of defect properties. Defects in wide-band gap semiconductor materials lead to the creation of energy states well within the band gap, conferring these materials with new and exciting properties due to quantum confinement. A popular and well-studied example of point defects are nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers in diamond, which can act as single-photon emitters In recent years, 2D semiconductors and insulators have emerged as new classes of materials able to host functional defects. Single-photon emission from such defects has been demonstrated in 2D Transition-Metal Dichalcogenides at cryogenic temperatures However, defects can also be detrimental, leading to a decrease in the electrical and mechanical properties of materials. For example, the use of hBN as an encapsulation layer in nanoelectronics Due to their atomic-scale nature, characterizing defects can be very difficult. Defects can be imaged with high spatial resolution in a transmission electron microscope (TEM) With this goal in mind, we recently established single-molecule localization microscopy (SMLM) as a viable strategy for wide-field mapping of optically active defects in hBN In this work, we focus on prototypical optically-active defects in hBN, and demonstrate that the implementation of spectral information concomitant to spatial SMLM (obtained by placing a prism in the detection path) is a valuable step forward in the large-area, nondestructive characterization of 2D materials and beyond. Our combined wide-field spectral and spatial super-resolved technique allows the determination of statistical ensemble spectral properties, as well as extraction of spatial, spectral and temporal dynamics of single defects. We demonstrate our approach on both monolayers of CVD-grown hBN materials, as well as irradiation induced surface defects in bulk exfoliated hBN materials. Similar operational principles could be applied to transition metal dichalcogenides at cryogenic temperatures Our set-up is based on a wide-field spectral super-resolution imaging scheme, using a prism in the detection path, previously developed in a biological context Wide-field photoluminescence emission from the sample is collected by the same objective and separated from the excitation laser using dichroic and emission filters. Emission light is then split through two paths using a beam-splitter (Fig. , where σ ,-. ≈ 150 nm is the standard deviation of the gaussian fit of emitter's intensity (corresponding to a diffraction-limited spot fixed by the Point Spread Function with FWHM of ≈ 350 nm) and N is the number of photons emitted by the defect during the acquisition of one frame. The second path consists of an equilateral calcium fluoride (CaF2) prism. This dispersive element leads to an approximately linear shift Δy -,78 [px] in the photoluminescence signal of each emitters relative to their emission wavelength λ, such that Δy -,78 ~a × λ, with a ≈ 0.25 px/nm (see SI Fig. Continuous green laser illumination of the flakes leads to photoswitching (blinking) of the emitters between bright and dark states As shown in Fig. We now proceed in Fig. As shown in Fig. Representative spectra for the first defect type ("type A") are shown in green in Fig. A representative time trace for the emission of each individual emitter is shown in Fig. To verify the generality of our approach, we characterized defects in a second class of hBN materials. We started from high-quality bulk hBN crystals Interestingly, as illustrated in Figs. Focusing on CVD-grown hBN, we now turn in Fig. Another interesting feature of the emitters investigated here is their blinking kinetics, also observed in several other studies An important question remains to understand the reasons for the spectral heterogeneity evidenced in our study and the presence of different emission lines and defects states in CVD grown hBN and irradiated bulk hBN crystals. In the quest towards the assignment of a precise chemical structure to optically active defects in hBN materials, recent works have shown a widely heterogeneous spectral response of defects in hBN The differences in the spectral shape and zero phonon line distribution of type A and B defects (Figs. We have shown the potential of spectral SMLM techniques for wide-field and high-throughput spectral mapping and characterization of defects in hBN materials. Our methodology allows the determination of statistical ensemble spectral properties, as well as extraction of spatial, spectral and temporal dynamics of single defects. We identify at least two types of defects in CVD grown materials, while irradiated exfoliated flakes show predominantly one type of defect. Further analysis of the blinking kinetics of optical emitters suggests that blinking is due to transient trapping of photoexcited charge carriers at the material's surface, similar to what is observed in quantum dots. This behavior provides strategies for blinking reduction and increase of photostability through encapsulation of defects and reduction of charge traps via thermal annealing. Our study demonstrates the potential of spectral SMLM as a wide field and highthroughput characterization technique in material science and paves the way towards multidimensional mapping of defects' properties. The sample is excited using a 561 nm laser (Monolitic Laser Combiner 400B, Agilent Technologies). Excitation power during imaging, measured at the back focal plane of the microscope objective varies from 20 to 65 mW, corresponding to power densities ranging from 250-800 kW/m 2 . We used a high numerical aperture oil-immersion microscope objective (Olympus TIRFM 100X, NA = 1.45). Wide-field photoluminescence emission from the sample is collected by the same objective and separated from the excitation laser using dichroic and emission filters (ZT488/561rpc-UF1 and ZET488/561m, Chroma). Paths 1 and 2 consist of two telescopes Localization: Emitters in the spatial and spectral channels are localized using the imageJ plugin, Thunderstorm Spectral calibration: Calibration between spatial and spectral channels is conducted using red fluorescent beads (20 nm FluoSpheres carboxylated-modified, 580/605). First, we calibrate the field-of-view transformation between spatial and spectral channels. For an emitter with a given wavelength, the relation between its position in the spatial and spectral channel is well approximated by a relation of the form (xSPEC,ySPEC) = A.(xLOC,yLOC) + B, where (xSPEC,ySPEC) and (xLOC,yLOC) corresponds to the position vector of the emitter in the spectral and spatial channels, respectively, A is a 2x2 matrix and B is a vector. Coefficients for A and B are calibrated by raster scanning a fiducial marker of controlled emission wavelength and mapping its position in both channels. In a second step, bandpass filters with a central wavelength of 600 nm, 630 nm and 650 nm, respectively, and FWHM of 10 nm (Thorlabs, FB600-10) are used to calibrate the relation between the emission spectrum and the vertical shift in the spectral channel. The relation between the vertical shift Δy -,78 [px] of the emission spectra and the emission wavelength λ, is well approximated by a linear relation such that Δy -,78 ~a × λ, with a ≈ 0.25 px/nm (See Fig. Spectral assignment: In order to assign a spectra to an emitter, localized in the spatial channel at (xLOC,yLOC), we compute its projected position (xSPEC(λ0), ySPEC(λ0)) in the spectral channel for a fixed emission wavelength λ0=650 nm. A pair-search algorithm finds the closest localizations (x'SPEC, y'SPEC) in a vertically-elongated rectangular zone around (xSPEC(λ0), ySPEC(λ0)). The corresponding central emission wavelength λ is then estimated as λ= λ0+1/a.(ySPEC(λ0)-y'SPEC). Spectra generation: Measured spectra in Fig. Image generation: SMLM images (Fig. Drift correction: Lateral drift is corrected using cross-correlation between reconstructed superresolved images on CVD-grown materials. No lateral drift correction is applied on exfoliated hBN flakes, as the lower density of defects leads to weak cross-correlations between reconstructed images. Blinking kinetics: We obtain the blinking kinetics of type A and type B defects (Fig. CVD-grown materials: CVD-grown materials are produced under similar conditions as described elsewhere The h-BN domains are transferred onto SiNx chips using the electrochemical bubbling method Exfoliated flakes: hBN multi-layer flakes are exfoliated from high quality bulk crystals No annealing was performed. 