Although a cubic phase of Mn3Ga with an antiferromagnetic order has been theoretically predicted, it has not been experimentally verified in a bulk or film form. Here, we report the structural, magnetic, and electrical properties of antiferromagnetic cubic Mn3Ga (C-Mn3Ga) thin films, in comparison with ferrimagnetic tetragonal Mn3Ga (T-Mn3Ga). The structural analyses reveal that C-Mn3Ga is heteroepitaxially grown on MgO substrate with the Cu3Au-type cubic structure, which transforms to T-Mn3Ga as the RF sputtering power increases. The magnetic and magnetotransport data show the antiferromagnetic transition at TN = 400 K for C-Mn3Ga and the ferrimagnetic transition at TC = 820 K for T-Mn3Ga. Furthermore, we find that the antiferromagnetic C-Mn3Ga exhibits a higher electrical resistivity than the ferrimagnetic T-Mn3Ga, which can be understood by spin-dependent scattering mechanism. Most of Heusler compounds crystallize in the cubic L21 structure, where special attention has been focused on half-metallic ferromagnetism to exhibit a metallic behavior in one spin channel and an insulating behavior in the other spin channel, resulting in complete spin polarization of electrons at the Fermi level In the present work, we have successfully fabricated hetero-epitaxial Mn3Ga films with stable cubic phase by using RF magnetron sputtering method. We report the structural, magnetic, and electrical properties of the cubic Mn3Ga (C-Mn3Ga), in comparison with the tetragonal phase (T-Mn3Ga). The structural analyses reveal that C-Mn3Ga deposited with low RF power crystallizes in the disordered Cu3Au-type structure, and it transforms to T-Mn3Ga as the power increases. We find the antiferromagnetic transition at TN = 400 K for C-Mn3Ga, while the ferrimagnetic transition at TC = 800 K for T-Mn3Ga. Furthermore, the electrical resistivity is higher in the antiferromagnetic phase of C-Mn3Ga than that in the ferrimagnetic phase of T-Mn3Ga. The films of Mn3Ga were deposited on MgO(001) substrate using RF magnetron sputtering with a base pressure of 1.0 × 10 -6 Torr. The RF power was varied from 10 W to 55 W with a constant substrate temperature of 400 o C and Argon pressure of 2mTorr during the deposition. The crystal structure of the samples was determined by using X-ray diffraction (XRD Bruker AXS D8 Discover diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation). In addition, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM FEI Tecnai G 2 F30 S-TWIN) and transmission electron diffraction (TED) were used for detailed structural investigation of Mn3Ga with MgO substrate. The surface morphology and relative Mn composition were measured using the scanning electron microscope (SEM) and electron dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX JEOL JSM-6700F). The magnetic properties and electrontransport properties were measured using a superconducting quantum interference device-vibrating sample magnetometer (SQUID-VSM Quantum Dsign MPMS) where the magnetic field was swept from -7 T to 7 T and temperature range 2 ~ 300 K. The temperature dependence of magnetization with high temperature was measured from 300 K to 800 K by using a physical property measurement system (VSM PPMS). The structural evolution with varying the deposition conditions has been investigated by the Xray diffraction (XRD) measurements. Figure Besides the peaks from MgO substrate, the XRD patterns mainly show three different peaks from the samples, which are two (002) and (004) tetragonal peaks and one (002) cubic peak. For the films deposited with high powers (P > 43 W), there are two dominant peaks at 24.99 and 51.28 which coincide with the (002) and (004) peaks of the D022 tetragonal structure, respectively. For the films grown with low powers (P < 41 W), we observe a peak at 48.27 which is matched with the (002) peak of the disordered L12 cubic structure The most prominent change in the crystal structure is clearly seen in the magnetism. We probe the magnetic transition temperatures of two T-Mn3Ga and C-Mn3Ga phases by measuring hightemperature magnetization up to 820 K. Figure The magnetization abruptly increases below TC = 800 K corresponding to the ferrimagnetic transition temperature of T-Mn3Ga. For C-Mn3Ga, on the other hand, we have measured the temperature dependent magnetization in an applied magnetic field of 1 kOe because of no remanence. In Figure These magnetic data recorded in thin films are different from those taken with nano-ribbons where the antiferromagnetic cubic Mn3Ga undergoes multiple magnetic and structural transitions to ferrimagnetic tetragonal phase at 600 K and to antiferromagnetical hexagonal phase at 800 K, and they are thermally irreversible. The irreversibility has been explained by the unstable cubic phase of Mn3Ga in nature because the cubic phase is obtained only by a nonequilibrium synthesis process such as rapid quenching from a very high temperature. However, in our case of a thin-film form, we obtain a quite stable cubic phase of Mn3Ga, which may be related to a strain effect of the MgO substrate. Notably, we obtain two different stable phases of ferrimagnetic T-Mn3Ga and antiferromagnetic C-Mn3Ga simply by changing the RF deposition power. As aforementioned, the lattice mismatch between Mn3Ga sample and MgO substrate is large (~ 10.2%). When such materials are deposited on the substrate with a large lattice mismatch, higher kinetic energy is necessary to overcome the energy barrier of metastable state and achieve the stable state. In the present case, the metastable state is cubic phase of Mn3Ga and the stable state is the tetragonal phase of Mn3Ga, and the higher deposition power means higher kinetic energy giving rise to the deposition of stable T-Mn3Ga phase. On the other hand, the lower deposition power could result in the growth of metastable C-Mn3Ga phase Figs. From the high-field data with linear dependence, we calculate the carrier density of n = 1.0  10 20 , 1.3  10 20 , and 1.9  10 20 cm -3 for T-Mn3Ga, M-Mn3Ga, and C-Mn3Ga, respectively. These values lie in poor metallic regime, which is necessary for later discussion on the electrical transport. We investigate the temperature dependence of electrical resistivity (T) for C-, M-, and T-Mn3Ga. The results are displayed in Fig. Since the electrical transport is strongly affected by the magnetic order in magnetic materials, it is useful to compare magnetoresistance with magnetization. As displayed in Fig. Our results show that the cubic phase of Mn3Ga can be stabilized and manipulated by reducing the deposition power in RF magnetron sputtering. Notably, depending on the crystal structure of Mn3Ga, two distinct magnetic phases have been observed experimentally; cubic Mn3Ga (C-Mn3Ga) and tetragonal Mn3Ga (T-Mn3Ga). The XRD and TEM analyses show that C-Mn3Ga is heteroepitaxially grown on MgO substrate in spite of large lattice mismatch. From the magnetic field and temperature dependent magnetization measurements, we confirm C-Mn3Ga to be antiferromagnetic Figure 1. Bang et al. Figure 2. Bang et al. Figure 3. Bang et al. Figure 4. Bang et al.