The study of the nanomechanics of graphene -and other 2D materials -has led to the discovery of exciting new properties in 2D crystals, such as their remarkable in-plane stiffness and out of plane flexibility, as well as their unique frictional and wear properties at the nanoscale. Recently, nanomechanics of graphene has generated renovated interest for new findings on the pressure-induced chemical transformation of a few-layer thick epitaxial graphene into a new ultrahard carbon phase, named diamene. In this work, by means of a machine learning technique, we provide a fast and efficient tool for identification of graphene domains (areas with a defined number of layers) in epitaxial and exfoliated films, by combining data from Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) topography and friction force microscopy (FFM). Through the analysis of the number of graphene layers and detailed Å-indentation experiments, we demonstrate that the formation of ultra-stiff diamene is exclusively found in 1-layer plus buffer layer epitaxial graphene on silicon carbide (SiC) and that an ultra-stiff phase is not observed in neither thicker epitaxial graphene (2-layer or more) nor exfoliated graphene films of any thickness on silicon oxide (SiO2). Understanding the mechanical properties of two-dimensional (2D) materials is of fundamental importance for their application in development of new devices Mechanical and nanomechanical testing of 2D materials is also a tool for materials discovery. Recent research efforts have focused on the pressure induced formation of new phases in 2D materials. In particular, the formation of an ultrastiff phase, diamene, was found while locally pressurizing epitaxial graphene films and more recently the formation of bonitrol from hexagonal boron nitride was demonstrated These films present structural, electrical, and mechanical properties completely different from their original 2D counterparts, and their stabilization in the form of two-dimensional layered structure can open avenues to new groundbreaking developments in nanotechnology. However, while important discoveries and new potential applications have been made possible by the accurate testing and understanding of the mechanics and force-induced structural modifications of 2D films, and specifically graphene, a framework to clearly correlate mechanical behavior with morphological properties, such as number of layers and type of graphene-substrate interface, still needs to be established. Machine learning techniques offer new opportunities to gain insight in experimental data In this paper, by means of atomic force microscopy (AFM) we correlate the number of layers in epitaxial graphene on silicon carbide (SiC) and exfoliated graphene on silicon oxide (SiO2) with the frictional properties, transverse elasticity, and formation of ultra-stiff diamene layers. To this aim, we employ a fast and robust clustering technique, namely, spectral clustering Exfoliated and epitaxial graphene samples are prepared following the procedures described in the Methods section. Optical micrographs and Raman spectra are used to identify regions with different number of layers in exfoliated graphene flakes on SiO2, as well as on continuous epitaxial graphene films grown on SiC. Figure Figure Figure The 2D peak is also substantially broader than for 1-layer exfoliated graphene. The difference between the spectra of epitaxial graphene and exfoliated layers can be explained by considerations on the nature of these films: i) graphene flakes can be spatially isolated to a size that is easily probed by traditional Raman microscopes (~1 m); on the other hand, epitaxial graphene on silicon carbide presents a complex structure, where domains of buffer layer (BfL), 1-layer, and 2-layer graphene coexist inside regions with size of few micron squared; ii) a strong interaction exists between the substrate (silicon carbide) and the first carbon layer (buffer layer, BfL), which may result in a broadening and shifting of the peak due to the presence of residual in plane strains in this structure. The values of the full width at half maximum (FWHM) are computed for the G and 2D peaks for all the spectra collected for exfoliated and epitaxial graphene samples. For single-layer graphene in Figure Topography of few-layer exfoliated graphene flakes on SiO2 presents large plateaus corresponding to the 2D layers Frictional forces measured in contact mode are inputted together with topography data to segment the surface using the spectral clustering algorithm, see Methods section. Figure The morphology of graphene epitaxially grown on SiC is more complex than the simple layered structure of exfoliated graphene flakes transferred on a wafer substrate. In this work, we investigate the properties of state-of-the-art epitaxial graphene samples fabricated following the original CCS methodology discussed in References To obtain a fast and robust identification of the 1-layer and 2-layer regions, we analyze frictional data through the spectral clustering algorithm. Results of clustering performed on the sole friction force data are displayed in Figure In epitaxial graphene, the formation of 1-layer, 2-layer, and BfL structures can occur independently on different SiC terraces during thermal sublimation of Si creating a quite complex layered architecture. By applying the clustered regions identified from friction map to topography data, a quantitative analysis of the height distribution is performed in a confined region within one of the terraces. We found that the average height of 1-layer graphene is -1.2±0.1 nm, the average height of the 2-layer region is -1.6±0.2 nm. The average height of BfL regions, assumed as the reference plane, is 0.0±0.2 nm. Notably, we obtain that the vertical distance from the exposed buffer layer to the nearby 1-layer region is approximately 1.2±0.3 nm, a value which accounts for the roughness of the buffer layer (≈ 0.3 nm) Å-indentation of graphene is performed to estimate the transverse elasticity of different graphene layers in both epitaxial and exfoliated films, as determined from the spectral clustering technique. Selective experiments are conducted to probe the stiffness of the different regions appearing in the SClust frictional map, namely BfL, 1-layer, 2-layer epitaxial graphene films and 1-,2-,3-layer exfoliated graphene flakes. Å-indentation curves measured in the points marked on the SClust frictional map in Figure There are still many open questions regarding the stability, structure, and isolation of the pressureinduced diamene phase exhibiting mechanical response to indentation similar to that of diamond. In Figure Å-indentation curves of exfoliated graphene on SiO2 are displayed in Figure Saturation of dangling bonds is also possible through the formation of bonds with -H and -OH groups, which are naturally available at the interface of the 2D layers when experiments are conducted in air at moderate humidity levels (>RH 35%) Figure properties, multi-layer graphene (graphite) with transverse modulus of ~36 GPa and SiO2 with modulus of ~60 GPa. Therefore, with increasing thickness of the top soft film (multi-layer graphene) the indentation modulus approaches the lower modulus of ~36 GPa. In this paper, through detailed Å-indentation experiments and machine learning clustering, we uncovered how the ultra-stiff diamene-graphene phase transition and interlayer elasticity depend on the graphene-substrate interaction and number of layers in epitaxial graphene grown on SiC and exfoliated graphene on SiO2. The correlation of topography and friction force microscopy provides sufficient information to univocally identify the different graphene structures/number of Epitaxial Graphene film Exfoliated Graphene flake Table layers in both exfoliated and epitaxial graphene. The use of spectral clustering techniques allows for fast and reproducible correlation of topographic and friction data and provide deeper insight in the analysis of graphene films, such as the identification of the number of layer and reconstruction of complex domains, even with limited friction contrast. Based on this methodology we conclude that the ultra-high stiffness can indeed be univocally attributed to 1-layer plus BfL epitaxial graphene, see Table Continuous epitaxial graphene films are prepared by thermal sublimation of silicon from the surface of 4H-silicon carbide (SiC) wafers following the confinement-controlled sublimation (CCS) method described in References Graphene exfoliation is performed by adapting the process originally reported in Reference Friction force microscopy (FFM) experiments are conducted on an Agilent Picoplus AFM using Nanosensors DT-NCHR polycrystalline diamond coated silicon tips are employed in all the experiments with resonant frequencies in the range 400-500 kHz, spring constant in the range 70-80 N/m, tip radius in the range 100-200 nm. Notably, while a stiff tip (high spring constant) does not guarantee optimal sensitivity in order to increase resolution in friction force microscopy, tips with a high spring constant are required for Å-indentation experiments and therefore are used in this work. The experiments are conducted in ambient conditions (RH ~40%, T ~25 ̊C) in contact with normal force ranging between 20 and 300 nN and scan rates ranging between 0.5 and 1.5 Hz. Friction force data are acquired during the first few scans to reduce the effect of wear and tip contamination on the 2D graphene layers. Following References where kl is the lateral spring constant of the cantilever, Dx is the lateral torsion of the cantilever, w, t, and L are the width, thickness and length and E is the Young's modulus of the AFM cantilever, respectively. The value of the AFM sensitivity S n is directly measured before the experiments by acquiring the force-distance curve, and it is in the range 50-60 nm/V. The voltage signal V l is the lateral deflection of the AFM cantilever that is measured as half the difference between the lateral deflections in the trace and retrace scans. A spectral clustering algorithm is employed to analyze the AFM data, detect the different graphene structures, and compute the mean values and distributions of the clustered regions The spectral clustering algorithm that we developed is based on the Sklearn package in Python After preprocessing, each column of the dataset is normalized using its standard deviation and fed to the clustering algorithm built-in the Sklearn package In our implementation, 2 or 3 clusters are normally employed. While one clustering step is sufficient to segment fully most of our datasets, a recursive method can be employed when the signal to noise ratio is particularly low or when different clusters have very different distributions, we refer to the Supplementary Information for further details on the procedure. Å-indentation is based on Modulated NanoIndentation (MoNI) For a comprehensive analysis of this technique we refer to the literature The indentation modulus measured for the 2D films is compared with the stiffness of the substrate as well as the stiffness of other ultra-stiff reference materials, namely CVD (001) diamond film obtained through a HFCVD process In the case of noisy datasets or datasets where clusters have particularly different distributions, a recursive approach is selected to identify the graphene domains. In this method, 2 clusters are initially identified through the clustering algorithm. The cluster with the largest number of elements is retained for successive spectral clustering steps, and the affinity matrix is computed on a reduced dataset composed only of data points of the largest cluster. The procedure is repeated iteratively. At each step the variation of the gap between the eigenvalues (eigengap) is evaluated to empirically verify that the "quality" of the clustering is increasing, and the procedure is considered completed when a marginal increase in eigengap is obtained between two steps. 