Intrinsic polar metals are rare, especially in oxides, because free electrons screen electric fields in a metal and eliminate the internal dipoles that are needed to break inversion symmetry. Here we use first-principles high-throughput structure screening to predict a new polar metal in bulk and thin film forms. After screening more than 1000 different crystal structures, we find that ordered BiPbTi 2 O 6 can crystallize in three polar and metallic structures, which can be transformed between each other via pressure or strain. In a heterostructure of layered BiPbTi 2 O 6 and PbTiO 3 , multiple states with different relative orientations of BiPbTi 2 O 6 polar displacements, and PbTiO 3 polarization, can be stabilized. At room temperature the interfacial coupling enables electric fields to first switch PbTiO 3 polarization and subsequently drive 180 • change of BiPbTi 2 O 6 polar displacements. At low temperature, the heterostructure provides a tunable tunnelling barrier and might be used in multi-state memory devices. Polar metals-analogy of ferroelectrics in metals-are characterized by intrinsic conduction and inversion symmetry breaking. Polar metals are rare (especially in oxides) because mobile electrons screen electric fields in a metal and eliminate internal dipoles that are needed to break inversion symmetry. The discovery of LiOsO 3 Density-functional-theory-based first-principles calculations have proven accurate in describing crystal structures and have been succesfully applied to predict new functional materials, such as ferroelectrics, piezoelectrics and multiferroics In this work, we use ab initio high-throughput structure screening to predict a new polar metal BiPbTi 2 O 6 (BPTO for short). After screening over 1000 different crystal structures, we find that ordered BPTO can crystallize in three different polar metallic structures (post-perovskite P mm2, perovskite P mm2 and perovskite P mn2 1 ), each of which can be transformed to another via external pressure or epitaxial strain. The mechanism is that 6s lone-pair electrons of Bi and Pb ions tend to favor off-center displacements Next we demonstate potential applications of the new polar metal BPTO by studying a BPTO/PbTiO 3 heterostructure. We find that different states in which BPTO polar displacements are parallel, anti-parallel and perpendicular to PbTiO 3 polarization can be stabilized in the heterostructure. 180 • switching of BPTO polar displacements needs to surmount an energy barrier of about 58 meV per slab. This implies that at room temperature where thermal fluctuations can overcome the switching barrier, the interfacial coupling between the polarization and polar displacements enables an electric field to first switch PbTiO 3 polarization and subsequently drive BPTO to change its polar displacements by 180 • ; at low temperatures where the switching barrier dominates over thermal fluctuations, the BPTO polar displacements can not be switched but the direction of PbTiO 3 polarization can be controlled by an electric field. This can stabilize three distinct states with different tunnelling barriers. The key question in predicting a new polar metal is to determine its crystal structure. Since ordered BPTO has not been synthesized in experiment, we perform a first-principles high-throughput search for the ground state structure using CALYPSO Fig. The crystal structure is explicitly shown in Fig. The next two lowest-energy crystal structures are both perovskite with P mn2 1 symmetry (space group No. 31) and P mm2 symmetry (space group No. 25). Both P mn2 1 and P mm2 symmetries are polar. The two perovskite structures have almost the same energy. Fig. Pb atoms have a layered ordering with a stacking direction along z-axis. It is clear that Bi, Pb and Ti atoms all have strong polar displacements with respect to O atoms along x-axis, which breaks inversion symmetry. While post-perovskite oxides are interesting by themselves If we want to grow BPTO thin films on a perovskite oxide substrate, the post-perovskite structure does not form due to very large lattice mismatch (see Supplementary Table We also enforce the post-perovskite P mm2 structure to be stabilized on a perovskite oxide substrate and we expectedly find that its total energy is about 10 eV f.u. -1 higher than the two perovskite structures because of the large lattice mismatch (Supplementary Figure In addition to the study of phase transitions under strains and pressures, the temperature effect on phase transitions can be found in Supplementary Figure The upper panels of Fig. Therefore spin-up and spin-down are summed in the DOS. The DOS projected on the two Ti atoms are identical and hence are also summed. The three DOS share similarities but also have important differences that in both perovskite structures (P mn2 1 and P mm2), because nominally Bi 3+ , Pb 2+ and O 2-, due to charge neutrality Ti must have a formal valence of Ti 3.5+ , i.e., every Ti atom has 0.5 electron in the 3d conduction bands (no charge disproportionation is found in the calculations). Figures. and Pb-6p as well as O-2p states make the largest contribution to the DOS around the Fermi level, which can also be seen in Supplementary Figure The Bader (static) charge analysis in Table In the lower panels of Fig. and DFT with SOI (lower panels of Fig. While DFT with/without SOI calculations do not find any magnetization or charge disproportionation, correlation effects from Ti-3d orbitals may favor spin ordering and charge ordering. A long-range magnetic ordering with a charge disproportionation (Ti 3+ +Ti 4+ ) can result in an insulating ground state were U and ρ(E F ) are Hubbard U parameter and density of states at the Fermi level of a nonmagnetic state, respectively. The upper panels of Fig. A local structural instability arising from lone-pair electrons has been reported in ferroelectric insulators and degenerately doped ferroelectrics In our study, the crystal structure screening takes into account both polar and anti-polar states for different cation orderings. We now show that in the three lowest-energy metallic phases of BPTO, the lone-pair ovskite oxides Next we study BPTO thin films. The P mm2 perovskite structure of BPTO, which has a layered Bi/Pb ordering, is highly suitable for thin film growth and can be stabilized on a perovskite oxide substrate having a lattice constant of 3.98 Å or larger. The Bi/Pb stacking direction in the P mm2 perovskite structure is chosen as the z-axis, while the polar displacements are in the xy-plane. In addition, we find that constrained by an in-plane lattice constant of 3.98 Å or larger, ferroelectric PbTiO 3 is under tensile strain and favors an inplane polarization over an out-of-plane polarization (Supplementary Figure to BPTO polar displacements. Both configurations are stabilized after relaxation in our calculations. We first find that one-unit-cell thin film of BPTO is still polar and metallic. bulk-like in both configurations. We note that the polar property of BPTO is not due to the interfacial coupling with PbTiO 3 (Supplementary Figure Next we study thermodynamics and the energy barrier of switching between "parallel state" and "anti-parallel state". DFT calculations find that the energy of "parallel state" is 37 meV per slab lower than that of "anti-parallel state". This is because in "anti-parallel state", a 180 • domain wall is formed in PbTiO 3 close to the interface, which is clearly seen from Fig. Fig. While "parallel state" is more stable than "anti-parallel state", "anti-parallel state" can be stabilized by itself because it is a local minimum. Therefore a finite energy barrier exists for BPTO to 180 • change its polar displacements from "anti-parallel state" to "parallel state". To quantitatively calculate the energy barrier and identify a possible switching path for polar displacement, we perform the climbing image nudged elastic band (NEB) calculations to "parallel state" (labelled as "3"), there is another metastable state (labelled as "2") where BPTO polar displacements are perpendicular to PbTiO 3 polarization in the xy plane (Fig. The larger one, i.e., the energy difference between the anti-parallel state and the highest saddle point, is 58 meV per slab. In this section, we discuss potential functions of the BPTO/PTO heterostructure based on the calculated switching barrier in the previous section. We first discuss room temperature applications. The switching barrier of BPTO is about 58 meV per slab. From transition state theory Next we discuss low temperature applications. At sufficiently low temperatures where the energy barrier is much larger than k B T , the interfacial coupling can not drive polar metals to change their polar displacements when an electric field switches the polarization of ferroelectrics. However, this has interesting implications: as we use the electric field to change the direction of PbTiO 3 polarization, we can individually stabilize multiple configurations in which the BPTO polar displacements are "parallel", "perpendicular" and "anti-parallel" to the PbTiO 3 polarization (shown in Fig. In conclusion, we demonstrate the power of first-principles high-throughput screening in designing new functional materials and in particular predict a new polar metal BPTO by utilizing the Bi/Pb lone-pair electrons. The three lowest-energy structures of BPTO are all polar and metallic (post-perovskite P mm2, perovskite P mm2 and perovskite P mn2 1 ), which can be transformed among each other via pressure or strain. In the perovskite structures, Bi 3+ and Pb 2+ enforce a fractional valence 3.5+ on Ti, which leads to conduction. In the post-perovskite structure, strong hybridization between Pb/Bi 6p and O 2p states induces a finite density of states at the Fermi level. In a BPTO/PbTiO 3 heterostructures, at room temperature the interfacial coupling can overcome the switching barrier, which enables an electric field to first switch PbTiO 3 polarization and subsequently drive BPTO to 180 • flip its polar displacements. This realizes an electrically switchable bi-state in the new polar metal BPTO. The switching method is applicable to other layered polar metals For bulk structures, density functional theory (DFT) calculations are performed using a plane wave basis set and projector-augmented wave method For the calculations of BPTO/PbTiO 3 structures, a Γ-centered k-mesh of 10 × 10 × 1 is used. The periodic slabs are separated by vacuum of 20 Å thick to diminish the interaction between them. Since asymmetrical interface modelling is used in our calculations, we employ dipole correction to eliminate the artificial electric field in the vacuum The energy barriers between the parallel and anti-parallel states, as well as the saddle points along the transition path are found by the nudged elastic band (NEB) calculations through the climbing image NEB method The electron localization function in our study, which is used to visualize lone-pair electrons in the real space is defined as where and Here ρ is the electron density and φ i are the Kohn-Sham wave functions. The crystal structure search for bulk BPTO is carried out using the particle swarm optimization algorithm implemented in CALYPSO code where q, j, ω, T , and k B are wave vector, band index of phonon dispersions, phonon frequency, temperature, and Boltzmann constant, respectively. In our study, the phonon frequencies are calculated by combining first-principles calculations with the supercell method and finite displacement method implemented in Phonopy The corresponding k-mesh for DFT calculations of the supercells of P mm2 post-perovskite, P mm2 perovskite, and P mn2 1 perovskite are 8×6×6, 5×3×5, and 8×3×7, respectively. The obtained Helmholtz free energy F (T ) = E 0 + F ph (T ) as a function of temperature (up to 3000 K) is shown in Supplementary Figure There is "size effects" in ferroelectric thin films However, polar metals do not have such a "size effect" because free electrons in metals fully screen depolarization fields in both bulk and thin films. To support that, we perform two additional calculations. The first calculation is a thought-experiment. We calculate a free-standing one unit cell BiPbTi 2 O 6 thin film. We find that down to one unit cell, BiPbTi 2 O 6 is still polar. The polar displacements of free-standing one unit cell BiPbTi 2 O 6 thin film are shown in Supplementary Figure The second calculation is to study "proximity effect" in BiPbTi 2 O 6 thin films. Instead of a BiPbTi 2 O 6 /PbTiO 3 heterostructure, we calculate a BiPbTi 2 O 6 /SrTiO 3 heterostructure, in which SrTiO 3 is paraelectric. Supplementary Figure Visualization