Wireless power transfer via a dielectric loaded multi-moded split cavity resonator (SCR) is proposed in this article. Unlike conventional inductive resonant coupling, the scheme enables the control of both the real and imaginary parts of the transfer impedance. It is demonstrated through measurements, analytical models and extensive full-wave simulation that the inclusion of dielectric resonators (DRs) tuned to the SCR T E 012 mode, significantly enhances the system figure of merit, optimal efficiency and maximum power transferred to the load. The effect of the DRs is shown to be related to the resonant coupling of the DRs T E 01δ and SCR modes, resulting in an electromagnetic induced transparency-like window. An efficiency of 70% is achieved when the transfer distance is 7 cm, or half wavelength. Additionally, it was shown that the efficiency is above 40% over a relatively wide bandwidth and a wide range of optimum load impedance. A circuit model is developed that enables the decomposition of the two port network parameters into their modal contributions. Hence it allows the comparison with conventional inductive resonant coupling systems on the fundamental level. Additionally, a Vector Fitting based method is proposed to calculate the circuit parameters from the measured scattering parameters. Wireless Power Transfer (WPT) has gained immense interest in the last decade due to its vast potential applications in existing and emerging domains such as in powering appliances, gadgets, electric vehicles and internet of things. Resonant inductive (or capacitive) coupling provide a promising mean of WPT due to its high efficiency over mid-range distances Resonant coupling methods rely on the mutual coupling between relatively high Q resonators. The strength of coupling can be quantified via the unit-less coupling coefficient κ. In terms of circuit elements, κ is directly proportional to the mutual coupling M between the different resonators. For a general electromagnetic resonators, it is the net overlap of electromagnetic fields of resonant modes 3 . To reduce unnecessary intrinsic losses, it is desirable to maximize the source and receiver intrinsic Q factors. Due to their very high Q values, the modes of Dielectric Resonators (DRs) have been exploited to transfer power efficiently over short and mid-range distances On the other hand, the modes of cavity resonators were exploited to transfer power within an enclosure A moderately high r DR placed inside a conducting cavity was shown to strongly interact with the cavity modes In the current manuscript, we experimentally demonstrate that an SCR loaded with two DRs (DR2SCR) provides efficient WPT. The SCR and DRs dimensions are chosen such that the DRs T E 01δ and SCR T E 012 modes have the same resonant frequency. Depending on the coupling of the input power to the SCR in the vicinity of the T E 012 resonance, several modes can be excited, resulting in a multimoded structure. Therefore, the structure can be regarded as a platform that enables the exploration of the contribution of multiple modes, or pathways, to the delivered power. Hence to describe the system behaviour and interpret the experimental results, a framework based on a combination of electromagnetic analysis and network theory is applied. Particularly, network theory allows the decomposition of the terminal parameters into their modal constituents. Additionally as a first order approximation, Coupled Mode Theory (CMT) and circuit modelling are applied to describe the interaction between the SCR T E 012 and DRs T E 01δ modes Section II describes the network theory approach to WPT systems and highlights the relevant electrical parameters. It will be shown that the framework permits the abstraction of the FOM and expresses it in terms of generic circuit parameters that are valid for arbitrary WPT systems. Furthermore, the electromagnetic modes are represented by a modal equivalent circuit and the procedure for calculating the ciruit parameters are outlined in detail. The geometry and dimensions of the SCR and DR2SCR structures are presented in Section III. Backed by full-wave simulations, the spatial disributions of the EM modes are computed for the SCR and DR2SCR schemes. Section IV presents experimental results, compares to simulations, discusses the findings, and relates the behaviour to the circuit parameters and interactions of modes. As mentioned in Section I, coupled resonators enable WPT via the possible electromagnetic coupling between them and their high Q values. The FOM of a WPT system can be expressed as the product κQ. From a circuit theory perspective, coupled resonators can be modelled by a two port network, thus allowing the FOM to be written in terms of circuit parameters as follows, where Z mn = r mn + jx mn is the (m, n) element of the Z matrix Hence to improve the FOM, one strives to maximize the value of x n , which can be achieved via, (1) the increase of the mutual coupling (moving the resonators closer, better design of the coils to increase the flux linkage, or the use of metamaterials or near field plates to focus the magnetic field inside the receiver coil It is worth to briefly illustrate how optimal conditions are calculated from the two port representation. For a detailed discussion and derivations, the reader can refer to Refs. 13-15, and 22. As a first step, the network is represented via its Z parameters, which provide a convenient means for expressing the system efficiency η in terms of the two port parameters and load impedance. Accordingly η assumes the form where is the input impedance. The above expression is valid for an arbitrary load impedance Z L . To find the optimal efficiency for the given network (Z is fixed), the derivative of the efficiency w.r.t the load impedance Z L is set to zero and the optimal load is determined. In general, the optimal load is complex and takes the form and where r 22 and x 22 are the real and imaginary of Z 22 , θ r = 1 + x 2 n 1r 2 n and θ x = r n x n . Additionally, it can be shown that, still under the maximum efficiency condition, the power delivered to the load can be maximized whenever the network parameters satisfy, An arbitrary network does not necessarily satisfy (6). However by inserting a series reactive element X c to x 11 or the input port (refer to Fig. On the other hand, if one is interested in maximizing the power transfer to the load rather than maximizing efficiency, similar steps can be taken to calculate the optimal load and corresponding efficiency. The optimum load in this case, however, can be determined by invoking the maximum power transfer theorem to show that the optimum load is equal to the conjugate of the impedance of the two port network seen from the load terminal. It is important to point out that the condition of maximum efficiency does not imply maximum power transferred to the load or vice versa. In fact as will be seen later in Section IV, for a given input available power the higher the efficiency is, the less the power transferred to the load. The interaction between the resonators is usually studied using CMT Fig. and where is the number of excited modes, and p k = 0 (p k = 1) when the mode fields have an even (odd) symmetry around the symmetry plane. Eqs. (7) and (8) express Z 11 and Z 21 as the net effect of all excited modes. Furthermore, the symmetry of a mode can be identified via the sign of r 21 in the vicinity of the mode resonant frequency. A circuit representation of the excitation of a general symmetric resonator. Ls and Rs represents the equivalent lumped of the feeding inductive loop. Mi is the coupling of the input power to the i th mode. Depending on the mode symmetry, the mode couples with load network via an equivalent mutual coupling ±Mi. It may appear that inductive resonant coupling systems that are usually represented by the circuits in Figs. II(a) and (b) are different in nature from the resonator circuit shown in Fig. On the other hand, the insertion of a relay coil, as shown in Fig. II(b), results in three cou- and anti-bonding Interestingly, the mutual coupling of the non-bonding with the source is twice that of any of the other two modes. The non-bonding mode allows an electromagnetic induced transparencylike mechanism to transfer energy between a transmitter and receiver Measurements are often made in the frequency domain, where the scattering parameters at the reference planes are measured by a Vector Network Analyzer. For the circuit in Fig. From a circuit modelling perspective, a resonant mode m is characterized by its resonant frequency ω 0m and Q factor Q m . To fully describe the multi-moded resonator in Fig. The measured Z 21 frequency domain data is fitted to a rational function Ẑ21 using the vector fitting (VF) method 32 where ω0k and Qk are the identified resonant frequency and Q factor of the k th pole, respectively. Each rational function in the above expression results from the combination of a simple first order rational function of the form A k /(s-p k ) with its complex conjugate A * k /(s-p * k ). From a fixed m th resonant mode perspective, Ẑ21 can be re-written as where In the vicinity of ω0m (i.e, δ ω -ω0m such that |δ| ω0m ), both the numerator n(δ) and denomenator d(δ) of the second term in (10) become first order in δ. In another words, (10) is approximated to The exact expressions of F (ω) and Âm are readily obtained from (10) after the substitution ω = ω0m + δ is made and noting that n(δ)/d(δ where k is a constant. Finally, k is absorbed in F (ω) (i.e, F (ω) = F (ω) + k). When Qm 1, the behaviour is dominated by the denomenator of the second term in (12). Now we show that the circuit model given by ( In the vicinity of ω 0m and after neglecting higher order terms of δ, (13) reduces to ) Eqs. ( As discussed in Subsection II A, the resonant frequencies and the unloaded Q of the different modes are identified using VF. To determine the general behaviour, it is also essential to calculate the strength of coupling of each mode to the source (M k ). This can be achieved by defining, Hence, Z 21 can be written as a linear superposition of ψ k , where a k ζM k (-1) p k and ζ M k /L k is a coupling coefficient term. The basis functions ψ k are complex (ψ k (ω) = Re.ψ k + iIm.ψ k ) therefore, we determine the coefficients a k by expanding r 21 in the real part of ψ k and apply the least mean square fitting method. Once the coefficients a k are determined, the imaginary part of ψ k can be used to validate the accuracy of the circuit model in Fig. (2). In another words, the a k values are determined from the fitting of the measured r 21 to N k=1 a k Re. ψ k (ω). For the model (2) to be accurate x 21 should be equal to N k=1 a k Im. ψ k (ω). For a complete description of the system, we identify the excited 3D EM modes via full-wave simulation. Such analysis provides a deep insight that guides the understanding of the DRs/SCR interactions; particularly when EIT-like transfer becomes observable. An SCR consists of two separate conducting cylindrical halves as shown in Fig. 12, it was shown that the flange length can be reduced with no significant effect on performance. The source is fed via a coaxial probe from one end, where it inductively couples the input power to the SCR modes via a coupling loop. Two DRs can be inserted in the SCR. Due to the interaction of the DRs and SCR modes, efficient power transfer can be achieved as was theoretically demonstrated in Ref. 12 and shown below via simulations and measurements. The excited modes intercept the receiving coil, which pumps energy to the load connected to the output coaxial cable. Generally speaking, at any given frequency, the fields inside the SCR (and DRs, when present) are the superposition of the excited modes. As the input frequency approaches the frequency of a particular mode (or pole), the fields of that given mode become dominant, provided it is efficiently coupled to the excitation loops and the frequencies of other modes are sufficiently far. The exact full-wave analysis can be quite complex. Fortunately for our purpose, a grey box model is sufficient for determining the system behaviour. Furthermore, the modal circuit discussed in section II, along with the procedure of calculating the contribution of each mode to the terminal parameters, enable a scalar analysis of the modal behaviour. The SCR, shown in Fig. The separation distance d affects the frequency and Q factor of the SCR resonant modes. The larger d is, the lower the resonant frequency and Q are (due to the increased radiation from the gap). When d is slightly perturbed around its nominal value, the circuit parameters and η will slightly change. However as the change in d becomes larger, the modes constituents may change. For instance, for smaller d values, some higher order modes will be pushed further up in frequency and hence gets barely excited. On the other hand, for larger d values, the frequencies of higher order modes reduce and may become close to the excitation frequency. For extremely large values of d (i.e, d d cut-of f ), the SCR modes will become radiative with very low Q values. This means that the different modes will overlap and modal picture will be blurred. At the vicinity of the DRs T E 01δ modes, the non-bonding mode permits the system to tolerate changes in the dimensions. This is because the nonbonding mode does not depend on the SCR modes. (For an elaborate discussion on the permissible magnitude of detuning, please refer to Ref. 33). In general the input power of a general two port network is given by where a 1 and b 1 are the amplitude of the incident and reflected waves, respectively. The output power is similarly given by for a matched load (i.e, terminated with a 50 Ω impedance), a 2 = 0 and Therefore, the efficiency η for this particular load becomes, where by definition S 21 b 2 /a 1 and S 11 b 1 /a 1 , when a 2 = 0. It is important to note, however, that the efficiency given by ( Two DRs of r = 25 and tan δ = 0.002 (Q = 500) are inserted in the SCR. They are supported by a low loss/low r foam and placed close to the coupling loops to enable the excitation of their T E 01δ modes. The DRs dimensions were chosen such that the T E 01δ mode has a resonance frequency of ≈ 2.3 GHz and, therefore, can strongly couple with the SCR T E 012 mode. Fig. The coupling between the modes results in a significant change in the fields profile. Fig. The system shown in Fig. The measured S 11 and S 21 , with the separation distance d = 7 cm, are reported in Fig. For the SCR measurement, the dip of the T E 012 was missed from S 11 during the VNA frequency sweep cycle. This is due to the very high Q value of the mode; emphasizing the difficulty of relying on the mode for WPT, regardless of its high Q value. However, more desirable effects can be harnessed when the DRs are included; as shown in Figs. To overcome the above challenges, we adopt the use of the modal circuit introduced in Section II. Hereafter, if not explicitly mentioned, the focus will be on the DR2SCR system. Vector Fitting is used to fit Z 21 to a rational function as described in Section II. The results are plotted in Fig. It is worth noting that although the circuit model relies on the terminal characteristics, the modal decomposition of equations ( The FOM is calculated from the Z parameters using (2) as shown in Fig. It is interesting to point out that for the SCR only case, the magnitude of x n is roughly double that of r n . Frequency (GHz) Both r n and x n change rapidly near 2.3-2.4 GHz, possibly peaking at the T E 012 mode. For the DR2SCR case, the situation becomes more interesting. The magnitude of x n is roughly increased by three folds due to the modal interaction between the DRs and the SCR, which is reactive in nature. Additionally, r n drops to values very close to -1 and then starts to go up. This makes the denominator of (2) very small and hence reinforce the increase in FOM. For this particular configuration, however, the x n approaches zero as r n approaches -1. Nevertheless, the net effect of r n and x n results in a peak of FOM in the vicinity of the T E 012 mode. The two degrees of freedom offered by the possibility of controlling both r n and x n , provide insight on how to enhance the performance of WPT systems; this is to be compared to inductive resonant coupling, where only one tunable parameter x n is possible. The modal decomposition of Z 21 and Z 11 shows that the behaviour of FOM in the vicinity of some mode m is affected mainly by the m th mode and to a lesser extent by the other modes as reflected by their resonant frequencies, Q and the mutual coupling to both the source and load. Therefore, by the proper placement of the resonators' modes, it is potentially possible to maximize the FOM. This is equivalent to engineering the parallel pathways in Fig. The efficiency is calculated for three different cases: (1) 50 Ω termination-the efficiency-calculated directly from the VNA measurements, (2) the maximum efficiency and (3) the efficiency when maximum power is absorbed by the load. As Fig. As was previously shown based on the theoretical analysis of two port networks, the efficiency at maximum load power is less than the maximum efficiency. Hence, to deliver more power to the load (i.e, operating the source near its rating value), the efficiency drops. Conversely at maximum efficiency, the actual power absorbed by the load is a fraction of the maximum power that can be delivered. Fig. Finally, Fig. A Wireless Power Transfer system based on the interaction of DRs and a multi-moded SCR has been proposed. Due to the complexity of the structure, a circuit based approach has been employed to study the system performance. It is shown that such configuration, unlike conventional inductive resonant coupling, offers the possibility of controlling both the real and imaginary parts of the transfer impedance Z 21 . This in turn has resulted in a significant improvement of the system figure of merit and efficiency. Furthermore, a modal circuit description is used for the first time to decompose the terminal parameters to their modal constituents. Hence, it reduces the task of manipulating Z 21 to the engineering of the different modes. The multi-moded SCR explored provides a platform to examine the interaction of different modes and how they contribute to the terminal transfer impedance Z 21 . It may find applications where conducting surfaces naturally appear. One potential application is charging electric vehicles via the exploitation of the already existing conducting surfaces. The dimension of the SCR may be reduced, for instance, by coating the surfaces with a dielectric material or via the manipulation of the boundary conditions using artificial materials (metamaterials) such as artificial magnetic conductors The non-bonding mode resulting from the coupling between the two DRs and the SCR modes is briefly presented here. Generally speaking, the fields of the coupled modes can be expressed as the linear combination of the DRs and SCR modes. Close to the f T E012 ≈ f T E01δ , the interaction is dominated by the DRs T E 01δ and SCR T E 012 modes. Hence around f T E012 , the field profile is mainly determined by these three modes. The DR two modes will be labeled "1" and "3"; and the SCR T E 012 is denoted by the "2" subscript. Therefore the analysis is identical to that in Ref. 12. It is worth noting, however, that unlike Ref. 12, the interaction is anti-symmetric (i.e, κ 12 = -κ 32 = κ). Taking this into account the eigenvalue problem is written as, where f 0 is the resonant frequency of the T E 012 mode, a i is the expansion coefficient of the i th mode, and f is the to be determined coupled frequency. There are three eigenmodes for the above equation: bonding, nonbonding and anti-bonding. By inspection, it is readily found that f = f 0 satisfies the eigenvalue problem with an eigenvector which is the eigenvector of the non-bonding mode. The fields in both DRs are in phase as shown in Fig. The sharp dip of the magnitude of S 21 at the frequency of the SCR T E 011 mode (around 1.9 GHz in Fig. Here we apply CMT to describe the effect of the DRs on the SCR T E 011 mode. To fix ideas, the DR closest to the excitation, the SCR, and the other DR will be denoted resonators 1,2, and 3 respectively. For a sinusoidal excitation with frequency ω in , the amplitude vector of the modes a = [a 1 , a 2 , a 3 ] t can be determined from the solution of where σ L , σ 2 and σ 0 are the load, SCR and DR decay constants, respectively. Generally speaking, the decay constant σ i is equal to ω i /2Q i . The ratios a 2 /a 1 and a 3 /a 1 can be found from (22) to be and where γ k = ω k + iσ k is the complex eigen-frequency of the k th mode. Albeit the factor γ 0 /γ k , these relations are identical to the ones derived in Ref. 12. Here, however, the resonant frequencies of the DR and SCR modes are different, which does not warrant γ 0 /γ 2 = 1 approximation to be valid. For the system under consideration, f T E011 ≈ 1.9 GHz, f T E01δ ≈ 2.3 GHz, the T E 011 Q, Q 2 ∼ 100 -1000, and the loaded Q of resonator 3 is Q 3 ≈ 100 -500. To estimate the order of κ, the expression derived in Ref. 43 for a closed cavity will be used. Although the expression is only valid when the distance d is zero, the field profile of the T E 011 does not change much; justfying its use for an order of magnitude analysis. Moreover, one needs to account for the axial shift of the DRs, where the fields of the T E 011 vary as a sinusoidal function. Taken all these into consideration, κ ≈ 0.02. Plugging the above estimates into ( To consider the plausible situation where the excitation is coupled to both resonators 1 and 2, the above arguments can be modified by taking the interaction with resonator 2 into account, i.e, letting J = [J 1 , J 2 , 0] t . This means that the amplitudes a k will be the linear combination of both interactions (a k = Φ k1 J 1 + Φ k2 J 2 ). For values of J 2 /J 1 from 0 up to 10, it was found that still η ≤ 2%. The anti-resonance behaviour at f T E011 implies that the mode cannot be described via the use of the series resonance circuits in Fig. 