Recent years have seen a large increase in the number of reported framework materials, including the nowadays-ubiquitous metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). Many of these materials show flexibility and stimuli-responsiveness, i.e. their structure can undergo changes of large amplitude in response to physical or chemical stimulation. We describe here a toolbox of theoretical approaches, developed in our group and others, to shed light into these materials' properties. We focus on their behavior under mechanical constraints, temperature changes, adsorption of guest molecules, and exposure to light. By means of molecular simulation at varying scale, we can now probe, rationalize and predict the behavior of stimuli-responsive materials, producing a coherent description of soft porous crystals from the unit cell scale all the way to the behavior of the whole crystal. In particular, we have studied the impact of defects in soft porous crystals, and developed a methodology for the study of their disordered phases (presence of correlated disorder, MOF glasses, and liquid MOFs). Recent years have seen a large increase in the number of reported framework materials, including the nowadays-ubiquitous metalorganic frameworks (MOFs), but also covalent organic frameworks, dense coordination polymers, and supramolecular frameworks. Many of these materials show flexibility and stimuli-responsiveness, i.e. their structure can undergo changes of large amplitude in response to physical or chemical stimulation. In this account, we describe here a toolbox of theoretical approaches, developed in our group and others throughout the world, to shed light into these materials' properties. For a background on the computational description of metal-organic frameworks, we refer the reader to the general reviews on the topic, such as Refs. 6 and 7. We focus here specifically on the theoretical description of the behavior of MOFs under mechanical constraints, temperature changes, adsorption of guest molecules, and exposure to light. By means of molecular simulation at varying scale, we can probe, rationalize and predict the behavior of stimuli-responsive materials, producing a coherent description of soft porous crystals from the unit cell scale all the way to the behavior of the whole crystal. In particular, we have studied the impact of defects in soft porous crystals, and developed a methodology for the study of their disordered phases (presence of correlated disorder, MOF glasses, and liquid MOFs). Historically, the first examples of flexible MOFs where observed upon adsorption or desorption of guest molecules, whether they were solvent molecules, external gas or liquid. Among the most famous of these early examples, we can cite the MIL-53 family of materials, 8 MIL-88, 9 ELM-11, 10 Co(BDP), At the same time, experimental work reported in the literature started to demonstrate that this potential for flexibility of MOFs could also be triggered by a physical stimulus of a different nature: the application of mechanical pressure. This was demonstrated, for example, on MIL-53 by application of isostatic pressure by compression in liquid mercury, which triggered a reversible structural transition under compression. Because of the link described above between adsorption-and pressure-induced structural transitions in soft porous crystals, it is of high importance to know their mechanical properties in order to shed light into their behavior under stimulation. The past few years have seen a large research effort focused on the characterization of the mechanical properties of MOFs in general, and flexible frameworks in particular. Among the first works to quantify the "softness" of these materials were the works of Tan et al, In computational schemes, the most commonly used way to characterize the mechanical properties of a crystal is the determination of its stiffness tensor, or matrix of second-order elastic constants Cij. These values can be calculated at the quantum chemistry level with high accuracy, by characterizing various strained structures, giving elastic constants in the "zero Kelvin" limit, i.e. without taking into account thermal motions. Analysis of these elastic constants can then be used to obtain more physically relevant elastic properties, including Young's modulus, shear modulus, linear compressibility and Poisson's ratio (described in Figure We have described above the study of mechanical properties of soft porous crystals, from the perspective of their linear elastic regime. We showed that this linear behavior is, in many cases, tightly linked to the large-scale response observed under stimulation, as is observed in the case of the "wine rack" breathing MOFs. Even phenomena that are intrinsically nonlinear, such as the pressure-induced amorphization, can be studied to some extent as the limit of some linear elastic behavior. However, there is also an existing need for computational tools that can describe non-linear phenomena induced by pressure or adsorption. We present here briefly three such cases. The first one is the case of the pressure response of zinc alkyl gate (ZAG) materials. Synthesized in the Clearfield group, Another example is the study of the hydrothermal breakdown of flexible MOF MIL-53(Ga). Another important axis of our recent work involving soft porous crystals has been the drive to move beyond the view of these systems as defect-free, ordered single crystals of infinite size. The presence of defects and disorder, which are present to some extent in all solids, can be exacerbated in soft porous crystals and coupled to the presence of flexibility -the reason being a common root, in the entropy of these materials. This, in turn, is linked to the high dimensionality arising from the intramolecular degrees of freedom of the materials, the many corresponding 'soft' modes of low energy due to the relatively weak interactions involved in the assembly. Defects are present to some extent in all crystalline solids, and in several cases they are key to the properties or function of materials. Yet, the study of their occurrence in MOFs and their impact on their behavior is still relatively recent, and far from systematic. Experimental studies have largely focused on materials of the UiO-66 family, where defects are often present in relatively high numbers, and their concentration can be controlled by the synthesis conditions. The careful introduction of defects in MOFs (defect engineering, or so-called "defective by design" materials) is a very active topic of research, in particular for catalytic applications. The second is the use of simulations in order to better understand the impact of the presence of defects on the properties of a given material. For example, the impact of missing linker defects on adsorption has been studied by several groups, showing the influence of their concentration and local distribution on both accessible surface area and pore volume. Such studies are typically performed in a classical approach, where the defect structure is assumed, based on experimental data or chemical intuition. Properties other than adsorption isotherms can also be calculated, however. We have shown, for example, that while CO2 uptake is enhanced in zirconium-based UiO-66 by introduction of defects, this is accompanied by a reduction in mechanical stability due to the lower coordination of the framework (Figure The presence of defects, as described above, can induce disorder (partial or total) in MOFs -though it is far from being its only possible cause. Recent years have seen the emergence of studies on intrinsically disordered phases of MOFs, including the most amorphous phases (i.e., MOF glasses), as well as a few examples of studies on the distribution of defects. Regarding the presence of disorder in crystalline MOFs, perhaps the best characterized system is that of UiO-66 materials with missing linker defects. It was extensively investigated, by both experimental and computational means, by the Goodwin and their collaborators. It was first shown that defects are not introduced in a random manner, but that correlated defect nanoregions emerge, whose size can be chemically controlled. This section will be short, since there are relatively few papers that deal with this topic, but we felt the need to highlight the recent trend in modeling realistic systems at a higher scale (mesoscopic or macroscopic). In devices and applications, it is most likely that soft porous crystals will not be used in the form of isolated single crystals, but a nano-or micro-structured composite materials: thin films on a substrate, core-shell particles, mixed matrix membranes, etc. Therefore, efforts to model such complex systems, as well as MOF/polymer interfaces (for example) are necessary. The group of Maurin worked in that direction, describing at the microscopic level the interface between MOF crystal surface and polymer. We have tried to give above a short account of the toolbox of theoretical approaches, developed in our group and others across the world, that have been used in order to study the behavior of soft porous crystals. This field is quite active and in constant development, so it is likely that by the time this account is published, novel simulation methodologies will have been published. Drawing perspectives is therefore akin to making predictions, which is difficult -especially about the future. However, it appears likely that some of the currently open questions will remain a challenge for a few more years at least. The description of defective and/or disordered systems is one of these challenges, where the length scales at play make computational approaches quite difficult. For a similar reason, the behavior of inhomogeneous systems, nanostructured composites, and polycrystalline systems is only rarely addressed in theoretical studies. Effects of crystal size will also need to be understood better, especially when we know that they can -at least in some cases -drastically affect the behavior of soft porous crystals Finally, while stimuli such as temperature, pressure and adsorption have been widely studied, the behavior of soft porous crystals under electric field, light, magnetic field, liquid-phase intrusion, pH or chemical gradients, ... is still a largely open question. The influence of light on photoresponsive MOFs is of particular interest, and has been studied by several authors in the past few years. 