We studied magnetostatic response of the Bi 0.9 La 0.1 FeO 3 -KBr composites (BLFO-KBr) consisting of nanosized (≈100 nm) ferrite Bi 0.9 La 0.1 FeO 3 (BLFO) conjugated with fine grinded ionic conducting KBr. When the fraction of KBr is rather small (less than 15 wt %) the magnetic response of the composite is very weak and similar to that observed for the BLFO (pure KBr matrix without Bi 1-x La x FeO 3 has no magnetic response as anticipated). However, when the fraction of KBr increases above 15%, the magnetic response of the composite changes substantially and field dependence of magnetization reveals ferromagnetic-like hysteresis loop with a remanent magnetization about 0.14 emu/g and coercive field about 1.8 Tesla (at room temperature). Nothing similar to the ferromagnetic-like hysteresis loop can be observed in BLFO ceramics, which magnetization quasi-linearly increases with magnetic field. Different physical mechanisms were considered to explain the unusual experimental results for BLFO-KBr nanocomposites, but only those among them, which are highly sensitive to the interaction of antiferromagnetic Bi 0.9 La 0.1 FeO 3 with ionic conductor KBr, can be relevant. An appropriate mechanism turned out to be ferro-magneto-ionic coupling. Multiferroics are ideal systems for fundamental studies of couplings among the order parameters of different nature, e.g. ferroelectric (FE) polarization, structural rotational antiferrodistortion (AFD), ferromagnetic (FM) and antiferromagnetic (AFM) long-range order parameters Bismuth ferrite BiFeO 3 (BFO) is the unique multiferroic with the large FE polarization (more than 60 μC/cm 2 at RT) and AFM order coexisting up to room (RT) and elevated temperatures Chemical doping of pristine BFO with lanthanum La ions having ionic radius (1.16Å Sol-gel synthesis method used to prepare BLFO solid solution leads to a formation of oxygen stoichiometric compounds those magnetic properties are governed by the exchange interactions between Fe ions being in 3+ oxidation state. Increase in the concentration of the lanthanum La ions leads to a gradual reduction in the critical magnetic field associated with a disruption of the spatially modulated spin structure and the compound with lanthanum content x ~ 0.17 is characterized by weak ferromagnetic structure at RT assuming complete disruption of the spatially modulated structure. The structural transition from the rhombohedral to the orthorhombic phase is accompanied by a significant increase of the remanent magnetization and coercive field, which is observed for the compounds having dominant or single phase orthorhombic structure. It should be noted that transport properties of the BLFO compounds are also strongly dependent on the La concentration, and the conductivity of these solid solutions gradually increases with the dopant content This work studies magnetostatic response of the newly synthesized Bi 0.9 La 0.1 FeO 3 -KBr composites (BLFO-KBr) consisting of nanosized (≈100 nm) ferrite Bi 0.9 La 0.1 FeO 3 (BLFO) conjugated with fine grinded ionic conducting KBr. We revealed that when the fraction of KBr increases above 15%, it demonstrates ferromagnetic-like hysteresis loop with a remanent magnetization about 0.14 emu/g and coercive field about 1.8 Tesla (at room temperature). To the best of our knowledge nothing similar was reported previously in the literature. Different physical mechanisms were considered to explain the unusual experimental results for BLFO-KBr nanocomposites. The original part of the manuscript is structured as follows. Magnetostatic and electrophysical properties of BLFO-KBr nano-composites are discussed in section II. Theoretical explanation of the ferromagetism in BLFO-KBr nano-composites is given in section III. Section IV is a brief summary. Auxiliary experimental results and samples characterization are given in the Supplement. The samples of nanograined BLFO ceramics have been prepared by the aqueous sol-gel method using hydrates Bi(NO 3 ) 3 •5H 2 O, Fe(NO 3 ) 3 •9H 2 O and lanthanum nitrate as starting materials. The prepared sol-gel samples were heated at 800°C for 1.5 h The compound Bi 0.9 La 0.1 FeO 3 , which has been mainly used to prepare the composites, is characterized by the grains with average radius of about 100 nm, and the small amount of the grains have the average radius of about 35-40 nm (the SEM image and the histogram of the grain sizes distribution are shown in the Fig. Under standard conditions, potassium bromide (KBr) is a white nonmagnetic crystalline powder which exhibits high ionic conductivity. Phase purity of the commercial KBr powder has been confirmed by the XRD measurements performed by the authors, the obtained results are in accordance with the structural data provided by the producer (see Supplement, Fig. For comparison with the composite, the temperature dependences of magnetization for the nanograined ferrites Bi 1-x La x FeO 3 (x = 0, 0.05 and 0.1) have been measured in the temperature range 300 -1000 K using MPMS SQUID VSM magnetometer (Supplement, Fig. The compound Bi 0.9 La 0.1 FeO 3 having rhombohedral crystal structure and modulated magnetic structure with almost zero remanent magnetization has been selected as the most appropriate compound for formation of the composites to estimate an influence of the constituents on the physical properties of nanocomposites. B. Magnetic and electrophysical properties of (Bi 0.9 La 0.1 FeO 3 ) x -(KBr) 1-x nano-composites The isothermal dependences of magnetization (M) on magnetic field (H) of the nanocomposites (Bi 0.9 La 0.1 FeO 3 ) x -(KBr) 1-x (shortly (BLFO) x -(KBr) 1-x ) are shown in Fig. Further increase in the KBr fraction significantly changes the magnetic properties of the composites (BLFO) x -(KBr) 1-x , namely leads to the appearance of ferromagnetic-like hysteresis of M-H-loops (see violet, brown and black symbols in Fig. Different physical mechanisms can be responsible for the appearance of RT ferromagneticlike response of (BLFO) x -(KBr) 1-x nanocomposites, where BLFO with La content less that 16% is purely antiferromagnetic in the bulk at temperatures lower than 650 K and KBr is magnetically inactive material. Anyway, the changes observed in the magnetization behavior of the composites can be completely attributed to the changes occurred in the ferrite component. One of the most plausible models, describing the changes of the magnetic properties observed for the composites (BLFO) x -(KBr) 1-x depending on the KBr content assumes intensive chemical processes in the vicinity of ferrite particle -salt interface occurred during the composites formation. As a result of the redox reactions the Fe ions near the complex oxide -alkali halide interface partially change their effective oxidation state from 3+ down to 2+. An uncompensated magnetic moment formed due to a difference between the magnetic moments attributed to the Fe 3+ and Fe 2+ ions within the antiferromagnetic matrix leads to a notable increase of remanent magnetization of the composites. Remanent magnetization estimated for the composites does not significantly changes with an increase of KBr and it remains nearly stable for the composites with KBr fraction of about (20 -50) %, which can be explained assuming that the chemical processes occur only in the thin subsurface layer of the crystallites of the ferrite component. An average size of the ferrite crystallites is about 100 nm as confirmed by scanning electron microscopy measurements (see Fig. In order to get more information concerning the effect of KBr matrix we have measured the electroresistivity of the nanocomposites (BLFO) x -(KBr) 1-x and nanograined ceramics BLFO produced by the sol-gel method. Current-voltage (I-V) characteristics of all these samples are quasilinear (see Supplement, Fig. Actually, Bi 1-x La x FeO 3 can exhibit weak ferromagnetic properties near the surface of microand especially nanoparticles via structural distortions unlocing the cycloid modulated spin structure and resulting in Fe 3+ spins canting due to non-vanishing Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya (DM) interaction According to this, different physical mechanisms should be considered to explain the unexpected experimental result for 0.5(BLFO)-0.5(KBr) and 0.7(BLFO)-0.3(KBr) nanocomposites (the model is shown in Fig Below we will try to prove that the appropriate mechanism turned out to be ferro-magnetoionic coupling, that is a natural extension of ferro-ionic and anti-ferroionic couplings In accordance with experiments, the critical size of ferroelectricity and antiferromagnetism disappearance in BiFeO 3 nanoparticles is very small -about 10 nm namely in a thin "shell" of thickness 2 -5 nm (see Fig. The second is due to the fact that the interaction with nonmagnetic KBr matrix, via the rotostriction coupling To quantify the above idea, we use the thermodynamic potential of LGD-type that describes AFM, FE, and AFD properties of BFO nanoceramics, including the RM, RE and ME biquadratic couplings, and the AFD, FE, AFM contributions, as well as elastic energy in the form Gibbs free energy of the nanoparticle (NP) has the following form: where and are the magnetic and magneto-elastic (magnetostriction and rotosriction) contributions to the NP energy, respectively. The magnetic part of the free energy describing the AFM-FM order-disorder type transition in the NP has the form: The NP average volume is . The dimensionless order parameter i l is a degree of the magnetic dipoles ordering in the NP (i=1, 2, 3). The value i l is statistically averaged over the orientations of elementary magnetic dipoles in the NP. The concentration of magnetic dipoles is related with the concentration of ions at the NP surface. J is the exchange constant that is positive ( ) for the considered case of the AFM core, and related with Neel temperature as in the mean field approximation (Boltzmann constant is J/K). nl is the nonlinear exchange constant. The macroscopic magnetization components, , are coupled with the applied magnetic field . The magneto-elastic contribution to the free energy (1) is: In Equation ( where we denote the elastic dipole tensor (Vegard expansion) of a surface defect as Tensor is the magnetostriction strain tensor, is the elastic stiffness. The value is the random concentration of elastic defects in the NP shell (including complexes with the surface ions and related with them). The approximate equality in Eq.( designates the small high order terms. Allowing for the presence of the term , the energy (3) changes the coefficient in Eq.( The statistical averaging over defect distribution in expression (5) gives: The summation in Eq.( (as the strongest inhomogeneity), and has exponential decay far from the surface [see Fig. Here is the decay length of defect concentration under the surface. The amplitude R R d << ( ) x N S depends on the KBr fraction (1-x) of NP surrounding, and preparation conditions of the composite. Indeed the ionic surrounding affects the defect formation energies, in accordance with e.g. Stephenson-Highland ionic adsorption model The approximate equality is valid at R R d << . The temperature of the possible FM transition induced by surface ions can be defined from the expansion of the free energy (2) in the mean-field approximation, namely from the expansion up to quadratic terms of the expression The coefficients α and β have the following form: The critical temperature satisfies the equation and acquires the form: , should be negative in order to make . Hereinafter we assume that the Vegard tensor is isotropic and diagonal, i.e. , and magnetostriction tensor symmetry is cubic, i.e. Hereinafter is the relaxation coefficient. In the static case the right-hand side of Eq.( The dependence of magnetization of (BLFO 3 ) x -(KBr) 1-x nanocomposite on quasi-static magnetic field was calculated from Eq.( Here M is the magnetization, H is the applied magnetic field. that is rigorous at negligibly small contributions of the linear and nonlinear , respectively. The nonlinear contribution to the magnetostatic response is attributed with ferro-magneto-ionic coupling between BLFO and KBr. We studied magnetostatic response of the composites consisting of nanosized ferrite Bi 0.9 La 0.1 FeO 3 conjugated with fine grinded ionic conducting KBr powder. When the fraction of KBr is rather small (less than 15 %) the magnetic response of the composite is very weak and similar to that observed for the compound Bi 0.9 La 0.1 FeO 3 ; pure KBr matrix without Bi 1-x La x FeO 3 has no magnetic response at all as anticipated. However, when the fraction of KBr increases above 15%, the magnetic response of the composite changes substantially and the field dependence of magnetization discloses ferromagnetic-like hysteresis loops with the remanent magnetization about 0.14 emu/g and the coercive field about 1.8 Tesla (at RT). Nothing similar to the ferromagnetic-like hysteresis loop can be observed in Bi 0.9 La 0.1 FeO 3 ceramics, which magnetization quasi-linearly increases with magnetic field. Different physical mechanisms were proposed to explain the unusual experimental results for nanocomposites Bi 0.9 La 0.1 FeO 3 -KBr, but only those among them, which are highly sensitive to the interaction of antiferromagnetic Bi 0.9 La 0.1 FeO 3 with ionic conductor KBr, can be relevant. We have shown that the ferromagnetic behaviour appears as a synergetic effect driven by the ferromagneto-ionic coupling. For the sake of comparison with the composite, we studied how the increase of La content affects on the field dependence of magnetic moment M(H) of the AFM compound Bi 1-x La x FeO 3 for x = (0 -0.17). Isothermal dependencies of magnetization M(H) shown in Fig. . Dependencies of magnetic moment on applied magnetic field (in Tesla) measured for Bi 1- x La x FeO 3 , where x = 0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.13 and 0.17 (different curves symbols) at room temperature. Volt-ampere characteristics of Bi 0.9 La 0.1 FeO 3 -KBr, and Bi 0.9 La 0.1 FeO 3 ceramics are shown in Note about heating a mixture of BiLaFeO -KBr (50-50) and checking its color, we've heated a mixture at 100C for 30min and longer and tried to find any difference in color -I'd say there is nearly no difference, then we heated at higher temperature (up to melting point of KBR (~750C) with a step of 50-100C), at elevated temperatures BiLaFeO becomes more dark, but whole powder in a crucible (not only that being in a contact with KBr), so I'd say it's not easy (if possible) to estimate this redox reaction visually. We've also made dc conductance measurements (pls. see attached file) (and hope to get impedance spectroscopy results in a couple of weeks). Assuming the I(V) curves we have an increase in conductivity (the samples were in tablet form with 5mm in diameter and 1mm thickness) with KBr content. If I'm not mistaken we can see only electronic conductance from BiLaFeO (not ionic from KBr) so the changes in conductivity can be associated with a formation of Fe 2+ ions and this correlates with an increased magnetization because of uncompensated magn. moments in antiferromagnetic interactions Fe 2+ -O -Fe 3+ . c can be estimated from the expansion as: