We present an algorithm to extract the distance list from atomic pair distribution functions (PDFs) in a highly automated way. The algorithm is constructed via curve fitting based on a Debye scattering equation model. Due to the non-convex nature of the resulting optimization problem, a number of techniques are developed to overcome various computational difficulties. A key ingredient is a new approach to obtain a reasonable initial guess based on the theoretical properties of the mathematical model. Tests on various nanostructured samples show the effectiveness of the initial guess and the accuracy and overall good performance of the extraction algorithm. This approach could be extended to any spectrum that is approximated as a sum of Gaussian functions. Determining the three-dimensional atomic positions in a nanostructure is one of the great challenges in materials science and engineering A program for extracting distance-lists from measured PDFs has been reported. PARSCAPE is an algorithm which can extract this complete set of information from the PDF by using the information-theoretic Akaike information criterion (AIC) Developing an algorithm for peak extraction which is automatable and robust to details of the baseline is our main goal here. From the curve fitting point of view, an estimated distance list can be regarded as a variable to generate a simulated PDF based on the given mathematical model, then one may minimize the residual of the simulated PDF with respect to a target PDF to obtain the optimized distance list. However the resulting curve fitting is generically a non-convex programming problem. In order to solve the problem more effectively, we analyze the properties of the mathematical model which allows us to construct, automatically, the initial guess of the variables, with good fitting results demonstrated in preliminary tests using simulated and experimental PDF data. This paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we briefly introduce the PDF method and present the mathematical model that we use to approximate the experimental PDF. Section 3 is a theory section containing the analysis of properties of the mathematical model. This leads to an approach to guess the initial values of all variables. Section 4 describes the formulation of the PDF distance list optimization. In Section 5, we present results from simulated and experimental PDF datasets used for testing the algorithm, and Section 6 contains a summary of the main points of the paper. We consider a nanostructure with a set of atoms. Let N be the total number of atoms in the structure, and {r j } N j=1 denote the positions of the atoms. The ideal PDF is defined by Here, for j = 1 . . . N and l = 1, . . . N, r jl is the distance between atoms j and l located at positions r j , and r l so that r jl = ||r lr j ||, where ||.|| is the Euclidean norm, f j is the scattering power of the atom at position r j , and f j is its complex conjugate. The ideal PDF (1) may also be obtained from measured data according to where is the normalized and corrected powder diffraction intensity, which is expressed in the Debye Scattering Equation as Here the quantity S(Q) is called the structure function and F(Q) the reduced structure function To compute G(r) numerically from F(Q) on the discrete Q i grid, we approximate G(r) by using the finite sum where N Q is the number of discrete values of Q, and ∆Q i is the difference between two adjacent values of Q. By ignoring the finite Q max , G(r) and the radial distribution function R(r) are related by where ρ 0 is the average density and γ 0 is the characteristic function of the sample shape is a baseline, and we may think of G(r) as the baseline plus peaks. In the literature to-date the shape of the baseline is either determined directly from the shape of the structural model Here, σ jl is the correlated broadening factor for the atom pair For the case of samples made of a single atom type, the atomic form factors f j can be factored out resulting in new functions as our mathematical model. If the material contains different atomic types, we use Equation ( In Equation ( Here, k is the number of different values of unresolved distances. m i represents the relative multiplicity which is equal to multiplicity times 1/(N f 2 ) . During curve fitting, we first determine the value of k. Then we recognize all the r i , m i , σ i as variables. In the next section, we discuss how to construct the initial guesses for these variables. This section is divided into several parts. We first present some properties of the mathematical model used to calculate PDFs, and then describe a few approaches for determining an initial guess distance list, using different atomic structures as examples. In real experiments, the intensities are measured only over a range Q min < Q < Q max , which introduces aberrations to the data that must be handled by our automated algorithm. To explore this in more detail we first consider a low energy 18atom Lennard-Jones decahedral cluster The three curves in the bottom panel of Figure ) which is shown as the dark blue curve, and compare it with the red curve (Q min = 0 Å-1 , Q max = 30 Å-1 ), where we find that a larger Q min makes the Ĝ(r) baseline deeper, as expected , we find that smaller Q max leads to larger oscillations in Ĝ(r), again as expected To consider the effects of the Q-range we decompose the PDF into different contributions from the different ranges of Q. According to Equations ( Here we split Ĝ(r) to three parts. If Q max is large enough, we regard the integral from Q max to ∞ as 0 due to the exponential term. The termination of the Fourier transform varies with the type of material and with the amplitude of lattice vibrations but, in general, termination with Q > 30 Å-1 produces minimal errors where r 1 is the smallest distance and σ is a lower bound of all σ i . The unattenuated term contains the atomic-scale structural information and is given by Ĝ1 which is a sum of Gaussians as expected. The part that determines the baseline is given by which has been simplified here by taking terms only up to second order in a Taylor series expansion. Approximating the baseline by does provide a good approximation as shown in Figure The red dashed line is an approximation to the baseline for Ĝ(r) following Equation (21), using the same values used for the simulated PDF in blue. If the target function is a sum of Gaussians, one can make an initial guess using the second order derivative We begin by considering Ĝ1 (r), which contains the structural signal. The second derivative of Ĝ1 (r), following Equation ( First, we take the simplest case of an isolated single peak that we label as the i-th peak. Due to the characteristics of the exponential function, other peaks are some distance away and may affect the single peak slightly. Then, r i can be extracted by using the location of the local maximum of Ĝ(r) or -Ĝ (r). Consider We have two zero crossing points of Ĝ 1 (r), z 1 = r i -σ i and z 2 = r i + σ i . Then we take as the initial guess of σ i , This result will be accurate if the curved baseline contribution to Ĝ, Ĝ2 (r), does not introduce a significant shift on the zero crossing points. Consider the second order derivative of Ĝ2 (r), where we have again used the Taylor expansion. Define η = (rr i )Q min . If η is close to zero, by Taylor expansion, On the other hand, if η is away from zero, then This is small and we can, with confidence, set z and z to be the zero crossings on the same side of Ĝ 1 (r) and Ĝ 1 (r) + Ĝ 2 (r), respectively. Further, we can ignore G 3 because when Q max is large enough, we can approximate it as zero due to its exponential term. This means that although G(r) is not purely a sum of Gaussians, the multiple derivative zero crossings method can still be expected to give acceptably good initial estimates of single peak positions. Then, we have Ĝ and by the Mean Value Theorem, where ẑ is a real number between z and z . For Therefore, we have To compute different even order derivatives of Ĝ(r) numerically, we do not use finite difference approximations, because it is very easy to produce numerical instabilities when calculating higher order derivatives. Instead, we calculate the derivatives directly on the formula Ĝ We only consider even order derivatives of Ĝ(r), which give the peaked functions that we seek for the zero crossing analysis. Intuitively, r is the maximizer/minimizer of Ĝ(2s) (r) and then Ĝ(2s)+1 (r ) = 0. Therefore, Ĝ(2s When the measured F(Q) is taken only at a finite point where N Q is the number of discrete values of Q, and ∆Q i is the difference between two adjacent Q. The high order derivatives obtained from F(Q) by this method are more stable. When F(Q) is not available from experimental data, a finite difference approximation can be used to calculate higher order derivatives from experimentally measured G(r). In Figure The blue curve is the simulated PDF for an 18-atom Lennard-Jones decahedron as shown in Figures The red curve, -Ĝ (r), is calculated as given in Equation (41). A magnified view is shown in the inset from ∼2.5-5.3 Å. The distances between the zero crossing of the first two peaks are very close to 0.2 Å which is twice the value of σ used to generate this PDF. This shows that it is reasonable to guess the initial value of σ i using the zero-crossing estimation given in Equation (24). Figure We consider the n-th derivative, where n is an even number, n = 2s. Using the fact that where C k n is the number of combinations of n items taken k at a time which is defined as n!/k!(nk)!, ! is factorial, and !! is double factorial. Considering r around r i and following Equation ( we can again use as the initial guess of σ i . The PDF simulated from a different model, a 39-atom decahedral cluster, provides an illustration of another interesting point of using zero-crossings from higher order derivatives to locate peaks. Figure The peak in the interval from 8.1 Å to 8.5 Å looks single valued but contains two true peaks at 8.23 Å and 8.40 Å, respectively. In Figure In this case, Ĝ(4) (r), was optimal for separating these two peaks. In practice, higher derivatives give greater selectivity for finding overlapped peaks, but also dramatically increases the number of zero crossings originating from noise, and a balance must be struck between these two competing factors. As a rule of thumb, we have found that the (n + 2)-th derivative should be considered only when the n-th derivative does not result in reasonable initial guesses for r i and σ i . In practice, for a fully automated peak extraction program we do not want human involvement in the decision making. We have found that Ĝ(4) (r) is a good balance between sensitivity and noise suppression in the examples we have tried. In the future, we may experiment with different protocols, for example, adaptively trying derivatives of different order, and even changing the order used to extract signals from specific peaks in the PDF. These improvements to the automated heuristic have not proven to be necessary to date. A magnified view of the highlighted r-range from (a) where the same simulated PDF is shown in light blue and overlaid with the 2nd (red) and 4th (green) order derivatives, -Ĝ (r) and Ĝ(4) (r) respectively. Zero-crossings for Ĝ(4) (r) are marked in purple and the initial guesses for the two overlapped peaks within this r-range are shown with teal arrows. After giving the initial guesses for r i and σ i , we can estimate values for the peak amplitudes, m i , by using the following standard box constrained least square, min m1,...,m k nQ j=1 where n Q is the number of discrete values of Q and the r i and σ i values are held constant. This is a convex quadratic programming problem which can be easily solved without having to specify initial values for the m i . For example, here we use the primal-dual interior-point algorithm With initial values for the variables we can continue to the optimization step. A standard box constrained least square problem is used to fit either the F(Q) or the Ĝ(r) curve according to min ri,σi,mi nq j=1 We have found that compared to fitting on F(Q), the real space optimization is more computationally intensive, but can yield better solutions. For the optimization we use a subspace trustregion method based on the interior-reflective Newton method described in Two target PDFs are tested for our extraction algorithm in this section. One shows the peaks extracted from a simulated PDF, and the other from an experimental PDF of atomically precise clusters where the structure has been satisfactorily solved. We revisit the 18-atom Lennard-Jones decahedron discussed in Sections 3.1-3.2 to generate a simulated PDF for this test. Here we set Q min = 0.5 Å-1 , Q max = 30 Å-1 , and all σ i = 0.1 Å. The distances extracted using our approach are reproduced in Table In general, we may be working with data that were measured at lower real-space resolutions, for example, Q max = 23 Å-1 , which we also tested. Smaller Q max results in less resolution but also in termination ripples, or oscillations, that might confuse the extraction process. In the initial guess stage, our program finds 36 peaks. In fact, most of them are from termination ripples. However, after the optimization stage, a subset of the peak amplitudes are close to 0. In Table , but it is still quite reasonable, containing a small number of false positives with very little weight. The program still successfully resolved the peaks at 4.76 Å and 4.99 Å but this time it misassigned some weight between these two peaks. However, all in all, it was a satisfactory extraction. An example with experimental data. Next we test our distance extraction algorithm on experimental PDF data collected from 144-atom gold nanoclusters capped with 60 thiolate staples, Au 144 (SC6) 60 . Sample preparation is described in In this paper, we have proposed an algorithm to extract distance lists from a target PDF with no a priori structural information. We use a mathematical model utilizing the sum of Guassians nature of the Debye scattering equation and the PDF to automatically recover peak position, and therefore interatomic distance information. It firstly uses an automated approach to find an initial guess for all the variables and then solves a global optimization problem. The preliminary tests show the effectiveness of the initial guess and good performance and accuracy of the extraction. The approach has been successfully tested on PDFs simulated from known nanoparticle clusters as well as from a challenging low-symmetry experimental dataset. Table True values 