X-ray absorption spectroscopy is a premier, element-specific technique for materials characterization. Specifically, the x-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) encodes important information about the local chemical environment of an absorbing atom, including coordination number, symmetry and oxidation state. Interpreting XANES spectra is a key step towards understanding the structural and electronic properties of materials, and as such, extracting structural and electronic descriptors from XANES spectra is akin to solving a challenging inverse problem. Existing methods rely on empirical fingerprints, which are often qualitative or semi-quantitative and not transferable. In this study, we present a machine learning-based approach, which is capable of classifying the local coordination environments of the absorbing atom from simulated K-edge XANES spectra. The machine learning classifiers can learn important spectral features in a broad energy range without human bias, and once trained, can make predictions on the fly. The robustness and fidelity of the machine learning method are demonstrated by an average 86% accuracy across the wide chemical space of oxides in eight 3d transition metal families. We found that spectral features beyond the pre-edge region play an important role in the local structure classification problem, especially for the late 3d transition metal elements. Knowledge of material structures at the atomic scale is essential to understanding physical phenomena and material properties that can lead to practical applications. Specifically, key information about the local chemical environment (LCE) surrounding an atom, including symmetry, coordination number, bond length and bond angle, forms the fundamental basis that determines the electronic properties of materials. In order to resolve the structure-property relationship, the characterization of atomic structures and their dynamic changes under different thermodynamic conditions has become a primary target of experimental studies. Such efforts have made tremendous impact on many research fields, including superconductivity Amongst many experimental techniques (e.g. imaging, diffraction, and spectroscopy), the x-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) is a premier tool for probing LCEs, because it is element specific, sensitive to local structural and electronic properties, and applicable under harsh experimental conditions In this study, we focus on 3d transition metal K-edge XANES, which carries rich information about the electronic transitions from the 1s core level of the absorbing atom to unoccupied states. Since the 1940's, extensive research has been carried out to correlate spectral features of K-edge XANES spectra, especially in the pre-edge region, to LCEs From a theoretical standpoint, the pre-edge peak intensity can be understood qualitatively from quantum mechanical selection rules. The dominant contribution in K-edge XANES comes from s → p dipole transitions, as the s → d quadrupole terms are generally orders of magnitude smaller. The density of states corresponding to the pre-edge regions of 3d transition metals are derived primarily from their empty 3d bands, and direct s → d transitions are dipole-forbidden, which implies a vanishing peak intensity. However, pre-edge peak intensity is enhanced when atomic, unoccupied p and d states hybridize. According to group theory, atomic p -d mixing is allowed under T d symmetry, but is forbidden under O h symmetry Despite the wide range of applications of the empirical fingerprint approach, including classifying LCEs in crystals, amorphous systems Secondly, the empirical fingerprint approach relies on human knowledge to engineer spectral descriptors, which may introduce bias. For example, existing spectral descriptors are primarily derived from the pre-edge region (e.g. peak positions and intensities). However, it is known that pre-edge features are much less visible in late transition metals than early transition metals Machine learning (ML) methods are a promising candidate to solve this inverse materials characterization problem. Instead of relying on empirical features derived from a small number of human observations, ML methods are data-driven approaches that make predictions based on large training sets, eliminating human bias from the feature selection process. There are myriad successful examples of the utilization of ML methods in condensed matter physics, materials science and chemistry, including methods to solve many-body problems In this study, we tackled the LCE classification problem using supervised ML applied to a wide energy range of the XANES spectra (∼ 50 eV above the onset) as input. In this way, the spectral feature space was systematically explored in order to establish the relationships between XANES spectra and LCE classes, specifically the local atomic geometries. As proof-of-principle, we applied ML algorithms to synthetic K-edge XANES spectra obtained from high throughput ab initio calculations. This study serves as a precursor to a potentially very powerful tool for real time structure refinement using experimental XANES, which will require in-depth understanding of the accuracy of the theory and further improvement of the ML algorithms. The workflow of the element-specific, spectrum-based LCE classification framework is summarized in Figure For any given element, the first step is to extract atomic structures representing different LCEs from existing materials structure databases. The structural database must be large enough to build a reasonablysized training set for machine learning models. To demonstrate the applicability of the LCE classification framework, we have considered eight 3d transition metal elements (Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) and extracted all available oxide structures that have been structurally optimized using density functional theory (DFT) from the Materials Project Database Once the structural database is established, the next step is to generate the corresponding spectral database. We focused on the K-edge XANES, as it is element specific and sensitive to the LCE (e.g., symmetry, charge state, and coordination number). In principle, one may populate the spectral database entirely with experimental spectra, but this strategy suffers from several drawbacks. First, experimental XANES spectra represent an average of signals (site-averaged signals) from each absorbing site (site-specific signals). In order to identify the correlations between spectra and local structures using ML, it is necessary to use site-specific spectra for training, as they possess much stronger spectral contrast than the site-averaged spectra. Second, when developing LCE classifiers using supervised ML methods, one needs to label XANES spectra with LCE descriptors, which means that only experimental spectra of known structures can be selected for the database. This requirement severely limits the pool of candidates for the database to mostly well-characterized crystal structures. As a result, qualified experimental spectra represent only a small fraction of the targeting LCEs in the local configuration space, which are heavily weighted in known crystals and underrepresent the materials space of amorphous systems, surfaces, interfaces and nanoparticles. Consequently, a pure experimental spectral database suffers from data availability and data heterogeneity issues. On the other hand, combined with available structural databases and well-established structure sampling methods, computational XANES have a clear advantage in exploring the LCE space and producing site-specific spectra. Furthermore, recent development in computational XANES modeling In this study, we generated the computational XANES database with the FEFF9 code All standardized data before augmentation are henceforth referred to as the base dataset. Training data were augmented by shifting the spectra by ±1 and ±2 eV. The size of the augmented training set thus becomes five times the size of the base dataset. We found that data augmentation improves the accuracy and robustness of the machine learning model. Feature engineering of LCEs is an active research topic with increasing applications in a variety of areas including, for example, neural network potential development We restricted the LCE labels to only tetrahedral (T4), square pyramidal (S5) and octahedral (O6) geometries, because across the eight transition metal families these are the most abundant LCEs, often by an order of magnitude more than the rest. The class breakdown of the dataset is presented in Table The core machine learning algorithm (see Figure For each absorbing site, we used statistical boostrapping. 90% of the database was used for training ML models and the remainder for testing. These subsets were selected randomly in a stratified manner: the proportion of each class in both the training and testing sets was always the same. In order to generate a statistical estimate on the accuracy of the classifier, we sampled the testing data with replacement over 10 folds and report the averaged results in Figure In the following, we present our LCE classification study through visual inspection, principal component analysis (PCA) The FEFF K-edge XANES database of eight 3d transition metal elements (from Ti to Cu) is shown in Figure In addition to pre-edge features, across the eight elements T4 exhibits the highest post-edge intensity, followed by S5 and finally O6. However, the role of postedge features in LCE classification has not yet been explored in the literature, which could be an important supplement to existing pre-edge based methods. We expect that algorithms including a wide energy range in the XANES spectra can in principle improve the spectral sensitivity to the LCE as compared to those relying solely on pre-edge features. We further analyzed the spectral database with PCA. Following the standard notation, X k is defined as the full set of spectral data for the kth absorbing species with x jk being the jth spectrum in the dataset (a single feature vector input) after taking zero sample mean and unit variance. Denote w 1k and w 2k as the first two principal axes in the feature space. We computed coordinates of spectrum j in the PCA plot, z jk = z jk 1 x + z jk 2 ŷ, as where for clarity the denominator scales z jk α within [-1, 1]. To evaluate the significance of the pre-edge features, we truncated the principal axes by applying a cutoff n c to the spectra, such that x jk nc correspond to the vertical dashed lines in Figure by excluding features beyond x jk nc . The axes in the plots generated by Eqs. 1 and 2 are scaled in the same way, so that their clustering patterns can be compared directly. Similar patterns are expected from the full and pre-edge PCA plots, if the pre-edge features dominate the spectral contrast. On the other hand, if the pre-edge features are less significant, there will be weak correlations between two sets of PCA patterns. Full PCA plots are shown in the lower right insets of Figure The lower center insets in Figure In summary, visual inspection and PCA suggest that a MLC is likely able to accurately learn the trends in XANES spectra and correlate them to their respective classes. However, it is unclear whether MLCs can perform equally well for every class in all of the transition metal species we studied. FIG. The accuracy of the MLCs for each LCE class is reported using the F 1 score, which is the harmonic mean of the precision P and recall R, where t + , f + and f -represent the true positives, false positives and false negatives in a two-class (2 by 2) confusion matrix. In order to make a fair assessment of the MLC performance, we need to address the data imbalance issue in our training set. As seen in Table In general, the F 1 score is a much stricter metric than the accuracy and is a better indicator of performance. It accounts for both the precision P (of all predicted positives, cases that are actually positive) and recall R (out of all the actual positives, cases that are correctly identified) and dramatically penalizes poor scores in either category (contrary to the mean of the precision and recall). To demonstrate why this is important, consider the F 1 score of the relatively underrepresented S5 class. Suppose that there are 10 S5 and 100 T4 and O6 in the data set, and that the classifier has a 10% false negative and false positive rate. Accuracy would naturally be 90%, but this is a terrible representation of the classifier, since 10 non-S5 data points were predicted as S5, unnaturally inflating the number of predicted positives. On the contrary, the F 1 score of 62% accounts for this by incorporating the low precision (47%) into the metric. In addition to a breakdown by class, the macro F 1 score (F 1 ) is reported, which is the average of the classwise F 1 scores computed using a one-versus-all approach. The F 1 score treats each class on equal footing and further penalizes classifying data in an underrepresented class incorrectly relative to a class with many data points. As clearly shown from the F 1 scores in Table The ability of MLCs to accurately classify late transition metal oxides that lack prominent pre-edge features suggests that features beyond the pre-edge region play an important role in the neural network model. This hypothesis is supported by the PCA results shown in the insets of Figure To gain further insight, we train MLCs with identical architectures using only the pre-edge region defined by energies below the dashed lines in Figure As shown in Table and summarize the results averaged over early (Ti, V, Cr, and Mn) and late transition metal elements (Fe, Co, Ni and Cu) in Table Class-wise F1 scores calculated using different machine learning models (CNN/MLP) for T4 (blue/cyan), S5 (green/light green) and O6 (red/pink) local coordination environments in eight 3d transition metal elements. While the full height of each bar represents the results trained on the full feature space, gray bars overlaid on top with lower F1 values represent the results for the models trained only on the pre-edge region. For example, for the Co S5 CNN, the F1 score reported for training on the full spectral space is about 0.7, but decreases sharply to about 0.2 when trained on the pre-edge region only. Error bars correspond to standard deviation; the ones with wider caps correspond to the full feature space. sition metals with F 1 = 0.28 (0.12) for the pre-CNN (pre-MLP). The substantially better performance of the pre-CNN is likely caused by the use of the convolutional filter, which makes the CNN able to learn subtle pre-edge features from augmented data more effectively than the MLP. The MLCs described so far were trained on computational FEFF XANES spectra. Developing MLCs that can classify the LCE of a broad range of material families using experimental XANES spectra is a more challenging task that is beyond the scope of the current work. Nonetheless, in this section we discuss several key issues that need to be addressed in order to achieve this goal, including validation of the theory, edge alignment of the simulated spectra, and the variations in the spectral intensity. In order to appy MLCs trained on synthetic data to experimental spectra, it is very important to validate the theory such that the computational spectra can faithfully reproduce experimental spectral features. To this end, we compare FEFF spectra with experimental spectra on a small number of oxides: K 6 Ti 2 O 7 , rutile (TiO 2 ), MnCr 2 O 4 , MnCO 3 , CoAlO 4 and Co(AsO 4 ) 2 in Figure Despite the relatively high PCC scores, MLCs trained on spectra at the FEFF level of theory as such cannot reliably classify experimental spectra. It is necessary to generate the computational XANES database with more accurate methods and conduct a systematic benchmark of theory against experiment. However, the computational expense of these calculations grows quickly with the complexity of the methods, which could in practice limit the level of theory used to generate the training set. A good compromise would involve developing robust ML algorithms for a physically sound but numerically imperfect training set. It may also be possible to augment the computational spectral database with a subset of experimental data and apply ML techniques that can handle a hybrid database, such as transfer learning. Another open question in computational XANES is the edge alignment of computational spectra with experimental spectra, because current first-principles electronic structure methods have difficulty predicting accurate ab- Comparison between representative experimental (solid) and FEFF (dashed) XANES spectra. FEFF calculations are shifted on the energy axis to maximize such that the Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) in order to find the best match between experimental and theoretical XANES. The experimental spectra of K6Ti2O7 and rutile were extracted from Farges et al. In order to investigate the impact of the edge alignment on the performance of MLCs, we shift the test set by up to ±3 eV to study the transferability of MLCs against the shifted data. We note that a shift of 3 eV in energy is quite significant, as the energy range of the pre-edge region is about 10 to 15 eV. As shown in Figure Additionally, we have seen that the spectral intensity of theoretical XANES spectra may not match perfectly with experiments. On top that, the intensity of experimental XANES spectra is subject to several uncertainties from sample preparation and various instrumental factors, such as type and mosaic spread of the monochromator crystals, source sizes, slit heights and beam instabilities From the analysis above, one can clearly see that MLCs perform dramatically better when the training set is augmented, which is a sensible result. It is interesting to note that the CNN underperforms relative to the MLP without data augmentation, specifically for early transition metals that exhibit strong pre-edge peaks. For example, the F 1 score of the unaugmented CNN for Ti and V drops to ∼ 0.45 and 0.25, respectively, at σ = 0.1. This trend is not entirely counterintuitive for two reasons. First, the CNN as described in Subsection II.C is not completely shift-invariant, and without proper data augmentation it may not learn how to account for small perturbations. Second, as shown in Table We propose a new computational framework to perform element-specific classification of local chemical environments from XANES spectra. In addition to the construction of structure and spectral databases and structural labels, a central element of this framework is unraveling the correlation between spectral features and local chemical environments systematically using machine learning classifiers. As proof-of-principle, we applied our method to the computational XANES database of eight 3d transition metal elements generated by the FEFF code and achieved a high average macro F 1 score of 0.86. Our method can reliably capture not only the prominent pre-edge features, but also the less characteristic spectral features beyond the pre-edge region. We showed that features beyond the pre-edge region turn out to be very important to the accuracy of the classification, especially for late transition metal elements. The ability to extract key structural information in the full spectral range makes our machine learning-based method more robust and transferable than empirical fingerprint methods based solely on the pre-edge region. As an important starting point, our work will motivate future research on the problem of classification of local chemical environments on experimental measured spectra.