A resistive coupling circuit is used to model the recently discovered dissipative coupling in a hybridized cavity photon-magnon system. With this model as a basis we have designed a planar cavity in which a controllable transition between level attraction and level repulsion can be achieved. This behaviour can be quantitatively understood using an LCR circuit model with a complex coupling strength. Our work therefore develops and verifies a circuit method to model level repulsion and level attraction and confirms the universality of dissipative coupling in the cavity photon-magnon system. The realization of both coherent and dissipative couplings in a planar cavity may provide new avenues for the design and adaptation of dissipatively coupled systems for practical applications in information processing. Strong light-matter interactions are an interesting and important subject of condensed matter physics, enabling new insight into material characteristics and device design At microwave frequencies such hybrid circuits involving charges, spins, and solid-state devices can be fabricated on a chip and integrated with well established microwave technologies, which is crucial for the future development of information processing However, the coupling between light and matter is not strictly limited to coherent interactions. Very recently dissipative coupling induced level attraction has been experimentally discovered, where hybridized modes coalesce rather than repel, due to a Lenz-like effect in a Fabry-Perot cavity A picture of the microstrip cross junction cavity is depicted in Fig. Essentially, the coupling mechanism of coupling effects in the coupled cavity photon magnon system can be defined by three fundamental electrodynamic principles: Ampère's Law, Faraday's Law and Lenz's Law In order to demonstrate the significance of these principles for concrete applications, in this paper we propose a phenomenological LCR model for both coherent and dissipative coupling in different physical systems. The equivalent LCR circuit, specific to the coupled cavity-photon magnon system reported in this paper, is shown in Fig. Using the LCR circuit model the transmission spectra of the magnon-photon coupled system can be calculated as, where are the resonance frequencies of the cavity and magnon, respectively. γ m = R m /2L m is the YIG damping while γ ce and γ ci are the extrinsic and intrinsic cavity damping, see Appendix A for detailed discussion of cavity transmission. The complex coupling strength G = (L Experimentally, level repulsion exhibits as two hybridized modes of the system repel each other in the frequency domain, when the coherent coupling is dominant. By contrast, during level attraction the two hybridized modes coalesce with each other and occur when dissipative coupling becomes dominant. An amplitude mapping of the microwave transmission spectra S 21 , measured using a vector network analyzer with the YIG in the centre of the cross junction at position A, is shown in Fig. Another robust method to distinguish level attraction and repulsion is to examine the transmission phase at ∆ H = 0. In level attraction a single 2π-phase jump at ∆ ω = 0 is observed in Fig. To examine the transition between level attraction and repulsion we moved the YIG position continuously along the x axis, between |x| < 5 mm. Selected YIG positions and the corresponding mappings are shown in Fig. The coupling strength depending on YIG sphere's x position can be determined for all three modes by using Eq. (1) to fit S 21 . The results are summarized in Fig. In this work we have developed an LCR circuit model to describe both level repulsion and its transition into level attraction, and have experimentally demonstrated the existence of mutual resistive coupling induced level attraction in a planar cavity. The realization of resistive coupling provides a new avenue for the development of circuit designs which implement the phenomenon of level attraction. By realizing such an on-chip device, future coupling modules may be more easily integrated into a lumped element system. Note added. After the paper was written, we found in the last week a preprint also studying the level attraction effect in planar cavity, but with a different cavity design, see 