Lead halide perovskite nanocrystals (NCs) are currently emerging as one of the most interesting solution processed semiconductors since they possess high photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY), and colour tunability through anion exchange reactions or quantum confinement. Here, we show efficient solar cells based on mixed halide (CsPbBrI2) NCs obtained via anion exchange reactions in ambient conditions. We performed anion exchange reactions in concentrated NC solutions with I -, thus inducing a PL red-shift up to 676 nm, and obtaining a high PLQY in film (65%). Solar cell devices operating in the wavelength range 350-660 nm were fabricated in air with two different deposition methods. The solar cells display a photo-conversion efficiency of 5.3% and open circuit voltage (Voc) up to 1.31V, among the highest reported for perovskite based solar cells with band gap below 2eV, clearly demonstrating the potential of this material. Inorganic 1 and hybrid lead halide perovskites nanocrystals 2 (NCs) are currently under the spotlight for a variety of optoelectronic applications such as light-emitting diodes, Chemicals: Lead(II) bromide (PbBr2, 99.999% trace metals basis), Lead(II) iodide (PbI2, 99.999% trace metals basis), Octane (synthesis grade), Oleic Acid (OlAc, > 99%), Caesium acetate (CsAc, 99.99% trace metals basis), Octylamine (OcAm, 99%), Octanoic acid (OcAc, 98%), Propionic acid (> 99.5%), Toluene (TOL, 99.8%) and Methyl acetate (anhydrous, >98%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. 1-propanol (PrOH, Pharmpur®) and n-Hexane (Hex, 99%) were purchased from Sharlab. All chemicals were used without any further purification. Synthesis and purification of CsPbBr3 nanocrystals: CsPbBr3 NCs were prepared following our previously published method according to the ref 27 of the manuscript. Anion and ligand exchange reaction: In 2 ml of concentrated (120 mg/ml) CsPbBr3 NCs dispersed in toluene, 2 ml solution (230 mg/ml) of PbI2 diluted in a mixture of octylamine, octanoic acid and hexane (1:1:1) was added dropwise while gently stirred. The solution turned from green to orange and finally red. After the PbI2 addition, the solution was further stirred for several minutes. Then, the perovskite NCs were collected with centrifugation (1000 RPM for 2 min ) without using any anti-solvent. The NCs were dispersed in 2 ml of toluene and 2 ml of Methyl acetate was introduced to precipitate the NCs and remove the excess ligands. Finally the NCs were disperse in 1 ml of Octane. For ligand exchange reactions, we substitute the octylamine/octanoic acid mixture with the desirable primary alkyl carboxylic acid/amine. The FTO substrates were sonicated with acetone and propanol for 20 minutes. Then the FTO surface was further clean with oxygen plasma. On FTO glass a sol-gel solution of TiO2 was spin coated at 3000 RPM for 30 sec resulting in a 50 nm layer. The substrates were annealed for 1 h at 500 o C. The sol-gel TiO2 was prepared according to the ref. 7 of the manuscript. For the single step device a concentrated solution (120 mg/ml) of CsPbBrI2 NCs dispersed in octane was spin-cast at 2000 RPM for 30sec. Then 5 drops of saturated Pb(OMeAc) solution cover the film for 3 seconds and then immediately spun at 2000 RMP for 30 sec while a further 1 drop of anhydrous Methyl Acetate was applied. For Layer-by-Layer deposition, a perovskite solution of 50 mg/ml was spin-cast at 2000 RPM for 30 sec. Then the same solid ligand exchanged treatment was applied as in the single step approach for each layer. As a hole-transport layer we used Spiro-OMeTAD (prepared in line with the ref 6) solution which was spin cast under inert atmosphere with a final thickness of 220 nm. Finally, 130 nm of gold electrodes were evaporated with the use of a mask (Pixel area 3.14 mm2). Transmission Electron Microscope: images were obtained using a JEOL JEM-2100 LaB6 transmission electron microscope, operating at 200 kV. The spectrometer is an Oxford Instruments INCA x-sight, with a Si(Li) detector. Samples for TEM characterization were prepared by dropcasting diluted NCs solutions onto 300-mesh carbon-coated copper grids. X-ray diffraction: X-ray diffraction spectra were collected using a PANalytical X'Pert PRO MRD diffractometer equipped with a Cu KαX-ray tube (Cu Kα λ=1.541874Å; Kα1+2 doublet λ1=1.540598Å, λ2=1.544426Å). The XRD spectra were collected in air at room temperature using grazing incidence (ω = 0.6o), a parabolic mirror combined with a parallel plate collimator and a parallel-beam geometry. The films used in XRD measurements were prepared by dropcasting the perovskite NCs solution onto a silicon substrate. Photoluminescence measurements: Photoluminescence measurements were performed using a Horiba Jobin Yvon iHR550 Fluorolog system coupled with a Quanta-phi integrating sphere and a FluoroHub time-correlated single photon counting card. Steady-state PL measurements were carried out using a Xenon-lamp coupled with a monocromator as excitation source (λ = 400 nm power density = 1mW/cm 2 ), while for time-resolved measurements a pulsed laser diode was employed (Horiba Nanoled, λ = 405 nm, pulse full-width-half-maximum of 50 ps, fluence of 1nJ/cm 2 ). All photoluminescence efficiency (ΦPL) measurements were carried out in the integrating sphere (λexc = 520 nm). CsPbBrxI3-x NCs solutions for ΦPL measurements were prepared in quartz cuvettes and diluted to 0.1 optical density at the excitation wavelength. All films for ΦPL measurements were prepared via spin-coating at 2000 rpm on soda-lime glass substrates (area of 1 cm 2 ). Photovoltaic performance characterization: solar cells efficiency measurements were performed in the globe box at 25 C°. The device I-V responses were collected using a Keithley 2401 source meter. All the J-V curves were collected with a dwell time of 1ms and a step of 0.02V with the use of a mask. Illumination intensity of AM 1.5 was maintained using a filter and an ABET solar simulator (spectral mismatch within ±20%). The intensity of the solar simulator was calibrated for 1 sun with a standard Si solar cell (provided by Fraunhofer ISE). The measurement and data acquisition was performed with a LabVIEW program. EQE measurements: EQE measurements were performed in air with an in-house build experimental set-up by using chopped (180 Hz, Thorlab) monochromatic illumination. The power of the monochromatic light was measured by a calibrated Newport photo detector (UV-818). The device response of the chopped signal was measured using a Stanford Research system lock-in amplifier (SR-830) which was fed by a Stanford Research system low noise current pre-amplifier (SR-570). The final EQE spectra were obtained with a LabVIEW program. Perovskite NCs of various shapes and sizes can undergo anion exchange reactions extending the degree of control over their optoelectronic response. However, the exchanged iodine based perovskite NCs present poor optical properties, as demonstrated by the lower PLQY compared to their pristine CsPbBr3 counterpart. Interestingly, the emission centered at 676 nm corresponds to the CsPbBr0.6I2.4 NC composition indicating that in the presence of an excess of iodine ions, full bromine replacement is not achieved. The incomplete exchange may arise from the polydispersity of the initial NCs and their agglomeration, as TEM images manifests (Figure Considering the good optical properties of the CsPbBrI2 NCs obtained using octanoic acid and octylamine, we tested the use of other shorter surface ligands in the anion-exchange solution (see Figure The J-V scans of both devices are shown in Figure In conclusion, we have synthesized mixed Br/I perovskite nanocrystals in ambient conditions via anion exchange, obtaining a high PLQY of 65% in dry films. We demonstrated a scale-up synthesis of perovskite nanocrystals with mixed halide which does not require high temperature and inert atmosphere to obtain high quality materials. Furthermore, we have shown that by using shorter surface ligands such as octanoic acid, the NCs are phase stable. This allowed us to fabricate a solar cell device via a single step approach with high Voc of 1.31 eV. Comparison and analysis of various XRD patterns, TEM images, absorption and PL spectra of NCs with different Br/I ratio, fitting parameters for time resolve PL measurements, time resolve PL maps, size dispersion histograms, NC ́s stability with different ligands, summary of device performance and stability .