Owing to fully occupied orbitals, noble gases are considered to be chemically inert and to have limited effect on materials properties under standard conditions. However, using first-principles calculations, we demonstrate herein that the insertion of noble gas (i.e., He, Ne, or Ar) in ZnO results in local destabilization of electron density of the material driven by minimization of an unfavorable overlap of atomic orbitals of the noble gas and its surrounding atoms. Specifically, the noble gas defect (interstitial or substitutional) in ZnO pushes the electron density of its surrounding atoms away from the defect. Simultaneously, the host material confines the electron density of the noble gas. As a consequence, the interaction of He, Ne, or Ar with O vacancies of ZnO in different charge states q (ZnO:VO q ) affects the vacancy stability and their electronic structures. Remarkably, we find that the noble gas is a functional dopant that can delocalize the deep in-gap VO q states and lift electrons associated with the vacancy to the conduction band. Understanding the role of point defects in materials is the paramount issue in modern solid-state physics/chemistry. Interaction of noble gases with ideal ZnO: Utilizing the methodology to screen different insertion sites explained in our previous work, To quantify the overall effect of the noble gas defects on the charge density rearrangements, we calculate a total deviation of the charge density difference for the system as s = ∑ |∆ρ i |V i N i , where ∆ρ i and V i are charge density difference and volume of the i cell in the discrete grid used for the summation. The computed total deviations of s = 0.28e, 0.49e, and 0.63e (0.92e for the octahedral interstitial defects) for He, Ne, and Ar imply that the strongest local destabilization of the electron density is caused by Ar insertion, while the smallest effect corresponds to the He defect. Unsurprisingly, larger atomic size of the noble gas results in a stronger repulsion between its atomic orbitals and those of the surrounding atoms. Because of the nature of the noble gas interaction with ZnO, the insertion of larger noble gas results in stronger local destabilization of electron density which correlates with the insertion energies (given above) and atomic displacements. For instance, the shortest He-Zn, Ne-Zn, and Ar-Zn distances are 2.16, 2.23, and 2.24 Å (2.32 Å for the octahedral site), respectively. Indeed, the atomic relaxation is the system's response to the unfavorable overlap of atomic orbitals. The large atomic size and high coordination of the octahedral interstitial site force Ar to break the Zn-O bond and minimize the number of the nearest neighbors and total deviation of the charge density difference. Specifically, Ar at the in-bond site has only 2 neighbors within the distance of 2.60 Å, while it has 12 neighbors at the octahedral site. The noble gas defects at octahedral sites do not change the electronic structure of ZnO noticeably (Fig. Although the noble gas insertion has limited effect on the electronic structure of the pristine ZnO apart from Ar that induces formation of near-VBM defect state, the interaction of the noble gases with vacancy-defected ZnO is different. In fact, the presence of VO results in a dependence of the insertion energy on distance d between the vacancy and inserted atom (the energy versus distance profile). First, the noble gas can act as an interstitial defect locating at a different distance from VO (ZnO:VO-X for d ≠ 0 Å). Second, it can occupy the vacancy site acting as a substitutional defect (ZnO:VO-X for d = 0 Å). From the calculations for ZnO:X systems, one can expect that the noble gases tend to occupy the vacancy site to minimize the unfavorable overlap of their atomic orbitals with those of the surrounding atoms: for the substitutional defect, the shortest He-Zn distance is ~2.5 Å, while for the interstitial one it is ~2.2 Å. However, we find that He does not act as a substitutional defect but goes to the interstitial site instead (Fig. The nature of Ne/Ar interaction with ZnO:VO is similar to that for the He case (Fig. To better understand the interaction between the noble gases and vacancies, we analyze the insertion of noble gases in charged ZnO:VO 1+ and ZnO:VO 2+ (Figs. Similar to ZnO:VO (and to pure ZnO), interstitial He and Ne do not change noticeably the electronic structure of the ZnO:VO 1+ system, while interstitial Ar produces an in-gap defect state. Moreover, when the noble gas occupies the vacancy side, it delocalizes both defect states, however, lifting up only 1e to the conduction band (Figs. In contrast to ZnO:VO and ZnO:VO 1+ , the formation of ZnO:VO 2+ does not create localized defect states (Figs. All calculations are carried out using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). The defect formation energies and finite size corrections are calculated within the methodology described by Lany and Zunger 