Ultrasonic AFM may improve fabrication technologies on the nanometer scale. In the presence of ultrasonic vibration, hard surfaces can be indented and scratched with the tip of a soft cantilever, due to its inertia. Ultrasound reduces or even eliminates friction, and hence modifies the tip-nanoparticle-surface interactions in AFM manipulation. The subsurface sensitivity of the technique makes feasible the purposed manipulation of subsurface nanoscale features by ultrasonic actuation. plitude is sufficiently high that the tip-sample distance varies over the nonlinear tip-sample force interaction regime, the cantilever experiences a static force during the time that the ultrasonic excitation is acting. This force is the so-called "ultrasonic force", and can be understood as the net force that acts upon the cantilever during a complete ultrasonic cycle, due to the nonlinearity of the tip-sample interaction force. The cantilever behaves then as a mechanical diode and deflects when the tip-sample contact vibrates at ultrasonic frequencies of sufficiently high amplitude. The magnitude of the ultrasonic force or of the ultrasonic-force-induced additional cantilever deflection (UFM signal) is dependent on the details of the tip-sample interaction force, and hence on material properties such as elasticity and adhesion. Therefore, UFM allow us to discern nanoscale topographic regions with distinct elastic contrast, as shown in figure Ultrasonic AFM techniques provide a means to monitor ultrasonic vibration at the nanoscale, and open up novel opportunities to improve nanofabrication technologies In the presence of ultrasonic vibration, the tip of a soft cantilever can dynamically indent hard samples due to its inertia. In addition, it has been demonstrated that ultrasound reduces or even eliminates nanoscale friction Information of ultrasonic vibration on the nanoscale has recently become accessible by a new family of Scanning Probe Microscopy techniques based on the use of Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) with ultrasound excitation In bottom-up approaches, ultrasound may assist in the self-assembly or AFM manipulation of nanostructures Eventually, it should be pointed out that the sensitivity of ultrasonic-AFM to subsurface features makes feasible to monitor subsurface The New BioMAT TM Workstation AFM. Results for Opaque Samples. The BioMAT TM Workstation combines upright optical microscopy with AFM and opens up a wide range of applications for the study of non-transparent specimens. Even in liquids. S c a n n i n g S e c t i o n modifications Ultrasonic AFM techniques provide a means to monitor ultrasonic vibration at the nanoscale, and open up novel opportunities in nanofabrication technologies. The use of ultrasound may improve both down-top and bottom-down approaches in nanofabrication, facilitating the patterning of nanoscale surface features, the manipulation or self-assembly of nanostructures, and possibly the controlled subsurface manipulation of buried nanoobjects. • G.I.T. Imaging & Microscopy 4/2007