After decades of explorations, suffering from low critical temperature and subtle nature, whether a metallic ground state exists in a two-dimensional system beyond Anderson localization is still a mystery. Supremely, phase coherence could be the key that unlocks its intriguing nature. This work reveals how quantum phase coherence evolves across bosonic superconductor-metal-insulator transitions via magneto-conductance quantum oscillations in high-Tc superconducting films. A robust intervening anomalous metallic state characterized by both resistance and oscillation amplitude saturations in the low temperature regime is detected. By contrast, with decreasing temperature the oscillation amplitude monotonically grows on the superconducting side, but decreases at low temperatures on the insulating side. It suggests that the saturation of phase coherence plays a prominent role in the formation of this anomalous metallic state. In 1979, the scaling theory of localization predicted that metallic states are absent at zero temperature in two-dimensional (2D) disordered systems due to quantum interference The resistance saturation as the characteristic of anomalous metallic ground state in 2D superconductors Here, we present a systematic study of Cooper pair phase coherence through the superconductor-anomalous metal phase transition followed by the anomalous metal-insulator phase transition in high-Tc superconductor (HTS) films patterned with array of holes. The relatively high energy scale of HTS and low temperature measurements make the observations reliable. The wide resistance saturation over one decade of temperature variation, zero Hall resistance and the giant magneto-resistance are simultaneously detected as characteristics of an anomalous metallic state. Interestingly, magneto-conductance quantum oscillations with a period of h/2e are detected in superconducting, anomalous metal and insulating states, providing a direct observable of Cooper pair coherence through the phase transitions. By reactive ion etching (RIE), we etched a high quality 12 nm thick YBCO thin film through a contact mask with a hexagonal array of holes (see Fig. The RIE transfers the pattern, around 70 nm diameter holes with center-to-center hole spacing of ~103 nm, onto the HTS film (Fig. Figure To further explore the nature of the anomalous metallic state, the Hall resistance ) and longitudinal resistance ( ) were measured simultaneously. Below , the slopes of curves are largely suppressed and drop to zero with decreasing temperature for a representative metallic state film (Fig. Below , the perpendicular magneto-conductance of all the YBCO nanopore thin films in Fig. To highlight the temperature dependence of the oscillations, we define the magneto-conductance oscillation amplitude as after subtracting the rising background. Figure The electrical transport and the magneto-conductance oscillations in YBCO nanopore thin films can be qualitatively understood by modeling them as resistively shunted Josephson junction arrays. With increasing etching time, the link resistances grow and the superconducting islands shrink The magneto-conductance oscillations originate from Cooper pair quantum interference effects in the multiply connected geometry imposed by the array structure The phase diagrams of resistance and differential resistance as a function of temperature and normal resistance in Fig. To estimate the phase coherence length , we approximately use the formula for quasi-particle quantum interference (1), where C is a geometrical factor ~ 1, is the quasi-particle relaxation length (thermal length), r is half of center-to-center hole spacing ~ 50 nm, h is Planck's constant and e is the electron charge. Since phase coherence time is identical to the quasi-particle relaxation time (2), and , we deduce . Thus . 