The insulator-to-metal transition (IMT) in vanadium dioxide (VO2) can enable a variety of optics applications, including switching and modulation, optical limiting, and tuning of optical resonators. Despite the widespread interest in optics, the optical properties of VO2 across its IMT are scattered throughout the literature, and are not available in some wavelength regions. We characterized the complex refractive index of VO2 thin films across the IMT for free-space wavelengths from 300 nm to 30 μm, using broadband spectroscopic ellipsometry, reflection spectroscopy, and the application of effective-medium theory. We studied VO2 thin films of different thickness, on two different substrates (silicon and sapphire), and grown using different synthesis methods (sputtering and sol gel). While there are differences in the optical properties of VO2 synthesized under different conditions, they are relatively minor compared to the change resulting from the IMT, most notably in the ~2 -11 μm range where the insulating phase of VO2 has relatively low optical loss. We found that the macroscopic optical properties of VO2 are much more robust to sample-to-sample variation compared to the electrical properties, making the refractive-index datasets from this article broadly useful for modeling and design of VO2-based optical and optoelectronic components. Vanadium dioxide (VO2) undergoes a first-order insulator-to-metal transition (IMT) at ~68 °C, which can be driven thermally Knowledge of the complex refractive index of VO2 across its IMT can enable computational design of various optical and optoelectronic devices incorporating this material. There is a large literature base of experiments that have been used to extract such optical properties, most notably using spectroscopic ellipsometry The goal of this paper is to provide a comprehensive study of the optical properties of thin-film VO2 across its IMT for free-space wavelengths from 300 nm to 30 μm. We studied films of different thickness (from ~70 to ~130 nm), grown by different methods (magnetron sputtering and sol-gel synthesis), and on different substrates (silicon and sapphire). To extract the complex refractive-index data, we used variable-angle spectroscopic ellipsometry (VASE) We selected four VO2 thin-film samples with varying thickness, substrate, and synthesis method (Table Commonly, both silicon (001) and c-plane-oriented sapphire are used as substrates for VO2 growth The substrate choice can significantly affect the film quality, in part due to the lattice mismatch at the substrate-film interface Finally, the growth technique can also have a large influence on the properties of VO2 To extract the complex refractive indices of the films, we performed two sets of VASE measurements, the first at shorter wavelengths (300 nm to 2 μm, using the V-VASE instrument from J. A. Woollam Co.), and the second at longer wavelengths (2 μm to 30 μm, IR-VASE). Both sets of measurements were performed at three incident angles of 50°, 60°, and 70°. Prior to the measurements, the back surfaces of the substrates were sandblasted to minimize backside reflections. The ellipsometry measurements were carried out only at two temperatures: 30 °C (VO2 in the insulating phase) and 100 °C (in the metallic phase). For intermediate temperatures, we combined the ellipsometry data with temperature-dependent reflection measurements, and calculated the temperature-dependent effective refractive index using an effective-medium theory (see next section). We chose this approach because ellipsometry across the IMT can result in artifacts due to temperature fluctuations of the sample combined with the hysteretic nature of the IMT; these artifacts are worse for ellipsometry than the reflectivity measurements because of the longer duration of a single ellipsometry measurements at a given temperature. The reflectance measurements were performed at near-normal incidence, for wavelengths from 2 μm to 17 μm, using an infrared microscope (Bruker Hyperion 2000) attached to a Fourier-transform infrared spectrometer (Bruker Vertex 70). All reflectance spectra were collected at temperatures between 30 °C and 100 °C (first heating, then cooling) with steps of 2 °C, and were normalized to a gold mirror, assuming a known reflectance of optically thick gold. Our fitting procedure comprised the following basic steps. First, we fit the shorter-wavelength V-VASE data, obtaining the complex refractive index and the fitted thickness of the VO2 film. The shorterwavelength fit was carried out before moving to longer wavelengths because, for deeply subwavelength films, there may be no unique fit for both the thickness and complex refractive index The experimental ellipsometric data (Ψ and ∆ in Fig. The V-VASE fitted thickness of VO2 (~69 nm) agrees with the cross-sectional SEM imaging to within the surface roughness (~9 nm, by AFM, see Supplementary Section 3). This fitted thickness enabled us to initialize our IR-VASE modeling with a fixed effective optical thickness and no surface roughness layer. The resulting fitting of the IR-VASE data enabled us to obtain the real ( ) and imaginary ( ) parts of the complex refractive index throughout the mid-and far-infrared regions [Fig. Combining the results of the V-VASE and IR-VASE data analysis, we plotted the complex refractive indices of Film 1 in both the insulating and metallic phases [Fig. We applied this characterization procedure to the other three samples, to compare the optical properties of VO2 films for different synthesis methods [Fig. In the long-wavelength region accessible to our measurements (11-30 μm), insulating-phase VO2 films feature three strong vibrational resonances (at approximately λ = 17, 20, and 25 μm We are unsure about the origin of the feature around 10 μm in the metallic phase, though the wavelength corresponds to a vibrational resonance in V2O5 Despite these differences, the overall trend of the refractive index for both insulating and metallic phases are quite consistent between all of our films. In particular, the refractive-index values are very similar between all of the films in the insulating phase in the mid-infrared region from 2 to 11 μm, which is also the region of the lowest optical losses. This is in stark contrast to electrical measurements using macroscopically spaced electrodes (see details in Supplementary Section 2, 3), which result in dramatic differences between the films: Film 1 shows a resistance change of ~2 orders of magnitude across the IMT; Film 2 shows ~3 orders; Film 3 shows ~4 orders; and in Film 4, no change could be observed at all, likely due to the small-scale cracks in the film (see Supplementary Section 2). Such structural features impede macroscopic electrical conduction, but are much smaller than the scale of the optical wavelength (> 300 nm), and therefore their impact on the optical properties is expected to be relatively minor. For a more-comprehensive comparison, we plot the complex refractive index of Film 1, together with data from a handful of literature references It has been demonstrated that effective-medium theories (EMTs) such as the Bruggeman formalism [52] and the Looyenga mixing rule where ̃ is the complex dielectric function of VO2, is the temperature-dependent volume fraction of the metal-phase VO2 domains within the film, and varies from -1 to 1 depending on the shape of the metallic inclusions. We used the empirical value of 0.3 for thin-film VO2 The phase co-existence can be understood as a first-order equilibrium, and therefore the temperature dependence of can be expressed as , where 4 contains information about the width of temperature range of the IMT, and 567 is the temperature at which half of the volume of the film is in the metallic state. Note that due to the hysteresis in VO2, the value of 567 is different for heating and cooling (in fact, there may be an infinite number of values of 567 , if minor loops within the hysteretic region of VO2 are considered [54]). For a given 4 and 567 , Eqns. (1, 2) can be used to calculate the temperature-dependent , which can then be used for any conventional optics calculations (e.g., Fresnel equations and the transfer-matrix formalism). To determine 4 and 567 during the heating and cooling stages, we fit a calculation of the normal-incidence temperature-dependent reflectance in the mid infrared to our FTIR measurements, taken at temperature steps of 2 °C. The best fit values for Film 1 -4 are listed in Table By using a combination of variable-angle spectroscopic ellipsometry (VASE) and effective-medium theory (EMT), we extracted temperature-dependent complex-refractive-index values for vanadium-dioxide (VO2) thin films over the wavelength range from 300 nm to 30 μm. We compared the results for VO2 films of different thickness, on different substrates, and grown using different synthesis methods. We found that there were very large differences in electrical properties among the films, substantial differences in the optical properties at wavelengths below 2 μm, but relative consistency in the mid and far infrared, especially in the 2 -11 μm region, which also corresponds to low optical losses for the insulating phase. Our full datasets, provided in the Supplementary Information, will be useful for those seeking to perform simulations of optical and optoelectronic devices based on VO2. nanocrystalline powder and thin film of vanadium dioxide VO2: electrical and infrared properties," Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids, vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 1229-1238, Jul. 2001. [52] M. M. Qazilbash et al., "Infrared spectroscopy and nano-imaging of the insulator-to-metal transition in vanadium dioxide," Physical Review B, vol. 79, no. 7, p. 075107, Feb. 2009. [53] H. Looyenga, "Dielectric constants of heterogeneous mixtures," Physica, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 401-406, Mar. 1965. [54] M. Gurvitch, S. Luryi, A. Polyakov, and A. Shabalov, "Nonhysteretic behavior inside the hysteresis loop of VO2and its possible application in infrared imaging," Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 106, no. 10, 2009. Films 1, 2, and 3 were deposited onto single-side-polished c-plane sapphire and undoped (resistivity > 1000 Ω • cm Si (001) wafers via magnetron sputtering from a V2O5 target, with radio-frequency power of 100 W. During deposition, the chamber pressure was maintained at 5 mTorr with an Ar/O2 gas mixture at a flow rate of 49.85/0.15 sccm. The substrate was heated to 700 °C for the formation of the VO2 phase. The thicknesses of the resulting films are given in Table Our process generally follows the 'aqueous sol-gel' route established by Hanlon et al. The solution is then spun onto the silicon substrate. Spin-coating is performed at between 1000 and 3500 rpm, depending on the viscosity of the sol and the desired film thickness. The substrate is baked for 5 mins at 200 °C to remove excess water. The samples are then thermally annealed at 550 °C in a tube furnace for 30 minutes. A mixture of 5%H2/95%Ar forming gas is used as the flow gas. We imaged our samples with a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Zeiss LEO 1530) to confirm the continuity and uniformity of the films [Fig. Post-growth temperature-dependent electrical resistance measurements were performed on the sputtered films on a customized temperature-controlled probe station. The resistance was obtained by measuring current while sweeping the voltage from -0.1 V to 0.1 V, using a Keithley 2635A source meter. Film 3 features the largest change in resistivity across the IMT (Fig. The parameterization that we used to model the dielectric function of VO2 in its insulating phase include several Lorentz oscillators were used for the mid-and far-infrared wavelengths. For the metallic phase, an additional Drude term In Fig. For the analysis of VO2 films on sapphire, we have to model the substrate as uniaxial With the VO2 layer on top (e.g., Film 3), the fitting procedure was different than the others due to the optical complexity (i.e., significant dispersion due to optical phonons, as well as anisotropy) of sapphire in the midand far-infrared regions. The fitting procedure used for silicon substrates and described in the main text is likely to artificially imprint the spectral features of sapphire into the multi-oscillator function of the VO2 layer. We also found that it was difficult to find a good fit if the initial fitting parameters were not set close enough to a realistic solution. However, if we chose an initial multi-oscillator function that was the result of the fitting of another sample (e.g., Film 1), our fitting procedure converged. Due to reflections from the back surface of sapphire, we discarded the data from 2 to 7 μm for the insulating phase of Film 3. Instead, we simultaneously fit the parameters VO2 layer to the 7-30 μm region and the 1.6-2.1 μm region, because thin-film VO2 is not expected to have any sharp features in the excluded region (e.g., Fig. The resulting complex refractive index for all films is shown in Fig. As described in the main text, we used the Looyenga effective-medium theory to calculate the complex refractive index of VO2 throughout its IMT. The resulting data for all four films are shown in Fig. Here we only show the comparison between the calculations and measurements during heating. The fitting parameters ( and extracted using the FTIR reflectance spectra are shown in Table Note: the VO2 complex-refractive-index data here was obtained from the fitting procedure described in the main text, and corresponds to Figs. 