Among the mysteries surrounding unconventional, strongly correlated superconductors is the possibility of spatial variations in their superfluid density. We use atomic-resolution Josephson scanning tunneling microscopy to reveal a strongly inhomogeneous superfluid in the iron-based superconductor FeTe0.55Se0.45. By simultaneously measuring the topographic and electronic properties, we find that this inhomogeneity in the superfluid density is not caused by structural disorder or strong inter-pocket scattering, and does not correlate with variations in Cooper pair-breaking gap. Instead, we see a clear spatial correlation between superfluid density and quasiparticle strength, putting the iron-based superconductors on equal footing with the cuprates and demonstrating that locally, the quasiparticles are sharpest when the superconductivity is strongest. When repeated at different temperatures, our technique could further help elucidate what local and global mechanisms limit the critical temperature in unconventional superconductors. Superconductivity emerges when electrons pair up to form so-called Cooper pairs and then establish phase coherence to condense into the macroscopic quantum state that is the superfluid. Cooper pairing is governed by the binding energy of the pairs, ΔPB, while the phase coherence or stiffness, governs the superfluid density, nsf. It has long been proposed that there can, in principle, exist spatial variations of the superfluid density. insulator transitions The pair-breaking gap and the superfluid density should be accessible through two distinct spectroscopic signatures in a tunneling contact between superconductors (Fig We calculate the current-voltage characteristics of Josephson tunneling based on two different theoretical frameworks: IZ and P(E). The former, named after its developers Ivanchenko and Zil'berman, models the environment as Ohmic and assumes that the thermal energy exceeds the Josephson energy. These preparations enable us to acquire Josephson tunneling spectra and maps on FeTe0.55Se0.45. Figure In Figs We now return to the relation between the pair-breaking gap and the superfluid density. We extract the pair-breaking gap energy, as well as the height of the coherence peaks, which will prove to be important later, by fitting the coherence peak of each spectrum. Figure In unconventional superconductors, there is a recurring theme that connects quasiparticle excitation line-shapes with the presence of superconductivity: Photoemission demonstrated that the incoherent quasiparticles in the normal state become coherent below the critical temperature. In summary, we have detected and directly imaged a strongly inhomogeneous superfluid and simultaneously measured the electronic and topographic properties in the same field of view, with atomic resolution. We found that the superfluid inhomogeneity is not caused by the structural disorder resulting from the Se/Te alloying, by the inter-pocket scattering, or by the variations of the pair-breaking gap. Instead, the superfluid density shows strong positive correlation with the sharpness of the quasiparticle peak: Superconductivity is needed for coherent quasiparticles, locally on the length scale of cooper pairing. It will be instructive to investigate the superfluid density in other materials using our techniques, including superconductor-insulator transitions, disordered conventional superconductors, or twisted bilayer graphene. 