Dendrite formation during electrodeposition while charging lithium metal batteries compromises their safety. Heterogeneous nucleation and ramified growth of lithium metal electrodeposits while charging lithium metal batteries is tied to uneven Li + transport across the anode-electrolyte interface. , where i is the current density at either a deformed or undeformed interface, α a is the anodic charge transfer coefficient, and Δμ e-is the change in electrochemical potential of the electron at a deformed interface. Notably, Δμ e-is governed by the Li-SIC interfacial tension (Υ) as well as the deviatoric and hydrostatic stresses in the system, according to, where κ is the mean curvature at the interface, τ d The hydrostatic stress term is nominally a function of V Li+ , V Li , G s , and G Li ; in addition, the volume ratio υ = V Li+ /V Li governs its sign. For υ > 1, Δμ e-becomes negative only when G s /G Li > 2.2, which agrees well with the prediction of Monroe and Newman that SICs with G s /G Li > 2 are needed to block dendrite propagation in lithium-ion and lithium metal batteries. Here, we capture both the low V Li+ of inorganic SICs and the low G s of polymers in a hybrid class of nanostructured SICs that transport Li + along their heteromaterial interfaces and confirm their predicted dendrite-suppressing character in high-voltage Li metal cells with an N/P ratio of ~4 (i.e., the ratio of anode to cathode capacity). As the ion-conducting inorganic phase, we turned to lithium halides (LiX, where X -= F -, Cl -, Br -, or I -) whose bulk and interfacial ionic conductivity spans 10 -6 -10 -2 S cm -1 at ambient temperature. We were successful in generating hybrid nano-LiF@polymer hybrid SICs using an in-situ cation metathesis. Soluble tetraalkylammonium fluoride precursors (e.g., tetrabutylammonium fluoride, TBAF) to insoluble LiF were loaded (0-60% w/w) into a microporous polymer host (e.g., PIM-1) Cation metathesis results in a volume change that is commensurate with the amount of TBAF initially loaded into the film. We characterized the influence of TBAF loading on the resulting morphologies of LiF@PIM composites using SEM, which showed few aberrations for loadings of 0-5% (w/w); here, PIM-1 accommodates the volume change effectively (Fig. LESA- Loading nano-sized inorganics in polymers typically increases their tensile strength and shear modulus, which can be evaluated by dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA). From stressstrain curves acquired for macroscopic specimens of each composite (Supplementary Fig. The molar volumes of Li and Li + determine the change in chemical potential μ of these species due to pressure according to the relation: Δμ = (∂μ/∂p) Δp = VΔp. The molar volume of Li in Li metal can be easily obtained as the inverse of its molar density. In contrast, the partial molar volume of Li + in the electrolyte, V !! ! , is hard to determine by direct measurement. For binary electrolytes, the Newman-Chapman relation states that the partial molar volume of an ion is inversely proportional to its transference number. The volume of the ion was determined using Bader charge analysis. It has been previously reported that LiF has a low surface diffusion barrier for Li + , 31 which has been explained to be the cause of uniform lithium electrodeposition and dendrite suppression in Li anodes protected by it. We experimentally determined the influence of PIM-1 on the Li + hopping barrier in LiF@PIM-1 composites by evaluating their temperature-dependent ionic conductivity in Li-Li symmetric cells over a temperature range of 25-85 ̊C (Fig. To understand the fraction of the ion current contributed by Li + , we determined the cation transference number (t + ss ) of LESA-3 during potentiostatic lithium metal plating in Li-Li symmetric cells. The cell was polarized at 10 mV and the current at steady state (i ss ) was assessed after 10 h (Fig. To demonstrate the efficacy of LiF@PIM-1 SICs in suppressing dendrite formation during high-rate cycling, we carried out plate-strip tests in symmetric Li-Li cells configured with thin Li electrodes (~30 μm). Cells were cycled at 2 mA cm -2 at 20 ̊C with 1 mAh cm -2 of the lithium reversibly cycled (~33% of the Li inventory). Those configured with LiF@PIM-1 formulation LESA-3 exhibited superior performance: the initial area-specific resistance (ASR) was ~18 Ω•cm 2 and cycle-life was ~270 h, where ~540 mAh cm -2 cumulative capacity was cycled (Fig. These aggressive cycling conditions for cells configured with thin Li electrodes begin to establish the prospects for LiF@PIM-1 composite SICs to advance Li metal battery technology development, but are not direct evidence of dendrite suppression and dense Li plating mediated by the LiF-PIM-1 SICs. To bridge this gap, we carried out synchrotron hard X-ray microtomography LESAs comprised of thin lithium anodes laminated with a flexible, adherent, coated separator that interconverts to a thin LiF-PIM-1 dendrite-suppressing solid-ion conductor with low ASR are attractive, drop-in components for lithium metal battery manufacturing. To understand their prospects in that regard, we assembled high-voltage Li-NMC-622 cells with the optimized LESA-3 formulation in place, alongside 30-μm thick Li anodes and 1.44 mAh cm -2 NMC-622 cathodes (Fig. Despite being a SIC, LiF@PIM-1 composites were unexpectedly more rate-tolerant from 0.1-5 mA cm -2 than either Celgard-or PIM-1-on-Celgard-configured Li-NMC-622 cells (Fig. The arc developed here for LiF@PIM composites as dendrite-suppressing SICs in lithium metal batteries, within the larger narrative of a universal chemomechanical model for electrodeposition of metals, indicates that a sensible discourse is now possible when rationalizing both the successes and failures of SICs in preventing dendrite formation, whether the outcome is fundamentally pressure-or density-driven. Furthermore, confining nano-LiF domains to the open-pore network of structurally rigid polymer hosts is an exciting strategy by which to elaborate hybrid SICs that embody the unique transport physics of nanoionics. Macromolecular hosts with tailored interfaces in such hybrids are key to revealing properties and behaviors not typically available to all-inorganic platforms. Here, macromolecular nanoionics directed us to LiF@PIMs as "soft ceramic" SICs due to their unusual chemomechanical characteristics, which are put to work in dendrite-suppression in Li metal batteries. It is likely that similar nanostructured composites will become available using leading-edge sol-gel chemistry, Computational methods. Self-consistent DFT calculations were carried out using the real-space projector-augmented wave (PAW) method Preparation of coated separators. Inks of PIM-1 Electrochemical characterization. Electrochemical studies were performed using CR2032 coin cells. A given LiF@PIM formulation, LESAs 1-6, or PIM-1 was coated on Celgard 2325 and assembled such that the coating was in direct contact with the lithium-metal electrode surface. Li-Li cells were assembled with thin lithium (30 μm) on copper foil (10 μm); the liquid electrolyte was 1.0 M LiPF 6 in EC:DMC (1:1). Li-NMC-622 cells were assembled with 30-μm thick Li anodes and NMC-622 (LiNi 0.6 Mn 0.2 Co 0.2 O 2 ) cathodes with areal capacity of 1.44 mAh cm -2 , which were provided by the CAMP facility at Argonne National Lab; the liquid electrolyte was 1.0 M LiPF 6 in EC:DMC (1:1) with 10% w/w fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) Synchrotron hard X-ray microtomography. Polarized Li-Li cells were dissembled, the Li/electrolyte/Li sandwiches were punched to quarter inch disks, and the disks were sealed in Allaminated pouches in an Ar-glovebox. Monochromatric hard X-ray (23 keV) microtomography was then carried out on beamline 8.3.2 at the Advanced Light Source at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. 