Here we demonstrate a new monoclinic iron oxide phase (μ-Fe2O3), epitaxially stabilized by growth on (010) β-Ga2O3. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations find that the lattice parameters of freestanding μ-Fe2O3 are within ~1% of those of β-Ga2O3 and that its energy of formation is comparable to that of naturally abundant Fe2O3 polytypes. A superlattice of μ-Fe2O3/β-Ga2O3 is grown by plasma assisted molecular beam epitaxy, with resulting high-resolution x-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements indicating that the μ-Fe2O3 layers are lattice-matched to the substrate. The measured out-of-plane (b) lattice parameter of 3.12 ± 0.4 Å is in agreement with the predicted lattice constants and atomic-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) images confirm complete registry of the μ-Fe2O3 layers with β-Ga2O3. Finally, DFT modeling predicts that bulk μ-Fe2O3 is antiferromagnetic, while the interface region between μ-Fe2O3 and β-Ga2O3 leads to ferromagnetic coupling between interface Fe 3+ cations selectively occupying tetrahedral positions. Magnetic hysteresis persisting to room temperature is observed via SQUID measurements, consistent with the computationally predicted interface magnetism. Iron oxides contain two of the four most abundant elements on earth and constitute one of the most important material classes for society and industry with a wide variety of chemical, electronic, and magnetic properties besides being mined for iron production. Among the known iron oxides, Fe2O3 (or iron (III) oxide) is the most widely used compound as the source of industrial iron production. As such, it is extremely well studied; while high-pressure research has discovered a number of sub-stoichiometric iron oxides in the past decade From this standpoint, Fe 3+ alloyed β-Ga2O3 presents a compelling and unexplored approach for developing magnetic semiconductors based on a single, simple alloy system. Furthermore, the low lattice thermal conductivity 7 of β-Ga2O3 is an attractive property in thermoelectrics and, in conjunction with magnetically ordered Fe 3+ dopants as a source for magnon-electron drag, may enable high thermoelectric efficiency. Once we found that Fe can be easily doped into the β-Ga2O3 lattice, the question arose if the monoclinic structure of β-Ga2O3 could offer a unique template on which to grow a new monoclinic phase of Fe2O3. Figure The total energy of μ-Fe2O3 in comparison to that of other known iron oxides was calculated within Dudarev's PBE+U approach to DFT 10 with an effective Hubbard U of 3 eV. In a recent comparative study, Fe2O3 structures examined included the lowest-energy polymorphs, specifically α-, β-, γ-, ε-, and the new structure, μ-Fe2O3. Note that for γ-Fe2O3, which is a defective spinel structure, the energy-minimized vacancy arrangement from Ref. Consequently, the strain energy is only 0.03 eV per formula unit when μ-Fe2O3 is lattice matched TABLE 1. Present DFT and experimental literature results for previously known polymorphs of Fe2O3 in comparison to theoretical predictions for μ-Fe2O3. The energy difference ∆E is calculated per Fe2O3 formula unit relative to the lowest-energy α-phase. Experimental values are from Springer Materials online Polymorph Space group wafer for 30 mins and measuring the film thickness using cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM). For simplicity, assuming the film to be fully dense body centered cubic (BCC) phase, the growth rate corresponds to an atomic flux of 2.8×10 16 cm -2 min -1 . Using this value, an equivalent growth rate for the hypothetical μ-Fe2O3 phase is calculated to be 0.4 ML/s. The β-Ga2O3 growth rate is 0.5 ML/s at a Ga BEP of 8.6×10 -8 torr. High-resolution XRD, shown in Figure The layers above the marked 25 ML line in Figure To examine this hypothesis, we first explore the energetics and magnetism for site preferences in β-Ga2O3 and μ-Fe2O3 with DFT calculations by using 1×4×2 supercells with analogous settings described above. As a reference level, we take the GaO3/2 and FeO3/2 energies for nondefective bulk material, as is the customary assumption for dilute semiconductors. The remaining 1 μB results from uncompensated partial moments on the O atoms. For nearest and second-nearest neighbor positions, Fe 3+ cations are calculated to couple antiferromagnetically, while for larger distances, the exchange interaction vanishes, suggesting a paramagnetic response for the dilute case. In support of this potential explanation for the paramagnetic component, HAADF-mode (Z-contrast) STEM imaging in Figure The situation at the interface is examined by calculations for a 1×8×1 heterostructure with 1×4×1 β-Ga2O3 and μ-Fe2O3 halves. After examining all possible permutations for mixed interface layers while maintaining stoichiometry, we find the lowest energy for interface layers occurs when either all tetrahedral or all octahedral sites are occupied by Fe 3+ , coupling ferromagnetically with 5 μB per interface cation, whereas the other sites are occupied by Ga 3+ . The calculated energy difference between these two configurations is less than 10 meV/nm 2 , and thus not significant within DFT accuracy. In contrast, flat interfaces as well as interfaces where both Ga 3+ and Fe 3+ occupy alternating tetrahedral and octahedral sites are 0.7 eV/nm 2 higher in energy, and both result in antiferromagnetic coupling. Thus, mixed interfaces with site separation of Fe and Ga between octahedral and tetrahedral sites is energetically clearly preferable, resulting in ferromagnetic coupling between Fe 3+ spins in the interface layer. These calculations suggest that the ferromagnetic response from the heterostructure comes from the interface regions. To test this hypothesis, we first isolate the ferromagnetic component of magnetization by subtracting the low-field linear paramagnetic contribution in Figure To summarize, we demonstrate a new polytype of Fe2O3 isomorphic to monoclinic β-Ga2O3, hereby called μ-Fe2O3. Ab-initio calculations show that μ-Fe2O3 is as thermodynamically stable as other natural polytypes of Fe2O3 and predict it to have an antiferromagnetic ground state. Using PAMBE we grew an increasing ML superlattice of μ-Fe2O3/β-Ga2O3. XRD yields an average b lattice constant of μ-Fe2O3 of 3.12 ± 0.4 Å, in agreement with the DFT prediction. STEM structural and chemical imaging shows registry of the Fe2O3 to the β-Ga2O3 lattice and demonstrates the high-quality epitaxial growth of μ-Fe2O3/β-Ga2O3 heterostructures. SQUID magnetometry measurements show a ferromagnetic hysteresis at room temperature. Abinitio modeling of the interface region between μ-Fe2O3/β-Ga2O3 demonstrates a site preference of Fe 3+ ions in the tetrahedral positions and predicts an interface ferromagnetic phase that is consistent with the measured magnetization. These results provide a pathway to add magnetic functionality into wide-bandgap power electronics. *E-mail: myers.1079@osu.edu. ML μ-Fe2O3