Here, we study the magnetism of the distorted 1T -T cX 2 (X=S,Se) based on first-principles calculation. The magnetism originates from the hole doping due to the density of states near the valence band edge having van Hove singularity feature. The calculated results show that the T cS 2 monolayer can develop an interesting ferromagnetic (FM) half-metallic phase with tunable spin-polarization orientation. The FM half-metallicity and magnetic moments of the hole-doped T cS 2 monolayer are primarily derived from the p orbital of S atoms, then, a FM ground phase with a high Curie temperature (T C ) (larger than 800 K) is obtained due to the strong S p -S p direct exchange interaction. The magnetic order is robust against thermal excitations at finite temperatures because of magnetic anisotropic energy. In the T cS 2 bilayer, the electrons near Fermi level are redistributed when introducing the interlayer interaction, which suppresses the ferromagnetism induced by hole doping. The ferromagnetism can be recovered when the interlayer interaction is weakened. Spintronics, which takes advantage of the spin degree of freedom of electrons for delivering and storing information, have attracted great interest in science and technology. It requires the precise control of magnetic properties in low dimensions with high Curie temperature (T C ) for fabricating spintronic devices at the nanoscale. Half metals (HMs) are a kind of important spintronic materials with one spin channel being metallic and opposite spin channel being semiconducting. They can provide the single-spin transport that is demanded in future nanoelectric devices, such as spin-polarized tips in scanning tunneling microscopy. For the practical spintronics application at the nanoscale, the two dimensional (2D) materials should possess the following important feature:(i) a stable ferromagnetic (FM) half-metallic ground phase; (ii) a T C beyond room temperature. In decades, tremendous new 2D materials have been predicated theoretically and realized experimentally The family of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) has been studied intensively because of the rich physics and tremendous potential for application, such as superconductivity In this work, we systematically explore the magnetism of TcS 2 system with hole doping from first-principles calculations. In the TcS 2 monolayer, the system develops the FM HM over a significant range of hole doping density. More interestingly, the spin-polarization orientation of metallic band can be manipulated. Furthermore, the magnetism arises from the p-orbital of S atoms, which realizes strong p-orbital magnetism. The T C is far beyond room temperature. We also study the strain effect on magnetization, spin polarization energy, magnetic anisotropic energy (MAE), and T C . On the other hand, we find that the interlayer interaction suppresses FM phase in the TcS 2 bilayer. The magnetic state can be reproduced with weakening the interlayer interaction. Our first-principles calculations are based on the density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) E n e r g y ( e V ) H S E The optimized lattice parameters (a, b and c) for TcS 2 and TcSe 2 bulks in our calculations are relatively smaller than those in previous DFT calculations The crystal structure of TcS 2 monolayer is illustrated in Figs. As mentioned above, the TcS 2 monolayer is a non-magnetic semiconductor with zero doping (ρ = 0, where ρ is the hole doping density). However, our firstprinciples calculations show that the system develops a spontaneous FM phase via hole doping. In Fig. of TcS 2 monolayer increases linearly as a function of the hole doping density. At the doping density ρ = 2.75 × 10 14 cm -2 (1 hole per unit cell), the magnetic moment reaches maximum 1μ B . The magnetic moment is 1μ B /holes in a wide hole doping range from ρ = 1.93 × 10 14 cm -2 to 2.75 × 10 14 cm -2 , which indicates that the holes are completely spin polarized, namely the spin polarization of holes is 100%. However, the magnetic moment decreases linearly with continually increasing hole doping density ρ, and the TcS 2 monolayer becomes non-magnetic phase at hole doping density ρ larger than 4.416 × 10 14 cm -2 (1.6 holes per unit cell). The large DOS not only results in magnetic instability but also gives rise to structural distortions. We relax structure by optimizing the lattice constants and the atomic positions under different hole doping density. The results (seen the Table The band structures of TcS 2 monolayer with various hole doping density, black curve for majority-spin and red curve for minority-spin. The hole density are 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1, 1.1, 1.2, 1.4, and 1.6 from (a) to (h), respectively. The Fermi level is set to zero. (24.1 meV per hole) at the doping density ρ = 2.75 × 10 14 cm -2 , which is larger than those of PtSe 2 (1.4 meV per carrier), PdSe 2 (7.0 meV per carrier) and C 2 N monolayer (8.5 meV per carrier), indicating its superiority for spintronics. After the doping density ρ = 2.75 × 10 14 cm -2 , the spin polarization energy decreases versus the doping density and drops to zero above ρ = 4.416 × 10 14 cm -2 . The physical origin of ferromagnetism can be explained by the Stoner picture The band structures of TcS 2 monolayer under different hole doping density are displayed in Fig. To confirm the hole-doped TcS 2 monolayer is indeed HM, we also calculate the electronic structure and magnetic moment under the hole doping density ρ = 2.208 × 10 14 cm -2 (0.8 hole per unit cell) at HSE level. It is found that the magnetic moment is also 0.8μ B , namely, the holes are fully spin polarized, which is same to that of PBE level. The DOS at HSE level (Figure The MAE not only reveals the ground-state magnetization orientation of system, but also indicates the relative stability of the long-range ferromagnetism against thermal excitation at finite temperatures Here, we use the mean field method to estimate the T C of the hole-doped TcS 2 monolayer. At the mean field level, the magnetic moment can be estimated by minimizing the electronic free energy of the system at finite temperatures Lattice strain is also an effective method to tune the magnetic properties of 2D materials. Hence, we study the strain-dependent magnetic properties of the hole-doped TcS 2 monolayer. In the present work, we only consider the biaxial tensile strain. Actually, it is reported that a critical tensile strain is larger than 12% in C 2 N monolayer In order to understand the strain-dependent magnetism, we plot the band structure of the TcS 2 monolayer without hole doping under different tensile strain in Fig. The TcS 2 bilayer is stacked along the c-axis with AA-stacking order. The lattice constants (a = 6.360 and b = 6.458 Å) are slightly smaller than the ones calculated for the TcS 2 monolayer. Specifically, the VBM of bilayer is switched to Γ point, displaying a direct gap semiconductor, and the band gap decreases slightly to 1.13 eV, as shown in Fig. To further study how the interlayer interaction affects the magnetic properties in the system, we plot the DOS of pristine TcS 2 bilayer and that with hole doping (ρ = 4.95 × 10 14 cm -2 , before and after layer separation expansion of 0.8 Å). As displayed in Fig. We obtain the charge density difference by subtracting the single layer's charge density from that of the bilayer for the pristine bilayer and layer separation expansion (0.8 Å) and display them in Fig. Although our work provides a general way to obtain high-temperature ferromagnetism and robust half-metallicity based on the TcS 2 monolayer, it is necessary to discuss several points in the following: (i) The possibility to obtain TcS 2 monolayer is tested by using two computational strategies The hole doping density can be tuned by the gating technique. For instance, the carrier doping density can reach the order of 10 14 cm -2 in graphene by ion 400 liquid gating In conclusion, we show that the p-orbital half-metallicity can be introduced when hole are doped into the TcS 2 monolayer from first principles calculation. The half-metallic phase with tunable spin-polarization orientation can be achieved in a wide range of hole doping density from 1.93 × 10 14 cm -2 to 4.416 × 10 14 cm -2 . Moreover, the half-metallicity is confirmed with the HSE06 method. The strong S p -S p direct exchange interaction is responsible for a FM phsae with T c above room temperature. Additionally, the lattice strain is an effective way to tune magnetism. A similar reversible modulation of magnetic moments and electronic phase transitions between half-metallic and semiconducting phases in zigzag MoS 2 nanoribbons has also been revealed 