Metal heteroatoms dispersed in nitrogen-doped graphene display promising catalytic activity for fuel cell reactions such as the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). Here we explore the effects of dopant concentration on the synergistic catalytic behaviour of a paired metal atom active site comprised of Co and Pt atoms. The metals are coordinated to six atoms in a vacancy of N-doped graphene. We find that HER activity is enhanced with increasing N concentration, where the free energy of hydrogen atom adsorption ranges from 0.23 to -0.42 eV as the doping changes from a single N atom doped in the pore, to fully doped coordination sites. The results indicated that the effect of N is to make the Co atom more active towards H adsorption and presents 1 a means through which transition metals can be modified to make more effective and sustainable fuel cell catalysts. Rising global energy demands along with heightened environmental pressures necessitate a sustainable and cost effective method for the production of energy. The hydrogen fuel cell, which generates energy via the conversion of oxygen and hydrogen into water, is a promising, environmentally-friendly solution to this contemporary issue. Though a thermodynamically spontaneous reaction, large-scale use of the hydrogen fuel cell is limited by the Pt-based electrode materials required for the efficient catalysis of its half-cell reactions. Equally as important to consider are the reactions of the water electrolysis cell, notably the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), as the sustainability of the hydrogen economy requires the hydrogen itself to be generated from water as opposed to hydrocarbon sources. Similarly to the fuel cell, the electrode materials required for the water electrolysis cell are metal-rich and are based on RuO 2 or IrO 2 for the OER at the fuel anode, and Pt/C for the HER at the cathode. Metal atoms dispersed on graphene, either embedded or anchored to the surface, have been demonstrated to exhibit high activity towards the electrochemical reactions of fuel cells such as the HER. We recently studied the catalytic activity of pairs of atomic Co and Pt embdedded in N-doped graphene for the oxygen reduction reaction, the cathode reaction of the hydrogen fuel cell. Experimentally, single metal atoms of Co and Pt were found to be embedded 2-4 Å apart which exhibited catalytic activity higher than state-of-the-art Pt/C under both acidic and basic conditions. In this manuscript we present the results of a study of one of the pore models examined in the work by Zhang et al. In this paper, we study the effect of pore doping on the performance of the paired metal cluster to observe how concentration and symmetry of doping affects the activity of the metal active site by increasing the doping concentration and determining the most stable dopant symmetry (X = 1-6). We examine the relationship between the stable doping configurations and observed HER activity. The HER is defined as: where protons from solution form gaseous hydrogen in the presence of a catalyst. The mechanism involves adsorption followed by two possible pathways to form H 2 : Step 1 : Step 2a : Step 2b : In both mechanisms, the critical step has been established to be the adsorption of the hydrogen atom onto the electrode surface, denoted H * which is featured in Step 1. Catalytic activity of the materials was gauged using ∆G H * , defined as the free energy of hydrogen adsorption. This has found to be correlated with the exchange current density, which is proportional to the number of H 2 produced per unit surface area. where n is the number of H atoms adsorbed on the surface. We use the combined ZPE and entropy correction of 0.24 eV from Nørskov et al. To improve on the performance observed for Pt(111), it is apparent that any new system should have ∆G H * ≤ | 0.09 | eV. The energy can be positive or negative as the sign will dictate which step of the two-part reaction is thermodynamically limiting -the adsorption of hydrogen atoms or the desorption of the hydrogen molecule. All calculations were performed within the density functional theory framework using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). For the visualisation of the coordinate data, the program VESTA was employed. where E CoPt@NXVY is the total energy of the surface and metal atoms, E GR is the energy of perfect graphene, μ C is the chemical potential of a C atom in perfect graphene, μ N is the chemical potential of N in N 2 , E Co is the energy of the Co atom, E P t is the energy of the Pt atom and X and Y are the number of carbon atoms removed to form a vacancy and the number of nitrogen atoms for doping, respectively. In this manuscript Y = 4 in all cases. The relative binding energies of the metal atoms to the pores were calculated by referencing to the undoped carbon material embedded metal cluster, CoPt@N0V4: 3 Results & Discussion Paired metal systems were studied with different doping concentrations (X = 1-6) and by studying possible configurations for each concentration to determine the most thermodynamically stable configuration for each concentration, X. Figure In Figure The stability of these systems indicate that they effectively form materials where the metal cluster is embedded in a doped graphene pore and which are likely to bind intermediates in a concerted reaction. It is worthwhile noting that the metal-metal bond-length does not increase linearly with doping concentration, rather is 2.42 Å for N1 and decreases with doping to N3 (2.40 Å), increases again for N4 and decreases to 2.36 Å, which is the shortest bond-length, for N6. In Table The difference of the binding energies of the metal clusters on the N-doped pores and that of the undoped pore were calculated to elucidate the effect of dopant concentration on the cluster binding strength (Table It appears that the N weakens the metal cluster interactions with the pore (∆E b ), whilst increasing the metal-metal interactions. This is consistent with the observed metal cluster bond-lengths. These observations based on the formation energy and the binding energy of the systems demonstrate that the substitution of C with pyridinic N is thermodynamically favourable in each case, whereas changing coordination from C to N results in weakening of the cluster interaction with the doped pore. Based on our experimental results, it is likely that this weakening of the interaction is due to the weakening of the Co interaction of the pore, since N was required to promote Pt adhesion. The efficiency of the HER was evaluated on the most stable surfaces by calculating ∆G H * for a single H. The free energy profile for hydrogen adsorption is shown in Figure For the doped systems, in most cases the H adsorption strength increases with N coordination. The exception is for the N3 pore, which has a higher adsorption free energy than N2. From the free energies, it appears that the substitution of a carbon atom and its coordination to Pt makes the bridge position for the metal cluster more weakly interacting with the H atom than with N3 which is non-spontaneous. For N1-N3, the adsorption step is non-spontaneous as the values are positive, and the reverse is true for N4-N6. These findings suggest that the weakening of metal-pore bonds is required for an effective interaction with the H atom. Furthermore, the less stable interaction that occurs at the bridge site for N1 and N3 is consistent with N being required to make Co more active for H adsorption which occurs for the other pores, as N4 and above have Co coordinated to three N atoms. The C atoms around the pore are otherwise under-coordinated and therefore would be expected to be comparatively active towards H adsorption. The preferential adsorption of H to C in N3 and to the cluster in N2 suggests that the coordination of Pt to N weakens the interaction between the cluster and the H atom, or conversely makes the surrounding C atoms more reactive. This would also explain why the N3 exhibits a weaker adsorption energy than N2. To test whether the coordination of Pt to N destabilises interactions at the bridge site for N3, H was also adsorbed to CoPt embedded in the N3 pore where Co was coordinated only to N (see Figure Figure Furthermore, it is interesting to note that hydrogen adsorption activity can be correlated with the cluster bond-lengths observed in the free surface and subsequently the magnetic moments on the metal atoms before H adsorption. It appears that since the cluster bondlength in the N2 surface is shorter than the N3 bond-length, that this may be the reason for the stronger H binding observed. This indicates that it is the coordination changes which accompany the N doping that are responsible for the observed activity. This also explains the change in doping from N3 to N4 which shows that N doping of Co to three N bonds increases adsorption strength by 0.56 eV. Hence, the binding strength of the H atom appears to be much more significantly affected by the N coordination of Co, whereas increasing the coordination to Pt for structures results in minor changes from 0.2-0.3 meV. Therefore, the gap in the behaviour between N1-N3 and N4-N6 is a result of the coordination of Co to the third N atom which is consistent for the stable surfaces from N4-N6 and the addition N3 structure tested for H adsorption. Furthermore, the Co-Pt bond-length also increases in N1-N6 from 2.43-2.47 Å. This is likely because the coordination of H to the Pt atom is increasing, and the bond between the metal atoms weakens. To analyse the effects on the local charge arising from the N doping, a Bader charge analysis was performed on the system with H adsorbed. From the Bader analysis, the total charge on the metal atom pair decreases with the degree of N doping from 1.09 to 1.29e. Therefore, the increase in doping to N6 enables 0.20e to be lost from the metal cluster. This indicated that there is a loss of electrons from the metal atom cluster consistent with an increased binding strength of the H atom to the metal cluster at the higher concentrations. It therefore appears that the metal atoms are able to more readily oxidise with the increased dopant, resulting in the stronger binding observed. However, examining the individual metal atoms, it appears that charge loss is occurring on both the Co and Pt atoms, where the result is generally an increase in the Co-H bond-length as the Pt atom coordinates more strongly to the H atom (Table These changes are consistent with Pt forming a stronger bond with the adsorbed H atom as the Pt-H bond-lengths get progressively shorter. These findings are consistent with the idea that the weakened bonds with the pore structure that occurs with doping enables the metal cluster, in particular, Co, to lose electrons more readily as demonstrated by the Bader charge as well as the observed changes in magnetic moments (Table Based on the study undertaken, nitrogen doping of graphene vacancies is a means to make transition metals, such as Co, more active towards H adsorption and hence improve catalytic activity towards the HER. It appears that the effect of N doping is to predominantly weaken the metal-substrate interactions which in turn make the active site more effective. The calculated formation energies indicate that the doping of graphene vacancies with pyridinic nitrogen is highly thermodynamically favourable, supporting the proposal that Co-Pt clustered systems should be highly active towards hydrogen adsorption. This was demonstrated by the behaviour observed for the N4-N6 systems. It is found that shorter cluster bondlengths result in stronger binding, whilst a nitrogen coordination number of three is required for the adsorption step of the HER to be spontaneous. Furthermore, the work demonstrated that N2 system enables the catalytic system studied to perform comparably to the industrial benchmark, Pt/C, with a ∆G H * of 0.08 eV. The findings of this study demonstrate the versatility of combining difference dopant and metal atoms for specific catalytic reactions. It exemplifies the wide applicability of dispersed metal atoms for the catalysis of fuel cell reactions. of Western Australia. We also acknowledge support from the Queensland Cyber Infrastructure Foundation (QCIF) and the University of Queensland Research Computing Centre. where ∆E is the DFT-calculated reaction energy, ∆ZP E the zero-point energy, T ∆S, the entropic correction, ∆G pH is the effect of the pH on the potential and neU describes the potential eU relative to the reversible hydrogen electrode scaled by the number of electrons, n. where E CoPt@NXV4 is the energy of the total doped system, E NXV4 is a single-point energy of the embedded pore with the metal atoms removed, E CoPt@N0V4 is the total energy of the undoped embedded metal system, and E N0V4 is the single-point energy of the undoped embedded system with the metals removed. 