The Cooper-pair transistor (CPT), a small superconducting island enclosed between two Josephson weak links, is the atomic building block of various superconducting quantum circuits. Utilizing gate-tunable semiconductor channels as weak links, the energy scale associated with the Josephson tunneling can be changed with respect to the charging energy of the island, tuning the extent of its charge fluctuations. Here, we directly demonstrate this control by mapping the energy level structure of a CPT made of an indium arsenide nanowire (NW) with a superconducting aluminum shell. We extract the device parameters based on the exhaustive modeling of the quantum dynamics of the phase-biased nanowire CPT and directly measure the even-odd parity occupation ratio as a function of the device temperature, relevant for superconducting and prospective topological qubits. The energy landscape of a Cooper-pair transistor (CPT), a mesoscopic superconducting island coupled to superconducting leads via two Josephson junctions, is determined by the interplay of the electrostatic addition energy of a single Cooper pair, E C = (2e) 2 /2C Such applications require the control of the Josephson coupling via the semiconductor weak link Here we directly measure the transitions between the energy levels of a NW CPT. The CPT is embedded in the circuit shown in Fig. We utilized a capacitively coupled Al/AlO x /Al superconducting tunnel junction as a broadband on-chip microwave spectrometer [green box in Fig. Here, I c,spec is the critical current of the spectrometer tunnel junction and Z (ω) is the impedance of the environment at the frequency ω = 2eV spec /h, determined by the spectrometer dc voltage bias, V spec [Fig. Here E JL = ∆ J h/(8e 2 R J ) = 249 μeV is the Josephson energy 4 , with ∆ J = 245 μeV being the measured superconducting gap and R J = 3.17 kΩ the normal state resistance of the junction, acquired at a voltage bias much higher than 2∆ J . This value yields E CL = 2e 2 /C L = 44 μeV and a shunt capacitance C L = 7.28 fF. Fitting the resonant peak using Eq. ( Next, we investigate the spectrometer response to the applied gate voltage V g and phase φ [Fig. We model our device with the schematics depicted in Fig. Here, the charging of the circuit is described by the effective parameters E C1 , E C2 and E Cc set by the capacitance values C 1 , C 2 , C L , C ig and C G with a functional form provided in the supplementary information To calculate the excitation spectrum, we solve the eigenvalue problem to find E i (n g , φ), where ĤΨ i = E i Ψ i , and compute the transition energies hω i = E i -E 0 , with E 0 being the ground state energy of the system. This model allows us to fit the excitation spectra simultaneously as a function of n g and φ based on the first two transitions (red and purple solid lines for hω 1 and hω 2 , respectively) against the measured data (yellow circles in Fig. To understand the nature of the excited levels, we calculate the energy bands of the hybrid SQUID using the fitted parameters [Fig. where N 1 and N 2 form the charge computational basis. However, it is more instructive to use the charge numbers N CPT = N 1 -N 2 and N Loop = N 1 + N 2 . Intuitively, N CPT and N Loop represent the excess number of Cooper pairs on the island and in the loop, respectively. Indeed, the ground state wavefunction is centered around Conversely, the probability distribution of the first excited state [Fig. Next, we investigate the impact of V tg1 and V tg2 on the CPT spectrum. In Fig. To quantify the probability of the even and odd occupations, we extract the gate-charge dependent component of the measured spectra δI spec (n g ) to evaluate δI odd = δI spec (n g = 0.5) and δI even = δI spec (n g = 0), see the inset in Fig. We plot the extracted p even in Fig. Here, N eff = ρV √ 2πk B T ∆ at a temperature of T with the island volume being V . We use the density of states at the Fermi level in the normal state ρ = 1.45 × 10 47 J -1 m -3 for aluminium While this analysis describes the breakdown of the even-odd effect [see blue dashed line as the best fit in Fig. The resulting best fit is shown as a solid red line in Fig. In conclusion, we performed broadband microwave spectroscopy on the gate charge and phase-dependent energy dispersion of InAs/Al hybrid CPTs, utilizing an on-chip nanofabricated circuit with a superconducting tunnel junction as a frequency-tunable microwave source. We understand the observed spectra based on the Hamiltonian of the circuit and find the characteristic charging and Josephson tunneling energy scales, both exhibiting strong modulation with the electrostatic gates coupled to the semiconductor channels. This broad tunability demonstrates the feasibility of prospective topological qubits relying on a controlled suppression of the charge modulation. Finally, we directly measure the time-averaged even and odd charge parity occupation of the CPT island, yielding a residual odd occupation probability and unpaired quasiparticle density which are much higher than typical values acquired earlier for allmetallic devices. This can be a limiting factor for topological quantum bit architectures that rely on charge parity manipulation and readout. The analyzed raw data sets and data processing scripts for this publication are available at the 4TU.ResearchData repository 51 . * These authors contributed equally to this work. † Corresponding author; e-mail address: