A silicon light source at communication wavelength is the bottleneck for developing monolithically integrated silicon photonics. Doping silicon with erbium ions was believed to be one of the most promising approaches but suffers from the aggregation of erbium ions that are efficient non-radiative centers, formed during the standard rapid thermal treatment. Here, we apply a deep cooling process following the hightemperature annealing to suppress the aggregation of erbium ions by flushing with Helium gas cooled in liquid nitrogen. The resultant light emitting efficiency is increased to a record 14% at room temperature, two orders of magnitude higher than the sample treated by the standard rapid thermal annealing. The deep-cooling-processed Si samples were further made into light-emitting diodes. Bright electroluminescence with a spectral peak at 1.54 μm from the silicon-based diodes was also observed at room temperature. With these results, it is promising to develop efficient silicon lasers at communication wavelength for the monolithically integrated silicon photonics. The monolithic integration of fiber optics with complementary metal-oxidesemiconductor (CMOS) integrated circuits will significantly speed up the computing and data transmission of current communication networks. It is known that the photoexcited electron-hole pairs in silicon can recombine through three competing paths. The first path is radiative recombination and the other two paths are the nonradiative Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) and Auger recombination. Since the Er/O impurities are donor-type dopants in silicon, a PN junction diode can be formed simply by doping the sample with boron via ion implantation. The peak concentration of boron dopants is ~10 Thickness: 500 ± 20 μm) were purchased from Suzhou Resemi Semiconductor Co., Ltd, China. The silicon wafers were first cleaned with ethanol, deionized water and then immersed in Piranha solution (Sulfuric acid : 30% Hydrogen peroxide = 3 : 1) for 30 min at 90 °C , followed by 2.5% HF etching. Erbium and Oxygen ions were implanted at the Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing, China. The injection energy and dose of Er and O ions were 200 keV, 4 × 10 15 cm -2 , and 32 keV and 10 16 cm -2 , respectively. After the implantation, the Er/Oimplanted silicon samples went through the aforementioned cleaning procedure again before the deposition of a 200-nm-thick SiO2 films by reactive magnetron sputtering (Delton multi-target magnetic control sputtering system, AEMD, SJTU). The deep cooling and standard RTA processes were applied to two Er/O co-doped silicon samples separately. After the capping SiO2 film was removed in buffered oxide etchant (BOE), PL characterizations were firstly performed. As shown in Supplementary Fig. Deep cooling and RTA processes. The deep cooling process was performed on the Er/O-Si samples in an upgraded dilatometer (DIL 805A, TA Instruments) in which the samples were annealed at 950 °C for 5 min by means of copper coil-based electromagnetic heating, followed by a flush of high purity He (99.999%) gas cooled in liquid N2 (77 K). The RTA procedure for Er/O-Si samples was firstly conducted in a rapid thermal processing furnace (RTP-300) at 1050 °C for 5 min. After the high temperature treatment, the silicon samples were gradually cooled to room temperature with a high purity N2 gas. PL measurements. The PL measurements were performed using a Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer (Vertex 80V, Bruker) equipped with a liquid-nitrogen-cooled Ge detector. A CW diode laser of λ = 405 nm (MLL-III-405, CNI, Changchun, China) providing a maximum excitation power of ~150 mW was employed as the excitation source. During the measurements, the Er/O-Si samples were mounted on the cold head of a Helium closed cycle cryostat (DE-202S, ARS), which allows for temperature adjustment from 4 K to ambient. (Fig. LED fabrication and imaging. To form a PN junction on the Er/O co-doped silicon wafers, boron ions were implanted (80 keV and 5.2 × 10 14 cm -2 ) into the silicon wafer with a peak concentration located ~240 nm below the surface (Supplementary Fig. After Al metal wire bonding (7476D, West Bond), the devices were integrated on a PCB board. The J-V curves of the Er/O-Si LED devices were measured using a digital sourcemeter (Keithley 2400) controlled by a Labview script. For EL measurements, the devices were electrically pumped by the sourcemeter and the emission spectra were collected using the same FTIR system for PL measurements. Near Infrared imaging of the emission from the Er/O-Si LED devices was obtained at room temperature under optical microscope (BX53M, Olympus) equipped with a NIR camera (C12471-03, Hamamatsu). The setup is shown in the Supplementary Fig. patterns of the intrinsic and Er/O-implanted Si samples without any thermal treatment were also collected. Talos F200X field-emission TEM was employed to take the EDX and TEM images (Supplementary Fig. 