Metasurfaces impart phase discontinuities on impinging electromagnetic waves that are typically limited to 0-2π. Here, we show that they can break free from this limitation and supply arbitrarily-large phase modulation over ultra-wide bandwidths. This is achieved by implementing multiple, properly-arranged resonances in the electric and magnetic sheet admittivities. We demonstrate metasurfaces that can perfectly reflect a broadband pulse imparting a prescribed group delay without distorting the pulse shape, opening new possibilities for temporal control and dispersion engineering across deeply subwavelength physical scales. Metasurfaces, i.e., ultra-thin periodic configurations of subwavelength resonant meta-atoms, have attracted considerable interest in recent years for an abundance of applications. Providing both electric and magnetic response (i.e., combining electrically and magnetically polarizable meta-atoms) allows for unidirectional scattering -a direct generalization of the Kerker conditions. In addition, the combination of electrically-and magnetically-resonant behavior can extend the underlying phase modulation to 2π. High transmission with an underlying 2π phase shift can be achieved with a pair of matched electric and magnetic resonances and allows -by Huygens' principle-for full control over the wavefront In this work, we demonstrate that metasurfaces can overcome this longstanding limitation on the imparted phase discontinuity. This is achieved by abandoning the singly-resonant nature of conventional metasurfaces in favor of the collective response of multiple, properly-arranged electric and magnetic resonances in the effective sheet admittivities. We focus on operation in reflection and specify the required admittivities for achieving arbitrarily-broadband uniform response with an underlying phase modulation greatly exceeding 2π. As an example capturing the rich possibilities of the proposed approach, we construct tunable group delay metasurfaces by requiring an exactly linear reflection phase; this way broadband pulses can experience the desired group delay with zero pulse distortion. We provide realistic implementations with few Lorentzian resonances accommodating broadband signals and assess the performance by studying the available spectral and angular bandwidth. In three-dimensional structures, providing a monotonic reflection phase greatly exceeding 2π is straightforward. Consider for example the grounded dielectric slab (also known as Gires-Tournois etalon) depicted in Fig. Consider a metasurface described by macroscopic, homogenized electric and magnetic resonant surface admittivities se  and sm  . The equations relating the surface admittivities with reflection and transmission coefficients are 1 ) , where we have defined effective sheet admittivities ( , ) / 2 depending on the polarization. Typically, metasurfaces feature a singly-resonant behavior in the electric admittivity, resulting in a narrow high-refection band with an underlying π phase shift. Increasing the reflection phase span and bandwidth by multiple single-nature resonances is not possible, as shown in Fig. where . The physical recipe of Eq. ( In practical implementations the Lorentzian sums of Eq. ( 