This paper demonstrates the significant benefits of exploiting highly aligned porosity in piezoelectric and pyroelectric materials for improved energy harvesting performance. Porous lead zirconate (PZT) ceramics with aligned pore channels and varying fractions of porosity were manufactured in a water-based suspension using freeze casting. The aligned porous PZT ceramics were characterized in detail for both piezoelectric and pyroelectric properties and their energy harvesting performance figures of merit were assessed parallel and perpendicular to the freezing direction. As a result of the introduction of porosity into the ceramic microstrucutre, high piezoelectric and pyroelectric harvesting figures of merits were achieved for porous freezecast PZT compared to dense PZT due to the reduced permittivity and volume specific heat capacity. Experimental results were compared to parallel and series analytical models with good agreement and the PZT with porosity aligned parallel to the freezing direction exhibited the highest piezoelectric and pyroelectric harvesting response; this was a result of the enhanced interconnectivity of the ferroelectric material along the poling direction and reduced fraction of unpoled material that leads to a higher polarization. A complete thermal energy harvesting system, composed of an parallel-aligned PZT harvester element and an AC/DC converter successfully demonstrated by charging a storage capacitor. The maximum energy density generated by the 60 vol.% porous parallel-connected PZT when subjected to thermal oscillations was 1653 μJ/cm 3 respectively, which was 374% higher than that of the dense PZT with an energy density of 446 μJ/cm 3 . The results are of benefit for the design and manufacture of high performance porous pyroelectric and piezoelectric materials in devices for energy harvesting and sensor applications. Energy scavenging, or energy harvesting, which involves the conversion of ambient energy sources of energy such as mechanical vibrations, heat and light in useful electrical energy continues to receive significant industrial and academic interest. This stems from the ability of harvesting systems to provide a route for the realization of autonomous and selfpowered low-power electronic devices Mechanical waste energy that is generated by a vibrating structure or a moving object, is a ubiquitous form of energy that can be harvested from our surroundings In order to assess the properties of materials for energy harvesting a variety of performance figures of merit containing combinations of physical properties have been developed to describe the ability of materials to generate energy for practical applications. For piezoelectric and pyroelectric energy harvesting applications, the following figures of merit have been widely used for materials selection and materials design where FoM $% is a piezoelectric harvesting based figure of merit to assess the electrical energy density under a mechanical stress and F / 0 is a pyroelectric harvesting figure of merit indicating the energy density due to a temperature change. In Eqns. 1 and 2, p is the pyroelectric coefficient, ε is the relative permittivity (or dielectric constant), ε0 is the permittivity of free space, cE is the volume specific heat capacity and dij is the piezoelectric charge coefficient, where d33 and d31 are the longitudinal and transverse piezoelectric charge coefficients respectively. These figures of merit take into account the piezoelectric, pyroelectric and thermal properties and therefore indicate which materials are likely to perform well in specific energy harvesting applications. Equations 1 and 2 indicate that the important requirements for improved performance are low relative permittivity, low specific heat capacity and high piezoelectric and pyroelectric coefficients. The two figures of merit above indicate that a porous structure whose permittivity is reduced due to the introduction of low permittivity pores would have beneficial consequences for piezo-and pyro-electric energy harvesting applications; however, it should be noted that the benefit is only achieved if the piezoelectric or pyroelectric coefficients are not reduced significantly by the presence of the pores. In general, it has been considered that porous piezoelectric and pyroelectric materials containing pores can be considered as a porosity (air)-ceramic matrix composite In this work freeze casting, also termed ice-templating, was utilized to fabricate porous PZT ceramics with tailored and aligned porosity to produce high performance materials for piezoelectric and pyroelectric energy harvesting applications. The piezoelectric and pyroelectric parameters and figures of merit for the energy harvesting applications of the porous PZT ceramics both parallel and perpendicular to the freezing direction have been investigated in detail. Based on the properties of these highly aligned materials, the porous composites are then utilized in an energy harvester and are shown to generate more energy compared to the dense material. The work demonstrates that tailored porosity can generate improved materials for piezoelectric and pyroelectric energy harvesting devices. Commercial lead zirconate titanate powder (PZT-51, Zibo Yuhai Electronic Ceramic Co., Ltd, Zibo, China) with a mean particle size of ~3 μm was ball-milled for 48 h using a planetary ball mill to reduce the particle size d50 to ~0.5 μm. Deionized water, polyvinyl alcohol (PVA, 420, Kuraray Co. Ltd, Japan) and ammonium polyacrylate (HydroDisper A160, Shenzhen Highrun Chemical Industry Co. Ltd, P. R. China) were used as the freezing vehicle, the binder and the dispersant, respectively. PZT suspensions with different solid loadings consisting of PZT powders, 1 wt.% dispersant and 1 wt.% PVA binder were ball-milled for 24 h in zirconia media and de-aired by stirring in a vacuum desiccator until complete removal of air bubbles. In the freeze casting process, the freezing operation is undertaken by a customized double-sided setup as described previously During the freeze casting process, dense and cellular zones are formed in the samples at the beginning of the freezing cycle, as shown in Fig. The microstructures of the sintered samples, such as their pore structures and the structure of the PZT walls, were characterized using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JSM-6480LV, JEOL Techniques, Tokyo, Japan). The apparent porosity of the composites was derived from density data obtained by the Archimedes's method where ρ 1JKJLM NOP is the density of the porous sample, ρ QLRS is the density of the bulk PZT. Before electrical properties were measured, corona poling was conducted on the sintered dense and porous samples at 120 °C by applying a potential difference of 14 kV to a point source above the sample for 15 min, and samples were then aged for 24 h before testing. The longitudinal piezoelectric strain coefficient (d33) and the transverse piezoelectric strain coefficient (d31) were measured using a Berlincourt Piezometer (PM25, Take Control, UK). Measurements of the relative permittivity (ε) of the sintered materials were carried out from 1Hz to 1MHz at room temperature (~30oC) using an impedance analyzer (Solartron 1260, Hampshire, UK). Ferroelectric properties, such as the maximum polarization, remnant polarization and coercive field, were measured using a Radiant RT66B-HVi Ferroelectric Test system on unpoled materials. The specific heat capacity (Cp) of PZT composites with different porosities was measured from 20 to 100 °C by a MicroSC multicell calorimeter from Setaram, with the Calisto program to collect and process the data. The density of the solid PZT, ρ, is 7.6 g/cm 3 (according to the data sheet), therefore the volume specific heat, CV, can be defined as: CV =ρ Cp (4) The pyroelectric short circuit current (IP) and pyroelectric open circuit voltage (V), were measured by an electrometer (Model 6517B, Keithley Instruments, Cleveland, OH), and the pyroelectric coefficient was determined by the Byer-Roundy method To demonstrate the effectiveness of the porous materials a thermal energy harvesting demonstrator was constructed, with a 1 μF charging capacitor used as an electrical storage element when the energy harvester was subjected to cyclic temperature fluctuations at 1.6 °C/sec. The temperature of the sample was continuously monitored using a K-type thermocouple with a response time of 0.5 s. A charging curve of the storage capacitor was measured for the range of materials, resulting in a maximum voltage on the storage capacitor without any electrical load. As an example of a typical microstructure, Fig. The compressive strengths of PZT ceramics with the porosities ranging from 20 to 60 vol.% in both the parallel and perpendicular directions to the unidirectional freezing direction has been shown in Fig. Fig. While the decrease in remnant polarisation with increasing porosity is simply due to the reduction in polarisable material, the increase in coercive field with an increase in porosity is less obvious. The porous ceramics are effectively composites with a high permittivity ceramic phase and a low permittivity pore phase (air). Such a structure strongly influences the distribution of the electric field throughout the material microstructure during the poling process. It has been shown that for porous ferroelectric ceramics, the local electric field in the ceramic phase near the pore is much lower than the applied field. This inhomogeneous field distribution results in the existence of unpoled areas along the poling direction A Finite Element Modelling approach has been used to investigate the effect of porosity in the freeze cast microstructure on the electric field distribution in the PZT during the poling process Previous work Fig. where q is charge, A is area and ε0 is the permittivity of free space. In the dense ceramic, the electric field is relatively homogenous (see Fig. As the porosity level increases it can be seen in Fig. Fig. In addition, the parallel-connected porous PZT exhibited a longitudinal piezoelectric coefficient d33 of 3.0 to 4.7 times higher than that of the series-connected samples, shown in Fig. In the 2-2 connectivity composite, where the first phase is the active PZT piezoelectric ceramic, and the second phase is the passive pore channel (denoted as 'pc', henceforth), the piezoelectric coefficients for the series and parallel connection can be calculated by Equations S1-S4 For series connection: `ab. c`d e * g For parallel connection: d _h = V NOP d _h NOP (10) where m is the ratio of the relative permittivity of the two phases ( ε __ NOP /ε __ 1n ) , while n is the ratio of the elastic compliances of the two phases (s __ NOP /s __ 1n ) . The calculated results are the dotted lines and the experimental values are the data points in Fig. Fig. where ε p S is the composite relative permittivity, v1 and v2 are the volume fraction of PZT and pore channel in the porous PZT respectively, ε NOP S and ε 1n S are the relative permittivity of PZT and pore channel, and k varies within the range of [-1,1], where k = 1 for a fully parallel connection and k = -1 for a fully series connection. Fig. Fig. For series connection: For parallel connection: Fig. In addition to potential energy harvesting applications, there are other important pyroelectric detection figures of merit to describe the performance of a material as a pyroelectric sensor . The current responsivity, F w , remains constant with increasing porosity for the parallel connected material since the decrease is pyroelectric coefficient is similar to the decrease in heat capacity, see Fig As a consequence of the reduced permittivity (Fig The measured forward voltage drop of the rectifier circuit was 2V and during the charging process, the energy is CV 2 /2, where C and V were the capacitance and the voltage of the capacitor, respectively. It can be clearly seen that on increasing the level of aligned porosity from 20 vol.% to 60 vol.%, the parallel-connected porous PZT produced an increasing peak voltage from 8.3 to 15.2 V after 3600s (Fig. This paper has demonstrated the significant benefits of using porosity to enhance the piezoelectric and pyroelectric properties of materials for energy harvesting. Novel 2-2 connectivity PZT ceramics with aligned pore channels have been prepared by freeze casting waterbased PZT suspensions, with porosity levels ranging from 20 to 60 vol.%. The unidirectional lamellar microstructure and the strong lamellar bonding originating from the ceramic bridges between the lamellar walls were shown to be beneficial to achieve a higher compressive strength compared with the conventional porous PZT with uniformly distributed porosity. The change in remnant polarization and coercive field with porosity level is described and explained with modelling of the electric field distribution within the two-phase microstructure. The parallel-connected porous PZT exhibited a 300% to 470% higher longitudinal piezoelectric coefficient d33 and ~250% times higher transverse piezoelectric coefficient d31 than the series-connected PZT in the complete porosities range of 20 to 60 vol.%. As a result of the reduced permittivity and reduced specific heat capacity, the aligned porous PZT demonstrated excellent piezoelectric and pyroelectric figures of merit, compared with the dense counterpart. The modelling results utilising the coupling of the ratio of the dielectric constant and elastic compliance between the ceramic wall and pore channel showed good agreement with the experiment results. To demonstrate the improved performance of the aligned porous materials a pyroelectric energy harvesting device was constructed and clearly demonstrated that the fastest charging speed, and maximum energy density was obtained when utilising the highest porosity of 60 vol.% for a parallel-connected PZT. The measured energy density was 374% higher than that of the dense PZT and demonstrate that porous materials are highly attractive materials for energy harvesting applications.