Hydrogen at high temperature and pressure undergoes a phase transition from a liquid molecular phase to a conductive atomic state, or liquid metallic hydrogen, sometimes referred to as the plasma phase transition (PPT). The PPT phase line was observed in a recent experiment studying laser-pulse heated hydrogen in a diamond anvil cell in the pressure range ∼ 100 -170 GPa for temperatures up to ∼ 2000 K. The experimental signatures of the transition are (i) a negative pressure-temperature slope, (ii) a plateau in the heating curve, assumed to be related to the latent heat of transformation, and (iii) an abrupt increase in the reflectance of the sample. We present a finite element simulation that accurately takes into account the position and time dependence of the heat deposited by the laser pulse. We calculate the heating curves and the sample reflectance and transmittance. This simulation confirms that the observed plateaus are related to the phase transition, however we find that large values of latent heat are needed and may indicate that dynamics at the transition are more complex than considered in current models. Finally, experiments are proposed that can distinguish between a change in optical properties due to a transition to a metallic state or due to closure of the bandgap in molecular hydrogen. Metallic Hydrogen (MH) was studied by Wigner and Huntington The great outer planets such as Jupiter are mainly composed of hydrogen. Descending through Jupiter's atmosphere, the pressure and temperature (T) increase until a transition takes place to liquid metallic hydrogen. For planetary modeling the location of the transition temperature and pressure is very important The ideal experiment would have a thermally isolated sample in a pressure cell and add heat to the sample to warm it through the transition, enabling a determination of the transition P and T and the latent heat. In this case a plot of the temperature vs. heat added would have a rising slope with a plateau at the temperature of the transition to enable a direct measurement of the latent heat. There are two ways of achieving the high pressures and temperatures required to observe the PPT: dynamic (shock) compression and static compression in a diamond anvil cell (DAC). Neither of these techniques provide thermal isolation of the sample. In dynamic experiments P and T conditions last for tens of nanoseconds; in DACs high pressures can be maintained continuously. DACs cannot maintain their integrity if continuously heated to the high temperatures of the transition (∼1000-2000 K), so pulsed heating is utilized to heat the sample. Liquid metallic hydrogen was first observed in dynamic experiments using reverberating shock waves The technique of pulsed laser heating led to the recent experimental determination of the phase line of the PPT for pressures in the range of 100-170 GPa and temperatures up to 2000 K by Zaghoo, Salamat, and Silvera (ZSS) In the experiment the properties change rapidly in time. The pressurized molecular hydrogen in the DAC is heated by a pulsed laser beam (280 ns pulse width), partially absorbed by a thin tungsten layer deposited on one of the diamonds (Fig. Increased laser power leads to thicker films of LMH growing at the LMH-molecular H 2 interface. Continuous wave laser light shines on the sample to measure transmission and reflection during the heating cycle using time-resolved spectroscopy. The optical properties are strongly time-dependent and moreover feed back into the position dependent absorption of the heating laser pulse, as the LMH itself also absorbs the laser power. In this paper we simulate these dynamics with a finite element analysis (FEA) of the pulsed-laser heated DAC. Previous simulations The goal of the present paper is to provide a finite element simulation that better corresponds to the experimental configuration of ZSS The structure of this paper is as follows. In Sec.II, we outline the numerical simulation method, consisting of three computation steps per time step: the laser-pulse heating, the heat conduction, and the temperature change. The results are presented in Sec.III for the heating curves and for the reflectance and transmittance. In Sec.IV these results are discussed and compared to other simulations and to the experiment. The importance for further experiments is discussed in Sec.V. We conclude in Sec.VI. The experimental setup of Ref. The transparent alumina coatings inhibit the diffusion of hydrogen into the diamonds and the tungsten. The partially transmitting tungsten layer acts as an absorber of laser light. A pulsed heating laser (with pulse duration τ = 280 ns and wavelength λ = 1064 nm) is incident on the top (hydrogen side) to heat the sample. Upon heating to the metallization taken into account but are not shown. Stressed diamond in the culet region will be deformed and have additional defects, such as vacancies, and thus will have a lower thermal conductivity. In both panels we take the z-direction to be perpendicular to the surfaces. temperature, part of this molecular hydrogen layer converts into metallic hydrogen. Probe laser light (wavelengths of 514 nm, 633 nm, 808 nm, and 980 nm) is continuously shone into the cell from the top (hydrogen side) to measure the transmittance and reflectance. Both the heating and probe lasers are slightly defocused, so that the light intensity can be assumed roughly uniform along the surface of the cell. Finally, the temperature is determined by collecting the blackbody radiation from the top of the DAC and fitting it to a Planck curve to enable determination of the peak temperature in a pulse In our numerical simulation, we use a one-dimensional (1D) model that incorporates the different layers with dimensions shown in Fig. To describe the thermodynamics of the system, the one-dimensional form of the diffusion equation was used. We define the z-axis to be normal to the plane of the sample. Call q(z, t) the local energy density (J/m 3 ), T (z, t) the temperature, S(z, t) the Poynting vector of the heating laser in the positive z-direction, and k the thermal conductivity of the material. Then, the continuity equation implies: To proceed, this equation was discretized in the z-and t-domains. A uniform temporal grid t n = n∆t and a non-uniform spatial grid z i with element thicknesses ∆z i were chosen. Replacing the energy density per unit volume q(z, t) by the energy density per unit surface Here a superscript (n) was used to indicate a variable is evaluated at time t n , and r denotes the thermal resistance between elements i and i + 1, given by: i,i+1 the thermal conductivity of the material between elements i and i + 1. As an amount of heat ∆q (n) i is added to the element i, one of two things can happen. First, the temperature in the element can increase. Second, if element i is a hydrogen element, the hydrogen molecules can dissociate, creating metallic hydrogen. To model this, a metallization fraction f (n) i between 0 and 1 is assigned to the hydrogen elements: f means the element is in the molecular state; when f For our grid, we chose elements of thickness ∆z i = 1nm in the hydrogen and alumina layers, and a non-uniform grid of thicknesses ∆z i > 5nm in the lower diamond. The tungsten is considered to be its own element with uniform temperature. Both doubling and halving the number of elements did not change the results. We start with a uniform temperature of T (0) j = 300K and no MH: f (0) j = 0. Every time step in the simulation is divided in three parts. First, the Poynting vector S (n) (z) is determined in every element from the optical properties of each element. Second, the thermal conductivity between adjacent elements and the contribution of heat conduction to ∆q , and so on. In the following subsections, each of these parts is described in detail. The values for the material parameters are listed in the final subsection. The Fresnel formalism is suitable to describe the optical properties of any number N of thin layers (thinner than the wavelength λ). The layers in the chosen geometry are shown in Fig. λ Ñj is the corresponding complex wavenumber. Furthermore, d j are the thicknesses of the layers, and Z j are the positions of the boundaries between the layers. The thickness of the layer of metallic hydrogen is found from the metallization fractions f (n) i mentioned above. In our simulation, we always find a sharply bounded region where f (n) i = 1, so the layer thickness of metallic hydrogen can be clearly determined. For a mixture of molecular and metallic hydrogen, the following complex index of refraction was used The laser is assumed to be incident along the normal, so the electric field is tangential to the interfaces between the layers. The magnitude of the electric field throughout the sample is given by the piecewise function with unknown coefficients a j and b j . The boundary conditions are such that E and ∂E/∂z are continuous across the boundaries. Applied to Imposing these, along with the boundary conditions depending on the incident direction of the laser, gives a system with a unique solution for all a j and b j , which is found numerically. Calculating the time-averaged Poynting vector and normalizing it to the time-dependent intensity of the laser pulse I 0 (t) then gives the laser power profile as a piecewise function in space: Note that S j (z) is constant if K j = 0, meaning that no power is lost in non-absorbing materials as expected. The Poynting vector is a continuous function of z because of the imposed electromagnetic boundary conditions. For the time-dependent laser pulse intensity we use the following function, that simulates the pulses used in the experiment: where A is the pulse energy (per unit area) and τ the full width at half maximum (FWHM) time. The transmittance T r and reflectance R of this multilayered system are calculated by comparing the transmitted and reflected laser power to the incident laser power assuming the outermost layers are not absorbing (K 1 = K N = 0). We get The transmission and reflection are calculated at every point in time for a wavelength of 500 nm. For thickness variations comparable to the wavelength of light, the Fresnel equations lead to Fabry-Pérot type interferences. However, this is an artifact related to the assumption of coherent, collimated illumination. Since the heating laser is not collimated, the cell chamber should not be treated as a Fabry-Pérot interferometer. To correct for this, the sample chamber is divided into the following subsystems: I. The (multiple) reflections between the boundaries outside the active region lead to power influx on the active region from both sides. Using the previously outlined Fresnel method on the active region with this power influx as input, the heat deposited in each element can be calculated. If elements i and i + 1 are associated with the same material, the thermal resistance can be calculated with formula The above method works for all pairs of neighboring elements except those where either i or i + 1 is the tungsten element. The thermal resistance to the tungsten element from either side is taken as the thermal resistance of the respective alumina layer. This includes any thermal boundary resistance. In general, the thermal resistance of an alumina layer with thickness d can be written as follows: It is possible that the thermal boundary resistances r bound,1 and r bound,2 cannot be neglected, since the thermal boundary resistance of amorphous alumina to platinum C. Change in temperature and metallization fraction (n) i be the total heat generated in element i. This is the sum of the heat delivered by the laser pulse described in subsection II A and the heat conducted into the element as discussed in subsection II B. From the mass density ρ and the specific heat per unit mass c of the material, the specific heat per unit volume ρc is calculated. From its definition, it follows that the change in temperature is given by: For elements with a mixture of metallic and molecular hydrogen, the following relation based on the Dulong-Petit form is assumed: For the hydrogen elements the temperature can be increased up to the metallization temperature T m . In this paper we present a simulation at one pressure condition (P = 140GPa) corresponding to a transition temperature of T m = 1500K. Then, we assume a first-order phase transition occurs, which can be modeled by changing the metallization fraction as follows: ∆f where L is the latent heat per unit mass and ρL is the latent heat per unit volume. The metallization fraction can increase until it reaches f i = 1, after which any additional heat again leads to a temperature increase. If ∆q is negative, the temperature/metallization fraction decreases, so the process occurs in reverse order. The material parameters used are given in Table The complex index of refraction was extrapolated using the Drude model for metals, and the Clausius-Mossotti relation (in both cases assuming that the dielectric function satisfies = Ñ 2 ). For H 2 , the index of refraction measured at high pressure In order to compare with the experimental results These show the temperature in the sample as a function of the input pulse energy. Experimentally, the peak temperature in a heating cycle is determined from a fit of the blackbody radiation, using a procedure discussed by Rekhi et al. Such a procedure is necessary since no steady state is reached. The heating curves are found by plotting T max as a function of the pulse energy per unit area. The result is shown in Fig. In Fig. For higher pulse energies, the absorption mainly takes place at the boundary between the metallized layer and the molecular hydrogen as the tungsten heater is increasingly obscured by the MH layer. Additionally, the pulse energy goes into thickening of the layer rather than to further increase the temperature. The object of a simulation is to reproduce the experimental observation. The absence of a plateau in the heating curve does not agree with the experimental observation In order to obtain heating curves with a plateau, it proved necessary to substantially increase the latent heat of transformation. This removes the rapid layer growth, and allows the tungsten layer to remain active as a heater. By increasing the latent heat by factors of 25, 50 and 100, the curves with asterisks, triangles and squares (Fig. In the experiment Carlo calculation Here, we will follow Ref. To determine whether the phase that results after the transition contains free electrons, ZSS measured the transmittance and reflectance and compared the results to a Drude freeelectron model. It has also been pointed out that the free-electron model is not valid at the transition, but applies beyond the phase line when the electron density is higher In the plateau region close to the transition, molecules dissociate and reform on a short time scale, so the charge density exists but is small The DC electrical conductivity seems to be a good order parameter and should have a discontinuity for this first order phase transition. The onset of the plateau correlates with the electron density and seems to be a proper choice for the transition line, not the abrupt rise of the reflectance that starts deeper in the plateau region. Using expression In this paper we have used the proper geometry and thermodynamic properties for the experimental demonstration of LMH In the FEA the observation of plateaus in heating curves was a challenge and we were only able to create these using very large values of the latent heat of dissociation. Morales et al. It is possible that the dissociation of molecular hydrogen in the liquid phase is a multistep process. Norman and Saitov Comparing our results from Fig. In the simulation, the maximum temperature in the DAC is determined as a function of the laser power entering the DAC, whereas in the experimental results, the heating curves were reported as a scaled function of the laser power measured by a power meter. Moreover, in the experiment the laser is defocused, so that only a fraction is absorbed in the tungsten film and part shines on the gasket. Hence, an undetermined transfer function is needed for a quantitative comparison of the heating curves. Finally, a comparison is made between our results and the results measured by ZSS for the transmittance and reflectance. In their paper ZSS used a multilayer analysis to isolate the reflectance and transmittance of hydrogen from that of the tungsten layer. Here, in Fig. There are two important experimental observations: in the plateau region the reflectance change is very small while the transmittance already has a measureable decrease, and as the LMH thickens the reflectance, R, saturates to a bulk value, which is about 0.5 as observed in the experiment. Our simulation supports this behavior. When saturated so that there is no transmittance, the absorption of the LMH is 1 -R, or about 0.5. In a dynamic experiment on liquid metallic deuterium, with rising pressure and temperature, Knudson et al. An issue with this phase line was that it had a very large isotope shift when compared to the hydrogen PPT line and by extrapolation was in strong disagreement with earlier dynamic measurements on deuterium. Recently, there have been two new experiments on the PPT of deuterium. Measurements at static pressures in a DAC were used to determine a phase line using two criteria: onset of plateaus and onset of reflectance In their measurements they first observed absorption, then reflection, and used the latter as the criterion for the phase line. They too attributed absorption to bandgap transitions. At this point in the study of the PPT there is now reasonable agreement between recently published experiments. There is a smaller disagreement for the isotope effect measured in static experiments If electrical wires were inserted into the sample one could measure the conductivity and heating curves simultaneously to make the determination. It is also possible to make a determination with only optical measurements. In dynamic experiments the pressure is ramped up in time. If in the dynamic experiments optical transmission was measured at two wavelengths (say blue and red) a determination could be made. In the case of metallization creating free electron absorption, one would see simultaneous absorption of both wavelengths. Alternately, in the case of bandgap closure one would first see absorption in the blue and then the red with increasing pressure. In DAC experiments the sample is isochoric (fixed density) and the pressure is essentially constant; the temperature is pulsed up for each pressure or density. In the case of creation of free electrons due to the PPT all wavelengths would be absorbed simultaneously at the transition. In the case of bandgap closure, at a pressure sufficient to close the bandgap into the visible, one would observe absorption first in the blue, and then as pressure was increased, absorption would occur in both the blue and the red. This absorption should be approximately temperature independent. In the DAC experiments visible/IR absorption was not observed until the pressure reached the plateau region and then all wavelengths were absorbed. Evidently, the transition takes place before the bandgap is in the visible region. We conclude that the onset of the plateaus is the proper criterion for the transition. We have presented a complete FEA of the liquid-liquid phase transition to LMH, also known as the PPT, using a simulation program that we have developed to include the many subtle conditions in the experimental study at static pressures and high temperatures in a DAC. We calculated heating curves for a number of conditions and were able to find plateaus. To simulate reasonable plateaus comparable to those observed in experiment it was necessary to use a substantially larger value of the latent heat than has been calculated for this many-body system. We discussed a more complicated multi-step process that may possibly explain this discrepancy and may lead to new, as of yet unexplored physics. Optical transmittance and reflectance were also simulated, and are in reasonable agreement with the experimental results. We found that the onset of the plateau is a good indicator for the insulator-to-metal transition. We discussed experiments to determine whether a change in optical parameters is due to bandgap closure or a transition to a metallic state. Possible further steps in this investigation could be to expand the simulation to two/three dimensions, to include a more accurate optical response in the transition regime, and to include better estimates of the thermal (boundary) conductivities of the various materials. The current simulation scheme, which makes use of the Fresnel equations for the pulse absorption, will be useful to analyse other high-pressure experiments with laser-pulse heated DACs.