In this paper, we propose an effective computational approach to analyze and active control of geometrically nonlinear responses of functionally graded (FG) porous plates with graphene nanoplatelets (GPLs) reinforcement integrated with piezoelectric layers. The key concept behind this work is to utilize isogeometric analysis (IGA) based on Bézier extraction technique and C 0 -type higher-order shear deformation theory (C 0 -HSDT). By applying Bézier extraction, the original Non-Uniform Rational B-Spline (NURBS) control meshes can be transformed into Bézier elements which allow us to inherit the standard numerical procedure like the standard finite element method (FEM). In this scenario, the approximation of mechanical displacement field is calculated via C 0 -HSDT whilst the electric potential field is considered as a linear function across the thickness of each piezoelectric sublayer. The FG plate includes internal pores and GPLs dispersed into metal matrix either uniformly or non-uniformly along plate's thickness. To control responses of structures, the top and bottom surfaces of FG plate are firmly bonded with piezoelectric layers which are considered as sensor and actuator layers. The geometrically nonlinear equations are solved by Newton-Raphson iterative procedure and Newmark's integration. The influence of porosity coefficient, weight fraction of GPLs as well as external electrical voltage on geometrically nonlinear behaviors of plate structures with various distributions of porosity and GPLs are thoroughly investigated. A constant displacement and velocity feedback control approaches are then adopted to actively control geometrically nonlinear static and dynamic responses, where structural damping effect is taken into account, based on a closed-loop control with sensor and actuator layers. A large demand for high structural performance and multifunctionality having superior mechanical properties and chemical stability in engineering applications has been significantly increased in the last few years. With cellular structures, porous materials having outstanding properties such as excellent energy absorption, lightweight, heat resistance has been broadly employed in various engineering fields On the other hand, piezoelectric materials have been developed and widely employed in various engineering fields to produce smart structures. One of the essential and excellent features of this material type is the capacity transformation between mechanical and electrical energy, which is known as piezoelectric effect and converse phenomenon It is known that the different basic functions are applied for approximation of geometry models and solutions in the framework of traditional FEM which can lead to errors in computational process. In order to tackle this issue, IGA which employed non-uniform rational B-splines (NURBS) basis as shape functions are developed by Hughes et al. From the above literature review, it can be observed that the mentioned researches have only focused on plate structures integrated with piezoelectric layers in which core layers are often made of FGM or FG-CNTRC. Furthermore, the geometrically nonlinear analyses of piezoelectric FG plates under various dynamic loads are still somewhat limited. In the view of practical applications of high performance and smart engineering structures, the geometrically nonlinear static and dynamic responses of piezoelectric FG plate structures should be thoroughly examined to support the structural design process. In addition, the exploiting and integrating the outstanding features of IGA into the available FEM frame-work should be more considered in the literature because of the excellent computational effectiveness of them. This work aims to fill the research gap in the literature regarding the analysis and control of geometrically nonlinear responses of piezoelectric FG plates having the core layer composed of porous materials reinforced by GPLs. Accordingly, Bézier extraction technique based IGA in conjunction with C 0 -HSDT is fully exploited in this study. By using the Bézier extraction, the IGA retains the element structure which allows the IGA approach to integrate conveniently into the existing FEM routine. The active control for geometrically nonlinear static and dynamic responses of FG plates with structural damping effect using a closed loop control via sensor and actuator layers is presented. In this study, the core layers are instituted by a combination of two porosity distributions and three GPL dispersion patterns across plate's thickness, respectively while the piezoelectric layers are perfectly bonded on both top and bottom surfaces of core layer. The Newmark's integration scheme in conjunction with Newton-Raphson technique is utilized for nonlinear analyses. Several numerical verifications are first conducted in order to demonstrate the accuracy and efficiency of the proposed approach. Numerically obtained results show that the responses of piezoelectric FG are significantly influenced by porosity coefficient, weight fraction of GPLs, distribution of porosity and GPLs into metal matrix as well as input voltages. More importantly, the best reinforcement performance for piezoelectric FG porous plate structures reinforced by GPLs is discovered in this study. The outline of this work as follows. Section 2 provides theoretical formulations including material models, C 0 -type HSDT, constitutive equations and weak form. The brief on Bézier extraction based IGA and discrete system equations are given in Section 3. The active control algorithm is described in Section 4. Section 5 presents numerical investigations for the geometrically nonlinear static and dynamic analyses along with active control. The paper is closed with some concluding remarks which can be found in Section 6. Consider a FG plate model as a sandwich structure whose core layer is porous material reinforced by GPLs and piezoelectric layers considered as face layers, as depicted in Fig. where E 1 and ρ 1 are the maximum values of Young's modulus and mass density in the thickness direction of core layer, respectively. The coefficient of porosity e 0 in Eq. ( in which E ′ 1 and E ′ 2 denote, respectively, the maximum and minimum values of Young's modulus for core layers without GPLs reinforcement, as shown in Fig. From Eq. ( In addition, the effective Poisson's ratio ν(z) can be given as where ν 1 denotes the Poisson's ratio of metal without internal pores. The parameter ς in Eq. ( where S i1 ,S i2 and S i3 are the peak values of GPL volume fraction, in which i = 1, 2 corresponding to two different porosity distributions. Additionally, the relation of volume fraction and weight fraction of GPLs can be expressed as From Eq. ( in which in which w GP L , l GP L and t GP L are fundamental dimensions of GPLs including the average width, length and thickness, respectively. It should be mentioned that the mechanical properties of metal matrix and GPLs are symbolized with subscript symbols m and GP L, respectively. Finally, the mass density ρ 1 and Poisson's ratio ν 1 can be determined based on the rule of mixture in which the relation of V GP L and V m can be given as 2.2. C 0 -type higher-order shear deformation theory Considering a plate carrying a domain Assuming that the displacement components of plate in the x, y, z directions and rotations about the y-and the x-axes are u 0 , v 0 , w 0 , θ x and θ y , respectively. Based on the higher-order shear deformation theory where where the subscript symbols x and y denote the derivative of any function corresponding to x and y directions, respectively. Meanwhile, the function f (z) describes the shear strain and stress distribution along the thickness, as found in In order to avoid the high-order derivations in approximate formulation and enforce boundary conditions conveniently, two extra assumptions are formulated as By substituting Eq. ( It can be seen that the strain fields in Eq. ( By employing the von Kármán assumptions, the relationship of strain and displacement is given as where where the nonlinear strain component is expressed as follows In this study, the constitutive relationship of FG plate embedded in piezoelectric layers is expressed as in which σ and ε = {ε, γ} T represent, respectively, the stress and strain vectors of mechanical field. D stands for dielectric displacement vector; Meanwhile, c, e and g are the mechanical, piezoelectric and dielectric constant matrices, respectively. In addition, the electric field vector E is calculated based on the electric potential field φ as follows in which φ stands for the electric potential difference through the piezoelectric layer. The material constant matrix c can be expressed as in which where E(z) and ν ( z) are the effective Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio, respectively. Additionally, the constant matrices of piezoelectric material, as presented in Eq. ( The governing equations of motion for piezoelectric FG plate can obtain by applying the Hamilton's variational principle which are given as follows in which t 1 and t 2 represent the starting and end time values, respectively. The general energy function L is the summation of kinetic energy, strain energy, dielectric energy and external work as follows where ρ represents the mass density; u and u denote the mechanical displacement and velocity vectors, respectively; f s and F p are, respectively, the external mechanical surface and concentrated load vectors while q s and Q p are the external surface and point charges, respectively; Γ s and Γ φ indicate the external mechanical and the electrical loading surface, respectively. Then, the variational form of Eq. ( In the parametric space for one dimensional (1D) problem, B-spline basis functions can be established by non-decreasing set real-valued coordinates called knot vector Ξ = {ξ 1 , ξ 2 , ..., ξ n+p+1 }, in which ξ i is the ith knot with i = 1, ...n + p + 1 indicates the knot index. Meanwhile, n and p are the number of univariate B-spline basis functions and its order, respectively. For a given knot vector Ξ, the B-spline basis functions are defined according to recursive form Then, B-spline curves can be constructed by taking a linear combination of B-spline basis functions and control points P i (i = 1, 2, ..., n) as The B-spline basis functions in two dimensional (2D) space can also obtain by taking a tensor product of two 1D B-splines basis functions. The B-splines surfaces are then expressed as follows in which N i,p and M j,q represent the 1D B-splines basis functions having orders p and q in the ξ and η directions corresponding with two knot vectors Ξ = {ξ 1 , ξ 2 , ..., ξ n+p+1 } and Θ = {η 1 , η 2 , ..., η m+q+1 }, respectively. In order to describe exactly some conic shapes such as circle, cylinder, sphere and ellipsoid, the NURBS is introduced based on the B-spline and a set of weights where w i,j represents the weight values. Finally, the NURBS surfaces can be determined as follows The main aim of Bézier extraction technique is to instead the NURBS basis functions by the C 0 -continuous Bernstein polynomial basis functions described over Bézier elements which have the similar element structure with standard FEM. As a result, the IGA is straightforwardly performed as well as can be integrated into most available FEM framework. It is well known that the B-spline basis functions of pth order possess C p-k continuity across each interior knots, in which k represents the multiplicity of knots in the knot value. Hence, we can obtain the C 0 -continuity by inserting the new knots into the original knot vector until k is equal to p. By inserting a new knot ξ ∈ [ξ k , ξ k+1 ] with (k > p) into the original knot vector Ξ = {ξ 1 , ξ 2 , ..., ξ n+p+1 }, a new set of control points Pi are found and expressed as follows Then, the Bézier extraction operator can be established by using the new set of knots as follows By employing the Bézier extraction operator C j , a new Bézier control points P b associated with Bernstein polynomial basis can obtain as follows in which the whole Bézier extraction operator C can be given as It should be noted that the above insertion into the original knot vector does not lead to any change of the geometry. Consequently, the B-spline surface can also obtain by using Bézier control points and Bernstein polynomials as where 2D Bernstein polynomials B (ξ, η) are defined recursively as in which Comparing Eqs. ( By substituting Eq. ( Based on Eq. ( where W denotes the local NURBS weights in diagonal matrix. Meanwhile, the weight functions W (ξ, η) are described based on Bernstein basis functions as follows in which w and w b indicate, respectively the weights of the NURBS and Bézier. In addition, the relationship of Bézier and NURBS control points can be given as 3.3. Discrete system equations 3. By employing Bézier extraction of NURBS, the approximation of mechanical displacement field u(ξ, η) for FG plate is expressed as in which m×n represents the number of basis functions and R e I (ξ, η) denotes the NURBS basis functions which are presented in Eq. ( includes the nodal degrees of freedom associated with control point I. Substituting Eq. ( in which and The electric potential field on piezoelectric layers is estimated by dividing each layer into n sub sublayers through the thickness. In each sublayer, the electric potential variation is assumed to be linear across thickness and calculated as follows where R φ indicates the shape function of the electric potential function which is determined in Eq. ( Assuming that at the same height, the values of electric potentials are set to be equal where By substituting Eqs. ( where where and where I i with i = 1 : 6 are defined as It should be noted that the electric potential field E depends only on following to z direction leads to the matrix K uφ in Eq. ( Finally, by substituting the second equation into the first one of Eq. ( Consider a piezoelectric FG plate, as illustrated in Fig. Then, the sensor charge resulted because of the corresponding deformation can be expressed as In this study, two constant control gains of the displacement G d and velocity feedback G v , respectively, are employed to couple the input and output voltage vectors as follows By substituting Eqs. ( Next, by substituting Eq. (68) into Eq. (64), one obtains in which and the active damping matrix C is expressed as Considering the structural damping effect, Eq. ( where the Rayleigh damping matrix C R is determined based on a linear combination between M and K uu , as follows in which α R and β R denote Rayleigh damping coefficients which can obtain from experiments. In this work, Newton-Rapshon iterative procedure is employed to obtain the solution of nonlinear problems. For the geometrically nonlinear dynamic analysis of FG plate under various dynamic loads, which the equations depend on both the time domain and variable displacement, Newmark's integration scheme is exploited. In all numerical examples, the PZT-G1195N piezoelectric is employed as well as perfectly glued on the upper and lower surfaces of plate and neglected the adhesive layers. In addition, a mesh of 15 × 15 quadratic Bézier elements, as illustrated in Fig. In this section, various numerical studies regarding the geometrically nonlinear static and dynamic analyses of isotropic as well as piezoelectric FG plates are carried out in order to perform the accuracy of the proposed approach. For geometrically nonlinear analysis, an isotropic square plate with a fully clamped (CCCC) boundary conditions is considered to show the validity of the present formulation. The plate structure is subjected to a uniform transverse load while the width-to-thickness ratio (a/h) is taken equal to 100. The material properties are E = 3 × 10 7 psi and ν = 0.316. In this example, the normalized central deflection and load parameter are given as w = w/h and P = q 0 a 4 /(Eh 2 ), respectively. Table Table Present Analytical In the next Sections, investigations into the geometrically nonlinear static and dynamic responses of piezoelectric FG porous plate with GPLs reinforcement will be presented. The geometrically nonlinear static analysis of a piezoelectric FG plate subjected to uniform load with q = q 0 × 10 3 is first addressed. A SSSS piezoelectric FG square plate made of aluminum oxide and Ti-6Al-4V has a = b = 0.2 m, h c = 2.0 mm and h p = 0.1 mm. Fig. In addition, Fig. - In this part, the geometrically nonlinear dynamic behaviors of a CCCC piezoelectric FG porous plate with GPL reinforcement are investigated. The basic dimensions as well as the material properties of FG plate are the same previous example. The FG plate is assumed to be subjected to time-dependent sinusoidally distributed transverse loads expressed as follows q = q 0 sin(πx/a)sin(πy/b)F (t). In this work, four different dynamic loads are examined via the function F (t) as follows Step load in which q 0 = 100 MPa, γ = 330s -1 . Fig. Next, the combination influences of various porosity distribution types and GPL dispersion patterns on the nonlinear dynamic behaviour is also examined and indicated in Fig. In this section, the active control for static and dynamic behaviors of FG porous plate with GPL reinforcement via sensor and actuator layers is performed. First, to demonstrate The FG plate having a = b = 0.2 m, h c = 1 mm and h p = 0.1 mm are composed of Ti-6Al-4V and aluminum oxide materials with material index n = 2.0. Fig. The last example aims to show the active control for geometrically nonlinear dynamic behaviors of a CCCC FG porous plate with GPL reinforcement under sinusoidally distributed transverse loads. The square plate with the porosity distribution 1 (e 0 = 0.4) and dispersion pattern A (Λ GP L = 1.0 wt. %) has a = b = 0.2 m, h c = 10 mm and h p = 0.1 mm. Fig. In this study, the IGA based on Bézier extraction of NURBS and C 0 -HSDT was successfully implemented for the geometrically nonlinear static and dynamic analyses of piezoelectric FG porous plates with GPLs reinforcement. The motion equations were derived based on the C 0 -HSDT in conjunction with von Kármám strain assumptions. While the mechanical displacements were estimated by using C 0 -HSDT based on Bézier extraction of NURBS, the electric potential field was assumed as a linear function through the thickness of each piezoelectric layer. Two porosity distributions and three dispersion patterns of GPLs with various related parameters were thoroughly examined via several numerical investigations. The control algorithms based on the constant displacement and velocity feedback were utilized to control the nonlinear static and dynamic responses of FG porous plate structures reinforced with GPLs. A number of key remarks can be drawn from the present work: • By applying Bernstein polynomials as basis functions in Bézier extraction, the IGA can easily be integrated into most existing FEM structures while its advantages are still maintained effectively. • The stiffness of plate structures is significantly enhanced after adding a small amount of GPLs into metal matrix, while the existence of internal pores yields the reduction in both structural weight and reinforcement effect. • The distribution of porosities and GPLs in metal matrix plays a crucial role in reinforcing performance. A combination of porosity distribution 1 with internal pores distributed around the midplane and GPL pattern A, where GPLs are close dispersed the top and bottom surfaces, achieve the best reinforcement performance. • The nonlinear dynamic responses can be actively controlled through the velocity feedback control algorithm based on a closed-loop control.