Flexoelectricity is a universal electromechanical coupling effect whereby all dielectric materials polarize in response to strain gradients. In particular, nanoscale flexoelectricity promises exotic phenomena and functions, but reliable characterization methods are required to unlock its potential. Here, we report anomalous mechanical control of quantum tunnelling that allows for characterizing nanoscale flexoelectricity. By applying strain gradients with an atomic force microscope tip, we systematically polarize an ultrathin film of otherwise nonpolar SrTiO 3 , and simultaneously measure tunnel current across it. The measured tunnel current exhibits critical behaviour as a function of strain gradients, which manifests large modification of tunnel barrier profiles via flexoelectricity. Further analysis of this critical behaviour reveals significantly enhanced flexocoupling strength in ultrathin SrTiO 3 , compared to that in bulk, rendering flexoelectricity more potent at the nanoscale. Our study not only suggests possible applications exploiting dynamic mechanical control of quantum effect, but also paves the way to characterize nanoscale flexoelectricity. Polar materials form the basis of electromechanics, optoelectronics, and studies on emerging quantum states To characterize the flexocoupling coefficients at the nanoscale, it is necessary to identify a nanoscale phenomenon that can be actively controlled by the flexoelctric effect, which could allow quantifying the flexoelectric polarization as a function of strain-gradient. It is well established that the quantum tunnelling probability through a nanometer thick ferroelectric barrier layer sandwiched between two metallic electrodes sensitively depends on the polarization direction and its magnitude Here, we demonstrate that a systematic control of quantum tunnelling through a paraelectric ultrathin SrTiO3 (STO) film by strain-gradient induced flexoelectric polarization allows quantifying flexocoupling coefficient at the nanoscale. By applying the strain-gradients from a conductive scanning probe tip we simultaneously polarize and measure the tunnelling current across the film. With increasing strain-gradients, the tunnelling current exhibits an asymmetric-symmetric crossover, which we attribute, based on the Wentzel-Kramers-Brillouin (WKB) modelling, to flexoelectric polarization-driven modification of the tunneling barrier profile. Furthermore, analyzing the modification of the barrier profile as a function of strain-gradients enables quantifying the flexocoupling coefficient, which we found to be significantly enhanced compared to the bulk. We discuss possible origins of this enhanced flexocoupling coefficient. Figure Therefore, we can utilize pure mechanical force by an AFM tip as a dynamic tool not only for systematically controlling quantum tunnelling, but also for characterizing nanoscale flexoelectricity. As a model system, we chose the archetypal dielectric material SrTiO3 (STO), which remains paraelectric down to a temperature of 0 K in bulk. We prepared homoepitaxial ultrathin STO films on (001)-oriented STO substrates with a conductive SrRuO3 (SRO) buffer layer. To avoid the off-stoichiometry-driven ferroelectric phase of STO Piezoresponse force microscopy confirmed that the STO films are indeed paraelectric (Supplementary Fig. We measured the tunnel current across a nine unit cell-thick (i.e., ~3.5 nm-thick) STO as a function of the applied strain gradients. Our theoretical analysis reveals that the transverse strain gradients defined as, ∂ut/∂x3 (= ∂u11/∂x3 + ∂u22/∂x3) (1) are an order of magnitude larger than the longitudinal strain gradients ∂u33/∂x3 (Supplementary Note 2 and Supplementary Fig. and are highly asymmetric, manifesting rectifying behaviour. The forward current systematically increases with increasing ∂ut/∂x3, whereas the reverse current remains comparable to the noise level (~1 pA). When ∂ut/∂x3 attains a critical value, 1.56 × 10 7 m -1 , the I-V curve became maximally asymmetric (Fig. Before addressing how flexoelectricity could explain these results, we rule out other possible origins of the phenomena. First, the AFM tip-induced pressure did not cause any permanent surface damage to the STO film (Supplementary Fig. To understand how the barrier profile affects tunnel current, we perform a onedimensional Wentzel-Kramers-Brillouin (WKB) simulation of a metal-insulator-metal (M1-I-M2) heterostructure (Supplementary Note 4). In the experiment, 'M1', 'M2', and 'I' correspond to SRO, PtIr, and STO, respectively. Our calculations suggest that the observed rectifying tunnelling behaviour should originate from an asymmetric, trapezoidal barrier profile, with the barrier height φ1 at the M1-I interface being smaller than the barrier height φ2 at the I-M2 interface (as in Fig. When the flexoelectric polarization increases further, the conduction band minimum of STO could cross the Fermi level (as in Fig. Next, to understand how the barrier profile varies with increasing ∂ut/∂x3, we fit the tunnel spectra of regime (A) to an analytical equation Based on this ∂ut/∂x3 dependence of φ1 and φ2, we estimate the strength of effective flexoelectric coupling. The transverse strain gradient polarizes the STO layer through the flexoelectric effect, and the induced polarization can be expressed as P = ε ꞏ feff ꞏ (∂ut/∂x3), where ε and feff are the dielectric permittivity and the effective flexocoupling coefficient of STO, respectively. In ultrathin STO, this flexoelectric polarization results in depolarization field ( ) and modifies the tunnel barrier profile according to the following electrostatic equation (Supplementary Note 7) where e is the electronic charge and Ebi is the additional built-in field contribution that could arise from the work function difference between SRO and PtIr, surface dipoles In addition, fitting also yielded a nonzero contribution at ∂ut/∂x3 = 0 (i.e., 8-10×10 7 V m -1 ), corresponding to the built-in field Ebi. We now focus on the onset of asymmetric-symmetric crossover of tunnel current at (∂ut/∂x3)c = 1.56 × 10 7 m -1 , which also allows us to estimate feff. According to our simulation, this crossover is attributable to the polarization-induced trapezoidal-to-triangular transition of the tunnel barrier. At the critical ∂ut/∂x3 (or equivalently, at the critical P), we therefore expect that φ1 = 0 and φ2 = φ0,2 + φ0,1•(δPtIr/δSRO) = 1.7 + 1.3/8 eV, giving (φ2 -φ1)/ed = 5.32 × 10 8 V m -1 (Fig. Interestingly, the estimated flexocoupling coefficient (23-28 V) is larger than Kogan's phenomenological estimate (1-10 V) In summary, we show that quantum tunnelling is mechanically tunable. Such mechanical tunability allows determining the flexocoupling strength at the nanoscale, which we found to be much enhanced compared to that in bulk. This finding emphasizes that flexoelectricity could become much more powerful at reduced dimensions due to not only a large strain gradient, but also an enhanced coupling strength. We hope that this study would encourage the construction of flexocoupling coefficient databases at the nanoscale, and the design of high-performance flexoelectric devices. From a broader perspective, this study highlights several favourable aspects of nanoscale flexoelectricity. First, nanoscale flexoelectricity allows for the generation of large polarization in a continuous manner. We started from a nonpolar STO, and continuously polarized it with P up to 0.4 C m -2 . Second, such a continuously tunable, large polarization can also generate a large electrostatic potential, which corresponds to a stationary effective electric field, as high as 10 9 V m -1 . This can be useful for a large electric-field control of dielectrics, which has been challenging due to dielectric breakdown. Sample fabrication. SRO and STO thin films were sequentially grown on TiO2-terminated and (100)-oriented STO substrates. The growth dynamics and thicknesses were monitored by in situ reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED). Film deposition was performed at 700°C under oxygen partial pressures of 100 and 7 mTorr for SRO and STO, respectively. After deposition, films were annealed at 475°C for 1 h in oxygen at ambient pressure and subsequently cooled to room temperature at 50°C min -1 . Structural characterization, namely, the reciprocal space mapping was performed to ensure that the STO film is strain-free (Supplementary Fig. Tunnelling measurements. Current-voltage curves were obtained using an Asylum Research Cypher AFM at room temperature under ambient conditions. Conducting PtIr-coated metallic tips (NANOSENSORSTM PPP-EFM) with nominal spring constants 50-60 N m -1 , and a dualgain ORCA module, were used to measure currents. An electrical bias was applied through the conducting SRO electrode; this was swiped from -1 V to +1 V at a ramping rate of about 4 V s -1 . The noise floor of the AFM system was about ~1 pA. To extract barrier heights from the tunnelling I-V curves, we used an analytical equation describing direct tunnelling through trapezoidal tunnel barriers where c is a constant and α(V) ≡ [4d(2me) 1/2 ]/[3ħ(φ1 + eV -φ2)]. Also, b, me, d, and φ1,2 are the baseline, free electron mass, barrier width, and barrier height, respectively. As explained in the main text, our fittings imposed the constraints φ2 = 1.7 + ∆φ and φ1 = 1.3 -8∆φ. In addition, we used a scaling factor to account for the increase in contact area with increasing contact force, but this did not affect our principal results (i.e., the RRs, |I+V/I-V|). For smaller ∆φ values, we used the entire tunnelling spectra for fitting (Supplementary Figs. Simulation of strain profile. The strain distribution in a 3.5 nm-thick STO thin film pressed with an AFM tip is obtained by solving the elastic equilibrium equation by using Khachaturyan microelasticity theory μN. The Young's moduli and Poisson ratios of the Pt tip and the STO film were E tip = 168 GPa and υ tip = 0.38, and E film = 264 GPa and υ film = 0.24, adapted from reference 41. The electrostrictive and rotostrictive coupling coefficients of STO were adapted from reference 42. See Supplementary Note 2 for more details. Simulation of polarization profile. The polarization distribution under the mechanical load by an AFM tip can be calculated by self-consistent phase-field modeling The bulk Landau free energy fbulk consists of two sets of order parameters, i.e., the spontaneous polarization P and the antiferrodistortive order parameter θ, which represents the oxygen octahedral rotation angle of STO The eigenstrain tensor ε 0 in the elastic energy density is given by where the electrostrictive, rotostrictive, and converse flexoelectric couplings are considered via tensor Q, Λ and F. The coefficients used in constructing the total free energy F of STO single crystal were given in our previous works First-principles calculations. The atomic and electronic structure of the system was obtained using the density functional theory (DFT) implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) To extract barrier heights from the tunneling I-V curves, we used an analytical equation describing direct tunneling through trapezoidal tunnel barriers 1,2 : where c is a constant and α(V) ≡ [4d(2me Also, b, me, d, and φ1,2 are the baseline, the electron mass, barrier width, and barrier height, respectively. Supplementary Figure Note that in a-c, we fitted the entire spectra (i.e., -1 V to +1 V), but we used smaller bias windows to fit the tunneling currents of d and f. We considered an STO thin film of thickness hf, with the top surface in contact with an AFM tip and the bottom interface coherently constrained by the substrate. At the top surface, the normal stress distribution (as a function of the distance from the contact center) is described by the Hertz contact mechanics of the spherical indenter, as follows: where stress is related to strain via 0 ( ) . The eigenstrain 0 ij u is derived from strain-order parameter couplings of STO through 0 ij ijkl k l ijkl k l u Q P P q q  λ , where Qijkl and λijkl are the electrostrictive and rotostrictive tensors, respectively. Using the Khachaturyan microelasticity theory and the Stroh formalism of anisotropic elasticity, we obtained the displacement field of the entire system and then the strain and stress distributions. Supplementary Figure Rigorously, the Hertz contact mechanics assumes a non-frictional contact between two isotropic, elastic materials. For dielectric materials, such as the incipient ferroelectric STO, it is generally not linear elastic because of the presence of electromechanical couplings (piezoelectric, flexoelectric, and electrostrictive effects) as well as antiferrodistortive-strain couplings (rotostrictive effect). However, we use the Hertz contact mechanics only to obtain the stress distribution at the STO film surface. With this surface stress distribution as the top boundary condition (and zero displacements at the substrate bottom as the bottom boundary condition), we calculated the stress distribution in the whole system (the film and the substrate) by solving the mechanical equilibrium equation (Supplementary Eq. 3). In our simulation, we also self-consistently take into account the electrostrictive coupling (thereby piezoelectric effects), flexoelectric coupling, and rotostrictive coupling as eigenstrains (stress-free strains). This approach allows us to extend reliably the Hertz contact mechanics to the flexoelectric materials for obtaining stress/strain distribution under the force imparted by the tip. where T(E), f(E), and U(x) represent the transmission probability, the Fermi-Dirac distribution, and the tunnel barrier profile, respectively. Using Supplementary Eq. 4, we obtain the tunneling current density for a trapezoidal barrier profile (Supplementary Fig. Finally, using Supplementary Eqs. (5-8), we obtain tunneling I-V curves for systematically modified tunnel barrier profiles (Supplementary Fig. I(V) / I(+0.1 V) (a.u.) 