Crystalline materials at elevated temperatures and pressures can exhibit properties more reminiscent of simple liquids than ideal crystalline materials. Superionic crystalline materials having a liquid-like conductivity  are particularly interesting for battery, fuel cell, and other energy applications, and we study UO2 as a prototypical superionic material since this material is widely studied given its commercial importance as reactor fuel. Using molecular dynamics, we first investigate basic thermodynamic and structural properties. We then quantify structural relaxation, dynamic heterogeneity, and average ions mobility. We find that the non-Arrhenius diffusion and structural relaxation time of this prototypical superionic material can be quantitatively described in terms of a generalized activated transport model ('string model') in which the activation energy varies in direct proportion to the average string length. Our transport data can also be described equally well by an Adam-Gibbs model in which the excess entropy density of the crystalline material is estimated from specific heat and thermal expansion data, consistent with the average scale of string-like collective motion scaling inversely with the excess entropy of the crystal. Strong differences in the temperature dependence of the interfacial mobility from non-ionic materials are observed, and we suggest that this difference is due to the relatively high cohesive interaction of ionic materials. In summary, the study of superionic UO2 provides insight into the role of cooperative motion in enhancing ion mobility in ionic materials and offers design principles for the development of new superionic materials for use in diverse energy applications. It is common intuition that diffusion and relaxation in crystalline materials are relatively slow in comparison to liquids because of the localization of particles to lattice positions, but there are diverse and practically important materials that defy this intuition. By cooling liquids, the rate of relaxation may then occur over geologically relevant timescales, and the rate of diffusion correspondingly becomes extremely slow, a phenomenon evidenced by many plastic polymer materials, foods, and diverse everyday objects. Although it is natural to expect that the properties of cooled liquids should progressively approach the properties of "solid" crystalline materials and that heated crystals should approach the properties of liquid materials upon heating, it is clear that something must preempt the freezing or melting transitions in these materials to allow a continuous tuning of their properties rather than the commonly found discontinuous property changes associated with freezing and melting. In these poorly understood, and often immensely useful materials, it is generally observed experimentally that relaxation and diffusion are non-Arrhenius and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have indicated the general prevalence of molecular transport taking the form of string like collective motion of atoms. Molecular dynamics simulations were performed to investigate thermodynamic and dynamic properties of UO2 at elevated temperature using a many-body empirical potential (CRG) proposed by Qin et al. The simulation cell consists of 10,368 ions with a dimension of about 5.5 nm x 5 nm x 6 nm, oriented with crystallographic directions , and in the X-, Y-and Zdirections. In the simulation of bulk properties of UO2, periodic boundary conditions were applied in all directions, while in the simulation interfacial diffusion, free boundary condition was applied in the Y-direction and periodic boundary conditions were applied in the other two directions. The isobaric-isothermal ensemble (NPT) was employed in bulk simulation where the zero pressure and simulation box size were controlled by the Parrinello-Rahman method The simulated UO2 material was first equilibrated at T = 1500 K for 1 ns and then continuously heated to T = 3200 K with a heat rate of 2  10 11 K / s. The potential energy and simulation box size were recorded in order to extract information on specific heat capacity and lattice parameter. Isothermal heating for an extended period of time was also applied in current study to ensure the system to reach near equilibrium and to allow us to probe kinetic processes that cannot be observed under continuous heating conditions. In current study, isothermal heating simulations were also performed at T = 2400 K, 2500 K, 2600 K, 2700 K, 2800 K, 2900 K, 3000 K, 3100 K, and 3200 K. At each T, the simulation was conducted for at least 5 ns and up to 20 ns. Self-diffusion coefficients of O ions are determined from the slope of the mean-square- displacement versus time t after long times, i.e., D is defined by the long time limit of the ratio, ( N i=1(xi) 2 + (yi) 2 + (zi) 2 ) / 6N t, where N is the total number of O ions in the system. Since function often follows form, it is natural to begin our discussion of our model UO2 material with the temperature dependence of the pair correlation function g(r) and static structure factor S(q). In Figure x-ray scattering measurements, as discussed previously by Annamareddy and Eapen • , where local density ∑ , N is the total number of atoms, and k is the wave vector that is chosen to be a reciprocal lattice vector of the ordered state. Based on this metric, the LRO equals unity for a perfect lattice and zero for a perfectly disordered fluid. Figure At still lower temperatures than we investigate, there is another transitional phenomenon observed in many ionic materials, including UO2. In particular, there is a so-called 'intrinsicextrinsic' transition at which there is an abrupt transition in electrical conductivity and other transport properties and Ruello et al. We may obtain a good sense of molecular correlations at large scales by considering the Fourier transform of g(r), the (partial) static structure factor S(q), and we illustrate this quantity in Figure Superionic crystalline materials are further conventionally classified in terms of an additional characteristic temperature that arises between T  and Tm. Type I superionics, such Ag halide-chalcogenides (e.g., AgI, AgS2, AgSI, RbAg4I5,...) and Cu halides (CuI, CuBr, CuCl), exhibit a first order solid-solid structural transition to a crystal morphology conducive to superionic transport Tarasov In the present paper, we strictly avoid the low temperature regime below T  in our simulations below. The properties of superionic materials in this "extrinsic" temperature range Now that we have established some basic structural aspects of the average static structure of crystalline UO2 over a range of T, we then consider how this structure evolves from the experimentally measurable dynamic structure factor. There are two types of dynamic structure factors to be considered, i.e., the collective intermediate scattering function Fc (q,t), which is naturally extending the definition of static structure factor to describe the time dependence of density correlations of the fluid as a whole, and the self-intermediate scattering function Fs (q,t), which focuses on the dynamics of individual particles within the background fluid. These two quantities can correspondingly be measured by coherent and incoherent neutron scattering measurements Since the Gaussian form of molecular displacement function provides a basic metric of material homogeneity from a dynamical standpoint, we first provide a measure of the extent to which our material system deviates from this ideal behavior. Such non-ideal systems are termed as "dynamically heterogeneous" and the standard metric for this property is to consider the non-Gaussian parameter 2(t), defined in terms of the moments of the mean square displacement r of the atoms in time interval, t measured from the first instant observation, a quantity that equals 0 if Gs(r,t) is Gaussian. We see from Figure Onuki and coworkers 81 also found this type of relaxation in a model two-dimensional superheated crystal and Gray-Weale and Madden found this type of near exponential relaxation, i.e.,  = 1.00  0.03, in previous simulations of a model superionic material. What is the mechanism of stabilization of crystals at the reasonable atmospheric pressures? Although superheating is very difficult to achieve in metals and atomic and molecular crystalline materials with van der Waals interactions, crystal superheating is actually quite common and large in mineralogical systems (e.g., superheating quartz by over 300 K), exhibiting a combination of charge and van der Waals interactions a relation reminiscent of the Stokes-Einstein relation between the self-diffusion coefficient and the structural relaxation time of a fluid. We observed this relation before in the simulation of superheated crystalline Ni. To confirm that we are really simulating a crystalline material exhibiting a mobility akin to a simple fluid that decays to zero after a structural relaxation time   , we calculate the collective intermediate scattering function, which should not decay to zero at long times in a crystalline state. Figure We further note that the O ion Fc (q,t) develops an unusual oscillatory tendency for q  = 2.1, as illustrated Fig. A large number of recent computational studies of the slowing down of the dynamics of cooled liquids under equilibrium conditions has revealed that strong continuous change in the dynamics is accompanied by the growth of string-like collective motions whose extent grows upon cooling where the average length of these dynamical polymeric structures directly determines the change in the activation free energy governing mass diffusion and structural relaxation. Before beginning our analysis of collective motion in superionic crystalline materials, we must point out that numerous previous simulation studies have indicated that this collective motion involves the exchange motion of mobile atoms of one type moving in a background of far less mobile atoms, which in the present instance corresponds to O ions moving with a background interpenetrating lattice of U ions. An examination of the mean square displacement of the O and U ions on a picosecond timescale, which defines the Debye-Waller factor of the respective ions clearly confirms this as a reasonable physical picture of UO2 over a wide T range (See Supplementary Information). Some early work suggested that the motion of the ions resembles the motion of a caterpillar where the movements occur sequentially 101 , while a later computational study by Wolf 102 indicated that the cooperative motion in a simulated LiN superionic material occurred as a collective 'sliding' of a whole group of atoms at the same time, forming a more or less random particle exchange path. This phenomenon in superionic crystals was interpreted in terms of a solitary wave conduction model of transport in these materials proposed earlier by Bishop. Cooperative particle dynamics is one of the most characteristic features of the dynamics of GF fluids. Both atomistic simulations and experiments on glass-forming colloidal and granular fluids exhibit string-like collective motion and MD simulations have recently shown that this type of motion also occurs in the dynamics of grain boundaries 106 and the interfacial and melting dynamics of NPs. As a first step in identifying collective particle motion, we must identify the "mobile" atoms in our system. In GF liquids, the "mobile" atoms (atoms with enhanced mobility relative to Brownian motion) are defined by comparing the self-part of the van Hove correlation function Gs(r, t) for the strongly interacting particle fluid to an ideal uncorrelated liquid exhibiting Brownian motion where Gs(r) reduces to a simple Gaussian function. Since "mobile" atoms are essentially those particles moving a distance r(t) larger than the typical amplitude of an atomic vibration after a decorrelation time t, but smaller than the second nearest-neighbor atomic distance (as suggested by the multiple peaks of the self-part van Hove correlation function shown in Figure where P(n) is the probability of finding a string of length n at the characteristic time, t*. In Figure The strings are clearly polymer-like in form and polydisperse in length, as found before repeatedly in glass-forming liquids, We are now in a position to determine if the length of the strings L is directly related to the temperature dependence of the activation free energy for molecular transport, as found in glassforming liquids. Confirmation of such a relationship would potentially greatly expand the realm of application of this model of relaxation and dynamics to include crystalline materials. The possibility that such a relation might hold is suggested by the previous successful application of the Adam-Gibbs model of the dynamics of glass-forming liquids to the dynamics of superionic materials in simulations by Gray-Weale and Madden. where LA is a residual collective motion at the onset temperature, in which L starts to vary appreciably with temperature in glass-forming liquids (We take in the current study of superionic UO2). Ds(O) scales inversely to  to a good approximation in our simulations so we confine our attention to Ds(O) in our subsequent analysis. Specifically, we expect from the string model that Ds(O) should be described by the relation, where Dso (O) and Go are taken as adjustable parameters that can be fixed in the present situation by matching this equation to Ds(O) at the melting point and the temperature dependence of Ds(O) for temperatures near Tm where L is slowly varying. We compare Eq. ( Most crystalline materials are actually polycrystalline in the sense that they contain a substantial of grains having grain boundary regions in which mobility and relaxation can be greatly different from mobilities deep within the crystal. The mobility in these interfacial regions has often been observed to many orders of magnitude larger so that the conductivity can be dominated by these interfacial regions. This phenomenon has also been observed in certain fluorite superionic materials. As we have observed before in the case of Ni and H2O interfacial regions, heating UO2 of simulated crystal with a crystal-vacuum interface leads to the formation of a mobile interfacial layer in which the Debye-Waller factor is enhanced relative to the bulk material modeled with periodic boundary conditions and a greatly accelerated diffusion for temperatures above the Tammann temperature, which in the present instance is close to T  . We illustrate the diffusion coefficient in the mobile interfacial region, defined as before There is another striking difference in the interfacial mobility of superionic UO2 in comparison to "normal" crystalline interfacial regions typified by Ni and H2O. Convex Arrhenius plots similar to our superionic material have been observed in the catalytic reaction dynamics of proteins where the 'kink' in the Arrhenius curve corresponds to some kind of dynamical transition from an active to a relatively inactive catalytic state. Efficient enzyme function of proteins and the high conductivity of superionic and other highly anharmonic crystalline materials seems to rely on some stabilizing framework that allows for the system to retain some structural integrity while at the same time a large degree of internal structural fluctuations to enable a high rate of reactivity and transport. The conductivity  of superionic materials is perhaps the most significant property of these materials. Although the variation of  generally shows similar qualitative changes with temperature as Ds(O), as expected from the Nernst-Einstein relation, we may expect deviations from the simple predicted proportionality relation estimated for these properties arising from ion correlations neglected by the Nernst-Einstein relation. In particular, we may expect the stringlike correlated exchange motion to enhance  relative to the Nernst-Einstein relation. This is another topic deserving a separate study in view of the computational difficulty of estimating precise estimates of . Some discussion of this phenomenon seems necessary in any discussion of superionic materials. In Figure The investigation of requires a study dedicated to this problem and here we just note that  Our discussion of the conductivity raises an interesting question regarding how collective influences  in comparison to the ion mobility measured by Ds(O). Voronin and Volkov mentioned in their comprehensive review of alkaline-halide (Type I)I superionic conductivity and thermodynamic data, In our previous simulations of homogeneous melting of crystalline Ni, we did observe a maximum in the string length as a function of T below the mechanical melting transition. At that time, we suggested that superionic materials might be superheated materials, or a material very much like them, based on the existence of this L maximum, and the corresponding maximum in the activation energy in measurement of the fluorite minerals. This suggests that we should take a closer look at the string length distribution found for our UO2 system (See Fig. We have confirmed the suggestion of Gray-Weale and Madden Given the emerging importance of superionic materials in diverse applications in the area of fuel cells, supercapitors, energy conversion, sensors Smaller ions tend to have to cross lower relative energy barriers to hop between positions in their lattice so the degree of superionicity tends to increase when the ratio of the mobile ion to that of those of the immobile ion lattice becomes smaller. Significant enhancements of conductivity relative to Nernst-Einstein predictions have been observed 154 , but the intrinsically slow dynamics of polymeric materials has made it difficult to obtain materials with values comparable to small molecule fluids. Recently, it has been suggested that lowering the dielectric constant of the polymer matrix 155 should greatly improve the situation and other strategies are actively being pursued. One especially promising approach to developing materials of practical interest is being pursued by Sokolov and coworkers who are exploring stiffening the polymer matrix 156 to create a better immobile polymer matrix with a more open pore space in which the mobile ions can move. We suggest this direction, in conjunction with engineering the dielectric properties of the polymer, offers a promising line of attack for creating practical superionic polymer materials for diverse proposed applications. Recent modeling of the dynamics of glass-forming polymer fluids See supplementary material for Debye Waller factors and Boson peaks.