We propose a pyroelectric energy conversion device that converts heat directly to electricity. In contrast to conventional pyroelectric energy conversion designs, this energy harvesting system is detached from any external power sources, operating only under periodically varying temperature. Such detachment unambiguously attributes the converted electricity to heat that drives the change of polarization in the pyroelectric material, not to the electric field alternation caused by the external battery. Using pure and Zr doped BaTiO3, we demonstrate the electricity generation in consecutive temperature cycles. We further develop a thermodynamic model for the energy conversion system. Our model suggests that the work output is rate dependent: the work output per cycle is linearly dependent on the heat/cooling frequency below the predicted threshold. The linearity is confirmed by experiments, and the threshold frequency is derived by theory. Finally we propose a figure of merit that separates the materials intrinsic properties from the system design parameters. The figure of merit guides the future material development and device improvement. Our work clears out confusions and reforms the foundation for pyroelectric materials' resurgence as a competitor for green electricity. According to the 2008 annual report of U.S. Department of Energy, one third to a half of the industrial energy input is wasted as heat of temperature around the boiling point of water For ferroelectric materials, the large pyroelectric effect is commonly observed during a structural transformation between ferroelectric phase and paraelectric phase. In most of the cases, such a structural transformation is * xianchen@ust.hk martensitic, that is a diffusionless solid-solid reversible phase transformation. As a result, within a narrow temperature range, the polarization of the material exhibits an abrupt jump. State-of-the-art technologies of fabricating sophisticated devices have demonstrated promising pyroelectric properties that can be leveraged by this kind of energy harvesting. The first pyroelectric energy device was designed as a capacitor. The working mechanism is based on the different kinds of quasistatic thermodynamic cycles proposed in early 80s In above conventional designs for pyroelectric energy conversion, Another factor often overlooked in thermodynamic analysis of pyroelectric energy conversion is the rate dependency of work output. Modern theoretical framework of thermodynamics is built on top of Carnot's work In our design, we replace the battery in conventional design by a reference capacitor (C ref ) as shown in FIG. Let the pyroelectric capacitor be the thermodynamic system. The free charge on its surface is a function of voltage V and temperature T , i.e. Q(V, T ), sketched in FIG. In order to have a rational understanding of the relationships among the material intrinsic properties, design parameters and control parameters of our batterydetached energy conversion device, we use the electric charge and voltage as the energy conjugate to study the thermodynamics of the system. The dynamics of the charge held by the pyroelectric capacitor is modeled by the time dependent voltage V (t) and temperature T (t). That is, at t 0, ) is a state function that can be determined by the state variables V and T despite of the time history. The initial voltage V b of the system and the capacitance of the reference capacitor C ref determine the total charges in the circuit, (1) When the system reaches the steady state in ferroelectric phase at T = T L < θ after being detached from the external power source, the corresponding voltage and charge are the same as the initial state Upon heating, the system transforms from ferroelectric phase to paraelectric phase. When the phase transformation finishes, the system reaches the other steady state at T = T H . By charge conservation, the corresponding voltage and charge are then In the temperature range of T L < T < T H , the charges flow in the circuit due to the change of the capacitance of the system. By Kirchhoff's law of voltage, In equation ( (5) Using the approximation of the planar capacitor with area A and thickness d satisfying d √ A, the free charges accumulated at the surface of the pyroelectric capacitor is estimated as where 0 is the vacuum permittivity and the electric field E in the capacitor is calculated as The constitutive function P (E, T ) is the polarization of the pyroelectric material under the applied electric field E at the temperature T . This is an intrinsic material property that can be characterized by measuring the P -E curves at different temperatures The parameter P L represents the polarization of the system at the low temperature phase, i.e. Note that the value of P L can be experimentally characterized by the P -E curve at temperature T L . Eq. ( Choose V b as the characteristic voltage, then We scale polarization and temperature in the following way: Here, the function θ(E) denotes the transformation temperature under the electric field E. A closed form will be proposed in the discussion of the constitutive assumption in Section IV B. In principle, the phase transformation temperature of a material varies with the application of external load, which is underlain by the Clausius-Clapeyron relation. Define dimensionless charge as Combining with (6), we get Finally, time is scaled by in which τ is the duration of heating half cycle. We consider this time scale to be a given constant in our model, because it is mostly governed by heat transfer and the thermal property of the material. As a rough estimate, if the intake heat flow is q and the latent heat of phase transformation is , the duration for completely transforming the material from low temperature to high temperature phase is /q. Substituting equation ( Equation ( We assume the duration of the cooling half cycle is also τ . The total energy harvested during a full cycle started at t 0 is We prepared three thin plate specimens: (i) pure BaTiO 3 (BTO) with thickness of 0.77 mm and area of 62.35 mm 2 , (ii) BaZr 0.006 Ti 0.994 O 3 (Zr 0.006 ) with thickness of 0.58 mm and area of 69.54 mm 2 , and (iii) BaZr 0.01 Ti 0.99 O 3 (Zr 0.01 ) with thickness of 0.57 mm and area of 33.12 mm 2 . The bulk ceramics were prepared by a conventional solid state reaction route. The appropriate amounts of BaCO 3 , TiO 2 and ZrO 2 according to the target stoichiometry were weighed and mixed with a planetary mill in n-Hexane with Zirconia balls. The calcination of the powders was performed twice at 1350 • C. After each calcination step the samples were ball milled. The obtained powders were mixed with a binding agent and pressed into discs with a diameter of 20mm. For sintering the pressed discs were surrounded by BaTiO 3granulate to get a homogeneous temperature distribution within the specimen. The binder was burnt out at 500 • C for 1 hour, afterwards the temperature was set to 1500 • C for 3 hours for the sintering process. The pyroelectric property in all three specimens were characterized by an aixACCT TF Analyzer 2000E. At a given temperature, the electric field varies between ±10 kV/cm at the frequency of 50 Hz. The value of P (E, T ) is evaluated at the upper branch of the hysteresis loop. At t = 0, we used a Tektronix PS280 DC power supply to charge the system and achieve the equilibrium voltage V b = 30 V. At t > 0, the power supply was detached and we monitor the voltage on the resistor while alternating the temperature of the system between 385 K and 405 K. Both the temperature and the voltage on resistor were recorded by an Agilent 34970A data acquisition/switch unit. Five consecutive transformation cycles of the system are shown in FIG. In FIG. In order to solve (15) numerically, we are going to propose a closed form constitutive relation P (E, T ). Consider the case that the giant pyroelectric effect is caused where ξ is the Clausius-Clapeyron coefficient. First, we model the constitutive response for each of the single phases far away from phase transformation temperature by P f (E) and P p (E). Subscripts f and p denotes ferro-and para-electric phase respectively. P p (E) is always linear. P f (E) is linear under small field and approaches to the saturated value at high field. Therefore we use the following hypothesis for Here, a, b c and χ are constant coefficients. Naturally, define the jump of polarization as By the shape of constitutive response measured in FIG. where κ is a material constant, g(z) is the sigmoid function and Note that g(E, T ) and z(E, T ) are dimensionless. The constitutive hypothesis (21) has the following properties: • Under any E, P → P f (E) as T → 0, and P → P p (E) as T → ∞. Across the whole temperature range, P monotonically decreases from P f (E) to P p (E). • Under any E, the steepest decreasing slope of P -T occurs at θ(E) where the slope is -κ. • From E = 0, as E increases, the P -T curve shifts towards higher temperature, i.e. the Clausius-Clapeyron relation. Using parameters listed in Table .I, we evaluate this hypothetical model and compare with the experimental measurements for BTO in FIG. Following the nondimensionalization introduced in Section III C, we have Rewrite the dimensionless function z(E, T ) as (25) The constitutive assumption (21) becomes P ( Ē, T ) = -P ( Ē)g(z( Ē, T )) + Pf ( Ē). (26) In real case, T L and T H are determined by the target working condition. To demonstrate a simulation of (15), we let T ( t) is defined as Using parameter values in TABLE I, we integrate (15) from t = 0 to t = 10. Results are compared with experiments in FIG. (30) Choosing t0 = 0, we exactly have W = W ES . In fact, one can prove that this equality holds analytically due to Here in Q, Ē , the comma in the subscript denotes a partial derivative. Ignoring higher order terms, ( where The ODE (32) can be solved analytically by the method of integration factor. Here we ignore the detailed solving procedure and only focus on a special degeneracy of the equation. In (32), when α(t) 1 and α(t) |β(t)|, h asymptotically vanishes. Then we can estimate Q( Ē, T ) by Q(1, T ), which is rate independent. By For our specimens, α is in the order of 10 6 to 10 7 , |β| is in the order of 1 to 10. The rate dependencies of work output per cycle are verified in our experiments for three testing samples shown in FIG. In this section, we derive an estimated criterion under which the asymptotic conditions α(t) 1 and α(t) P, Ē comes from two factors: 1) single phase permittivity, 2) the coupling between the change in permittivity and Clausius-Clapeyron relation. Denote ferroelectric susceptibility χ f = P f (E). We have by (19a), That is and From (36), to satisfy α 1, we need By (37), if (38) holds, then α β leads to which is not related to the rate parameter τ . If instead we have (39), then Define the threshold frequency to be[7] (43) By Substituting back into where P is the short hand of the functional evaluation P (V b /d), which can be loosely interpreted as "the jump of polarization across phase transformation". The work density is then (50) Here, ζ 1 is determined by material properties, while ζ 2 depends on device parameters. For our specimens, the material FoM ζ 1 is 0.35, 3.5 and 4.0 μC 2 /(J cm K) for BTO, Zr 0.006 and Zr 0.01 respectively, which agree well with the performance measured at various rates in FIG. 