We present a compact 10 kHz Ti:Sa front-end relying on an original double-crystal regenerative amplifier design. This new configuration optimizes the thermal heat load management, allowing producing a 110 nm large spectrum and maintaining a good beam profile quality. The front-end delivers up to 5 W after compression, 17 fs pulses with a 170 mrad shot-to-shot residual CEP noise. The latest efforts devoted to a deeper understanding of attosecond temporal dynamics have led to a rapid development of ultrafast laser technology. High energy, few cycle laser pulses represent the main tool for accessing the strong-field interactions that rule these dynamics. When an ultrashort, high-intensity (above 10 14 W/cm 2 ) driving pulse interacts with a medium, non-linear effects take place, producing a train of XUV attosecond pulses through high harmonic generation A grating-based CPA system has been demonstrated to be, since now, the most suitable choice for achieving high-energy pulses, keeping the B-integral value low, for Ti:Sa based amplifier Besides mechanical vibrations, two other factors inside the amplifier influence the CEP stabilization We present here an original, full water-cooled front-end system which is capable of delivering CEP stabilized, 17 fs pulses at 10 kHz repetition rate. The output energy of the compressed pulses is around 500 micro joule. Our technology is based on the Chirped Pulse Amplification technique The system has been developed by Amplitude Technologies in collaboration with CEA Saclay within the joint laboratory Impulse. The front-end is seeded by a CEP stable oscillator (Rainbow CEP4, Femtolaser) producing pulses at 75 MHz repetition rate with a residual theoretical CEP noise below 60 mrad A Dazzler module (AOPDF) is placed at the output of the stretcher A 6 pass amplifier boosts the pulses energy before further amplification in the regenerative amplifier. A KD*P Pockels Cell between the first three and the last three passes decreases the repetition rate to 10 kHz. The ring configuration of this multipass amplifier, or booster, ensures small angles between each pass and the pump inside the Ti:Sa crystal; this good superposition between the pump (15 W) and the IR beam allows an overall gain of 200, leading to an IR pulse energy of 50 nJ. Increasing the seed energy helps to obtain a better contrast between the picosecond and the nanosecond regime after the regenerative cavity. The pulses are then amplified in a double Brewster-cut Ti:Sa regenerative cavity. The crystals length is 20 mm; the doping concentration ensures 90% absorption of the incident pump power. This new W-like designed cavity generates high energy, broadband pulses whose duration can be shortened below 20 fs. Ultrashort time duration requires wide spectrum. Unfortunately, this is limited by gain narrowing occurring in the Ti:Sa crystal amplification where r1 is the radius of the pumped zone on the crystal, r2 is the radius of the crystal, K1 is the thermal conductivity, dn/dT is the refractive index gradient in function of the temperature, αth is the coefficient of thermal expansion, L is the length of the crystal, Pth is the fraction of pump power converted in thermal power. Even though proper dimensioning of the crystal and cooling systems help reducing the heat load, the thermal effect is critically influenced by the pump power density. As the pump power increases, the focal length of the thermal lens becomes shorter, leading to instability of the cavity, aberration and thus poor beam profile. At optimal pump power the focal length of the thermal lens can be as short as ten centimeters. Figure Pumped with a total power of 27 W, this double Ti:Sa crystal cavity could generate pulses up to 5.1 W (0.3 % RMS stability) in moderate spectral bandwidth, i.e. 50 nm at 1/e 2 . When AOPGCF is implemented and after optimization process an amplified spectrum up to 110 nm at 1/e 2 is obtained with an output power of 2.6 W (0.3 % RMS stability) for 28.5 W of pump. As comparison, a single crystal cavity pumped at optimal condition for excellent beam profile with 80 nm spectral width would deliver less than 1 W output power (we were unable to reach 110nm spectral width in this configuration). Thus the double-crystal cavity is about three times more efficient. Reaching higher output power in a single crystal cavity is possible with increasing the pump power at the cost of a poor beam profile. This effect in turn causes the cavity to be unstable and the Mazzler to be less efficient with higher losses for spectral broadening. Further amplification up to 7 W (0.35 % RMS stability) is achieved in a two-crystal single pass amplifier (preamplifier) pumped with 25 W. Since the single pass amplifier is also affected by gain narrowing and red-shifting of the amplified pulse, the spectral shaping via Mazzler is performed using the output spectrum of the preamplifier. The gain narrowing pre-compensation ensures that the spectrum at the output of the preamplifier has the desirable width and shape for a pulse duration as short as possible. For the pumping scheme of all amplifiers dichroic mirrors have been used to ensure high transmission at the pump wavelength and high reflectivity at the IR wavelength. In the meantime pump and IR beams paths are adjusted in order to ensure a good overlap inside the crystals. The last module of the front-end is the reflection grating-based (1480 grooves/mm) compressor. To prevent our system from being critically sensitive to mechanical vibrations, considering also the extended dimension, new CEP stable grating mounts have been designed for the stretcher and for the compressor. The new mounts are without rotation and translation stages, in order to ensure a solid and stable support for the optics. Figure The residual CEP noise of the amplified pulses has also been measured. The CEP stabilization method proposed here is based on a complete analog acquisition system coupled to a fast actuator Funding. European Union H2020-MSCA-ITN-MEDEA-641789; Agence Nationale de la Recherche ANR11-EQPX0005 ATTOLAB.