Half-metallic Heusler alloys are attracting considerable attention because of their unique half-metallic band structures which exhibit high spin polarization and yield huge magnetoresistance ratios. Besides serving as ferromagnetic electrodes, Heusler alloys also have the potential to host spin-charge conversion which has been recently demonstrated in other ferromagnetic metals. Here, we report on the spin-charge conversion effect in the prototypical Heusler alloy NiMnSb. Spin currents were injected from Y3Fe5O12 into NiMnSb films by spin pumping, and then the spin currents were converted to charge currents via spin-orbit interactions. Interestingly, an unusual charge signal was observed with a sign change at low temperature, which can be manipulated by film thickness and ordering structure. It is found that the spin-charge conversion has two contributions. First, the interfacial contribution causes a negative voltage signal, which is almost constant versus temperature. The second contribution is temperature dependent because it is dominated by minority states due to thermally excited magnons in the bulk part of the film. This work provides a pathway for the manipulation of spin-charge conversion in ferromagnetic metals by interface-bulk engineering for spintronic devices. The spin-charge conversion in well-designed materials and/or new states of matter is essential for the development of future energy-efficient spintronic devices Here, we study the spin-charge conversion in a NiMnSb Heusler alloy which was first reported to be a HMF by first-principles calculations As shown in Fig. Figure where VSC represents the voltage by spin-charge conversion; VAHE is the contribution from AHE; ∆H is the full width at half maximum for the voltage signal. Typical fitting results for the measured voltage signals at 10 K and 300 K are shown as solid lines in Fig. In the following, we theoretically discuss and analyze the observed voltage due to spin-charge conversion, as well as its temperature dependence. Technical details are presented in the Supplemental Material. Firstly, by considering the low temperature regime, the experimental data show a nonvanishing voltage V0 when approaching zero temperature. At T = 0 K, it is however impossible to inject a pure spin current -a net spin current in the absence of any charge currentinto a perfect HMF: pumping such a current requires establishing an equal-in-magnitude and opposite-in-sign chemical potential imbalance for two different spin species, while a perfect HMF has only one available. Since the pumping source is YIG, a ferrimagnetic insulator (no carriers available for spurious charge injection), this signal must be related to a spin-orbit active interface region, expected to be about 1-2 nm, where the perfect half-metallicity is known to be degraded where e = |e| is the elementary charge, L is the sample length, and j s is the (three-dimensional) spin current generated by YIG. Furthermore, α is the Rashba coefficient, m the effective electron mass, and n the (two-dimensional) particle density of the interface region, respectively. Secondly, at finite temperatures T > 0 K, even perfectly half-metallic bulk NiMnSb is capable of absorbing a pure spin current. This is because electron-magnon (spin flip) scattering yields a finite Density of States (DOS) for the minority band of NiMnSb where N ↑ , N ↓ are, respectively, the majority (↑) and minority (↓) DOS, while T* ~ 10 ) j eff s . ( Here d, θsH, and ρ are the thickness, spin Hall angle, and (3D) resistivity of the sample, respectively. Thus, the total voltage due to spin-charge conversion is the sum of the interface and bulk magnon-induced contributions The interfacial spin-charge conversion is taken to be T-independent (V0 = const) as a consequence of For V0 < 0 (see inset of Fig. In addition to the temperature-dependent effective pumping spin current, Eq. ( The spin diffusion length depends on the diffusion constants of majority and minority spin electrons, D ↑ and D ↓ , respectively, and on the spin-flip relaxation time τ s . Assuming D ↑ ≫ D ↓ , and that D ↓ and τ s are proportional to 1/N ↓ , the spin diffusion length is estimated as From Eq. ( The spin Hall angle can be separated into majority and minority band contributions, θ sH ↑ and θ sH ↓ , respectively, and the same is done for the corresponding spin Hall conductivities, σ sH ↑ and σ sH ↓ . According to Ref. which serves as a fitting equation with the parameters A, B, and C to the experimental data, Fig. The parameter B allows us to extract the ratio between the scattering-independent and the skew scattering contributions at zero temperature, see Table In conclusion, the spin-charge conversion in NiMnSb alloy films was investigated through the injection of spin current from YIG by spin pumping. It was observed that the voltage due to spin-charge conversion showed an unusual temperature dependence and a sign change at low temperature depending on film thickness and ordering structure. The temperature dependent behavior of the voltage in the NiMnSb films was further analyzed by the spin-charge conversion contributed by interface and bulk effects. This study may contribute a way for efficient spin-charge conversion in FMs for spintronic devices. The NiMnSb alloy films were deposited on YIG substrates by a co-sputtering method from Ni and MnSb targets in an ultrahigh vacuum magnetron sputtering system with a base pressure of ~ 1 × 10 -7 Pa. 1.5-nm-thick AlOx was subsequently deposited on the NiMnSb films for protection. The stoichiometric composition of the NiMnSb films was confirmed to be Ni1.01Mn0.98Sb1.01 by inductively coupled plasma (ICP) analysis. The samples with high ordering structure were deposited at a substrate temperature of 500 °C while the sample with low order was grown at room temperature. The structural properties of NiMnSb films were characterized by x-ray diffraction (XRD) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.15418 nm). AMR effect was measured at 10 and 300 K by a physical properties measurement system (PPMS). The YIG-substrate//NiMnSb device was placed on a coplanar waveguide where the microwave was applied. Two terminal electrodes were attached on the device for measuring the voltage. The magnetic field was applied in the plane of the films and perpendicular to the direction across the two electrodes. The power of microwave was varied from 25 to 200 mW and the frequency was changed from 5 to 7 GHz. The voltage signal was detected by using lock-in techniques and the voltage measurement was performed in PPMS at low and room temperatures. Experimental results on the FMR spectrum of NiMnSb and the voltage signals due to the NiMnSb resonance: Extrinsic spin-orbit coupling can be included We derive Eq. ( for the nonequilibrium spin density s = n ↑ -n ↓ with the spin current in z direction j z s = j z ↑ -j z ↓ , and the spin-flip relaxation rate 1/τs. Here, n ↑ (n ↓ ) is the majority-spin (minority-spin) particle density (per volume) induced by the spin pumping. The majority-and minority-spin particle currents j z ↑ and j z ↓ are given as diffusive currents, where D ↑,↓ is the diffusion constant per spin channel. Inserting Eq. (S5) into Eq. (S4) we easily find the general solution for n ↑,↓ and thus also for j z ↑,↓ , using again Eq. (S5). For the spin current, we take the boundary conditions as where the first one corresponds to the spin pumping scenario and the second one to spin conserving scattering at the surface. In addition, no charge flows along z, i.e., we have open-circuit conditions j z c = -e(j z ↑ + j z ↑ ) = 0. This yields the mean injected particle current per spin channel where λ sd = √2D ↑ D ↓ τ s /(D ↑ + D ↓ ) is the diffusion length in terms of the diffusion constants and the spin-flip relaxation time. Due to the inverse spin Hall effect, the injected spin current induces a particle current where σ ↑,↓ are the majority and minority longitudinal (particle) conductivities, and θ sH ↑,↓ is the spin Hall angle per spin channel. In an open-circuit situation, i.e., j x c = -e(j x ↑ + j x ↓ ) = 0, the electric field is given by where ρ = -e/(σ ↑ + σ ↓ ) is the resistivity. The experiments are performed in the temperature range 0 < T ≤ 300 K in highly-disordered samples. Thus, we are away from the "ultra-clean" regime of Ref. 41 and well below the Fermi temperature, and we will neglect η 2 (T) ≪ η(T). Indeed, at the moment one can only speculate about the increasing importance of phonons, and in particular of phonon skew scattering, with increasing temperature. On the one hand, the importance is suggested by the low Debye temperature of NiMnSb, especially of its surface modes affecting the interfacial spin galvanic conversion On the other hand, the magnon-limited bulk signal appears dominant in all samples considered in our study. Notice also that η(T) ≪ 1 for the experimental data (Fig. 1 + σ sH ss,0 /σ sH sj . (S16) As discussed in the main text in connection with Eq. ( In order to connect the total voltage, ). (S19) As shown in Fig. 3 