Thermal emission is the process by which all objects at non-zero temperatures emit light, and is welldescribed by the classic Planck, Kirchhoff, and Stefan-Boltzmann laws. For most solids, the thermally emitted power increases monotonically with temperature in a one-to-one relationship that enables applications such as infrared imaging and non-contact thermometry. Here, we demonstrate ultrathin thermal emitters that violate this one-to-one relationship via the use of samarium nickel oxide (SmNiO3), a strongly correlated quantum material that undergoes a fully reversible, temperature-driven solid-state phase transition. The smooth and hysteresis-free nature of this unique insulator-to-metal (IMT) phase transition allows us to engineer the temperature dependence of emissivity to precisely cancel out the intrinsic blackbody profile described by the Stefan-Boltzmann law, for both heating and cooling. Our design results in temperature-independent thermally emitted power within the long-wave atmospheric transparency window (wavelengths of 8 -14 μm), across a broad temperature range of ~30 °C, centered around ~120 °C. The ability to decouple temperature and thermal emission opens a new gateway for controlling the visibility of objects to infrared cameras and, more broadly, new opportunities for quantum materials in controlling heat transfer. The total amount of power thermally emitted by a surface in free space can be obtained by integrating its spectral radiance-given by Planck's law and an emissivity-over all wavelengths and hemispherical angles This assumption of a near-constant emissivity must be re-examined for thermal emitters comprising materials whose optical properties can be widely tunable with temperature (i.e., thermochromics). For example, an emissivity that increases with temperature can result in emitted power growing faster than T Here, we show that it is possible to achieve a complete breakdown of the conventional one-to-one mapping between the temperature and the thermally emitted power, P. A thermal-emission coating with this unique property can serve as a radiator that outputs a fixed amount of heat irrespective of its temperature, and can conceal differences in temperature across an object from infrared imagers. This condition can be written as ∂P/∂T = 0, and occurs when ε tot = γT Here, we demonstrate ZDTE in the 8 -14 μm atmospheric-transparency window To enable design of thermal emitters using SmNiO3, we performed temperature-dependent variable-angle spectroscopic ellipsometry over the 2 -16 μm wavelength range, through the entire range of the phase transition [Fig. To minimize fabrication complexity and cost and thus realize robust and large-area ZDTEs, we explored designs based on un-patterned thin films of SmNiO3. We used the temperature-dependent optical properties in Fig. The presence of the zero-differential region has profound implications for infrared imaging and control of infrared visibility. To demonstrate this, we performed a model experiment where two samples-our ZDTE, and a reference sapphire wafer-were mounted on a temperature-controlled chuck such that only a corner was touching the chuck and most of the sample was suspended in air, resulting in a temperature gradient from ~140 directly on top of the chuck to ~105 °C at the corner of the suspended area. When imaged with a long-wave infrared (LWIR) camera, the gradient is readily observable on the sapphire reference [Fig. 1(b)], but almost completely disappears on our SmNiO3-based ZDTE [Fig. We note that the presence of zero-differential emission does not necessarily guarantee completely temperature-independent infrared signatures. For example, slight differences can still be observed in the emission from our ZDTEs at 110 °C vs. 140 °C in Fig. In conclusion, we demonstrated that the typical one-to-one relationship between temperature and thermal radiation can be severed using zero-differential thermal emitter (ZDTE) coatings based on SmNiO3, a quantum material featuring a hysteresis-free thermally driven insulator-to-metal transition. The temperature range of the zero-differential emission effect can be widely tuned by strain, doping, or tilt control of SmNiO3, which can shift the transition range to room temperature and even below Materials synthesis: The SmNiO3 films were grown using magnetron sputtering. The sputtering power was set to 90 W DC for the Ni target and 170 W RF for the Sm target. The total pressure during deposition was kept at 5 mTorr under a constant gas flow of 40 sccm for Ar and 10 sccm for O2. The as-deposited films were subsequently transferred into a home-built high-pressure chamber and annealed in 1400-psi oxygen gas at 500 °C for 24 hours to form the perovskite phase. The electrical resistance of SmNiO3 films [Fig. ] was measured on a temperature-controlled probe station by sweeping the voltage from -0.1 V to 0.1 V with a Keithley 2635A source meter, with Pt electrodes on top of the SmNiO3 films. The electrodes can be seen in the bottom row of Fig. Nanoscale X-ray absorption spectroscopy: The x-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) / x-ray photoemission electron microscopy (XPEEM) experiments were performed at the XPEEM end station of the Electron Spectro-Microscopy beamline (21-ID-2) at the National Synchrotron Light Source II. The sample was illuminated with a focused monochromatic soft x-ray beam with a photon energy tuned around the Ni-L3 resonance (840 -850 eV). The temperature was controlled to within 0.1 °C of the target setpoint. All images are drift corrected and the same field of view was recovered at each temperature. All measurements were taken with linear-horizontal polarized light at an incident angle of 73° to the surface normal. The SmNiO3 film used for XAS/XPEEM measurements was deposited epitaxially on an LaAlO3 (001) substrate. The XAS/XPEEM is a spatially resolved probe to measure the Ni valence electronic states during the IMT. The metallic/insulating phases can be distinguished by different XAS spectral shapes. The maps in the inset of Fig. Optics measurements: The temperature-dependent complex refractive index of SmNiO3 was measured using a Woollam IR VASE MARK II spectroscopic ellipsometer with a temperature-controlled stage, assuming the film thickness obtained from SEM imaging of the cross section. The fitting was performed using WVASE software. The SmNiO3 film was assumed to be isotropic, whereas anisotropy in the sapphire was included in the fitting model. The reflection measurements were obtained with a Bruker Vertex 70 FTIR and a Hyperion 2000 microscope with a reflective objective (numerical aperture (NA) = 0.4), and a Linkam THMS600 temperature-controlled stage. The direct-emission measurements were obtained with the temperature stage and sample in the FTIR sample compartment, using a parabolic mirror for collection (NA = 0.05). In both direct-emission and Kirchhoff's-law measurements, we used a liquid-nitrogen-cooled mercury-cadmium-telluride (MCT) detector and a potassium bromide (KBr) beam splitter. A gold mirror was used as the reflection reference, whereas a vertically aligned carbon nanotube (CNT) forest on a silicon substrate was used as the emission reference (see Supplementary 5 for details about reference calibration and the accounting for background thermal radiation). LWIR imaging was carried out using a FLIR A325sc camera, sensitive to the 7.5 -13 μm range. The color bars of the infrared images in Fig. Optics calculations: For the calculation of emissivity, we used the transfer-matrix method together with the optical properties from ellipsometry to obtain the absorptivity, which we converted to emissivity using Kirchhoff's law. The emitted spectrum was then calculated by multiplying the spectral emissivity by the Planck distribution at the appropriate temperature, which could then be integrated over the mid-infrared transparent window of 8 to 14 μm to obtain the emitted power. The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. To ensure that the optical response of SmNiO3 has no hysteresis, we performed temperature-dependent reflection measurements for a full cycle of heating and cooling [Fig. Based on the characterized complex refractive index of SmNiO3 and the optical properties of sapphire and LaAlO3 from literature [S4], we estimated the ZDTE performance of SmNiO3 films of different thickness on these two substrates. Our calculations show that both substrates work well, but superior performance is achieved with the sapphire substrate (Fig. In general, one can describe the detected emission signal from an FTIR system as [S6]: where XX XX (λλ, TT) is the measured Fourier-transformed emission spectrum, mm(λλ) is the system response, εε XX (λλ, TT) is the temperature-dependent sample emissivity, LL BBBB (λλ, TT) is the blackbody radiance, and BB XX (λλ, TT) is the background, which can also be sample dependent. To calibrate our FTIR, we performed temperature-dependent thermal-emission measurements using three samples: a vertically-aligned carbon nanotube forest (CNT) [S7] "blackbody" (with constant εε ~ 0.95 across the infrared spectral range), a fused-silica wafer, and a sapphire wafer. Using Eq. (S3-1) and further analysis of our FTIR instrument [S8], we can obtain the emissivity of an unknown sample from a known reference αα via: Note that S3-2 does not work for all situations and systems; careful analysis is necessary to make sure that the emissivity is being extracted correctly. We measured the emissivity of our test samples (polished fused silica and sapphire wafers) by using this formula, and further confirmed that the extracted emissivity matches well with the value obtained by spectroscopic ellipsometry, Fresnel equations, and an application of Kirchhoff's law (Fig. We numerically studied the angular dependence of the thermal radiance of our SmNiO3/sapphire ZDTE. Based on our numerical analysis [Fig. Here, we provide our numerical analysis of the temperature drop due to the non-zero thermal conductivity and thickness of our emitter. We calculated the temperature distribution for a 0. ∂∂zz 2 ) along the sapphire wafer using the heat transfer parameters for sapphire from Table In this section, we show that it may be possible to achieve ZDTE over a different temperature range than what we demonstrated in the paper by leveraging other rare-earth nickelates with lower transition temperatures. As shown in Ref. [2], while the transition temperatures of SmNiO 