Boundary scattering in hierarchically disordered nanomaterials is an effective way to reduce the thermal conductivity of thermoelectric materials and increase their performance. In this work we investigate thermal transport in silicon-based nanostructured materials in the presence of nanocrystallinity and nanopores at the range of 300 K -900 K using a Monte Carlo simulation approach. The thermal conductivity in the presence of nanocrystallinity follows the same reduction trend as in the pristine material. We show, however, that the relative reduction is stronger with temperature in the presence of nanocrystallinity, a consequence of the wavevector-dependent (q-dependent) nature of phonon scattering on the domain boundaries. In particular, as the temperature is raised the proportion of large wavevector phonons increases. Since these phonons are more susceptible to boundary scattering, we show that compared to the wave-vector independent thermal conductivity value this q-dependent surface scattering could account for even a ~40% reduction in the thermal conductivity of nanocrystalline Si. Introduction of nanopores with randomized positions enhances this effect, which suggests that hierarchical nanostructuring is actually more effective at high temperatures than previously thought. Hierarchical nanostructuring is the most promising approach to date to achieve very low thermal conductivities (κ) and high thermoelectric (TE) figure of merit (ZT) as hierarchically sized nanofeatures scatter phonons across wavelengths and reduce phonon transport throughout the spectrum From the theoretical point of view, a large number of works can be found in the literature in explaining thermal conductivity trends in nanostructured materials, by us and others, using a variety of theoretical and simulation methods For calculating the thermal conductivity we solve the phonon Boltzmann transport equation (BTE) using the Monte Carlo method, with all details and validation described in our recent works In the nanocrystalline geometry cases, the average grain size in the simulation , where x L is the length of the domain in the transport direction and G N  is the average number of grains encountered in that length. Grains in the nanocrystalline case are generated using Voronoi tessellations, where grain boundaries are created by expanding grain areas radially outward from their initial "seeding points" until two areas meet If the phonon is scattered, another parameter which depends again on the roughness and the phonon wavevector, the specularity, p, determines the angle of phonon scattering based on geometrical considerations (the angle of incidence is the same as the angle of reflection) as: where θinc is the angle of propagation of the phonon relative to the x-axis, and γ is the angle formed by the line perpendicular to the pore at the point of interaction and the x-axis (see Fig. The main investigation we undertake in this work concerns the influence of boundary scattering at high temperatures, and more specifically the role that different wave vector (q) and MFP phonons play in grain boundary scattering. Therefore, we find it useful to provide an indication of the participation of larger q phonons in thermal conductivity as the temperature is raised. We can show this for the pristine bulk material based on the lattice thermal conductivity, l  , as derived from the Boltzmann transport equation in the single mode relaxation time (SMRT) approximation. The phonon thermal conductivity is given as ( ) ,i , ll iq   =  q , where [30]: In Eq. 3, above, the index i refers to each mode or band (two transverse and one acoustic), q q is the group velocity as a function of the wavevector, and is derived from the expression provided for each band's  , i  is similarly the relaxation time for each mode, T is the temperature, k B is the Boltzmann constant and is the reduced Planck's constant. The Bose-Einstein statistics are incorporated in this equation in the so-called phonon window function term which is shown in Fig. with vs = 9.01 × 10 3 ms -1 and c = -2 × 10 -7 m 2 s -1 for the longitudinal acoustic (LA) branch, and vs = 5.23 × 10 3 ms -1 and c = -2.26 × 10 -7 m 2 s -1 for the transverse acoustic (TA) branches where B = 2.8 × 10 -19 s/K and C = 140 K. (Note that coded in the Monte Carlo solver is a more detailed and elaborate scattering rate description as in The relative contribution of each q-state to the thermal conductivity as the temperature changes, compared to the 300 K contribution, is shown in Fig.   q at T = 300, 400, 500, and 600 K using Eq. 4. Then we perform the following two steps: i) We normalize the ( ) q values with respect to their initial q = 0 value, ( ) , ii) We normalize again those new values with their corresponding values at 300 K (which we use as our basis). This tells us how much more higher q-states contribute to thermal transport at higher temperatures, compared to room temperature. Thus, Fig. We begin our investigation with the effects of nanocrystallinity on the thermal conductivity of Si as the temperature is raised. In Fig. The introduction of nanograin boundaries into the material (as shown in the inset of Fig. To clarify this magnitude, in Fig. Next, we perform the same investigation for hierarchical nanostrucutred Si-based materials, in which case we incorporate nanopores into the nanocrystalline structures (as in Fig. In Fig. In Fig. In order to directly compare and contrast q-dependent and q-independent scattering at grain boundaries, we turn off the q-dependence and re-run the simulations. In this case we consider only specular scattering at grain boundary and transmission without change in phonon angle. In this way, we compare the thermal conductivity of randomizing barriers versus q-dependent specular barriers, which also include temperature dependence. In Figs. 5a-c the effect of q-independent grain boundary scattering, for the nanocrystalline (NC) case with <d> = 50 nm (purple-dashed line) is compared to the q-dependent case (red line). Figure In this work we employed the Monte Carlo transport simulator to solve the Boltzmann transport equation (BTE) for phonons in nanocrystalline Si-based materials and nanocrystalline materials with pores. We investigated the influence of wavevector qdependence scattering on the nanocrystalline boundaries, and how this affects the thermal conductivity. We show that at higher temperatures, because the average phonon wavevector (q) increases, scattering throughout boundaries becomes stronger, and the thermal conductivity reduction is enhanced with temperature, compared to q-independent boundary scattering. We show that even up to ~ 40% further reduction in thermal conductivity at high temperatures (800 K) is attributed to the q-dependence of boundary scattering, compared to if the boundary scattering was q-independent. The introduction of random nanopores in addition to nanocrystallinity magnifies this effect by an additional ~15% at 800 K. This suggests that nanostructuring at high temperatures can actually be more effective than previously thought, and a simple constant MFP due to boundary scattering overestimates the thermal conductivity. We expect that our approach could be used to predict the behavior of materials depicting q-dependent boundary scattering at high temperatures, as well as providing insight into the design of low thermal conductivity, high ZT nanostructured materials. Here  = 5%, for a random polydispersed pore arrangement, with pore diameter of uniformly distributed between 10 nm -50 nm. (c) Schematic for grain scattering indicating the initial angle of the phonon, θGB, from the normal (dashed line), grain boundaries (black lines), initial path of the phonon (blue line) and probable paths of the phonon after scattering (red-dashed lines and green-dashed transmitted line). Transmission is dependent on grain boundary roughness as well as phonon wave vector q. Transmission probability is given by Eq 1. (a) Effect on thermal conductivity (κ) as temperature increases from 300 K to 900 K, for the pristine case (blue line), nanocrystalline (NC) case with <d> = 100 nm (green line) and <d> = 50 nm (red line). A sharp reduction in κ of over 75% is observed at 300 K for the <d> = 100 nm case (green line). This drops further to more than 85% for temperatures over 800 K. The κ drop is greater in the <d> = 50 nm case (red line). A typical geometry for <d> = 100 nm case is given as Fig. 