Graphene, defined as a single atomic plane of graphite, is a semimetal with small overlap between the valence and the conduction bands. The stacking of graphene up to several atomic layers can produce diverse physical properties, depending on the stacking way. The bilayer graphene is also a semimetal, adopting the AB-stacked (or Bernal-stacked) structure or the rare AA-stacked structure. The trilayer or a few layer graphene (FLG) can be semimetal or semiconductor, depending on whether it takes Bernal (ABA) stacking or rhombohedral (ABC) stacking. We will give a perspective on the recent two mild approaches to control the stacking via local transition from ABC stacking into ABA stacking. It is believed that with the rapid development of graphene-based materials, these techniques for stacking control can be used for more complex structure to fulfill fascinating properties and devices. Graphene, defined as a single atomic plane of graphite, is a semimetal with small overlap between the valence and the conduction bands Compared with these ideal stacking structure, the stacking structure in most graphene multilayers is actually more complex. Twinning is a common feature, where different stacking configurations coexist, connected by discrete twin boundaries Owing to the possibility of different stacking configurations, controlling the stacking structure of graphene materials is vital to realize specific properties and/or novel functional devices. In early 2018, Japanese scientists reported their success in selective fabrication of pure ABA and ABC trilayer graphene Very recently, Latychevskaia et al. In joule heating, the high temperature induced stress was thought to be the driving force for the transition. However, the high density direct current can also induce significant stress or structural change due to strong electron-lattice couplings Laser pulses of 790 nm wavelength were used to initialize the transition in a focused zone of ca. 20 um as the second method. The stacking transition is triggered by the laser illumination the focused zone. Compared with the laser, a short-wavelength UV light (10 nm-400nm), which generates much higher energy, is more promising to control the stacking transition in a smaller focused zone. This method will allow customized design of the stacking structure on a scale of nanometers by controlling the pathway of the pulsing beam like stereo lithography, which widen the feasibility of making novel graphene-based functional devices. Although nanospot angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy is powerful to characterize the local stacking structure The above techniques to control and characterize the stacking structure can also be applied to other 2D or layered materials, which makes it possible to introduce more exciting properties or solve structural mysteries. One example is graphitic C 3 N 4 (g-C 3 N 4 ), the most stable allotrope of carbon nitrides and a fascinating 2D semiconductor. In past decades, many efforts to make g-C 3 N 4 produce mainly graphitic s-heptazine based C 3 N 4 (gh-C 3 N 4 ), containing a small amount of H With the rapid development of graphene-based materials, these techniques for stacking control can be used for more complex structure to fulfill fascinating properties and devices. However, challenges still lie ahead, e.g. encapsulation of heterostructure, precise control of heating effects, mechanical performance of devices, etc. To tackle these challenges, in-depth understanding is required not only on these techniques but also on the structure-properties relationships of graphene-based materials, which also leads to better structural design. Compared with the extensive studies in structure and electronic behaviors, less attention was paid to mechanical properties of graphene-based materials and functional devices. From the perspective of practical application, the mechanical properties are also very important and therefore significant efforts are needed to be devoted 