We propose that Cu-substituted Fe 2 P, (Fe 1-x Cu x ) 2 P (x ∼ 0.16), to be an outstanding contender for the STT-MRAM application. Using first principles based calculations in the framework of density functional theory and through Monte Carlo simulations, we demonstrate that this material can be used as ferromagnetic electrode in the magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ) of STT-MRAM due to its moderate perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA), large tunnel magneto-resistance (TMR), good thermal stability and high ferromagnetic transition temperature. We point out that the simplicity in the synthesis, huge abundance, and non-toxicity make this material a very good candidate to replace the current MTJ materials for STT-MRAM such as FePt, FeCo or FeCoB. In the current years, heaps of considerations are given to Spin-transfer-torque magnetic random access memory (STT-MRAM) due to its high density, low power consumption, non-volatility and considered to be one of the promising candidate for next-generation universal memory In the present study, we propose another contender for the ferromagnetic electrode, which can be utilized as a part of MTJ of the STT-MRAM. We show here that (Fe 1-x Cu x ) 2 P can be used as alternative to FeCo or FePt. This material fulfils all the essential requirements to act as component in MTJ. Stoichiometric Fe 2 P is a ferromagnet with Curie temperature (T C ) of 216 K All the above mentioned studies were intended to make the metal substituted Fe 2 P to be useful for permanent magnet applications. However no efforts have been made so far to in a direction where non-stoichiometric Fe 2 P may find a "softer" magnetic applications We explored systematically the the effect of Co, Ni, Cu and Zn substitution on the various magnetic properties of Fe 2 P, particularly the magnetic moments, Magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy, the ferromagnetic transition temperature. Such screening shows Cu substituted Fe 2 P is the most suitable candidate for the MRAM application which we have further verified through the calculation of TMR. We discuss our findings following a brief outline of the computational methods. We performed first-principles calculations using the projector-augmented wave (PAW) method The Heisenberg exchange coupling constants (J i j ) are calculated using spinpolarized relativistic (SPR) Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker (KKR) Green's function method, as implemented within SPRKKR package where, êi and ê j are the unit vectors along the direction of local magnetic moment on atomic site i and j respectively. The exchange parameters can be obtained from the energy difference between two different magnetic configurations using the formulation of Liechtenstein et al. Once the exchange coupling constants are calculated from SPRKKR package, one can estimate the Curie temperature either using simplified mean filed approximation or via more sophisticated Monte Carlo simulation as implemented in VAMPIRE software package where, J i j is the pair wise exchange energy either between same or different species of atoms within nearest neighbor approximation, z is the coordination number (number of nearest neighbors), k B is the Boltzmann constant and ε represents a correction factor to account for spin wave fluctuations in different crystal lattices. Initial structure of Fe 2 P is taken from the experimental data An early X-ray diffraction experiment on (Fe 1-x M x ) 2 P alloys (where M is the transition metal) by Fruchart et al. To examine the site preference of the solute M atoms in Fe 2-x M x P, we compared the total energies for both cases, i.e. with M atom at Fe I and Fe II sites, and the energy differences ∆E Fe I -Fe II is listed in Table Table Fig. Table Similar to Fe 2 P, lower energy structures of Co, Cu and Zn substituted Fe 2 P also have [001] as magnetization easy axis. Since these alloys have T C above room temperature and magnetic easy axis oriented along the [001] direction, they can be used in perpendicular magnetic recording applications. For Ni substitution it is reversed, i.e., the magnetic easy axis is along [100] direction. Further, it shows lowest MAE (97 μeV/f.u.) among all the alloys under consideration (see Fig. From the above, it is quite evident that the Cu-substituted Fe 2 P satisfies all the necessary requirements. In the following we further investigate its competence as for the same from the calculation of T C and TMR calculations. Here, we demonstrate the results of interatomic exchange constants for pristine Fe 2 P and Cu-substituted Fe 2 P obtained using SPR-KKR package and the corresponding Curie temperature as presented in Table where, m(T) is normalized magnetization as a function of temperature (T), T C is the Curie temperature and β is the critical exponent. In case of Fe 2 P, β is 0.501 whereas, for Cu-substituted Fe 2 P it is 0.497. The fitted values of T C for both Fe 2 P and Cu-substituted Fe 2 P are shown in Table3. The simulated T C for Fe 2 P is 230K which is in good agreement with the experimental value of 217K, where as in case of Cu-substituted, T C reaches to 792K. We have also calculated the T C with the lower concentration of Cu (8.11%) and got the value 502K. To further understand the origin of large T C in the Cu-substituted Fe 2 P, we show in the Fig. trilayer structure The magnetic tunnel junction(MTJ) composed of Cu-substituted Fe 2 P having different number of insulating layers of MgO is shown in Fig. where, P L 1 (P L 2 ) is depicts spin polarization value of ferromagnetic layer, L 1 (L 2 ). The variation of TMR with different number of insulating layer has been shown in Table5. The maximum TMR achieved for 8.11% of Cu-substituted Fe 2 P having two layers of MgO (94%) which is considerably large and makes the material suitable for STT-MRAM applications. In summary, we have studied the magnetic properties of Fe 2 P and M-substituted Fe 2 P (M is the transition metal) using first-principles calculations based on DFT. Our calculations show that Co, Ni substitutes Fe preferentially at tetrahedral site, whereas Cu and Zn substitutes at pyramidal site. For all studied alloys, total magnetic moment is less than that of Fe 2 P and decreases linearly as we move from Co to Zn substitution. Further, decrease in magnetic moment is more pronounced for substitution at pyramidal site. Computed MAE for Fe 2 P is 496 μeV/f.u., with magnetic easy axis oriented along the [001] direction, which is in excellent agreement with the experimental results. The MAE of Fe 2 P is found to decrease for all substitutions. Co, Cu and Zn substituted Fe 2 P retains [001] as magnetization easy axis, thus can be used in perpendicular magnetic recording applications. Interestingly, Ni substituted Fe 2 P has [100] as easy axis with lowest MAE of 97 μeV/f.u. For Cu -substituted Fe 2 P, we show that due to its moderate perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, large TMR, it has significant potential to be used as component for a magnetic RAM. Cu-doped Fe2P Site μ