Optical properties of atomically thin transition metal dichalcogenides are controlled by robust excitons characterized by a very large oscillator strength. Encapsulation of monolayers such as MoSe2 in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) yields narrow optical transitions approaching the homogenous exciton linewidth. We demonstrate that the exciton radiative rate in these van der Waals heterostructures can be tailored by a simple change of the hBN encapsulation layer thickness as a consequence of the Purcell effect. The time-resolved photoluminescence measurements show that the neutral exciton spontaneous emission time can be tuned by one order of magnitude depending on the thickness of the surrounding hBN layers. The inhibition of the radiative recombination can yield spontaneous emission time up to 10 ps. These results are in very good agreement with the calculated recombination rate in the weak exciton-photon coupling regime. The analysis shows that we are also able to observe a sizeable enhancement of the exciton radiative decay rate. Understanding the role of these electrodynamical effects allow us to elucidate the complex dynamics of relaxation and recombination for both neutral and charged excitons. The control of the spontaneous emission using a cavity to tune the number of electromagnetic modes coupled to the emitter has been demonstrated in various atomic and solid-state systems, following the pioneering work of Purcell In this Letter we demonstrate that the top and bottom hBN encapsulation layers form a microcavity-like structure which controls the exciton radiative lifetime in the MoSe 2 monolayer through the Purcell effect. In this weak coupling regime, the escape time of spontaneous photons out of our open cavity-like structure is much shorter than the radiative lifetime and reabsorption is negligible. This is in contrast with the strong coupling regime obtained with much more reflective mirrors resulting in microcavity polaritons Samples and setup. We have investigated MoSe 2 MLs encapsulated in hBN deposited onto a 80 nm SiO 2 /Si substrate using a dry-stamping technique Results and discussion. The encapsulation of TMD monolayers with hBN results in high optical quality samples with well-defined optical transitions exhibiting linewidth in the 1 . . . 4 meV range at low temperature Figure Assuming a free space radiative lifetime of MoSe 2 ML of 2.7 ps which is the single free parameter, we find in Fig. Laser or reflectivity spectroscopy used here cannot disentangle the linewidth contributions from inhomogeneous broadening, non-radiative processes, light scattering and radiative decay. This would require the use of non-linear techniques such as FWM experiments Finally, the control of the radiative lifetime resulting from the hBN encapsulation is further confirmed by measuring the dynamics of the charged exciton (trion, T). Figure The cavity effects revealed in this work make it possible to elucidate the complex dynamics of relaxation and recombination of excitons in TMD MLs Excellent fits of both the neutral and charged exciton PL dynamics can be obtained with the two-level model using the same relaxation time τ relax from the photogenerated high energy states, inset of Fig. In conclusion, we have shown that encapsulation of TMD MLs with hBN does not only improve the exciton emission/absorption linewidth by reducing the disorderinduced broadening related to local dielectric fluctuations. The hBN layers surrounding the semiconducting monolayer also have a dramatic impact on the exciton photon coupling through the Purcell effect. We demonstrate that we can control the radiative recombination time by one order of magnitude from ∼ 1 ps up to about 10 ps in full agreement with the theoretical analysis. This opens the way to engineer the exciton-photon coupling in these van der Waals heterostructures. An interesting prospect would be to deposit TMD monolayers on top of epsilon-near-zero metamaterials We fabricate the van der Waals heterostructures by mechanical exfoliation of high quality hBN crystals and bulk MoSe 2 (similar results have been obtained with commercial MoSe 2 provided by 2D Semiconductors or HQ Graphene). A first layer of hBN is mechanically exfoliated and deposited onto a 80 nm SiO 2 /Si substrate using The thicknesses of the bottom hBN layer d is roughly determined by the color obtained in reflectivity Fig. The exciton kinetics are fitted with simple biexponential fits based on a simple two-level model assuming that the system can be described by the population of the "reservoir" of photogenerated hot carriers n hot and of the cold excitons n X (inset of Fig. where τ relax is the relaxation rate of the hot excitons into the emitting states and τ rad is the radiative decay rate of excitons. In Eqs. (S1) we disregarded non-radiative recombination processes. Then the calculated exciton PL intensity simply writes: The time-resolved photoluminescence measurements show that the radiative lifetime in sample I is limited by the temporal resolution (in the main text we infer τ X < 1.5 ps) We can tentatively estimate the radiative lifetime by combining the cw and time-resolved PL results. The exciton homogeneous linewidth writes: Γ = Γ rad + Γ , where Γ rad is the radiative linewidth and Γ includes both non-radiative and pure-dephasing processes. The linewidth contributions from inhomogeneous broadening, light scattering, non-radiative processes, and radiative decay cannot be, unfortunately, disentangled by linear techniques such as photoluminescence or reflectivity spectroscopy used here. Nevertheless a rough estimate can be obtained assuming that the linewidth in sample II is mainly determined by pure dephasing processes and neglecting inhomogeneous broadening. We find Γ ≈ 1.1 meV (FWHM); the measured radiative lifetime (≈ 10 ps) gives a negligible radiative linewidth contribution : Γ rad ≈ 0.06 meV. Assuming that nonradiative and pure dephasing processes are identical in samples I and II, we can deduce a radiative linewidth of ≈ 0.9 meV in sample I corresponding to a radiative lifetime of ≈ 740 fs. Although this analysis is rather approximate, the results are consistent with the recent FWM measurements in similar samples demonstrating that the homogenous broadening is not fully controlled by the radiative broadening Figure Our attribution of the decay time of neutral exciton to the relaxation of hot excitons in the main text assumes for simplicity the absence of non-radiative channels. Although this work demonstrates that the lifetime of an exciton in the radiative cone is dominated by its radiative recombination (tunable by cavity effects), we cannot claim that all hot excitons necessarily relax to the light cone. Indeed, any non-radiative channel such as defects trapping, relaxation to a dark state or formation of a trion at a timescale shorter than the relaxation to the light cone would lead exactly to the same dynamics but with smaller neutral exciton PL yield. In this subsection we briefly analyze this scenario depicted in Fig. Here the non-radiative decay rate of excitons includes contributions of trapping to defects, trion formation as well as possible formation of dark states. For excitons within the light cone we neglect non-radiative processes since τ nr τ rad . The calculation shows that the exciton PL dynamics under the condition is given by the exponential law ∝ exp (-t/τ decay ). We emphasize that if the trion formation from the hot exciton reservoir is the dominant process, then it is not surprising to observe the same rise time for the trion than the decay time for the neutral exciton. In order to provide an additional evidence for the variation of the exciton radiative lifetime as a result of the cavity-like effect we present in Fig. where R M L is the intensity reflection coefficient for the sample with the MoSe 2 monolayer and R is the intensity reflection coefficient of the same sample but without the monolayer (measured in a different spot). Panel (a) shows the data on the sample I where the exciton radiative recombination is enhanced and panel (b) shows the data on the sample II where the exciton radiative recombination is inhibited. Despite certain spread of the DR/R values, one can see that the reflection contrast in the sample I is systematically much larger than in the sample II ; the exciton linewidth in sample I is also substantially larger than the one in sample II. We stress that these reflectivity data are fully in line with the cw PL and time-resolved PL measurements presented in the main text. We abstain from the detailed multi-parameter fit of the reflectivity data which requires also careful analysis of the light scattering and inhomogeneous broadening (as well as possible effects of finite NA of our optical setup). In this section we outline the general electrodynamical method to calculate the radiative decay rate based on the transfer matrix formalism, present its justification on the basis of quantum mechanical approach. We use the transfer matrix method in order to calculate the elementary response functions (reflectivity, transmission and absorbance) of our structure "cap hBN layer/TMD ML/bottom hBN layer/SiO 2 /Si" Here Ti→j is the transfer matrix through the interface between the layers i to j, Ti is the transfer matrix through the layer i, the prime denotes the bottom hBN layer. For the TMD ML transfer matrix we consider the situation of the monolayer embedded into the infinite hBN: Here r and t are the reflection and transmission coefficients of the TMD MLs in the infinite homogeneous hBN, ω 0 is the exciton resonance frequency, Γ hBN 0 is the exciton radiative decay rate (into the hBN, Γ hBN 0 = Γ vac 0 /n hBN , where n hBN is the hBN refractive index and Γ vac 0 is the radiative decay rate into free space, see Eq. (S21) and discussion below) and Γ is the exciton non-radiative decay rate. The Si layer is assumed to be thicker than the absorption length, hence, the reflection of light at the interface Si and air is disregarded. The transfer matrix provides the following relation between r tot and t tot the amplitude reflection and transmission coefficients through the structure: Equation (S9) allows us to obtain r tot (ω) and t tot (ω) from the transfer matrix and the absorbance of the monolayer can be expressed as where n Si is the refraction index of Si. According to the general theory where dots denote regular part, Z r and Z t are the complex constants, and the quantities ω eff 0 and Γ eff 0 represent the renormalized exciton frequency and its radiative decay rate. Accordingly, the absorbance in the vicinity of the resonance can be approximated by Thus, in order to calculate the radiative decay rate Γ eff 0 (HWHM)in our structure, we found numerically the absorbance, A(ω) at Γ → 0, Here and below we provide quantum mechanical approach to emission of excitons into homogeneous dielectric media. Let us start with the calculation of the emission rate of the exciton in a TMD ML into a free space. We neglect dielectric contrast between the ML and the surrounding. Hereafter we consider only s-polarization of light and fix the direction of the electric and magnetic fields. Normalization of electric field per photon reads where V is the normalization volume, E 0 and B 0 are the complex amplidutes of the electric and magnetic field. It is convenient to use the vector potential A such that E = -c -1 ∂A/∂t. Hence E 0 = (iω/c)A 0 and the normalization for the vector potential reads The light-matter coupling operator can be expressed as where j is the current associated with exciton transition. In the two-dimensional layer the matrix element of the perturbation (S14) related to the formation of exciton per one photon with the center of mass wavevector where S is the normalization area, φ(0) is the exciton envelope wavefunction at the coinciding electron and hole coordinates, p cv is the interband momentum matrix element, q = (q x , q y ) is the in-plane wavevector of light. Using the Fermi golden rule we obtain the exciton radiative decay rate Here ω 0 is the exciton resonance frequency, and the light wavevector q = q 2 + q 2 z where q = 0 and q z = 0 are the in-plane and normal components of the wavevector. We transform the sum over q into the integral over q z as q . . . δ q ,0 = V S The energy conservation law provides two values of q z = ±ω 0 /c. As a result, for the radiative decay rate Γ 0 we have in agreement with Refs. Here q 0 = ω 0 /c is the wavevector of emitted radiation. Let us now analyze the modifications of Eq. (S18) for emission into a dielectric medium with the background dielectric constant κ b . Normalization of the field and vector potential reads (note that the relation between E and A does not depend on κ b and in the homogeneous medium B 0 = √ κ b E 0 so that electric and magnetic energies are the same): (S19) Additional modification in the Fermi golden rule approach comes from Eq. (S16) where the energy conservation δ-function reads now therefore, the removal of the δ-function yields √ κ b in the numerator. As a result Here q b = ω 0 √ κ b /c is the wavevector of emitted radiation in the medium. The comparison of Eqs. (S18) and (S20) shows that In this approach we disregard, for simplicity, the modification of exciton wavefunction at the coinciding coordinates φ(0), interband momentum matrix element p cv and the exciton resonance frequency ω 0 due to the dielectric environment effects, including the screening of Coulomb potential of electron-hole interaction. This approach allows us to clarify the electrodynamical effects which can be interpreted here as: (i) change of the photon density of states and (ii) change of the field amplitude per photon. We demonstrate now that this result, Eq. (S21), simply follows from the electrodynamical approach presented above. We consider a monolayer surrounded by the homogeneous hBN semi-infinite layers. We introduce the reflection coefficients from the dielectric to vacuum (r b0 ) and from vacuum to the dielectric (r 0b ). First, we calculate the reflection coefficient r + from the half space filled with a dielectric with the ML on its left side, Fig. Here t 0b = 1 + r 0b and t b0 = 1 + r b0 are the corresponding transmission coefficients. Substitution of Eq. (S23) into Eq. (S24) gives Equation (S25) has the same form as Eqs. (S8) and provides the explicit connection between the renormalized and non-renormalized exciton radiative decay rate in full agreement with Eq. (S21) confirming the electrodynamical approach. Now we turn to the structure shown in Fig. This result was derived by the electrodynamical approach. Note, that this equality is general and can be applicable for any system with complex reflection coefficient, e.g., if the barrier is finite or the absorption is involved or if the barrier consists of several layers. In the particular case of a barrier made of a homogeneous dielectric with the real susceptibility κ b we have It is instructive to derive Eq. (S27) by means of the Fermi golden rule. For convenience and in order to avoid problems with fact that the dispersion of waves in the left-hand side and in the right-hand side of the structure is different we assume that at z → +∞ the background dielectric constant κ b goes smoothly to 1. Asymptotic behavior of the modes of electromagnetic field at z → ±∞ can be written as: Here |E 0 | is given by Eq. (S12), the t b is the transmission coefficient through the dielectric barrier from the left to the right, r b is the reflection coefficient from the barrier for the radiation incident from the right, t b is the transmission coefficient through the barrier from the right to the left, see Fig. ) which hold true for non-absorbing media only, where, strictly speaking, quantum mechanical approach is applicable. The dispersion relation remains the same as for the waves in the empty space. Now we apply the Fermi golden rule [cf. Eq. (S16)] S31) where V (i) is the perturbation for interaction with the waves (S29), i = 1, 2. The summation over q z is understood as follows [cf. Eq. (S17)] Taking into account that the amplitude of the electromagnetic field at the TMD ML for the mode 1 is given by E 0 (1 + r 0b ) and for the wave 2 is given by E 0 t b , the ratio Thus, Fermi golden rule, Eq. (S33) and the electrodynamical approach, Eq. (S27), gives the same result for non-absorbing dielectric media. It is worth stressing that Eq. (S27) is more general in a sense that it can be applied for absorbing structures as well where the quantum mechanical approach fails In this section we provide simple but accurate analytical approximation for the Purcell effect in our structure. We also consider the effects related to emission at oblique angles and demonstrate that they are not particularly important in the studied system. The main simplification comes from the fact that the thickness of the top hBN layer (typically within 10 nm range) does not affect electrodynamical properties of the structure because it is much smaller than the light wavelength at the exciton resonance frequency. That is why we can consider a simplified structure in our analytical model shown in Fig. We introduce the following notations for the reflection coefficients: we use r j = -r j for the reflection through the same interface but in the backwards direction, and we use t j = 1 + r j , t j = 1 + r j for the transmission coefficients, j = 1, . . . , 3. We use q j and L j to denote corresponding wavevector and thickness, i.e., q 1 is the wavevector in hBN, L 1 ≡ d (in the notations of the main text) is its thickness. For the SiO 2 /Si part of the structure (light is incident from hBN) the reflection coefficient reads Analogously, for the whole structure hBN/SiO 2 /Si The Purcell factor, i.e., the ratio of the emission rate in our structure and in vacuum, in agreement with written above is given by We stress that we analyze here the impact of the electrodynamical environment only. The effects related to possible variation of the exciton binding energy and oscillator strength due to modification of the Coulomb interaction dielectric screening are disregarded. The calculation of the exciton radiative lifetime after Eq. (S38) and Eq. ( A. Effects of the in-plane wavevector of exciton The aim of this section is to determine the influence of the emission angle because in the experiments, a high NA objective is used which collects photons emitted by excitons with non-zero momentum. To that end, let us now consider the emission of exciton with an in-plane wavevector k. In this case, the polarization of radiation becomes important. As before, we start from the emission into free space and present the side-by-side comparison of the Fermi golden rule approach and electrodynamical treatment of the problem. The light-exciton coupling matrix elements depend on the light polarization [cf. Eq. (S15)] and read: where cos θ = q z /q = k 2q 2 /q. Additionally, in the Fermi golden rule the energy conservation δ-function should be transformed as δ( c q 2 z + q 2ω 0 ) = which produces extra factor 1/ cos θ in the Fermi golden rule. This factor arises from van Hove-like singularity of photon density of states at the edge of the light cone. As a result, we have the following relations Γ vac 0,s (k) = 1 cos θ Γ vac 0 , Γ vac 0,p (k) = cos θΓ vac 0 . (S41) This result can be also obtained from the electrodynamical approach j,j+1 = -n 2 j+1 q z,jn 2 j q z,j+1 n 2 j+1 q z,j + n 2 j q z,j+1 . (S46) The transmission coefficients read t We also note that in actual calculations is it convenient to change from the integration over k to the integration over the angle of incidence θ. Assuming that f (k) is constant in the relevant wavevector range, by virtue of kdk = q 2 0 sin θd sin θ = q 2 0 cos θ sin θdθ the integral in Eq. (S44) can be recast as (μ = cos θ): Université de Toulouse, INSA-CNRS-UPS, LPCNO, 135 Av. Rangueil, 31077 Toulouse, France Ioffe Institute, 194021 St. Petersburg, Russia and National Institute for Materials Science, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan In this way we disregarded possible weak asymmetry of the optical spectra due to exciton-phonon interaction which could be taken into account by using Γ as a function of frequency[8, 9].