We present models for prediction of activation energy barrier of diffusion process of adatom (1-4) islands obtained by using data-driven techniques. A set of easily accessible features, geometric and energetic, that are extracted by analyzing the variation of the energy barriers of a large number of processes on homo-epitaxial metallic systems of Cu, Ni, Pd, and Ag are used along with the calculated activation energy barriers to train and test linear and non-linear statistical models. A multivariate linear regression model trained with energy barriers for Cu, Pd, and Ag systems explains 92% of the variation of energy barriers of the Ni system, whereas the non-linear model using artificial neural network slightly enhances the success to 93%. Next mode of calculation that uses barriers of all four systems in training, predicts barriers of randomly picked processes of those systems with significantly high correlation coefficient: 94.4% in linear regression model and 97.7% in artificial neural network model. Calculated kinetics parameters such as the type of frequently executed processes and effective energy barrier for Ni dimer and trimer diffusion on the Ni(111) surface obtained from KMC simulation using the predicted (data-enabled) energy barriers are in close agreement with those obtained by using energy barriers calculated from interatomic interaction potential. The development of computational approaches which enable long time simulation of atomic system that reveal rare events responsible for system dynamics and morphological evolution is an ongoing research topic. The kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) method 1,2 that approximates a system evolution as succession of state-to-state Markov walks dictated by rates of all possible processes is taken as one of the method of choice in such studies. In KMC, the probability to execute a process is proportional to its rate and the time advanced after each process execution depends inversely on the sum of the rates of all possible processes in the system. The rate for atomic diffusion processes on surface follows Arrhenius rate expression from transition state theory where k ij , r 0 , E a , k B and T are the rate of transition from state i to state j, an attempt frequency, activation energy barrier of the process, the Boltzmann constant, and the absolute temperature, respectively. The quantity E a is the energy difference between the maximum energy in the minimum energy path (MEP) and the energy of the stable initial configuration on which the process in question executes. For a given interatomic interaction, various methods In island diffusion studies, although repeated calculation of barriers of single-atom, multiatom, and concerted processes can be avoided by storing and retrieving the values from a database using a pattern recognition scheme, as exemplified in the self-learning kinetic Monte Carlo (SLKMC) method In what follows, we provide computational details including considerations of descriptor generation and the basics of predictive models in section II. Results including comparison of predicted and calculated barriers are illustrated in section III, and conclusions are offered in section IV. In this study information about the geometry of islands before and after execution of a process and the energy barriers of 844 processes are taken from our SLKMC study of homoepitaxial adatom island (containing 2-4 atoms) diffusion on the (111) surfaces of Ni, Cu, Ag, and Pd. Some of the barriers are reported in our previous studies As already mentioned, to identify descriptors we analyze the variation of the energy barrier of processes executed by a specific adatom of an island as it hops from one site to other allowed target sites on the underlying substrate, for a variety of configurations of the island. For example, we consider the initial and final geometry of the diffusing island, the local neighborhood of the adatom on the top substrate layer, and energetics such as the binding energy of the island with the substrate and lateral interactions within the island. The selection of proper descriptors and their sufficiency is very crucial to get high correlation between the predicted barriers, obtained from regression models, and those from interaction potentials. Below we provide the rationale used in the identification of descriptors using examples of processes found for the diffusion of Pd islands on the Pd(111) surface which have led to the identification of a set of predictors adequate for describing the diffusion energetics of our systems of interest here. Note that in the figures that follow, adatoms are represented by filled blue circles, the bonds between them by red lines, the executed processes by black lines with arrowhead, and the substrate mesh by orange lines at whose intersections (node) the substrate atoms sit. In the trimer island shown in Fig. Except for x 3 , the shift of geometric center, the other descriptors discussed above cannot encode the variation of the barrier of the same process for different elements. For each cases we propose the binding energy of the island with the substrate to be an additional descriptor. To make our case, we first examine the variations in the activation energy barriers of small islands of several systems of interest. The energy barriers in the first four columns in Table where E island+subs. , E island , E subs. are the total energy of a system containing the adatom island on the substrate, the isolated island, and the isolated substrate, respectively. One can see from Table In an earlier work where E island+sub. , E mono+sub. , and E sub. are the total energy of the system with the island on the substrate, a monomer on the substrate, and that of an isolated substrate, respectively. The calculated values of E L.I. for four different systems whose energy barriers are in Table Table From Table The frequency distribution of the values of each of the descriptors and activation energy barriers in our database along diagonal boxes in the scatter plot is shown in Fig. The distribution of values of descriptor x 4 indicates that there are large number of single atom processes. The negative correlation with x 5 reflects that there are the single atom processes or less number of atom moving processes most in configurations or systems with higher binding energy with substrate. The negative correlation with activation energy barrier reflects the relatively small value of barriers of multi-atom or concerted processes in comparison to that of many detaching single atom processes in our database. The values of descriptor x 5 has values in range -7eV to 1 eV and has negative correlation with the barrier of processes. It has strong correlation with value 0.75 with descriptor x 6 indicating that the system with larger binding energy with substrate also has larger lateral interaction. Such a tendency can also be seen from Table As an initial step, a predictive model based on multivariate linear regression technique which assumes independent variables linearly contribute to the dependent variable is tested whose mathematical form is where y i represents the predicted value of dependent variable (E a of a diffusion process in this study) on the i th instance (i has value 844 when all data is used to develop model in this study) and x j is the value of j th independent variables, (j=1, 2, ..6) on the same instance. The parameters β 0 and β j s represent an intercept and the predictor x j ′s slope, respectively and ε i represents error term on i th instance. Taking error function as the sum of square of errors and applying the condition of its minimization with respect to parameter βs, one can get a matrix of values of fitting parameters βs using where X refers a matrix formed with values of 6 descriptors along column and training samples as rows, T refers the transpose operation of matrix and Y is a column matrix formed by calculated activation energy barriers, c i . The Pearson's correlation coefficient (R) between c i s and y i s is used for quantitative measure of the predictive capacity of the model which is calculated using where N represents the sample size used to predict. In this study, the possibility of a non-linear dependence between independent and dependent variables is modeled by using artificial neural network (ANN) , where the superscript refers hidden layer number, w kj , where the second transfer function is linear function in this study. The output (y i ) which gives the predicted barrier is given by . (7) The mean square error (MSE) is taken as error function which is calculated as , where c i refers to the calculated energy barrier or target value assigned at the beginning of fitting and N is the number of training samples. During the training process, the weights and biases are adjusted to optimize the function that converts the neural network training problem into an optimization problem. Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm where I is an identity matrix, μ is a training rate parameter which influences the rate of weight and bias adjustment and JJ = (J F ) T (J F ) for J F being the Jacobian of performance function with respect to weights and biases.. In this study, the initial weight and biases are randomly selected and the initial value of the learning rate parameter μ is taken as 0.001 which is increased by a factor of 10 until the updated x k+1 results in a reduced performance after which μ is decreased by a factor of 0.1. During training, the network performance in the validation vectors is checked every epoch and if it increases or remains constant in the current step for 6 additional epochs in a row or the performance error is 0 or the gradient of the error is less than 10 -7 , the calculation is terminated. In this section, we present results of predicted diffusion barriers obtained from using multivariate linear regression and neural network techniques. In the first set of calculation, a multivariate linear model is formed by taking each atomic system separately. The value of R 2 obtained using Equation ( The close agreement of the quantities plotted in Fig. In this work we have applied a multivariate linear and nonlinear regression models to train and thereby predict the activation energy barriers for the diffusion of small, two-dimensional adatom islands containing 1-4 transition metal atoms, on their respective (111) surfaces. The training set was extracted from a large database of activation energy barriers, calculated using semi-empirical interaction potentials, for diffusion processes (single and multiple atoms) revealed using a Self-Learning Kinetic Monte Carlo scheme. A comprehensive analysis of this large set of barriers led the identification of 6 descriptors, 4 geometric and 2 energetic, which explain the observed trends. The values of these descriptors and activation energy barrier of diffusion processes are then used to train, validate, and test models in linear approximation using multivariate linear regression and non-linear approximation using the neural network approach. After parametrization, the models are used for ultrafast prediction of activation energy barriers for those systems in both supervised and unsupervised mode. The high value of correlation coefficients of predicted barriers with computed ones using energy minimization techniques make this approach very promising for application of tools suitable for multi-scale modeling of thin film growth and morphological evolution of nanostructured systems. As expected, the comparison of results of diffusion properties in a test case of Ni dimer and trimer island diffusion on the Ni(111) surface obtained from KMC simulation using such predicted barriers captures the features from such study using barriers from interatomic interaction potential. While this study was focused on homo-epitaxial systems consisting of transition metal with fcc stacking, ther results and the approach is quiet general and should be applicable to a variety of systems of interest. Although our training data in the work here is founded on homo-epitaxial system, we include hetero-epitaxial systems to show the general trend. As a second scenario, we use the dataset of Cu, Ag, and Pd systems that contains 516 samples to develop a model and test its predictive capacity for the Ni system. The value of R 2 When using neural network, training, validation, and testing data sets are randomly selected from input data in 70%, 15% and 15%, respectively. The value of correlation coefficients between calculated and predicted barriers are presented in Table