Coating metal nanotips with a negative electron affinity material like hydrogen-terminated diamond bears promise for a high brightness photocathode. We report a recipe on the fabrication of diamond coated tungsten tips. A tungsten wire is etched electrochemically to a nanometer sharp tip, dip-seeded in diamond suspension and subsequently overgrown with a diamond film by plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition. With dip-seeding only, the seeding density declines towards the tip apex due to seed migration during solvent evaporation. The migration of seeds can be counteracted by nitrogen gas flow towards the apex, which makes coating of the apex with nanometer-thin diamond possible. At moderate gas flow, diamond grows homogeneously at shaft and apex whereas at high flow diamond grows in the apex region only. With this technique, we achieve a thickness of a few tens of nanometers of diamond coating within less than 1 μm away from the apex. Conventional transmission electron microscopy (TEM), electron diffraction and electron energy loss spectroscopy confirm that the coating is composed of dense nanocrystalline diamond with a typical grain size of 20 nm. High resolution TEM reveals graphitic paths between the diamond grains. Negative electron affinity (NEA) materials are of great interest for photocathodes due to their high photoelectron yield and low thermal emittance All these arguments favour a thin and dense diamond coating on a sharp tungsten tip. For the deposition of such thin layers, a high nucleation/seeding density is crucial. The shorter the mean distance between neighbouring nucleation sites, the thinner the resulting dense film can be. Sufficiently high seed densities require appropriate adhesion of the seeds to the substrate, e.g. via electrostatic forces Tungsten wire is etched electrochemically with 3 mol/L aqueous NaOH via the lamellae drop-off technique Sharp tungsten tips are dip-seeded for a few seconds in monodisperse nanodiamond suspensions of crystal diameter of 4-6 nm. Both 0.025 wt.% aqueous suspension from Carbodeon and 0.025 wt.% in dimethyl sulfoxide:methanol 1:3 from Adamas Nanotechnologies were used in this work with comparable results. Due to the oxidized tungsten surface after etching, the zeta potential of the freshly etched tungsten surface is presumably negative at the pH of the seeding suspensions. To ensure good adhesion of the diamond seeds, highly zeta-positive hydrogenated seeds are therefore used. Even though the exact zeta potential of the tungsten surface and of the seeds is not known, this qualitative approach has worked reliably on flat samples and nanotips. Experiments with zeta-negative seeds on flat tungsten samples showed more than one order of magnitude lower seeding densities. Directly after seeding of a nanotip by dip-coating, it is blown dry with pressurized nitrogen gas directed from the shaft towards the tip apex with adjustable flow rates between 0.5 -2.5 L sec through a nozzle with 3.5 mm diameter. Diamond deposition is performed in a home-built microwave plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (MPECVD) chamber at 2.5 GHz frequency and 512 W microwave power, at a pressure of 49 mbar using 50 sccm hydrogen and 2 sccm methane flow. The sample holder is heated to 600 °C and then lifted into the plasma. The plasma additionally heats the sample so that the local temperature of the tip apex region is expected to be higher than 600 °C. Deposition times range between 2 and 20 min with a growth rate of approximately 10 nm min . After terminating the diamond growth by switching off the microwave power and sample heater, the sample cools down in a hydrogen atmosphere at 45 mbar. This recipe reliably results in a hydrogenterminated diamond surface with negative electron affinity Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is used for routine imaging of the tip geometry and the morphology of the diamond films. In addition, a coated tungsten tip is characterized by imaging, electron diffraction and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) in a Titan Themis transmission electron microscope (TEM) operating at 200 kV. The microscope is equipped with C s -correctors both at the illumination and imaging side and a Gatan GIF Quantum ER spectrometer. The sample wire was inserted in a Nanofactory STM-TEM holder. The image corrector was tuned to negative C s imaging condition where the first pass band corresponds to a resolution of 1 Å. We noticed that upon illumination of the tip area, the effective lens aberration can suffer from strong drift at high dose rate. Therefore, a moderate to low dose rate and careful grounding of the STM-TEM holder is necessary to obtain highresolution TEM (HRTEM) images with good quality. The single electron energy loss (EEL) spectra were acquired directly in TEM diffraction-coupled mode with the largest collection angle -i.e. without objective aperture -to suppress the anisotropic effect in the study of graphite The EEL spectrum image was acquired in scanning TEM (STEM) mode with an effective collection angle of 30 mrad, a pixel size of 1.1 nm and a short dwell time to balance the sample drift. The lowloss and high-loss (i.e. zero-loss and Carbon 1s region in this study) are acquired with a dispersion of 0.25eV/channel. The standard Fourier-Log deconvolution method using the recorded zero-loss and plasmon peaks is applied to account for multiple scattering Diamond films deposited ater dip-seeding on tungsten foils show clear signs of evaporation dynamics and their influence on local seeding density (see Appendix A). A related effect can be observed when tungsten tips are dip-seeded with nanodiamond suspensions. Without dry-blowing of the dip-seeded tips, continuous and homogeneous coating with diamond was achieved at the shank of the tip, as can be seen in fig. Carbon deposited by MPECVD results in various phases as graphite, diamond and amorphous carbon depending on the exact parameters. The nanocrystalline diamond (NCD) films are expected to be composites of graphitic and diamond phases. Their morphology and composition will have decisive influence on the electron emission properties from coated tips. In order to elucidate the structural details we performed an extensive TEM study on an ultrasharp tungsten tip (apex radius approximately 5 nm) covered by a 100 nm thin NCD film. Figure Tungsten tips with apex radii down to 5 nm have been successfully coated with dense nanocrystalline diamond films with a thickness as small as 20 nm. Solvent evaporation after seeding has a large effect on the local seeding density, especially at strongly curved surfaces, and must be engineered appropriately. To counteract evaporation forces, we adopt a nitrogen gas flow towards the tip apex. Diamond deposition on shaft only, apex only as well as homogeneous coating of shaft and apex is achieved by variation of the nitrogen flow. We achieved the growth of 20 nm thin diamond limited to less than 1 μm away from the tip apex by this technique. EELS and electron diffraction of a coated tungsten tip confirm the presence of diamond with a fraction of sp 2 -bonded carbon, identified as graphitic paths inbetween grains via HRTEM images. A spatially resolved STEM-EELS measurement shows an elevated fraction of the relative sp 2 -content at the tip apex. Furthermore, a columnar radial growth of diamond crystallites with a typical grain size of 20 nm is revealed. We expect that these diamond-coated tungsten tips with negative electron affinity offer a great potential for the use as high brightness photocathodes both in dc and ultrafast laser-triggered operation. Where N at is the total number of carbon atoms. Therefore the ratio of sp 2 -to sp 3 -bonded carbon y becomes To deconvolute the contributions in the EEL spectra, we fit three gaussians with center energy 285, 289 and 292 eV to the spectrum. Assuming that N π is proportional to the area under the gaussian centered at 285 eV and N σ is proportional to the area under the other two gaussians with the same proportionality factor, we calculate y for every pixel of the STEM-EEL spectrum. This is a simplified picture of the situation, but sufficient for a spatially resolved qualitative comparison of y. The graphitic reference spectrum shown in fig. 