Non-equilibrium steady state (NESS) conditions induced by DC current can alter the physical properties of strongly correlated electron systems (SCES). In this regard, it was recently shown that DC current can trigger novel electronic states, such as current-induced diamagnetism, which cannot be realized in equilibrium conditions. However, reversible control of diamagnetism has not been achieved yet. Here, we demonstrate reversible in situ control between a Mott insulating state and a diamagnetic semimetal-like state by DC current in the Tisubstituted bilayer ruthenate Ca 3 (Ru 1-x Ti x ) 2 O 7 (x = 0.5%). By performing simultaneous magnetic and resistive measurements, we map out the temperature vs current-density phase diagram in the NESS of this material. The present results open up the possibility of creating novel electronic states in a variety of SCES under DC current. After the discovery of high T c superconductivity An interesting candidate to achieve this goal is the bilayered ruthenate Ca 3 (Ru 1-x Ti x ) 2 O 7 , for which a Mott metalinsulator transition can be sensitively controlled by tiny Ti substitution In this letter, we report the discovery of current-induced diamagnetism in Ca 3 (Ru 1-x Ti x ) 2 O 7 (x = 0.5%) by performing simultaneous measurements of electrical resistivity and magnetization under DC electric current. Our results demonstrate in situ control of diamagnetism and open up new possibilities for controlling SCES under NESS conditions. Single crystals of Ca 3 (Ru 1-x Ti x ) 2 O 7 (x =0.5%) were grown by a floating-zone method using an infrared image furnace (Canon Machinery, model SC-K15HD) in Kyoto University. We added extra RuO 2 both as self-flux and as compensation for RuO 2 evaporation We designed a sample holder compatible with a commercial SQUID magnetometer (Quantum Design, MPMS XL) for simultaneous measurements of transport and magnetic properties under DC current. The details of the design can be found in the Supplemental Material of Ref. Figure The most interesting change is observed upon further cooling: M becomes negative below the crossover temperature T DM for applied current above 300 μA indicating the appearance of a novel diamagnetic state. As the current is increased, the crossover temperature increases as shown in the inset of Fig. We use the measured transition temperatures to construct the T -J phase diagram for the various magnetic phases as a function of current density in Fig. Temperature vs current-density phase diagram of Ca 3 (Ru 1-x Ti x ) 2 O 7 (x = 0.5%). T N1 , T N2 and T MIT all show negligible changes with current. The antiferromagnetic insulating phase (blue) evolves into a more conducting state (yellow) with increasing current density. At temperatures below 10 K a diamagnetic phase (green) appears for J > 0.1 A/cm 2 with persisting AFM-b ordering. The triangles represent T DM taken from Fig. In-situ control of diamagnetism with current in Ca 3 (Ru 1-x Ti x ) 2 O 7 (x = 0.5%). (a) Cycling the current between the OFF and ON state induces (b) a change between the high-and lowresistance state and (c) between the positive and negative magnetization (diamagnetic state). Due to the different Joule heating in the two states, sample temperature varied between 2 and 4 K in each cycle (see Fig. We now demonstrate that reversible control of resistance and magnetization can be achieved by changing the applied DC current. As shown in Fig. We now compare the field dependence of the magnetization with and without current. For this measurement both H and I are applied parallel to the b o axis. As shown in Fig. Because of the coexistence of diamagnetism and AFM-b, the magnetization signal contains both contributions. We attempt to isolate the diamagnetic contribution, which appears only under current, by evaluating ∆M = M(1 mA) -M(0 mA) as a function of μ 0 H (Fig. In the rest of this Letter, we discuss the possible origin of the current-induced diamagnetism in Ca 3 (Ru 1-x Ti x ) 2 O 7 . In its sister compound Ca 2 RuO 4 , similar current-induced diamagnetism has been observed and attributed to the Landau diamagnetism of light-mass quasiparticles generated by the partial Mott gap closing The ground state of pure Ca 3 Ru 2 O 7 has a metallic character with a possible small gap in some parts of the Fermi surface Important novel aspects are found in the diamagnetic state of Ca 3 (Ru 1-x Ti x ) 2 O 7 . Firstly, the current-induced diamagnetism occurs in a insulating state with much lower resistivity compared to Ca 2 RuO 4 . Secondly, diamagnetism in Ca 3 (Ru 1-x Ti x ) 2 O 7 coexists with the AFM ordering. This important difference may originate from the difference in the nearest-neighbor spin alignment: it is ferromagnetic within a Ru-O bilayer in Ca 3 (Ru 1-x Ti x ) 2 O 7 whereas it is G-type AFM in Ca 2 RuO 4 To summarize, we demonstrated that the insulating state of Ca 3 (Ru 1-x Ti x ) 2 O 7 system can be electronically controlled by flowing electric current. Most importantly, the antiferromagnetic insulating state can be reversibly changed in situ to a diamagnetic state with a lower resistivity. The basic origin of the diamagnetism in Ca 3 (Ru 1-x Ti x ) 2 O 7 is believed to be caused by the light-mass carriers generated in the NESS. The present work reveals that DC current is a new control tool to control the physical properties of a variety of SCES, with the possibility of inducing novel states which are not accessible by conventional control parameters. This work was supported by JSPS Grant-in-Aids KAK-ENHI Nos. JP26247060, JP15H05852, JP15K21717, and JP17H06136, as well as JSPS Core-to-Core program). N. K. and S. U. acknowledge the support from JST-Mirai Program (No. JPMJMI18A3) in Japan. We acknowledge fruitful discussions with Takashi Oka, Sota Kitamura, Kazuhiko Kuroki, Teppei Yoshida and Masatoshi Imada. Temperature dependence of the resistance of Ca 3 (Ru 1-x Ti x ) 2 O 7 (x = 0.5%) (Sample #1) measured under various values of DC current at 1 T. The inset shows a zoom-in-view. These measurements were carried out with a constant positive current, the small current-dependent shift of the curves in the metallic phase is most likely due to uncompensated voltage offsets. (a) In a negative field of -1 T (current changed between 10 nA and 300 μA), the magnetization is positive in the ON state, anti-parallel to the external field as it happens for positive field of 1 T. (b) For negative current between -10 nA and -300 μA (at +1 T), the magnetization in the ON state is negative, indicating that the magnetization direction does not depend on the current direction. The sample temperature shows a slight increase of 2 K in the ON state due to Joule heating, but its effect is negligible in the large observed changes of R and M.