We have used spin-polarized neutron reflectometry to investigate the magnetization profile of superlattices composed of ferromagnetic Gd and superconducting Nb layers. We have observed a partial suppression of ferromagnetic (F) order of Gd layers in [Gd(dF )/Nb(25nm)]12 superlattices below the superconducting (S) transition of the Nb layers. The amplitude of the suppression decreases with increasing dF . By analyzing the neutron spin asymmetry we conclude that the observed effect has an electromagnetic origin -the proximity-coupled S layers screen out the external magnetic field and thus suppress the F response of the Gd layers inside the structure. Our investigation demonstrates the considerable influence of electromagnetic effects on the magnetic properties of S/F systems. Artificial heterostructures with alternating superconducting (S) and ferromagnetic (F) layers are currently attracting great attention due to a diverse set of proximity effects For most S/F heterostructures composed of elemental metals or alloys, T F greatly exceeds T c . In such systems, one still expects significant magnetic proximity effects if the effective energy E F ∼ T F d F /d S becomes comparable to E S ∼ T c , where d F (d S ) are the thicknesses of the F (S) layers The ability to control the magnetic state by superconductivity is attracting attention also in applied research on superconducting spintronics Our recent study of Nb(25nm)/Gd(d F )/Nb(25nm) trilayers has shown that high quality structures with highly transparent S/F interfaces and rather high correlation length ξ F = 4nm can be grown cell, where M Gd,N b is the in-plane magnetization of a Gd and Nb layer, respectively. In the first approximation we may neglect the small magnetization of the Nb layers (M Gd ≫ M N b ) and write S n ∼ M Gd . We were able to reproduce the experimental curves with a model based on 12 identical pairs with d F = 1.7 nm and d S = 25.0 nm and magnetization of Gd of 4πM Gd = 2.5 kG. Within the measurement error of 10%, this value agrees with 2.7kG which can be calculated using the saturation magnetic moment m sat =134 μemu measured by a Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID) magnetometer (inset in Fig. Fig. Fig. We have thus observed a suppression of the spin asymmetry of the first Bragg peak below T c after zero-field cooling. The effect takes place in an intermediate range of magnetic fields between remanence and saturation. However, we did not observe any additional Bragg peaks below T c at these magnetic fields. Thus AF alignment or any other modification of the magnetic period can be excluded in our structure. Moreover in our previous study of Nb(25nm)/Gd(d F )/Nb(25nm) trilayers we did not observe any statistically significant change of the spin asymmetry below T c In order to qualitatively describe the suppression of the spin asymmetry we have fitted the neutron data measured on sample 1 above and below T c in magnetic field H = 0.8kOe (Fig. We have thus shown that thanks to the proximity effect the entire Gd/Nb superlattice behaves as a uniform thick (magnetic) superconductor. As a thick superconductor it is able to screen the applied magnetic field, thus suppressing the ferromagnetic response of the inner Gd layers. This effect is to some extent similar to the cryptoferromagnetism predicted in 