The mode I crack tip asymptotic response of a solid characterised by strain gradient plasticity is investigated. It is found that elastic strains dominate plastic strains near the crack tip, and thus the Cauchy stress and the strain state are given asymptotically by the elastic K-field. This crack tip elastic zone is embedded within an annular elasto-plastic zone. This feature is predicted by both a crack tip asymptotic analysis and a finite element computation. When small scale yielding applies, three distinct regimes exist: an outer elastic K field, an intermediate elasto-plastic field, and an inner elas- tic K field. The inner elastic core significantly influences the crack opening profile. Crack tip plasticity is suppressed when the material length scale l of the gradient theory is on the order of the plastic zone size estimation, as dictated by the remote stress intensity factor. A generalized J-integral for strain gradient plasticity is stated and used to characterise the asymptotic response ahead of a short crack. Finite element analysis of a cracked three Strain gradient plasticity is increasingly used in fracture analyses to predict the stress elevation that accompanies gradients of plastic strain, see, for example, Gradients of plastic strain are associated with lattice curvature and geometrically necessary dislocations The crack tip stress elevation, as predicted by strain gradient plasticity theory relative to conventional plasticity theory, plays a fundamental role in the modelling of numerous damage mechanisms In the present study, we examine the mode I crack tip field according to strain gradient plasticity theory We shall show in the present study that the crack tip field for Gudmundsontype strain gradient theories is of a different nature, such that the asymptotic crack tip field comprises both elastic and plastic straining, and it is not possible to simplify the crack tip asymptotic state by neglecting elastic strains. Instead, the elastic strain ε e ij scales as r -1/2 with distance r from the crack tip, whereas the plastic strain tensor ε The leading order term ε ∼ p (0) has a finite value independent of x. The next term in the series, ε ∼ p (x), scales as r 3/2 where r = |x| is the polar coordinate from the crack tip, and ε ∼ p (x) also depends upon the polar coordinate θ. Thus, we can write ε p ij in polar coordinates as, Later, in the paper, we shall obtain explicit expressions for the angular functions f (θ) and g (θ). Thus, the elastic strain is more singular than the plastic strain and the Cauchy stress σ ij (r, θ) is given by the usual elastic K-field in the vicinity of the crack tip. The following simple argument supports the finding that the crack tip is surrounded by an elastic K-field in an elastic-plastic strain gradient solid. Introduce a generalized effective plastic strain Ẽp such that in terms of a material length scale l; the comma subscript () ,k denotes spatial differentiation with respect to the coordinate x k in the usual manner. Consider the case of a deformation theory solid, and assume that the plastic strain energy density w p scales as Ẽp (N +1) in terms of a strain hardening exponent N (where 0 ≤ N ≤ 1). We proceed to show that the elastic strain must dominate the plastic strain. To do so, we shall explore the consequences of assuming that the plastic strain dominates the elastic strain near the crack tip. Then, w p must scale as J/r in order for the energy release rate for crack advance to be finite at the crack tip. Consequently, Ẽp and lε p ij,k scale as r -1/(N +1) and ε p ij scales as r N/(N +1) . We conclude that ε p ij tends to zero as the crack tip is approached. If the elastic strain is dominated by the plastic strain then this implies that ε e ij tends to zero at a faster rate than r N/(N +1) , and the crack tip will have a strain and a stress concentration of zero. This is implausible on physical grounds. We conclude that the elastic strain field must dominate the plastic strain field at the crack tip, and the Cauchy stress and elastic strain are given by the usual elastic K-field. We idealise strain gradient effects by means of the The primal kinematic variables are the velocity ui and the plastic strain rate εp ij . Upon adopting a small strain formulation, the total strain rate reads εij = 1 2 ( ui,j + uj,i ) and is decomposed additively into elastic and plastic parts, Write the internal work within a volume V as where σ ij denotes the Cauchy stress, q ij the so-called micro-stress tensor (work-conjugate to the plastic strain ε p ij ) and τ ijk is the higher order stress tensor (work-conjugate to the plastic strain gradient ε p ij,k ). The volume V is contained within a surface S of unit outward normal n i . Now make use of Gauss' divergence theorem to re-express δW as the external work on the surface S, to obtain the following equilibrium equations within V : Here, s ij is the deviatoric part of the Cauchy stress such that s ij = σ ijδ ij σ kk /3. Equations ( where T i = σ ij n j and t ij = τ ijk n k denote the conventional and higher order tractions, respectively. The elastic strain ε e ij gives rise to an elastic strain energy density, where C ijkl = C klij is the isotropic elastic stiffness tensor, given in terms of Young's modulus E and Poisson's ratio ν. We identify the elastic work increment σ ij δε e ij with δw e such that The stresses (q ij , τ ijk ) are taken to be dissipative in nature and we assume that the plastic work rate ẇp reads, where ẇp ( Ėp ) is given in terms of a combined effective plastic strain rate, thereby introducing a material length scale l. The use of ( and Upon introducing an overall effective stress Σ = ∂ ẇp /∂ Ėp , these expressions reduce to Note that Σ is work conjugate to Ėp , such that it satisfies and, upon making use of ( 3. Asymptotic analysis of crack tip fields We begin our study by conducting an asymptotic analysis of the stress and strain state at the crack tip. As already discussed in the introduction, consider a deformation theory solid such that the strain energy density is decomposed into an elastic part w e and a plastic part w p , The elastic contribution is stated explicitly by ( in terms of a reference value of strength σ Y , yield strain ε Y = σ Y /E and hardening index N (where 0 ≤ N ≤ 1). Upon writing the dissipation increment δw p as and upon introducing the notation Σ = ∂w p /∂ Ẽp , we have We note in passing that substitution of ( via ( We proceed to obtain the asymptotic nature of ε p ij (r, θ). The finite element solutions presented later in the study consistently reveal that the deviatoric Cauchy stress s ij scales as r -1/2 . We shall adopt this scaling law for s ij and explore its ramifications. First, note from ( to leading order in r, and consequently τ ijk is of order r 1/2 . This imposes a severe restriction on the form of ε p ij (r, θ). Assume the separation of variables form for ε p ij in terms of its Cartesian components where A ij is taken to be independent of θ and the index α > 0 remains to be found. First we show that this form satisfies the field equations, and second we justify this choice. Accordingly, the plastic strain gradient reads where Bijk can be expressed in terms of B ij (θ) and its derivatives with respect to θ. Substitution of ( Consequently, ( Upon recalling that s ij scales as r -1/2 the above equation implies that α = 3/2 for consistency. The above solution reveals that the elastic strain energy density w E scales as r -1 while the plastic strain energy density scales as r 0 , upon recalling ( For example, if we assume that the Cartesian components A ij are a function of θ we find that ε p ij,k scales as r -1 and τ ijk,k scales as r -(N +1) , and the equilibrium relation (29) for s ij is violated. Alternatively, if we take A ij = 0 then an equilibrium solution for s ij is obtained provided we take α = N/(N + 1). This leads to a higher order term in the series expansion of ε p ij than that given by the first two terms of (29). Finally, what is the implication of assuming that α < 0 in our asymptotic expression (29)? If we were to assume α < 0, then the leading order term becomes r α B ij (θ). Asymptotic matching of both sides of the equilibrium relation (26) again results in α = N/(N + 1), which is inconsistent with the initial assumption that α < 0. In summary, the plastic strain field ε p ij (r, θ) is of the asymptotic form ( Assume that the leading order terms in ε p ij , in polar coordinates, are of the form (2)-( and, Now make use of the higher order equilibrium equation ( where K I is the mode I stress intensity factor. The higher order equilibrium follows by suitable substitution of ( In addition, the symmetry condition ahead of a mode I crack tip demands that f (θ) is an even function of θ. Thus, the solution to the system of differential equations is given by Now make use of the traction-free boundary conditions t rr = t θθ = 0 along the crack flanks (θ = π) to obtain a relation between the constants a 1 and a 3 . Free boundary conditions on the higher order traction τ θθθ = 0 on rendering a 1 = 7/3 -a 3 . Imposition of vanishing higher order traction τ rθθ = 0 on θ = π is identically satisfied and provides no useful additional information on (a 1 , a 3 ). It follows that numerical analysis is needed to calibrate a 1 and a 3 and obtain a full field solution. We make use of the finite element implementation of Martínez-Pañeda et al. ( where the current flow stress σ F depends on the initial yield stress σ Y and on E p via a hardening law. We adopt the following isotropic hardening law, and assume that the yield strain is ε Y = σ Y /E = 0.003. The viscoplastic function V ( Ėp ) is defined as and the rate-independent limit is achieved by choosing a sufficiently small value of the material parameter ε0 . The numerical experiments conducted show that the ratio Ėp / ε0 is sufficiently high that V ( Ėp ) ≈ 1 in the vicinity of the crack for all remote K values considered. A mixed finite element scheme is adopted, such that displacements and plastic strains are treated as primary variables, in accordance with the theoretical framework. The non-linear system of equations for a time t + ∆t is solved iteratively by using the Newton-Raphson method, where the residuals comprise the out-of-balance forces, Here, B ij denotes the strain-displacement matrix, and N i and M ij are the shape functions for the nodal values of displacement and plastic strain components. The components of the consistent stiffness matrix are obtained by differentiating the residuals with respect to the incremental nodal variables. The reader is referred to Martínez-Pañeda et al. ( We make use of the so-called boundary layer formulation to prescribe an outer K-field. Consider a crack with tip at the origin and with the crack plane along the negative axis of the Cartesian reference frame (x, y). A remote K field is imposed by prescribing the nodal displacements in the outer periphery of the mesh as, where ν is Poisson's ratio and the functions f i (θ, ν) are given by and Upon exploiting the symmetry about the crack plane, only half of the finite element model is analysed. A mesh sensitivity study reveals that it is adequate to discretise the domain by approximately 5200 plane strain, quadratic, quadrilateral elements. A representative small scale yielding solution is now presented in Figs. 1 and 2, for the choice K = 20σ Y √ l, N = 0.1, ε Y = 0.003, and ν = 0.3. Conventional J 2 flow theory implies a plastic zone size R 0 of magnitude and so the choice K = 20σ Y √ l implies R 0 = 42l. Consequently, the plastic zone size is much larger than l for the strain gradient solid also. The plastic zone is plotted in Fig. In broad terms, the outer boundary of the plastic zone is given by the contour ε p /ε Y = 0.1. Additional contours for ε p /ε Y = 1 and 3 are included. It is found that ε p /ε Y attains a plateau value slightly greater than 3 within the contour ε p /ε Y = 3. Consequently, the stress state within this crack tip zone is elastic in nature. This finding is supported by a plot of tensile stress σ yy as a function of r directly ahead of the crack tip (y = 0), see Fig. The following J-integral argument can be used to show that the magnitude of K for the crack tip elastic zone is identical to that in the outer field. Write the potential energy P of the cracked solid as where (T ∞ i , t ∞ ij ) are the prescribed tractions on a partial boundary S T , with outward normal n i . Define J as the energy release rate per unit crack extension, such that for a body of unit thickness in the z direction. Note that for any closed contour in the solid that excludes the crack tip. Also note that σ ij n j = 0 and τ ijk n k = 0 on the faces of a traction-free crack. Then, an evaluation of J for a contour Γ which encloses the crack tip, starts on the lower crack flank and ends on the upper flank, gives where the crack lies along the negative x-axis. The proof is straightforward and follows that outlined by We proceed to examine the influence of the strain hardening exponent N upon the crack tip stress state, see Fig. The strain state near the crack tip is shown in the form of the components ε p yy and ε yy versus r/l in Fig. The dependence of ε p yy (r → 0) upon K/(σ Y √ l) is plotted in Fig. Strain gradient plasticity influences the crack tip profile δ(r) behind the crack tip. Fig. (60) while the elastic solution reads with α = 0.18 and β = 0.48. The finite element results show large differences between conventional and gradient-enhanced plasticity solutions. Strain gradient plasticity sharpens the crack profile to resemble that of an elastic solid. Now consider the sensitivity of the plastic zone size r p to the magnitude of K/(σ Y √ l). We have already noted that, when K/(σ Y √ l) is significantly large, the plastic zone size scales with Irwin's approximation R 0 as given by ( The small scale yielding (SSY) approach is valid provided the crack length is much greater than the plastic zone size R 0 at the onset of frac-ture, a > 7.5πR 0 . Thus, on a map with axes a/R 0 and l/R 0 the small scale yielding regime exists for a/R 0 > 7.5π; this is shown explicitly in Fig. We follow the ASTM E 1820-01 Standard 2 and model a three point single edge bend specimen, as outlined in Fig. with J e being computed from the remote load and the specimen dimensions and J p being calculated from the area below the force versus displacement curve. A reference length scale R 0 can be defined from the estimated value of J as Crack tip stresses for a/R 0 = 0.8 and W/R 0 = 1.6 are shown in Fig. We examine, numerically and analytically, the crack tip asymptotic response in metallic materials. The solid is characterised by strain gradient plasticity theory, aiming to phenomenologically link scales in fracture mechanics by incorporating the stress elevation due to dislocation hardening. Results reveal that an elastic zone is present in the immediate vicinity of the crack tip. The stresses follow the linear elastic r -1/2 singularity and the plastic strains reach a plateau at a distance to the crack tip that scales with the length scale of strain gradient plasticity l. The dominant role of elastic strains in the vicinity of the crack invalidates asymptotic analyses that neglect their contribution to the total strains. The existence of an elastic core is reminiscent of a dislocation free zone, as introduced by The emergence of an elastic core has important implications on the onset of plasticity and the crack opening profile. Numerical predictions show that strain gradient plasticity sharpens the crack opening profile to that of an elastic solid. Differences with conventional plasticity are substantial and results suggest that an experimental characterisation of the crack opening profile could be used to infer the value of the length scale parameter. On the other hand, plasticity is precluded if the remote load is not sufficiently large, such that the plastic zone size (as given by, e.g., Irwin's approximation) falls within the elastic core domain. In addition, we show that the inner elastic regime is also present when the crack is small and an outer elastic K field does not exist. A generalised J-integral is presented for strain gradient solids and the stress fields are computed under J-dominance conditions in a three point single edge bend specimen. Finally, we note that the material length scale l is on the order of a few microns for most metals. This is roughly the smallest scale at which void nucleation and growth occur, suggesting that the transition to an inner zone dominated by elasticity will have important implications in quasi-cleavage but play a secondary role in ductile fracture. 