Ferromagnetic (FM) axion insulators may greatly simplify experimental explorations of the topological magnetoelectric effect, as the FM ordering can be stable in a broad range of magnetic field. Through density functional theory calculations and four-band model studies, we find that two-dimensional van der Waals FM CrI 3 and MnBi 2 Se 4 overlayers induce opposite-sign exchange fields in the topological surface states of Bi 2 Se 3 film when they are ferromagnetically ordered. Consequently, CrI 3 /Bi 2 Se 3 /MnBi 2 Se 4 heterostructure is a robust FM axion insulator, according to surface-resolved Berry curvature calculations. Our work opens up new opportunities for the design of materials with the topological magnetoelectric effect. The topological magnetoelectric (TME) effect where is the fundamental fine structure constant, and 0   or  for the topologically trivial and nontrivial cases where P and M are the electric polarization and magnetization, respectively. Obviously, studies of AIs may not only advance fundamental physics, but also open a new vista of technological innovations, particularly for quantum devices , is typically small and hard to control. Second, the constant need of a sizable external magnetic field in operations may consume energy and makes it difficult to implement in practical devices. To circumvent these problems, it is desired to realize the AI state with a FM ordering (FMAI) between two the FMIs, which can be easily established with a small or even zero external magnetic field. It is interesting to compare the performances of between FMAIs and AFMAIs when one sweeps magnetic field. The AFM ordering between the two FMIs survives in the range can be thereby obtained according to Eq. ( In this Letter, we demonstrate that the heterostructure of CrI 3 ML, MnBi 2 Se 4 (MBS) septuple-layer (SL) and 3D TI Bi 2 Se 3 (BS) film (CrI 3 /BS/MBS) is an excellent FMAI. Based on the density functional theory (DFT) calculations and four-band model analyses, we find that CrI 3 ML and MBS SL in CrI 3 /BS/MBS provide opposite exchange fields to the TSSs of BS film and produce opposite AHCs at the top and bottom interfaces when their magnetizations are parallel to each other. This establishes a robust FMAI state in a large range of external magnetic field, and CrI 3 /BS/MBS is thus a very promising system for the use in nanodevices. Our DFT calculations are performed using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package with the generalized gradient approximation x-and y-axes are in the surface plane. We first investigate the band structure of CrI 3 /6QL-BS/MBS with a FM ordering between CrI 3 ML and MBS SL. Unless otherwise noted, the FM ordering with Cr 3+ and Mn 2+ ions' magnetic moments pointing along the z axis (Fig. To shed light on the signs of the top-and bottom-surface exchange fields in CrI 3 /6QL-BS/MBS, we examine the spin components of bands I-IV. For bands II and III at the top surface, there is a strong spin intermixing and band II has a large weight in the spin-down channel (Fig. . Here Furthermore, we elucidate the effect of V P on the FMAI state in vdW-FMI/TI/vdW-FMI, because it could be comparable to the exchange field, as in the case of CrI 3 /BS interface. A nonvanishing V P is caused either intrinsically by the structure inversion asymmetry due to the use of two different vdW-FMIs or extrinsically by the operating bias in applications Indeed, DFT band structures (Fig. tb t  , b  , and V