The carrier dynamics and electronic structures of type-II Weyl semimetal candidates MoTe2 and WTe2 have been investigated by using temperature-dependent optical conductivity [σ(ω)] spectra. Two kinds of Drude peaks (narrow and broad) have been separately observed. The width of the broad Drude peak increases with elevating temperature above the Debye temperature of about 130 K in the same way as those of normal metals, on the other hand, the narrow Drude peak becomes visible below 80 K and the width is rapidly suppressed with decreasing temperature. Because the temperature dependence of the narrow Drude peak is similar to that of a type-I Weyl semimetal TaAs, it was concluded to originate from Dirac carriers of Weyl bands. The result suggests that the conductance has the contribution of two kinds of carriers, normal semimetallic and Dirac carriers, and this observation is an evidence of type-II Weyl semimetals of MoTe2 and WTe2. The obtained carrier mass of the semimetallic bands and the interband transition spectra suggest the weak electron correlation effect in both materials. Materials with linear band dispersions at the Fermi level (E F ) such as surface states of topological insulators and Dirac semimetals have been recently attracting attention because the very high mobility as well as high speed devices are expected thanks to the very low effective carrier mass of the linear band dispersion. In the case of the space-or time-reversal symmetry breaking of Dirac semimetals, the spin degeneracy of the Dirac band is released in the momentum space, resulting in forming two Dirac bands with different spin directions at the symmetry points with respect to high symmetry axes. These materials are named as Weyl semimetals. Weyl semimetals are classed in two groups by the shape of the Fermi surface. One named type-I exhibits pointlike Fermi surfaces owing to Lorentz invariant band structures, and another named type-II has tilted Weyl cones appearing between electron and hole Fermi surfaces. 1T ′ -MoTe 2 and 1T ′ -WTe 2 of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD) are candidates of the type-II Weyl semimetals MoTe 2 with monoclinic β structure (P 2 1 m, No. 11) at room temperature is regarded as a trivial metal, however, it has a phase transition at about 240 K with structure change to orthorhombic 1T ′ structure (P mn2 1 , No. 31). The 1T ′ -MoTe 2 (this is denoted as MoTe 2 hereafter) is believed to be a putative Weyl semimetal WTe 2 also has orthorhombic crystal structure (P mn2 1 ) below room temperature. This material has a large positive magnetoresistance 10 , and the electron and hole Fermi surfaces are the same size, which is consistent with other normal semimetals Since both of MoTe 2 and WTe 2 have been theoretically predicted to be type-II Weyl semimetals The evidence of the existence of Weyl points can be observed in optical conductivity [σ(ω)] spectra. For instance, in the σ(ω) spectra of TaAs, which is one of type-I Weyl semimetals, the rapid decrease of the Drude width and the decrease of the Drude weight with decreasing temperature have been observed So far, temperature-dependent σ(ω) spectra of WTe 2 have been reported by Homes et al. In this paper, we report optical spectra of MoTe 2 and WTe 2 , in which the evidence of Weyl electrons commonly appears in both materials. As a result, the character of Weyl electrons can be identified by the analysis with the combination of two Drude curves, namely narrow and broad Drude components. The γ value of the narrow Drude component is strongly suppressed at low temperatures, which is similar to that of a type-I Weyl semimetal TaAs, suggesting the existence of Weyl electrons. In addition, the electron correlation is discussed using the comparison of the experimentally obtained σ(ω) spectra with band calculations and calculated σ(ω) spectra. High-quality single-crystalline MoTe 2 and WTe 2 samples with the size of about 2 × 0.5 × 0.1 mm 3 were synthesized by a self-flux method. One of our samples, WTe 2 , shows a large residual resistivity ratio of 1330 and very large magneto-resistance with obvious Shubnikovde Haas oscillation Figure Calculated σ(ω) spectra obtained from band calculations in Fig. In the present data, even though the calculation without electron correlation has been performed, the spectrum below 500 meV, especially peaks at around 100 meV, seems to reproduce the experimental spectrum. However, a peak at ω = 550 meV in MoTe 2 and two peaks at 300 and 600 meV in WTe 2 in the experimental spectra cannot be reproduced by our calculation. There are peaks at 750 meV in MoTe 2 and at 400 and 800 meV in WTe 2 in the calculated spectra. If these peaks in the calculated spectra are regarded to move to the experimental peaks by a self-energy effect owing to an electron correlation The overall intensity of the experimental σ(ω) spectrum of MoTe 2 is larger than that of WTe 2 . This implies that the DOS of MoTe 2 near E F is higher than that of WTe 2 . This is consistent with the calculated DOS shown in Fig. Figure Considering these features, the σ(ω) spectra have been fitted by using the combination of two Drude functions as follows; Here, m denotes the electron rest mass, and σ i (0), γ i , and N * i are the direct current value, the damping constant of carriers, and the effective electron number of each component, respectively. The fitting results are shown in Fig. The damping constant γ of D2 in both materials is almost flat at temperatures below 80 K and slightly increases with increasing temperature above 130 K. Since the γ value originates from the scattering of carriers and the boundary temperature T * of about 100 K is consistent with the Debye temperature θ D = 133.8 ± 0.6 K of WTe 2 It should be noted that the carrier densities evaluated from the DOS of MoTe 2 and WTe 2 in Fig. Next, the narrow Drude component D1 is discussed. In both materials, N * rapidly increases with decreasing temperature below about 100 K. This change cannot be expected from the shape of DOS. In addition, as pointed out by Homes et al. The temperature dependence of the γ of WTe 2 follows γ ∝ T 1.6±0.05 below the temperature of 80 K as shown in Fig. The evidence for Dirac/Weyl semimetal phase in optical sepctra also appears in the power-law dependence of the interband optical conductivityσ(ω) spectra To summarize, the electronic structures of type-II Weyl semimetal candidates MoTe 2 and WTe 2 have been inves-tigated by optical conductivity σ(ω) spectra and LDA band calculations. Obtained σ(ω) spectra can be explained by the band calculations with the renormalization factor of 0.74 ± 0.01. Two kinds of Drude components have been observed below the photon energy of 40 meV. One of the two components originates from the carriers of semimetallic electron and hole bands, the other from Dirac carriers at the Weyl points located at E F that emerge only at low temperatures and the width of the Drude component become sharper continuously with decreasing temperature. Therefore, MoTe 2 and WTe 2 have two kinds of carriers and are concluded to be type-II Weyl semimetals.