The development of compact indirect microwave holographic set-up by the implementation of low cost, specifically designed directive antennae as transmitter and receiver is proposed. Microwave holograms are recorded by 2D scanning over a plane using motorized translation stage. The recorded interference pattern i.e. holograms are then processed numerically to reconstruct the amplitude and phase information employing the angular spectrum diffraction method. The quality of the reconstructed amplitude image is further enhanced through the deep neural network, in order to combat with the low resolution of reconstructed images. The qualitative experimental results exploit the possibility of developing the miniaturized, and low cost indirect microwave holographic system for near field applications. Microwave holography consists of the acquisition of scattered wave-field from an object and provides the amplitude and phase information of the same. It is a non-destructive and non-invasive technique which is based on interference while recording the hologram and diffraction principle for reconstructing the hologram. Microwave holography is categorized as -direct and indirect. In direct holography, the complex scattered field is measured over a selected aperture in the near field using Vector Network Analyzer (VNA) to image the objects. This technique is very expensive and computationally complex as it is based on vector calculations. Earlier, the indirect holographic technique was used for the determination of antenna radiation characteristics. Previously, we have proposed the use of microstrip patch antenna for receiving the scattered wave-fields in the indirect holographic set-up with a horn antenna as transmitter. In this paper, the holographic arrangement using specifically designed UWB Vivaldi antennae with a maximum gain at 45 o as transmitter and receiver has been demonstrated experimentally. It has been depicted that there is considerable reduction in the size of the system. The amplitude and phase are reconstructed effectively with the use of small size Vivaldi antennae. The vivaldi antennae have benefits over the traditionally used probe antennae in terms of their size scalability for use at multiple frequencies, cost effectiveness and broadband characteristics. Further, the resolution of the reconstructed amplitude has also been improved using a well trained deep neural network i.e. VDSR network. The whole experimental set-up of indirect microwave holography comprises of -(i) Design and fabrication of antennae and (ii) Recording and reconstruction of holograms. Vivaldi antenna is a kind of tapered slot UWB antenna which has wide bandwidth, high directivity and is able to produce symmetrical radiation pattern. Figs. 1(a) and (b) show the schematic of the designed antenna with detailed marking of designed parameters. The designing parameters of antenna are given in Table Fig. The ability to reconstruct the interference pattern utilizing the scalar power measurement techniques is the fundamental of indirect microwave holography. By combining the complex field of the scattering wave from the object, with a synthesized reference wave, Where O(x, y) defines the scattered field detected by the antenna from the object, and R(x, y) denotes the reference wave. The plus and minus signs are corresponding to the resultant intensities recorded from the sum and difference port of the Hybrid Tee respectively. This is employed in order to reduce the overlapping in between the diffraction orders in the Fourier domain. Taking the Fourier transform of Eq. 1, we obtain the spectrum for interference pattern or hologram, The hologram spectrum consists of three diffraction orders: DC term or zero order, +1 order and -1 order. Fig. In Eq.3, k r represents the offset wave vector, which depends on the sample spacing during scanning in the x and y axis i.e. ∆x and ∆y. This offset wave vector is used to synthesize reference wave by introducing the phase shift of ∆φ = 2π/3 rad between the sample spacing of ∆x = λ/6, which produces an electronically synthesized reference wave with a offset of k r ≥ 2k. The benefits of the synthetically generated reference wave is that the linear phase gradient generation enables the measurements in the near field of the antenna. A suitable and precise sampling separation must be provided to reconstruct the object image (both amplitude and phase). The image reconstruction is done by a diffraction technique i.e. Angular Spectrum Method (ASM). The recorded and reconstructed pixel size of hologram remains same in ASM. In this method, the recorded complex signal's plane wave spectrum in x-y plane is defined by Fourier spectrum as shown in Eq. 2. The signal is back propagated to the object plane and inverse Fourier transform is performed to reconstruct the object using Eq.4. where, Where, z 0 is representing the distance in between the object plane and the recording plane (where the holograms are recorded) and in between the recording and reconstruction plane, the complex amplitude is reconstructed at z 0 = 0 i.e at object plane. The phase of the complex amplitude is calculated by: φ(x, y) = tan -1 im (e(x, y)) re (e(x, y)) The phase obtained from Eq. 5 is wrapped in the range of (-π, +π), the reconstructed phase images are shown in the results section. The schematic of the experimental microwave holographic set-up is shown in Fig. The other part is forwarded from the directional coupler to the attenuator, which is used to generalize the whole experimental set-up for both low and high gain antennas based on various application. The attenuator is utilized to adjust the level of the reference and scattered signals according to the gain of the antenna and to increase the dynamic range of the hologram. The attenuated signal is further used to generate a synthesized reference wave by providing a 3-step linear phase shift in 'x' and 'y' direction to separate the twin images and dc term. The receiving second antenna is used to collect the scattering wavefield from the object surface at the receiver side. This antenna is connected to a linear XY motorized translation stage to perform a 2D scan across the image plane. The sample spacing of x and y (i.e. ∆x and ∆y) is taken as 5mm. The corresponding receiving power at each scanning step of the antenna is made to interfere with the reference wave and measured. The power meter, which is connected to a personal computer controlling the movement of the antennas across the scanning aperture and imports the power meter data, reads the received power consisting of the combination of the scattered signal with the tapped coherent reference signal.Holograms have been recorded with a linear phase increment of 2π/3 rad for each sample spacing. The whole scanning aperture is shielded using microwave absorbers to minimize the scattering effects of outer objects while performing the experiments. A reference hologram was recorded without placing any object to subtract the background noise from the resultant hologram. The post processing is done by reconstructing the amplitude and phase of the recorded hologram numerically. Since, the hologram recorded is with 40×40 pixels so it is having low resolution, because the lower spatial frequencies are recorded due to the less number of samples, which are limited because of longer wavelength of the microwaves. Hence, the quality of the reconstructed amplitude images is improved from lower resolution to higher resolution by applying a well-trained VDSR network, SNR = 1 Speckle Index (7) and, Where, μ x and μ y are means of images x and y respectively, σ x and σ y are variances for the respective images, σ xy shows the co-variance and c 1 and c 2 are the variables used to stabilize the division. Structural similarity index is calculated for the resolution enhanced images to define that there are no structural variations after applying the neural network. The calculated values of aforesaid evaluation measures for resolution enhanced object images are shown in Table The performance of the proposed experimental set-up is demonstrated on 4 types of metallic objects having different shapes, sizes and scattering properties. The object is placed at 25mm from the scanning aperture. Fig. Fig. The +1 order from the frequency spectrum is filtered out and back propagated on the object plane for reconstructing the hologram using Eq. 4. The reconstructed amplitude image is shown in Fig. In Fig. Moreover, to investigate the ability of the experimental setup for separating two close objects, two steel keys of different sizes, each of 110mm and 49mm respectively with a separation of 30mm are used as object. The reconstructed results are shown in Fig. Post experimentation, it has been noted that however the performance of the Vivaldi antenna is good but as receiver it depends on some factors which needed to be taken care of. The transmitter and receiver provide the best result when both of them are having common field of view. In such geometrical conditions the perturbed scattering signals can be avoided. However, in case of microwaves it is bit difficult to do the holographic experimental alignment as microwaves are not visible to human eye. So, one should know the properties of the antenna and then can find the best location by geometry and repeated experimental realisation. Further, the experimental arrangement must be aligned to satisfy the condition of interference. Failing to which no fruitful reconstruction of holograms can be done. The implementation of Vivaldi antennae with a maximum gain at 45 o , as transmitter and receiver in an indirect microwave holography is proposed. The design concept is novel, economic, compact, simple and promising, perceived with a combination of reconstruction and super resolution method. This work has given details of various experiments in the proof of concept while utilizing the small size directive antennae for holographic system to reduce the size of the overall set-up. The qualitative results show that the usage of Vivaldi antennae as transmitter and receiver has a significant potential in imaging applications of indirect microwave holography. Here, we have measured and demonstrated the results for metallic objects. The proposed microwave holographic set-up could be utilized and modified in terms of designing a specific antenna for various applications e.g. metal detection, biomedical imaging for cancer detection etc. This technique can be further ameliorated with more precise antenna structures and experimental design for better holographic recording and reconstruction. List of Figures 