We theoretically predict proximity-induced odd-frequency (odd-ω) pairing on the surface of a Weyl nodal loop semimetal, characterized by a nodal loop Fermi surface and drumhead-like surface states (DSSs), attached to conventional spin-singlet s-wave superconducting leads. Due to the complete spin polarization of the DSS, only odd-ω equal-spin triplet pairing is present, and we show that it gives rise to a finite Josephson current. Placing an additional ferromagnet in the junction can also generate odd-ω mixed-spin triplet pairing, but the pairing and current are not affected if the magnetization is orthogonal to the DSS spin polarization, which further confirms the equal-spin structure of the pairing. Weyl nodal loop semimetals (WNLSs) are recently discovered topological semimetals, where the valence and conduction bands cross each other along a closed onedimensional (1D) loop carrying a π Berry flux The topology of WNLSs makes them a very interesting candidate for unconventional superconductivity. WNLSs have already been shown to allow for fully gapped chiral three-dimensional (3D) bulk superconductivity Odd-ω superconductivity refers to when two electrons in a Cooper pair are odd in the relative time coordinate, or equivalently frequency Odd-ω superconductivity has mainly been considered for hybrid structures In this work we use a Josephson junction setup on the surface of a WNLS to explore proximity-induced superconductivity, especially odd-ω pairing. Odd-ω pairing was very recently discussed in regard to WNLSs in Ref. 8, but with leads attached across the bulk of the WNLS, thus measuring the bulk effects. We instead us e a much simpler setup on a single surface and show explicitly how only odd-ω equal-spin triplet pairing is present on the surface, due to the complete spin polarization of the DSS. We further prove that the odd-ω pair amplitude is directly measurable by generating a finite Josephson current. Moreover, the flat-band dispersion of the DSS is also detectable in the Josephson current, as it forces part of the current to flow into sub-surface layers and reduces the overall magnitude. By adding a FM region to the junction we find additional mixed-spin triplet pairing, but only when the FM magnetization opposes the spin polarization of the DSS. The finite proximity effect and Josephson current on WNLS surfaces can therefore be entirely attributed to odd-ω pairing, with its equalspin structure verified by anisotropic behavior with an external magnetic field. The Hamiltonian for a minimal model of a 3D WNLS breaking time-reversal symmetry is 6,7,10 where k i is the wave vector along the i-th (x, y or z) axis and the Pauli matrices, σ i act in spin space. The first two terms give rise to a Fermi nodal loop with its shape set by α 1 and α 2 and protected by T I-symmetry, a product of time-reversal (T ) and inversion (I) symmetry, and mirror symmetry with respect to k z →-k z 4 . For the finite chemical potential μ w the Fermi surface is instead a small torus-like surface surrounding the nodal loop. We here use α 1 =α 2 =1 and μ w =1 (in units of the nearest neighbor hopping integral), but the appearance of odd-ω pairing is not restricted to these values. For surfaces perpendicular to the z axis, the Fermi nodal loop projects to form a large topologically protected DSS. To capture the DSS we therefore consider a finite cubic lattice system along the x and z-axes, but keep the periodicity along the y axis to arrive at H w (k y ), (see Appendix A). This leads to the nearest-neighbor hopping integrals -σ x and -σ x -iα 2 σ y , along the x and z-axes, respectively. We use a slab L z =21 layers thick along the z axis with L x =16 sites along the x axis for each layer. To form a Josephson junction on the surface we attach two conventional spin-singlet s-wave SCs to the top layer (n z =1) of the WNLS, at the n x =1 and n x =L x sites [see Fig. where G R rσrσ (E, k y ) is the element of the whole retarded Green's function given by ( Here r (= {x, z}) is the lattice site index, and E is the energy. To verify the existence of the DSS we show in Fig. We next attach the SC leads and study the proximityinduced Cooper pairs on the WNLS surface. To capture the superconducting pair amplitude we consider the whole Josephson junction, the WNLS plus two SC leads, and calculate the anomalous Green's function The results in Fig. Odd-ω spin-triplet pairing is well established in SC-FM heterostructures Having established the existence of only odd-ω equalspin pairing in the DSS, we next add a FM island on the top layer of WNLS to further study the pairing structure. In Fig. We can understand the behavior of the WNLS with an added FM from the traditional FM Josephson junction, where the spin-singlet pairing of the SC is transformed to mixed-spin triplet pairing in the FM region As seen in Fig. To be able to measure the effect of odd-ω pairing, we calculate the Josephson current J, which appears for fi- nite phase differences between the two leads, using the charge continuity equation In the absence of a FM, the current can be carried by only the odd-ω down spin-triplet pairing, as that is the only pairing present well inside the junction. From the previous studies of both conventional FM Josephson junctions (with two magnetization directions) To illustrate how the flat dispersion of the DSS suppresses the current, we divide in the inset of Fig. In addition, a majority of current in sub-surface layers, with an overall reduced magnitude, verifies the existence of extremely low-velocity carriers in the DSS. Now, we add the FM island and show the total current for three different P in Fig. ) FIG. Finally, we report how the current changes as the magnetization is tuned from the z direction to the x-direction, given by varying θ F from zero to π/2. In Fig. In this work we showed that the superconducting proximity-effect on the surface of WNLS is significant and consists entirely of odd-ω equal-spin triplet pairing, due to the complete spin polarization of the topologically protected DSS. The odd-ω pairing is directly measured by the presence of a finite Josephson current. The flat-band dispersion of the DSS is also visible by forcing significant current to flow into sub-surface layers and causing a reduction of the total Josephson current. In fact, the sub-surface current directly indicates the flat band nature of the surface states. Placing a FM island in the Josephson junction additionally generates mixedspin triplet pairing when the FM magnetization opposes that of the DSS polarization. However, for FM magnetization perpendicular to the DSS spin polarization, the pairing and Josephson current remain unaffected, further corroborating the equal-spin triplet nature of the pairing in WNLS Josephson junctions. We note in particular that it is the topology of the WNLS that leads to the appearance of a pure odd-ω equal-spin triplet Josephson effect, without any further interface engineering needed. The equal-spin triplet supercurrent can be utilized in superconducting spintronics devices where r+δx (δz) represents the position of the nearest neighbor site along x (z)-direction. c † r,ky (c r,ky ) is the creation (annihilation) operator for the electrons on site r on a square lattice (in the x-z plane) with momentum k y . Note that we use μ w =0 throughout the paper, but qualitatively, our main results remain valid also for finite μ w values. Appendix B: Calculation of the anomalous Green's function In the Nambu basis, each part of the SC-WNLS-SC junction can be described by the Bogoliubov-deGennes (BdG) equation as where H η (k y ) may be the WNLS (H w (k y )) or either of the two SC leads, H sc (k y ), as well as the coupling in-between. Here Ψ(r, k y ) is the four component eigenstates given in the basis (ψ † r↑ y ),ψ † r↓ (k y ),ψ r↑ (k y ),ψ r↓ (k y )) T . We model the electron part of each SC lead by a 2D Hamiltonian where μ sc and t sc are the chemical potential and hopping amplitude. Then, we take the inverse Fourier transformation along the x-direction and arrive at where r s denotes a lattice site index along the x-direction within SC lead and b † r,ky (b r,ky ) is the creation (annihilation) operator for the electrons in SC. ∆ s is the SC gap parameter (zero for the WNLS, ∆ s for the SC leads) and φ is the SC phase. We use φ L and φ R to denote the phase factors of the left and right SC lead, respectively. We use equal phases ∆φ (φ L =φ R =0) for all the plots of the anomalous Green's function. We show all the results for 20 number of lattice sites of SC, which is large enough to model bulk SC leads. Throughout the work, we fix t sc =1 and μ sc =2, to match the energy scale in the WNLS but with a Fermi level mismatch. Our results are not sensitive to these parameter choices nor the value of ∆ s . The coupling between each SC lead and the WNLS is given by the hopping Hamiltonian where t w-sc is the coupling strength between the WNLS and each SC lead. In our model, we couple the first site (L1) of the left lead to the first (n x =1) site of the top layer of the WNLS and similarly, the first site (R1) of the right lead to L x -th site of the top layer of the WNLS. We define the retarded Green's function in the Nambu basis as Following Eq.(B2), G R can be expressed in a 2x2 blockmatrix form as , is used to calculate the amplitude of the induced pairing on the surface of the WNLS where the diagonal components correspond to the equal-spin triplet pairing and the off-diagonals provide the information for mixed-spin-triplet pairing Note that due to the periodicity along the y-direction, we here sum over all k y within the first BZ. In this appendix we present additional results as well as an analytical calculation for the spin polarization of the surface states of the WNLS to further support the discussion of the spin density of states in the main text. First, we show the constant energy cut using Eq. (1) for E=0 in the k x -k y plane in Fig. Next, we show the behavior of the SLDOS with the variation of energy for the middle site (L x /2=8) of the very bottom layer (n z =21) of the WNLS in Fig. Here the SLDOS for the up spin is very high compared to that of the down spin close to the Fermi energy. This is in complete contrast to that of the top layer as shown in the main text. Comparing Fig. where k || ({k x , k y }), being good quantum numbers, are absorbed in α 1 . Further, we approximate cosine and sine functions of Eq. ( We set two open boundaries at z=0 and z=L z in order to calculate the zero-energy end state solution. The boundary conditions are expressed as In the end we arrive at an equation for any zero energy states We operate σ y from the left side and obtain Now, we look for the eigenstate of the σ z operator and separate the spatial and spin parts of the wavefunction as ψ k || (z)=φ k || (z)χ ν where the spin part satisfies the equation σ y χ ν =νχ ν , with ν=±1. Considering the ansatz φ k || (z)∼e -ηz , we find the secular equation as We have two boundaries one at z=0 and the other one at L z as mentioned in Eq. (C2). To find the solutions for the two surface states, we imagine two different situations. In one case, we consider it to be semi-infinite having a cut-off at the top layer at z=0. For infinitely large L z , we can write φ k || | Lz→∞ =0. To satisfy this condition, the product of the two solutions η 1 and η 2 of the secular equation must be positive but we have η 1 η 2 =-2να 1 α 2 . For positive α 1 and α 2 , we must have ν=-1. This is true for all the states encircled by the projection of the bulk nodal loop on the k || surface. Therefore, the DSS of the top layer of the WNLS is polarized along -z direction or down spiin polarized. Similarly, for the bottom layer, we imagine the cutoff at z=0 and semi-infinite along the opposite direction i.e., φ k || | Lz→-∞ =0. Following the similar argument, the spin polarization will be along the +z direction. In this section we provide additional data for the behavior of the superconducting pair amplitudes in the presence of a FM island in the WNLS Josephson junction, in particular, the complete frequency behavior. In Fig. When P is set along the z axis, the FM polarization partly counteracts the DSS spin polarization. This allows for both spin-singlet and mixed-spin triplet pairings to increase whereas, the amplitude of the ↓↓ spin-triplet pairing is also finite due to the still strong spin polarization of the DSS. There is a competition between them and the dominant pairing is determined by the value of m z . When we increase m z , the amplitude of the ↓↓ spin-triplet pairing decreases, while the amplitude of the mixed-spin triplet pairing starts increasing, so that they eventually become comparable to each other. The behaviors of the real and imaginary parts of F are oscillatory with the variation of ω for all the spin-triplet pairings, but clearly the result in Fig. 