used as process and quality control in industry to ensure consistency of product properties. In an urge of replacing cobalt as a binder phase, a demand on understanding the magnetic response as a function of composition on the atomic scale is growing. In this paper, a theoretical description of the measured weight specific magnetic saturation of hard metals as a function of the tungsten weight fraction present in the cobalt binder phase, based on first-principle calculations, has been established for standard WC-Co. The predicted magnetic saturation agrees well with the experimental one. Furthermore, it is proposed that the theoretical description can be extended to alternative and more complex binder phases which allows to transfer the production control to those hard metals. ab initio calculations, VASP, magnetic saturation, hard metal, alternative binder, fcc Co. Hard metals (HM) are widely used in industrial applications since 1920s due to their unique properties such as relative high hardness, toughness, and fatigue resistance. Hard metals consist in their simplest and most common form of a hard phase, e.g. tungsten carbide (WC), and a ductile binder phase, e.g. cobalt (Co). The properties are mainly dependent on their overall chemistry which itself determines the fraction of tungsten (W) and carbon (C) dissolved in the Co binder phase after sintering. The fraction of W and C solutes in the Co binder phase strongly affects the grain growth and microstructure and, consequently, both the performance as well as the magnetic properties of the hard metal. Therefore, magnetic saturation measurements are used in industry as a fast, reliable and non-destructive method to assess consistency of properties and performance of hard metals. More specifically, magnetic saturation measurement is a means of locating hard metals within the so-called carbon window in the W-C-Co phase diagram, i.e. in which only the desired phases exist. These measurements are not only used as quality control in production, but they are equally crucial for the control of several production processes as well as in the development of compositions of new hard metals. However, a well-established relationship between the binder phase composition and the overall properties and performance of hard metals is required to determine the location of samples within the carbon window. The accuracy needed for estimating the C content from the magnetic saturation measurements for samples prepared under closely comparable conditions is about 0.01 % The aim of the presented work is to gain fundamental knowledge on the magnetic saturation of hard providing a theoretical framework of the empirical equation of Roebuck by using first-principles calculations. In the hard metal industry, the Cobalt magnetic saturation (Com), of a WC-Co hard metal insert is normally determined in accordance with the international standard (IEC 60404-14). The weight specific magnetic saturation of the WC-Co hard metal insert (4πσ H M ) is measured and compared to the magnetic saturation per unit weight of pure Co (4πσ C o ). Based on above description, Com of a WC-Co hard metal insert can be expressed as where M H M is the total magnetic moment of the hard metal insert, M C o is the total magnetic moment of a pure Co reference material, m H M is the mass of the hard metal insert and mC o is the mass of the pure Co reference sample. Since M H M comes mainly from the Co binder phase. it is usualy close to M C o and, thus, the Com value of a hard metal insert is hence close to the weight fraction of Co in that hard metal insert. However, since non-magnetic W and C will be where m R ef is the mass of the hard metal with pure Co as binder phase. By using Equation 1 and 2 Com/Co(wt.%) becomes with N C o and μ C o being the total number of Co atoms and the magnetic moment of pure Co per Co atom, respectively. Thus, Com/Co(wt.%) can be understood as a measure of how much the weight specific magnetic moment of the cemented carbide is lowered by the dissolution of W and C in the Co binder phase. For the theoretical description of the relative magnetic saturation of a hard metal, only the binder phase needs to be considered since WC is non-magnetic. We also follow the assumption by Roebuck et al. The magnetic effect of the dissolved W in Co can be derived as schematically depicted in Figure where m W denote the atomic mass of W. By re-writing Equation If only the Co-W phase as alloy is considered as Roebuck et al. To determine the change of the magnetic moment in the Co binder phase induced per W solute, μ ef f W , first-principles calculations were performed by applying a supercell approach. In hard metals, the Co binder phase is normally stabilized in the metastable face-centered-cubic (fcc) structure (Figure The additional magnetic moment μ C o in the first term in Equation All first-principles calculations were performed using an all-electron projector-augmented wave (PAW) method as implemented in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) code The energy cut-off for plane waves included in the expansion of wave functions was set to 1.3 ENMAX. All calculations were carried out at zero electronic and ionic temperatures. TA B L E 1 Calculated magnetic moment of pure Co per Co atom (μ C o ), induced magnetic moment of the W atom (μ W ), the effective magnetic moment of a W solute (μ ef f W ) using first-principles calculations and the atomic mass of Co and W. 1.658 -0.545 -3.00 58.933 183.84 To verify the applicability and accuracy of our model, the calculated Com/Co(wt.%) are compared to the results found in hot extruded Co-W-C alloys The empirical equation for Com/Co(wt.%) by Roebuck et al. where 4πσ B is defined as the measured magnetic saturation of a Co-W metal alloy per unit weight. By assuming the relation of Equation For conventional WC-Co hard metals, i.e. not alloyed with other metals, Com/Co(wt.%) are known to correspond to about 0.70 and 0.98 for the η-phase limit, i.e. at high W concentration dissolved in the Co binder phase, and the graphite limit, i.e. at low W concentration dissolved in the Co binder phase, respectively. For this range of Com/Co(wt.%), the concentration of W in the Co binder phase ranges from about 16.1 wt.% and 1.4 wt.% according to WC-Co phase diagram calculated using the Thermo-Calc software package To investigate the correctness of the assumption that the clouds are not overlapping, the volume of the "cloud" of a W solute, i.e. number of affected Co atoms in the supercell, has been determined by comparing the magnetic moment of the Co atoms surrounding the W solute to the magnetic moment of pure Co per Co atom, counting all Co atoms with a changed magnetic moment of more than 0.08 μ B . The "cloud" of a W solute was then determined to comprise the 12 nearest neighbour atoms, i.e. 1 out of 13 atoms. As a result, an absolute maximum for the approximation of non-overlapping "clouds" to be is 7 at.%, corresponding to about 19 wt.%, which is above the upper limit of the W concentration in the Co binder phase, i.e. the η-phase limit of the carbon window. However, the random distribution of W atoms in the alloy will lower this limit and possibly contribute to the difference between theory and measurement that we can see at high W concentrations in Figure In the case of cemented carbide, the other main effect that will change the calculated Com/Co is the magnetic environments at the WC-Co interfaces. In a recent investigation, this effect was estimated for a FeNi based binder alloy and it was found that the magnetic moments are lowered at the interfaces First-principle calculations of the magnetic moment of Co and a random Co-W solid solution alloys have been used to develop a theoretical model to calculate Com/Co(wt.%) as a function of W wt.% that can be applied to cemented carbide. The comparison of experimental values and values determined using Roebuck's empirical equation, verifies that our approximations of non-overlapping "clouds" in a random solid solution of Co-W neglecting the effect of C dissolved is acceptable for the given concentration range of W and C in the Co binder phase. Therefore, our results provide reliable and sufficiently accurate prediction of Com/Co(wt.%) that can be used in production control. The theoretical description of Com/Co(wt.%) can be expanded to other materials and phases by performing similar calculations that describes the binder phase. In particular, the generalization from Co-based binders to alternative binders of alloys, e.g. FeNi-based binders, is possible due to the predictive power of first-principles calculations 