We introduce an extension of the Kitaev honeycomb model by including four-spin interactions that preserve the local gauge structure and hence the integrability of the original model. The extended model has a rich phase diagram containing five distinct vison crystals, as well as a symmetric π-flux spin liquid with a Fermi surface of Majorana fermions and a sequence of Lifshitz transitions. We discuss possible experimental signatures and, in particular, present finite-temperature Monte Carlo calculations of the specific heat and the static vison structure factor. We argue that our extended model emerges naturally from generic perturbations to the Kitaev honeycomb model. Introduction. The famous Kitaev model on the honeycomb lattice The Kitaev model is approximately realized in a family of strongly spin-orbit-coupled honeycomb materials, where its anisotropic spin interactions emerge between effective J = 1/2 angular momenta in the t 2g orbitals of 4d or 5d ions From a more phenomenological point of view, the lowenergy physics of the Kitaev spin liquid is described by Majorana fermions (spinons) with Dirac nodes, coupled to an emergent Z 2 gauge field In this Letter, we extend the Kitaev model by including four-spin interactions that preserve the exact solution of the model and emerge naturally from generic perturbations. By introducing frustrated further-neighbor hopping for the Majorana fermions, these additional interactions stabilize a rich variety of vison crystals, as well as a symmetric π-flux spin liquid with a vison at every plaquette. Interestingly, the π-flux spin liquid exhibits a Fermi surface of Majorana fermions undergoing two subsequent Lifshitz transitions. On a technical level, we first use a simple variational treatment to compute the zerotemperature phase diagram of our extended model. The validity of this approach is then confirmed by unbiased Monte Carlo (MC) simulations that also reveal the finite melting temperatures of the vison crystals. Model. We consider a generalized Kitaev Hamiltonian arXiv:1902.06166v3 [cond-mat.str-el] 23 Jul 2019 on the honeycomb lattice: where isotropic Kitaev Hamiltonian with ferromagnetic (K 1 > 0) Ising interactions between the spin components σ α along each α = {x, y, z} bond ij α [see Fig. where (αβγ) is a permutation of (xyz) in each term, and ijkl αβγ is a path of length 3 consisting of bonds ij α , jk β , and kl γ . Each term in H K3 is the product of the three terms in H K1 that correspond to the three bonds along the appropriate path. Different K 3 and K 3 terms are related by space-group symmetries, simultaneously transforming the lattice and the spins; particular examples of their respective paths, with (αβγ) = (yzx), are depicted in Figs. Importantly, the exact solution of H K1 where u α ij = -u α ji ≡ ib α i b α j is a Z 2 gauge field along the α bond ij α . Since these gauge fields are conserved quantities, u α ij = ±1, providing a redundant description of the conserved gauge fluxes, W p = u z 12 u x 32 u y 34 u z 54 u x 56 u y 16 = ±1, Eq. ( In analogy with how three-spin interactions may be obtained from a Zeeman field We first concentrate on the two fully symmetric noncrystal phases occupying most of the phase diagram: the zero-flux phase, which has no fluxes at any plaquettes, and the π-flux phase, which has a Z 2 flux at each plaquette. For K 3 = K 3 = 0, the creation of each Z 2 flux with W p = -1 costs a finite energy ∆ ≈ 0.15K 1 , and the ground state thus belongs to the zero-flux sector. For K 3 /K 1 > 0, the K 1 and K 3 terms in Eq. ( Increasing K 3 /K 1 , one can modify this interaction and stabilize various intermediate phases with nontrivial flux configurations. Indeed, there are five distinct translationsymmetry-breaking vison-crystal phases in Fig. Majorana problems. For the different ground-state flux sectors discussed above, distinct configurations of the gauge fields u α ij = ±1 lead to different Majorana Hamiltonians in Eq. (3). Consequently, each phase in Fig. Interestingly, the Majorana fermions have more complex nodal structures in the π-flux phase. This phase is amenable to a full analytic understanding as, due to the perfect cancelation of all K 3 terms in Eq. ( In particular, there is a π-flux phase where the Majorana fermions are gapless at Dirac points only, and another two π-flux phases where these Dirac points coexist with Fermi surfaces (i.e., nodal lines) of distinct topologies (see Fig. Such a coexistence of Dirac points and Fermi surfaces is rather surprising and is not expected to be stable. Instead, due to the nature of the time-reversal and particlehole symmetries in the Majorana problem Experimental signatures. The phase diagram in Fig. For the vison-crystal phases in Fig. Monte Carlo simulations. To verify the phase diagram in Fig. for representative parameters of four different vison crystals, where X p is the position of plaquette p, and k is the ordering wave vector of each vison crystal, corresponding to either the K or the M point of the BZ. We first observe that, as for the pure Kitaev model, C(T ) exhibits both a high-and a low-temperature peak, which correspond to spinon and vison excitations, respectively Discussion. By considering a natural extension of the honeycomb Kitaev model, we have found a rich spectrum of novel spin-liquid phases that are not adiabatically connected to the original Kitaev model, including a fully symmetric π-flux spin liquid, and five distinct symmetry-breaking spin liquids with various degrees of vison crystallization. In the future, it would be interesting to study how an external magnetic field affects our spin liquids. For the Dirac phases, it may generate non-Abelian gapped spin liquids with distinct Chern numbers of the Majorana fermions The spin Hamiltonian H in Eq. ( Due to the resulting enlargement of the local Hilbert space, the four Majorana fermions must be reconciled with the original spin degree of freedom via the local gauge constraint In turn, the corresponding gauge redundancy means that the expressions in Eq. (S1) for the spin components are not unique; for example, one can use Eq. (S2) to obtain the following equivalent expressions: Employing Eqs. (S1) and/or (S3) appropriately, the two terms H K1 and H K3 of the spin Hamiltonian H then become Substituting Eq. (S4) into Eq. ( For each phase in Fig. Using this notation, the quadratic Majorana Hamiltonian in Eq. (3) of the main text takes the general form where each M R -R,λ,λ is a product of gauge fields u α ij = ±1 along a path connecting the sites (A, R, λ) and (B, R , λ ) occupied by the Majorana fermions c A,R,λ and c B,R ,λ . In terms of the momentum-space complex fermions where N is the number of sites, the Hamiltonian in Eq. (S5) assumes the standard Bogoliubov-de Gennes form where the summation is over pairs of momenta ±q due to the particle-hole redundancy ψ A(B),q = ψ † A(B),-q . Using the particular structure of this quadratic Hamiltonian, reflecting time-reversal symmetry, the Majorana energies at each momentum ±q are then given by the singular values of the n × n matrix Mq . From Eq. (S7), the nodal structures of the Majorana fermions are characterized by vanishing singular values of Mq or, equivalently, by det Mq = 0. Since det Mq is generically complex, det Mq = 0 translates into two independent equations for its real and imaginary parts. Consequently, for each phase in Fig. and the determinant of Mq readily factorizes into the product form where κ ≡ K 3 /K 1 is the dimensionless third-neighbor hopping amplitude, and the two functions F (q) and G(q) are While the function F (q) is complex, and the solutions of F (q) = 0 thus give point nodes at q x a = ±π/(6 √ 3)+2πn x / √ 3 and q y a = ∓π/6+2πn y /3 as well as at q x a = ±5π/(6 √ 3)+2πn x / √ 3 and q y a = ∓π/6+2πn y /3 (with n x , n y ∈ Z), the function G(q) plotted in Fig. To analyze these nodal lines, we plot G 0 (κ) in Fig. In principle, a non-magnetic impurity, such as a spin vacancy [see Fig. 