Blue energy relies on the chemical potential difference generated between solutions of high and low ionic strength and would provide a sun-and-wind independent energy source at estuaries around the world. Converting this osmotic energy through reverse-electrodialysis relies on ion-selective membranes. A novel generation of these membranes is based on atomically thin MoS2 membranes to decrease the resistance to current flow to increase power output. By modulating the surface charge by light we are able to raise the ion selectivity of the membrane by a factor of 5 while staying at a neutral pH. Furthermore, we find that the behavior of small nanopores is dominated by surface conductance. We introduce a formalism based on the Dukhin number to quantify these effects in the case of a concentration gradient system. As a consequence, the charges created by light illumination provoke two important changes. Increased surface charge at the pore rim enhances the ion selectivity and therefore larger osmotic voltage (dominating in small pores), while the increased surface charge of the overall membrane enhances the surface conductance and therefore the osmotic current (dominating in larger pores). The combination of these effects might be able to efficiently boost the energy generation with arrays of nanopores with varying pore sizes. The term blue energy embodies all the attempts to harvest energy coming from the spontaneous and irreversible mixing of sea-water and river-water. The chemical potential difference between two liquids of different salt concentration holds immense amounts of energy: 2.3MJ of theoretical energy is buried in each cubic meter of water Using single-layer MoS2 we can engineer a reverse-electrodialysis membrane with the highest single pore power to date The presence of a visible range direct band gap in the single-layer TMDs makes them very attractive for optoelectronics applications In this work, we investigate the possibility of tuning the surface charge with light in singlelayer MoS2 nanopores. We show that the observed changes in the efficiency of the generated osmotic power are due to photon absorption and the generation of charge carriers within the material. To our knowledge this is the first demonstration of a light-induced efficiency boost for osmotic power harvesting. Furthermore, we optimize the light intensities and the excitation wavelength to maximize the power output, while avoiding any material damage that could be possible due to the process of photo-oxidation Experiment. Figure The lasers were aligned perpendicular to the membrane by adjusting the position of the flow cell to maximize the light transmitted through the membrane (Supplemental Movie M1). We first set out to investigate the pore size stability of the MoS2 membrane. We found that a laser flux of 3 W/cm 2 was sufficient to slowly increase the pore size in MoS2 or create additional holes or defects (Figure Laser induced surface charge changes. The osmotic current (the current at zero potential) and the osmotic potential (the potential needed to zero the current) is found by measuring the linear ionic current response in a voltage range of -200mV to 200mV (IV). All reported values were corrected for the contribution of the electrode potential difference (Table Next, we created nanopores of 3nm and 10nm size, respectively, using the ECR method The median of the osmotic potential of the 3nm pore increase from 73mV in the dark state to 92mV (blue laser) and 98mV (red laser), whereas the 10nm pore did not show any significant difference in osmotic potential. Consistently with previously published work Figure Photoluminescence. We further investigate this difference in optical response for these two wavelengths and have performed micro-photoluminescence (μ-PL) measurements of MoS2 deposited on the membrane and in the vicinity of the membrane. A bright field image of the area considered for the PL measurements is shown in Figure Heat. As previously reported by Hwang et al. Evidence for increased surface-charge density. The ionic current measurements performed in this work illustrate an enhancement in osmotic voltage (Figure Surface vs. bulk conductances. We are intrigued by the fact that the osmotic voltages are higher in the larger nanopore (Figure We suspect that small nanopores do not follow bulk conductance rules, since deviations in conductance from bulk predictions have been observed in nanopores with high aspect ratios L/D<1, where D is the pore diameter and L is the membrane thickness , where P is the permeability ratio, Rb and Rs are the contribution ratios of the bulk conductance and surface conductance that satisfy ; I + ; < = 1 and are estimated using the Dukhin number: ; < = Q QB*, and ; I = *, QB*, . The ion concentration close to the charged membrane is denoted as: R S K 4T6UI , R V' N 4T6UI , R V' N 0WI and R S K Consequence for light boosting. The surface conduction highly dominates the smaller 3nm nanopore. This decreases the effective concentration gradient sensed by the nanopore. As a consequence, the osmotic potential is lower than what would be expected from bulk predictions. The larger the nanopore becomes, the less it is dominated by surface conduction, emphasizing the bulk gradient and therefore increasing the effective chemical potential difference. We have shown that light can double the osmotic power in small nanopores and increase the power output of larger pores by up to 20%. Since the power is a product of osmotic voltage and osmotic current it can be affected by either of the osmotic potential, or the osmotic current. During light-exposure of the pore two changes are occurring simultaneously: First, the surface charge at the pore rim increases, leading to an enhanced ion selectivity (by enhancing repulsion of anions) and therefore larger osmotic voltage. Second, the surface charge of the membrane increases, which in turn enhances the surface conductance and therefore increases the osmotic current. The first effect dominates in small pores, while the second effect dominates in bigger pores. This can be seen by the astonishing osmotic potential increase in small nanopores, while in larger pores this difference is less pronounced and results only in a small improvement of the ion selectivity. However, even though the effect on the ion selectivity is small in the large pore, the enhanced surface conductance during light illumination (due to large lDu) increases the ionic current substantially (Figure Outlook. To increase the osmotic current, arrays of nanopores will have to be fabricated on a large-scale. We suggest achieving this through a non-specific large scale defect creation method, such as oxygen plasma In a real-world application, one could imagine boosting the osmotic power generation during daytime by directing sunlight onto the membranes. Typical irradiance levels of sunlight are about 100 mW/cm 2 at sea level making it easy to achieve here reported power densities by focusing the sun's light using standard concentrators used in solar cells To our knowledge, this is the first observation that laser light can modulate the ion selectivity of MoS2 nanopores through a photogating effect and thus increase the osmotic power generated through reverse electrodialysis. Furthermore, we developed a novel formalism to qualitatively explain the data observed in thin nanopores. The fabrication of the devices has been previously described Single crystal MoS2 was grown using chemical vapor deposition on sapphire substrates. We then spin-coat PMMA on this substrate and do a water-based transfer to the target substrate. The devices are then soaked in Acetone and baked overnight at 400°C with a flow of argon(100sscm) and hydrogen (10sscm) in order to remove the majority of PMMA residues. The devices are then placed into a transmission electron microscope (FEI Talos, Hillsboro, Oregon, USA) at an acceleration voltage of 80kV to assess the integrity and cleanliness of the sample. If the sample passes the quality control, a nanopore of the desired size is drilled by focusing the electron beam to the smallest possible spot. The devices are then mounted into a custom made PMMA flow-cell using two rubber O-rings to ensure a good seal. The two chambers are subsequently flushed with an ethanol-DI water mixture (50/50) in order to properly wet the nanopore. The input channels are then sealed off by a cover slip to create a flat water-glass interface. This avoids light scattering and greatly improves the alignment precision. The flow cell is then placed on a xy-stage in a custom-made Faraday cage and aligned to the laser beam. The laser electronics (iBeam smart, Toptica Photonics, Gräfelfing, Germany) are placed outside the metal cage to avoid noise increases. The beam is inserted into the cage through a hole in the box. On the opposite side of the flow cell a small USB microscope is placed to observe the light transmitted through the nitride membrane. The flow-cell can then be carefully aligned using the xy-stage. The point where the most light penetrates the nitride membrane was considered to be the ideal position. An Axopatch 200B in combination with a custom made LabView program is used to measure and record the current through the nanopore. Pore sizes were checked by comparing current-voltage characteristics in symmetrical salt concentration, i.e., 1M/1M KCl at the start and the end of the experiments. All pore sizes were estimated by substituting the conductance in the well-established conductance model , where G is the conductance, d the pore diameter, l the pore length (set to 1nm for MoS2) and σ the ionic conductivity. For all measurements, we used the potassium chloride (K + /Cl -) ion pair due to their nearly identical bulk mobilities. All our buffers have been adjusted to a pH of 7.4, except for the 1mM dilution, which was adjusted, but unbuffered. All laser powers reported are the values that have been entered by the user in the software (iTopas, Toptica Photonics, Gräfelfing, Germany). A table of the theoretical vs. measured output power can be found in Table The laser fluxes were calculated by dividing the corrected output power Pc by the approximate area that have been measured using a slit scanning beam profiler (BP104-VIS, Thorlabs, Newton, New Jersey, United States). The correction factor was determined by measuring the laser power using a FieldmaxII-TOP (Coherent, Santa Clara, United States) and reported in Table Micro photoluminescence (z-PL) spectra were performed in air at room temperature using the laser light focused to the diffraction limit with a beam size of about 1 μm. The incident power was 90 μW for both excitation wavelengths. The emitted light was acquired using a spectrometer (Andor) and the laser line was removed with a long-pass 488-nm (650-nm) edge filter in the case of 488 nm (647 nm) excitation. The presented z-PL maps were obtained by scanning the sample using the nano-positioning stage (Mad City Labs Nano-Drive). Bright field image was acquired by a CCD camera (Andor Ixon). The IV traces were recorded at a reduced sampling rate 6'250Hz with a lowpass filter set to 1kHZ. The voltage polarity switched when the voltage ramps to avoid charging of the membrane, i.e. 0, 100mV, -100mV, 200mV, -200mV. Each voltage step lasts for 10 seconds. The traces are then segmented through detecting the current transient when the voltage was switched. Each extracted part is fit to a simple exponential function c({) = c h ⋅ | ]<⋅} + c I46<'2 . The considered current value corresponds to the stable current at infinite time. The standard deviation of this fit μexp-fit is extracted by taking the square root of the covariance matrix. We then perform a linear fit of the obtained current-voltage values. By using York's method we can propagate the previously calculated errors correctly through the linear fit The effective osmotic current is then calculated as c 5Io = ~5Io ⋅ X. The osmotic power is defined as: g 5Io = ~5Io / ⋅ X The errors are propagated using the following formula: The error on the redox potential is calculated by assuming a 5% error in the salt concentration of the two reservoirs cmin and cmax using the following equation: Similarly: COMSOL Numerical Modeling -Heat COMSOL 5.3a was used for all finite element simulations. The COMSOL model was built by keeping all dimensions as close to the reality as possible. The silicon chip was defined as 380um thick and 5x5mm square. The backside contained a 520um large, pyramidical opening penetrating through the chip and leaving a 52μm large membrane area on the frontside. The silicon chip is encompassed by a 10mm cubic PMMA flowcell, which has two 1mm large channels that provide the liquid contact to the silicon chip. The heat transfer in solids module is used. Initial temperatures were set at 20°C. We then apply the power from the laser in two steps by using the Deposited Beam Power module. 1 st , we apply a Gaussian distributed beam (centered in the middle of the membrane, standard deviation 250um) of power of 70% of the laser power (simulating the silicon absorbance) to the area outside of the membrane. 2 nd , we apply a second beam (same center and standard deviation) of power of 10% of the laser power (nitride absorbance) to the membrane only. Heat transfer in Solids and Fluids modules are used to model transfer of heat along the silicon chip, the PMMA and the liquid. Furthermore, the diffuse surface module is used to take into account the radiative heat source. The finite element simulation is then run for different laser power. As a boundary condition for the temperature, the edge of the PMMA flow-cell was set to be at 20°C. We simulated the stationary ion distribution around a monolayer MoS2 membrane by solving the Poisson-Nernst-Planck equations given by: í. ó V' N = í . ö-é " V' N í ñ+ ] -9 \ * LM N 78 ñ+ ] íɸõ = 0 (3) Where φ is the electrostatic potential at every point in space. This potential along with the current densities of the respective ionic species (Ji) is dependent on the concentration of the ionic species (i = K + /Cl -), the respective diffusion coefficients (Di ) and the temperature T. F is Faraday's constant while R is the universal gas constant and ε is the relative permittivity. Equation (1) refers to the self consistent Poisson equation that computes the electrostatic potential in the presence of the solute ions while eqs 2 and 3 refer to the Nernst-Planck equation describing the electrodiffusion in terms of concentration of the ionic species across the membrane. Since we are interested in the steady state distributions of the ions in the vicinity of the nanopore, the current continuity equations are set to 0. A modified version of the above equations was used to explore the ionic distribution around nanopores in salt concentration gradients by Xie et. al. We can then use the same method as applied to the experimental data to extract the osmotic current and potential. A similar setup was utilized by Rollings et. al. . b, Simulated potassium (blue) and chloride (red) concentration distribution from a charged wall with surface charge σcis=-50mC/m 2 . The bulk concentration levels of potassium and chloride ccis and ctrans are indicated with the blue and red dashed lines. The red box shows the EDL length over which ions have been averaged for the calculation of the effective ion concentration in the case of a surface conductance dominated system. c, The reversal potential calculated from the modified GHK model (equation In this part we estimate and rule out the influence of temperature on the observed results. Here, we ignore any influence of the surface concentrate on the temperature dependence of the KCl conductivity. Electrolytic conductivity (σ) values of KCl (concentrations ranging from 10mM to 1M) in a temperature (T) range of 0 to 50°C were extracted from the NIST standards for electrolytic conductivity Since the conductivity-temperature relationship is linear in this range, we extracted parameters a and b from: σ = a ⋅ T + b . We can then extract the temperature corresponding to a certain nanopore conductance using: T = ] -1 6 . In these calculations, we assume that the pore diameter and length does not change. We used a suspended MoS2 layer in a 50nm nitride hole. In this configuration, the MoS2 layer reaches until the nitride edge producing a pore of diameter 50nm and a thickness of 21nm (20nm nitride + ~1nm MoS2). The advantage of this configuration is its higher temporal stability. In Figure Other than viscosity changes, heat also influences the chemical potential difference. We can express the osmotic voltage observed in Figure where Vdiff is the measured osmotic potential, S(Σ)is the ion selectivity and the logarithmic expression the concentration gradient. To estimate the pure thermal effect, we assume that the laser is not influencing the ion selectivity, so we set S(Σ)is to a fixed value (selectivity in the dark state) and vary T in order to obtain the values measured. In the case of the smaller, 3nm pore, a temperature differences of 118°C and 73.9°C are needed to explain the change due to a 643nm and 475nm laser irradiation. For exactly the same laser conditions these values drop to 11.5°C and 6.5°C for the 10nm pore. Realistically, no difference should be seen between the two cases since an enlarged nanopore does not influence how the laser heats the system. Furthermore, the values obtained for the small nanopore are at least an order of magnitude away from anything we could expect from the previous estimation. In order to estimate the influence of the temperature on the EDL we analytically calculate the thickness of the EDL for different temperature (Figure With the Debye-Hückel approximation we can calculate the Debye length λ as 7 : , where κ is the Debye-Hückel parameter, εr the relative permittivity of water, ε0 the permittivity of vacuum, kB Boltzmann's constant, T temperature, ni the bulk volume density, zi the valence (in the case of KCL: ∑n i ∞ z i 2 = 2n ∞ ) and e the electron charge. Since ε r depends on the temperature as well we can use an analytical approximation to calculate its value The surface charge of MoS2 in water is estimated through the following chemical equilibrium: We can estimate the diffuse layer electrostatic potential Φs (Zeta potential) of the surface by , where σ is the surface charge and Γ the density of reactive sites. The pK of nanocrystalline MoS2 has been measured to be around 3.1 Last but not least, the redox potential generated at the interface of the Ag/AgCl electrode with the ionic solution also depends on the temperature. Depending on the salt concentration the potential can increase between 200 and 600μV/K (Figure Deviations in conductance from bulk predictions have been observed in nanopores with high aspect ratios L/D<1 , where κ s is the surface conductivity and κ b the bulk conductivity. This Dukhin length lDu can be approximated using the surface charge σ and the bulk ion concentration c s as: l Du ≈ σ 2⋅c s ⋅e . The surface charge of the MoS 2 membrane was fixed to -50mC/m2 as previously determined 