Background: Nanoscale composition of silk defining its unique properties via a hierarchial structural anisotropy has to be analysed at the highest spatial resolution of tens-of-nanometers corresponding to the size of fibrils made of β -sheets, which are the crystalline building blocks of silk. Results: Nanoscale optical and structural properties of silk have been measured from 100-nmthick longitudinal slices of silk fibers with ∼ 10 nm resolution, the highest so far. Optical sub-1 Recent advances in nanofabrication of electronic devices require cutting-edge analytical technologies to provide a reliable structural characterisation of materials at the nanoscale. Such technologies are particularly important to probe molecular properties of cross-sections smaller than 100 nm in all three dimensions, which is of rapidly growing interest in the field of nanotechnology. Electronic chip manufacturing is currently introducing the sub-10 nm fabrication node (a half pitch of a grating pattern) in the development of 3D fin-gates of field transistors. Nanofabrication techniques are now approaching single-digit-nm resolution using electron emission The structural and optical properties of material are interrelated. By using a wide spectrum of electromagnetic waves from visible to THz, it is possible to gain insights into complex hierarchical structures of composite materials. For materials with strong structural anisotropy, defined by the molecular orientation and alignment of crystalline micro-volumes, it is important to characterise structure at the highest lateral and longitudinal resolutions Real and imaginary parts of the refractive index, ñ = n + iκ, together with the orientation dependency of the birefringence ∆n and dichroism ∆κ, define the optical response of materials. Reflectance R is proportional to the real part, while the absorbance A corresponds to the imaginary part of ñ. Recently, we demonstrated that the IR measurements of silk performed using three different methods, including (i) a table-top Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) transmission, (ii) a synchrotron-based attenuated total reflection (ATR) FTIR, and (iii) an atomic force microscopy (AFM) tip response to the IR absorbed light (nano-IR Here, we used a near-field scattering method to probe n, κ and to determine spectral differences between the reflectance and absorbance of silk fibers with ∼ 10 nm resolution. Cross-sections of silk fibers were prepared using an ultramicrotome. Silk was chosen due to its well known spectral properties and its increasing applications as a biocompatible and biodegradable material Silk has uniaxial symmetry which can be examined from longitudinal microtome slices used in this study. Sub-wavelength resolutions in hyperspectral IR mapping of absorbance and orientational properties of the absorbing bands were reliably measured from 100-nm-thick slices of silk. Such a high resolution technique is essential in order to gain a better understanding of the fibril structure of silk Silk fibers were embedded in epoxy resin (Oken Ltd., Japan) and thin-sectioned by ultramicrotomy to achieve a sample thickness of ∼ 100 nm. Slices were then immobilised on IR-transparent nonbirefringent substrates (CaF 2 ). A 3D X-ray computed micro-tomography (micro-CT) was performed using a lab-based ZEISS Versa 520 X-ray Microscope at the Stanford Nano Shared Facilities, Stanford University. The scan Reconstructor software (Fig. 2D X-ray diffraction of Bombyx mori silk was carried out on a Bruker D8 Venture single crystal diffractometer using a Cu-Ka micro-focus X-ray source with wavelength of λ = 1.5418 (Fig. The sub-diffraction scattering scanning near-field optical microscopy s-SNOM (neaspec GmbH) uses a metalized atomic force microscopy (AFM) tip which maps the surface relief (topography) by its basic AFM operation, and simultaneously, under external infrared illumination (broadband laser working by difference-frequency generation, Toptica), acts as a light-concentrating antenna such that the sample is probed with a nanofocused light field. The AFM tapping mode operation (ca. 60 nm amplitude) modulates the near-field interaction between the tip and sample The nano-FTIR spectra were recorded in ca. 100 s/spectrum with a spectral resolution of 10 cm -1 . Removal of the instrumental response function from the nano-FTIR spectra was done by normalization of the measured spectra to a reference Si signal. Resulting nano-FTIR absorption and reflectivity spectra can be directly correlated with the standard far-field IR spectra X-ray diffraction is the method of choice to reveal the internal structure of complex materials and to detect crystalline regions. Figures Silk is a strongly birefringent material, as revealed by cross-polarised optical imaging (Fig. (C=O), and amide A at 3290 cm -1 (N-H). Perpendicular orientation between C=O and C-N bonding was revealed at a high accuracy when longitudinal silk slices were prepared Scattering SNOM was used to measure reflectance and absorbance spectra from nanoscale areas of a single silk slice. Lateral slices of 0.1 μm were prepared on a gold mirror (Fig. The amide I and II bands were well reproduced in absorption spectra collected from four different single points; however, only spectra from two measurement points are displayed in Fig. Next, direct absorbance and orientation mapping Alternatively, the real part refractive index can be determined from the known reflectance R and extinction κ values following the equation n was not measured in this experiment. Anisotropy in absorption is defined by the dichroism ∆" where k = 2π/λ is the wavevector. It defines the losses in transmission T , at the maximum and minimum orientations of linear polarisation e -∆ " = T /T ⊥ . The dichroism was estimated for the Amide bands: for the Amide A ∆" 0.014 suggests only a minute transmission change T /T ⊥ 98.6% for the two perpendicular polarisations. Similarly, the results obtained for the Amide I (∆" 0.027 and 97.4%) and Amide II (∆" 0.019 and 98.1%) also indicated that very small changes of absorbance of light passed through the thin 100 nm lateral slices of the silk fiber. This shows that anisotropy of absorbance can be measured from nanoscale materials of sub-wavelength thickness. There were no apparent spectral differences among few measured samples at different orientations of 100-nm-thick silk slices. The far-field (Fig. In summary, spectral characterisation, lateral mapping and transmission with deep sub-wavelength resolution at IR molecular fingerprinting spectral window were demonstrated using thin 100 nm lateral slices of silk. Absorbance and reflectance spectra of silk with resolution of SNOM tip ∼ 10 nm were obtained. Absorbance from nano-thin silk slices with only 1.5% of the wavelength were measured when the beam diameter was comparable with the IR-wavelength. Hyper-spectral mapping across the silk fiber slice was obtained at a high accuracy and reproducibility. Orientational map of the amide bands was revealed and was consistent with data collected from bulk sam-ples. It shows that preparation of thin micro-tome slices of soft bio-materials is not altering their structure and opens possibility to read optical properties from nano-volumes. In the case of optical measurements, optical averaging over thicker inhomogeneous volumes of samples can be avoided using nano-slices and this provides more reliable direct measurement of optical properties. The study demonstrated characterisation of the silk fiber with a nano-scale resolution in all three dimensions.