Experiments were performed with Fabry-Perot optical resonators in vacuum at low temperatures. Mirrors were applied on substrates of various optical materials. The infrared laser with a wavelength of 1.064 microns was used. The pump power at the maximum could reach 450 mW. The evolution of the optical properties of the FP cavity was traced in the temperature range (300 -10) o K. The main parameters measured were the integral characteristics of the FP resonances -sharpness (finesse) and contrast of interference. Three types of substrates were tested: a sitall -the optical glass with ultra low thermal expansion (ULE), sapphire and calcium fluoride. During cooling, the 1 degradation of the integral characteristics of the FP cavity was observed for the sitall mirrors due to the loss of the properties of (ULE), for sapphire mirrors due to the birefringence effect. The satisfactory constancy of the integral characteristics of the FP resonators on calcium fluoride was demonstrated in the entire temperature range studied At present, optical Fabry-Pero cavities are used for different applications and for precise measurements in fundamental physics. In particular, they are used to address the problem of optical frequency standards Atomic transitions used as reference frequencies in optical clocks usually have a quality factor in the region of 10 15 , which corresponds to a line width of about 1 Hz or less. To explore such narrow transitions, an optical local oscillator is required that has a similar or narrower line width. Available solid-state and semiconductor diode lasers have a line width of tens of kHz to tens of MHz. Reducing the laser line width to the required level is most often achieved using the Pound-Drever-Hall stabilization method With good temperature control at the point of zero thermal expansion and suppression of the influence of mechanical vibrations, the frequency stability of the reference optical resonator (spacer) is limited only by dimensional changes due to thermal vibrations of the substrates of mirrors and their coatings Currently, ULE glasses are used for optical reference resonators, since they have zero expansion near room temperature. A significant reduction in thermal noise can be achieved by switching to silica, which has much lower mechanical losses. Then the thermal noise will be determined mainly by coating (sprayed) and will be at a lower level. However, silica has a relatively large thermal expansion, and therefore very good temperature control is required. An alternative would be to use a body of a reference resonator (spacer) made of ULE glass with low thermal noise and silica for substrates of mirrors The prospects for increasing the sensitivity of laser interferometric gravitationalwave antennas To combat thermal noise, quantum photon noise and light pressure noise in a KAGRA setup, large heavy sapphire mirrors on sapphire suspensions The search continues for various materials for test mass mirrors and their spectrally selective reflective coatings. Their evolution under conditions of longterm operation in gravitational-wave bursts monitoring is investigated. In a recent paper by the KAGRA In the observation interval of 35 days with a vacuum of 6 • 10 -6 Pa, a drop in the finesse value of up to 5% recorded (the growth rate of the adsorbed layer was estimated to be 27 ± 1.9 nm/day). In future gravitational-wave interferometers of the third generation, this effect should apparently be taken into account (for example, periodically destroying the adsorbed layer by a pulsed increase in optical pumping In particular, it might be valid for solid-state resonance gravitational antenna of moderate sensitivity with an optical read out system, named as OGRAN detector In this article we report the particular result of our experimental study of behavior FP optical resonators with mirrors on substrate of different materials. 2 Cryostat for cooling test bodies in optical experiments. To carry out the experiment, a pilot model of the OGRAN detector was manufactured The vacuum system included a spiral oil-free pre-pump and a turbo molecular pump (Turbovac 350). At the degassing stage, the cryostat was evacuated up to a vacuum of at least 10 -7 Torr. This cryostat could operate in both flow and fill mode. In our experiments, we used a flow-through mode. Both chambers of the cryostat were filled with liquid nitrogen, while liquid helium was passed through a copper tube that enveloped the body of the cooling chamber The process of cooling the pilot model of mass 8 kg from the 77 to 5 K was carried out during about 3 hours and required about 30 litres of liquid helium. A detailed description of the cryostat design and the suspension system of the test body inside the cooling chamber in the following paper The cryostat is equipped with one window for input and output of optical beam radiation. The temperature of the object was monitored by two commercial sensors from the Lakeshore company. One was mounted directly on the FP cavity mirror and the second was attached to the test body (i.e. bar of the pilot model). The choice of material for the mirror substrates for use gravitational-wave interferometers is primarily dictated by the requirement for small mechanical (acoustic) losses Among the key parameters describing the physical properties of the substrate material and determining their behavior under low temperature conditions with high optical pump powers, a number of thermodynamic, mechanical, and optical characteristics are important Young's modulus and thermo elasticity (coefficient of thermal expansion) affect the measurement of the mirror's deformation, t optical refractive index and its nonlinear component, and also the coefficients of optical reflection and absorption of incident radiation. The latter parameters are mainly determined by the quality and number of reflective layers of sprayed mirror coatings. Our mirrors were manufactured (Polyus research institute of M.F.Stelmakh, Moscow, Russia 3 ) using multilayer dielectric interference coatings of alternating layers of oxides TiO 2 /SiO 2 and Ta 2 O 5 /SiO 2 , which were applied by ion beam spraying. The average parameters are: a scattering K s < 10 ppm, absorption coefficient K a < 10 ppm, a reflection coefficient R ≥ 99.998 %, laser strength It is useful here to provide a summary of parameters for the substrates in our study, see Table An important point in the experiment on cooling mirrors on substrates of these materials was to ensure sufficient thermal contact of the mirrors with the cryostat, so that the experiment could be carried out in a finite time. Working through various mounting options led to the design shown in Fig. The comments to the picture are as follows (the numbers and arrows mark particular details): the lower parts of the holder (2) are pressed (inserted on friction) into both bar ends of central tunnel of the PM (1), so that their planes are parallel to each other. The upper part of the holder (3) presses the inserted mirror (4) by means of screws (5) distributed along its perimeter. The clamping (press down) screws alternate with the spacer (wringing) screws, which allows the mutual optical tuning of the mirrors. In the upper part of holder of the input mirror, a groove is made to place the temperature sensor The experimental setup consisted of the following main components, see Fig. In our experiment, we used a single mode tunable Nd:YAG laser with λ = 1.064 μm with the maximum power up to P∼ 1W, which was developed in the Institute of Laser Physics SB RAS, Novosibirsk. Construction was based on the principle of a running wave ring laser In the experiment, two main integral characteristics of the FP cavity at the optical resonance were measured: F , finesse (or sharpness of the resonance); and C, contrast. By adjusting the laser frequency through the voltage applied to piezo-ceramics, one can tune the optical resonance of the FP cavity and measure its characteristics using the absorption curve in reflected light. This curve appears on the oscilloscope when synchronizing the sweep speed with the rate of change of the laser frequency. However, the possibility of observing it depends on the laser's frequency stability and the width of the optical resonance. The laser device with pre-stabilization that we used The contrast parameter C gives the fraction of light involved in the interference (i.e. in optical resonance) and significantly affects the sensitivity of the FP standard in precision measurements. According to the theory of a FP cavity, under absence of losses the intensity of reflected light equals zero at resonance frequency (i.e. the wave coming out from the cavity is compensated by the anti-phase wave reflected from the input mirror). This situation corresponds to the contrast parameter C = 1 In reality, the complete compensation does not exist due to losses (i.e. there is no zero intensity in reflected light on resonance). The measure of contrast is estimated by a relative depth of the dip in the absorption curve. Usually, an average value of the contrast under a satisfactory FP cavity tuning is on the order of 20 -30%. The contrast essentially depends not only on the parameters of the mirrors themselves but also on the mode matching with the radiation structure (i.e. from the delicate accuracy of the resonance tuning). Temperature distortions of the mirrors obviously destroy the contrast. Before placing the PM in the cryostat, the mirrors were mounted on it in a dustproof box. The mirrors were fastened at the ends of the PM in special clips (holders) (Fig. a) Mirrors on sitall substrates. The material Sitall CO-115M or "Astrositall" refers to the category of "zerodures", which are materials with a low coefficient of thermal expansion (1.5 The other solid-state characteristics are listed in Table The indicated characteristics of Sitall CO-115M are confirmed in the temperature range of -60 o C -+60 o C. However, reliable data for cryogenic temperatures are unavailable. The results of our measurements of the evolution of the integral characteristics of a FP cavity with mirrors on substrates made of this sitall are shown in Fig. One can see a rather rapid drop in both parameters when the FP cavity is cooled. The finesse (red line) drops almost seven times as the temperature decreases by 100 o C. The contrast (blue line) weakens slightly slower, by three times when approaching the nitrogen temperature. Measurements at lower temperatures have already lost their meaning and have not been carried out. In the reverse course, during warming up, the parameters were restored (not shown), coming to the initial state with some hysteresis (a slight vertical shift for the same temperature). Thus, the observed changes were reversible. b) Mirrors on sapphire substrates. According to its solid-state properties, sapphire is considered to be the most perfect material with a high Debye temperature and low internal losses that rapidly die out during cooling. Its modulus of elasticity is noticeably (3-4 times) larger than that of optical glasses and fluorites (i.e. less deformability). However, the tendency to double refraction is an order of magnitude higher than that of Sitall. The difference between the refractive indices of the extraordinary and ordinary rays (n e -n o ) ≈ 0.01. This creates certain problems when using sapphire mirrors in optical resonators at low temperatures. The results of measurements of the integral characteristics of a FP cavity with mirrors on sapphire substrates are shown in Fig. In practice, before the start of cooling, the resonance peak of the mode has a weak splitting, which can be roughly removed by mutual rotation of the mirrors. However, upon cooling, the splitting arises again and grows approximately linearly in temperature. In the left-hand part of Fig. Fig. Calcium fluoride is a widespread material in IR spectroscopy in the wavelength range (0.15 -9)μm. The CaF 2 crystal has high mechanical strength (withstands high pressure) and is non-hygroscopic. It is believed that it is sensitive to thermal effects (although the melting point is rather high 1 418 o C). At room temperature it is optically isotropic. The difference between the refractive indices of the extraordinary and ordinary rays is very small (n e -n o ) 0.001. Our measurements of the FP cavity with mirrors on calcium fluoride substrates showed that its integral characteristics (finesse and contrast) are practically kept in a wide range of temperatures, from room to helium. A slight drop in the contrast 20% was observed during the passage beyond the mark of 60 o K. (It should be noted that the thermal conductivity of calcium fluoride in the region from 60K to 40K increases from ∼1 W/cm•K up to ∼10 W/cm•K As mentioned in the introduction, optical resonators FP are used for pre-stabilization of lasers in schemes of optical frequency standards and for registration of small opto-acoustic perturbations in gravitational antennas. The known PDH technique This paper presents a study of the temperature evolution of the FP cavity for three types of mirrors. The main result is a demonstration of the suitability of mirrors on calcium fluoride substrates. The flaws of sitall and sapphire based mirrors were also discovered. The reasons for the fall in the quality of the FP of resonators with sitall mirrors are not completely clear. Given that their optical nonlinearity is small, we can assume a deterioration in the optical qualities of such mirrors is due to thermomechanical effects. However, this hypothesis requires additional research. Optical nonlinearity (birefringence) affects sapphire mirrors. It is obvious that with a large frequency splitting of resonances that preserves the high finesse, the use of the PDH technique may also be applied to a separate isolated peak. However, this does not prevent the loss of contrast because the optical power is spread over all of the peaks. The obtained results are directly important for the implementation of the cryogenic version of the OGRAN 