Folded Dipole Antenna for Narrowband Applications Sanghamitro Das , Member, IEEE, David J. Sawyer , Member, IEEE, Nectaria Diamanti, A. Peter Annan, and Ashwin K. Iyer , Senior Member, IEEE Abstract-A novel miniaturized printed folded dipole (FD) antenna has been designed for narrowband sensing applications. It is shown that the antenna may be systematically engineered to achieve matching to a practical source impedance at frequencies well below its half-wavelength resonance using series-LC loading and asymmetrical arm widths. This approach is used to design an inherently well-matched antenna that does not require an external matching network and demonstrates approximately 75% miniaturization, excellent co-to cross-polarization separation, over 24 dB higher realized gain, and strongly improved radiation efficiency relative to an unloaded FD of the same electrically small size. Experimental validation of a fabricated prototype demonstrates excellent agreement with simulations. Index Terms-Folded dipole (FD) antenna, miniaturization, reactive loading. T HE process of miniaturizing an antenna, which is often the largest component in a wireless system, generally degrades its efficiency and/or bandwidth significantly. Nevertheless, electrically small antennas are extensively used in lowpower sensing/monitoring applications, such as RFID tags, biomedical implant antennas, or Internet of Things (IoT) devices The challenge, of course, is that reduction in the antenna size typically results in a small input resistance and a large input reactance, making it very difficult to match to a practical source impedance. The use of external matching networks to mitigate this problem often comes at the expense of increasing the size and complexity of the structure. Some of the most widely used antennas for sensing applications are dipole antennas and their folded-dipole counterparts, particularly because of their simplicity, low cost, compact size, well-defined radiation properties, omnidirectional coverage, and simple analysis and design. It is well known that conventional dipole antennas can be miniaturized using various reactive loading techniques More recently, electrically small monopole and dipole antennas have been realized by applying metamaterial loading To appreciate the constraints on dipole miniaturization, we may consider the input-impedance responses Z in ( f ) of both conventional and FDs. These are shown in Fig. A distinguishing feature of the FD antenna is that, unlike its conventional counterpart, the resonance frequency f R is surrounded by two antiresonances f AR,1 and f AR,2 , as can be seen through comparison of Fig. The main contribution of this article is to show that, by employing a simple (passive) reactive loading scheme and then judiciously choosing the values of the required loading reactances, the input-impedance response of an FD antenna can be practically engineered in order to achieve good impedance matching at a desired miniaturization level with respect to an arbitrary source impedance, without the need for external matching networks or other techniques that increase the overall footprint of the antenna and/or its complexity. Specifically, it will be shown that a series combination of inductive and capacitive lumped loading introduces a new resonance frequency below f AR,1 , and that this new resonance together with f AR,1 may be used to control the Z in of the antenna in order to achieve excellent return loss and better radiation efficiency compared to an unloaded FD antenna of the same size at the same frequency. An asymmetric reactive loading scheme is used to realize a greater current imbalance between the arms of the FD in order to improve the radiation efficiency. Finally, the use of unequal arm widths has been exploited as an additional degree of freedom in conjunction with the reactive loading in order to fine-tune the impedance matching and the radiation performance. It will be shown that a reasonably small arm-width ratio will be required for this case, thus a small antenna footprint can be ensured. This article is organized as follows. Section II presents a study on the input-impedance trends of a reactively loaded FD antenna, obtained by performing a series of full-wave parametric simulations. The major inferences drawn from the study are then exploited to design a 75% miniaturized antenna that demonstrates good return loss at the target operating frequency of 1 GHz. Several practical issues related to the components used in designing the miniaturized antenna are also discussed. In Section III, the fabrication of a prototype based on the final simulated design is described, followed by the measured results that are found to be in excellent agreement with the corresponding simulated results. In order to engineer the impedance-matching response of the FD antenna, we need to first study the effects of different series inductive (L) and capacitive (C) loading values on Z in . As a starting point, an infinitesimally thin (w, s λ) planar FD antenna in vacuum is selected. A schematic of the antenna shown in Fig. A 40 mil-thick Megtron 4 R-5725 Laminate (ε r = 4.14, tanδ = 0.005) dielectric substrate has been considered for this work. The antenna length l was kept unchanged at 38 mm, but the arm widths and the separation between them were made larger in order to facilitate fabrication. The driven and folded arm widths were made unequal for generality and assigned two different width parameters: w dr and w f d , respectively. The antenna is fed by a balanced coplanar stripline (CPS) that comprises a linearly tapered transition from a 200 CPS line to the 0.5 mm-wide feed gap on the driven arm of the FD, as shown in Fig. 1) Choose a target frequency of operation or, conversely, the desired degree of miniaturization for a given physical length. 2) Introduce high series L-loading on the folded arm in order to bring f AR,1 below the target frequency. 3) Introduce series C-loading on the driven arm to bring f AR,1 around the target frequency and f R,N very close to f AR,1 . 4) Using parametric simulations, fine-tune the loading values and the arm widths simultaneously to achieve good return loss at the target frequency. Since the FD antenna requires a balanced input, for measurement using a standard 50 reference impedance it is necessary to design a balun structure that can transform a 50 unbalanced coaxial line to a 200 balanced CPS. A surface-mount balun transformer (Mini Circuits TC4-25+) has been selected for this purpose. It is a center-tap transformer with a 1:4 turns ratio and can be operated over a bandwidth of 500 MHz to 2.5 GHz. A microstrip-based feed structure has been designed to house the balun transformer and a microminiature coaxial (MMCX) surface mount connector, which can be fed via a 50 MMCX cable. The total length of the feed structure is 23.5 mm (0.08λ at 1 GHz), which is much smaller than conventional printed microstrip-to-CPS balun structures that require approximately quarter-wavelength (or even longer) transition lengths In order to determine the frequency response of the feed layout, it was simulated in HFSS with 50 and 200 port impedances at the input and output sides, respectively. The balun transformer could not be included in the simulation due to the unavailability of an accurate full-wave model. However, the scattering parameters of the feed layout obtained using HFSS could be co-simulated with the published scatteringparameter data of the transformer The loading inductance was achieved using a Coilcraft 0603HP-33N inductor, which has a nominal value of 35.45 nH at 1 GHz as determined from its manufacturer-provided SPICE model The antenna was simulated in HFSS with the selected lumped inductor in the presence of the feed structure. It is important to note that every practical lumped inductor is associated with some amount of ohmic loss, which is usually quantified as the quality factor (Q) of the inductor and can be represented as an equivalent series resistance. The Q of the selected inductor was found to be 79 at 1 GHz, suggesting an equivalent series resistance of 2.8 , which was also introduced in the simulation. The corresponding S 11 response was compared with the return-loss response shown in Fig. However, as mentioned earlier, all these effects can be compensated and better matching can be realized at 1 GHz for the whole structure by parametrically tuning the different antenna parameters. For the selected lumped inductor, in order to bring the return-loss peak to 1 GHz and compensate for the lost inductance, two perpendicular sections of width w p = 1 mm Fig. The radiation efficiency is expected to be strongly reduced by the inductor Q but is also susceptible to additional insertion losses incurred due to multiple scattering outside the antenna operating bandwidth, where the antenna is strongly mismatched to the feed. To quantify both sources of power dissipation, we may define an overall radiation efficiency of the antenna with the feed structure (η rad,O ), which may be estimated using the following equation: ( Here, η F is the efficiency of the feed structure in transmitting the accepted power, and η rad,A is the radiation efficiency of the antenna including the parasitic effects of the feed layout, which can slightly shift the antenna resonance. This was obtained from HFSS by directly exciting the antenna in the presence of the feed layout, excluding the balun transformer. The feed efficiency η rad,O can be written in terms of the scattering parameters of the feed structure including the balun structure (subscript F) and the antenna (subscript A), as follows: The derivation of (2) is detailed in the Appendix. Using (1), a comparison was made between the reactively loaded FD antenna and an unloaded FD antenna having the same overall footprint, both in the presence of the feed structure, and shown in Fig. Although not shown, the proposed miniaturized FD antenna was also compared with an equivalent (38 mm-long) miniaturized conventional dipole antenna, loaded inductively so as to make it resonant at f R = 1 GHz. It was observed that, for equal inductor Q, both antennas demonstrated nearly identical radiation efficiency when fed using idealized matched sources. However, although the proposed miniaturized FD antenna could be practically designed for an essentially arbitrary input impedance suitable for matching to any balanced feed, the miniaturized conventional dipole would generally require an external matching network in order to produce comparable realized gain. Finally, it is important to note that the observed S 11 bandwidth, radiation efficiency, and antenna quality factor of the miniaturized FD antenna are well within the Chu-Harrington limit as given in The final parametrically tuned structure was fabricated using an LPKF ProtoLaser U3 milling machine that uses a laser to pattern designs on a dielectric substrate. The lumped inductors were soldered onto the antenna surface, along with the balun transformer and the MMCX surface-mount connector, and the vias were created using LPKF 0.9 mm copper rivets inserted into the substrate using a manual rivet punch and then soldered. The fabricated prototype is shown in Fig. The return-loss characteristics of the fabricated antenna were measured using a Keysight PNA-X (model N5244A) vector network analyzer. Early prototypes exhibited a matching frequency slightly higher than 1 GHz, suggesting that the inductance of the surface-mount inductor component used in this study was slightly less than its reported nominal value. Thus, the length l p of the perpendicular sections was further increased to 2.75 mm (keeping the other antenna parameters unchanged) in order to bring the return-loss peak closer to 1 GHz. Excellent -44.36 dB matching was obtained for the fabricated antenna at 0.999 GHz (∼75% miniaturized). It was found through simulations that a reduction in the loading inductance from its reported nominal value of 35.45 to 34.15 nH (which is within the specified ±5% tolerance value of the inductor) predicts the observed returnloss maximum at 0.999 GHz. The measured return loss was compared to the simulated result described in Section II-C (l p = 2.11 mm, L = 35.45 nH) and shown in Fig. This article demonstrated that engineering the Z in of a printed FD antenna using asymmetric series-LC loading and arm widths can enable excellent impedance matching, co-to cross-polarization separation, and improved radiation efficiency, even when it is highly miniaturized (∼75%) at the operating frequency. The miniaturized antenna does not require any external matching network and has attractive radiation performance suitable for sensor applications. Finally, the measured results are in excellent agreement with the simulated results. Although the approach presented in this article was used to achieve a real Z in at the target operating frequency, it may more generally be used to realize complex Z in for conjugate matching in some sensor applications like RFID, in which antennas are driven by chips possessing either an inductive or a capacitive output impedance. Furthermore, a fully printed equivalent antenna can be developed, which will not require any lumped components and, thus, will not be susceptible to the tolerances in off-the-shelf lumped component values, and will also be easier and less costly to fabricate. Additionally, the locations of reactive loading on the driven and folded arms can be varied in order to further improve the response. The antenna with the feed structure can be represented using the schematic shown in Fig. Thus, the overall radiation efficiency of the antenna including the feed structure can be given by the following equation: where S 11,F , S 12,F , S 21,F , and S 22,F are the generalized scattering parameters of the feed structure and S 11,A pertains to the antenna loaded by the feed structure parasitically, but excluding the balun transformer. Now, P rad can be given as follows: where η rad,A is the radiation efficiency of the antenna including the parasitic effects of the feed layout, which was directly obtained from HFSS. The accepted power into the antenna P acc,A can be expressed using the following equation: (5) Thus, incorporating (4) and ( It may also be noted that, for an inherently well-matched antenna, S 11,A ≈ 0, hence Furthermore, for a broadband, low loss, and well-matched feed structure, considering S 11,F ≈ S 22,F ≈ 0 and S 12,F ≈ S 21,F ≈ 1, η F and η rad,O can be obtained as and η rad,O = η rad,A . Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA. Downloaded on May 06,2020 at 00:55:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.