Potassium aluminium tetrahydride KAlH 4 of high phase purity (space group Pnma (62)) was synthesized via a mechanochemical route. The thus obtained material was studied by 27 Al and 39 K MAS NMR spectroscopy. For both nuclei precise data for the isotropic chemical shift and the quadrupole coupling at T = 295 K were derived ( 27 Al: δ iso = (107.6±0.2) ppm, C Q = (1.29±0.02) MHz and η = 0.64±0.02; 39 K: δ iso = (6.1± 0.2) ppm, C Q = (0.562 ± 0.005) MHz and η = 0.74 ± 0.02). The straightforward NMR spectroscopic approach applied here should also work for other complex aluminium hydrides and for many other materials containing half-integer nuclei experiencing small to medium-sized quadrupole couplings. In the quest for materials for reversible hydrogen storage, complex aluminium hydrides have attracted much scientific interest in the last two decades. There are at least two straightforward preparation methods for KAlH 4 . The first is a direct synthesis reported by Ashby et al. To the best of our knowledge, there are only four reports on NMR studies of potassium aluminium tetrahydride. Tarasov et al. The third, more recently published paper by Sorte et al. The Sorte et al. Recent papers All procedures were performed under argon as protective gas atmosphere and with carefully dried solvents. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were carried out in Debye-Scherrer transmission geometry on a STOE STADI P diffractometer using Cu Kα 1 (λ = 1.5460 Å) radiation. To avoid any contact with air, sealed 0.5 mm diameter glass capillaries were used. The data were collected with a linear position sensitive detector fabricated by Stoe in the 15-80 • 2Θ range. The NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker Avance III HD 500WB spectrometer using double-bearing MAS probes (DVT BL4) at resonance frequencies of 130.3 MHz and 23.3 MHz for For the For the 39 K MAS NMR spectra, single π/8 pulses (t p = 3.0 μs) were applied at a repetition time of 6 s (4,000-24,000 scans) and spinning frequencies between 4.0 and 6.0 kHz. The 39 K chemical shifts are given with respect to 1.0 M aqueous solution of potassium chloride using solid potassium chloride (ν M AS = 6 kHz) with its sharp resonance at δ= 47.8 ppm 34 as secondary standard. Solid potassium chloride was also used for determining the flip-angle. Both the spinning-sideband patterns of the Throughout the paper any effect of chemical shift anisotropy on the - Different regions of a This effect can easily be explained by a non-uniform increase in temperature over the length of the sample brought about by frictional heating. (1) The quadrupole-induced shift δ qis (m) depends on the spin quantum numbers I and m, the quadrupole coupling constant C Q and the asymmetry parameter η of the nucleus under study and the magnetic field at which the spectrum is measured. where eq = V zz is the zz-component of the electric-field gradient tensor, e is the elementary charge, and Q is the quadrupole moment of the nucleus. , the asymmetry parameter is definded as As shown by Samoson, 41 the quadrupole-induced shift of a transition (m -1 ↔ m) of a nucleus with spin I can be calculated by the following formula: Here, ν L is the Larmor frequency divided by 2π. Although the effects of the quadrupole interaction on shape and position of NMR lines are well known to experts in the field, line positions observed in NMR spectra of quadupolar nuclei are very often erroneously reported as chemical shifts. For the central transition, the quadrupole-induced shift is always negative, i.e., the resonance line is shifted to higher field. By determining δ cg (m) for two different values of m, the isotropic chemical shift δ iso can be experimentally obtained in a reliable way. In particular, for a nucleus with I = 5 2 the quadrupole-induced shift of the inner satellite transitions is given by δ qis ( 3 2 ) = -δ qis ( 1 2 )/8. 41 Hence, the isotropic chemical shift can easily be calculated from the following relation: If the quadrupole coupling is small, δ iso is very close to the centre of gravity of the inner satellite transitions. For the sample under study, the centreband and the first spinning sidebands (enlarged in the blue insets above the bottom trace of Fig. The well-resolved MAS NMR spectrum in Fig. Hence, the splitting observed in the spinning sidebands is directly related to the two parameters describing the quadrupole interaction: the quadrupole coupling constant C Q and the asymmetry parameter η. The quantity is referred to as the quadrupolar interaction product We can even go one step further. At sufficiently low spinning speeds, the envelope of the spinning sidebands agrees with the lineshape one would obtain for a stationary sample. The total spread of the resonance line caused by a pair of satellite transitions (∆ν T S (m)) depends on the quadrupole coupling constant C Q , but is independent of the asymmetry parameter η. 27 Al MAS NMR spectra of KAlH 4 measured at different spinning frequencies are summarized in Fig. A more precise estimate of the asymmetry parameter can be obtained when the ratio between the splitting of the maxima of the inner satellite transition (∆ν M ( The spectrum measured at ν M AS = 1.4 kHz (top trace in Fig. By varying the simulation parameters and carefully comparing the simulated with the experimental spectrum we finally derived the following values for the parameters describing the quadrupole interaction: C Q = (1.29 ± 0.02) MHz and η = 0.64 ± 0.02. A comparison between experiment and simulation for ν M AS = 3.0 kHz (Fig. From the strength of the quadrupole coupling found for T S,M AS ( 1 2 ) = 9 56 For I = 5 2 and the above determined values of C Q and η, eqn (10) yields ∆ν T S,M AS ( 1 2 ) = 201 Hz. The total broadening caused by second-order quadrupole interaction exceeds the experimental F W HH of the centreband of the central transition by only a few Hertz. Other broadening mechanisms such as the homonuclear dipole-dipole interaction or the line broadening caused by structural defects mask the effect of second-order quadrupole interaction. The two-dimensional one pulse (TOP) presentation of 1D MAS NMR spectra Provided that neither other broadening mechanisms nor the presence of by-products obscure the characteristic features of the quadrupolar lineshape, the parameters describing the quadrupole interaction can alternatively be derived from spectra measured without spinning the sample under the magic angle. Because of the width of these spectra, corresponding to a very fast decay of the NMR signal, the spectra of stationary samples have to be measured with an appropriate echo technique to overcome the inevitable dead time problems after a strong radio pulse. For molecular aluminophosphate compounds containing aluminium nuclei with quadrupole coupling constants slightly larger than the one observed here, the Solomon echo sequence 48 has successfully been applied as an alternative approach for the determination of C Q and η. Ares et al. For the much better studied NaAlH 4 , which crystallises in the tetragonal space group I4 1 /a, 9 a significantly stronger quadrupole coupling has been found (C Q = 3.15 MHz 15 ). Since the Al atoms in NaAlH 4 are located in Wyckoff position 4b, i.e., on a C 4 axis, the asymmetry parameter is zero. For the monoclinic LiAlH 4 (space group P 2 1 /c 50 ) an even stronger quadrupole coupling (C Q = 3.90 MHz Because of the relatively low gyromagnetic ratio of the 39 K isotope (natural abundance: 93.3%, I = 3 2 ), the intensity of the resonance line is much weaker than in the case of the same number of T S ( 1 2 ) = 1 64 The discrepancy concerning the chemical shift data can be explained even more easily. What Tarasov et al. With our above determined parameters of the quadrupole coupling, eqn (13) yields a value of -47.7 ppm for δ qis at the Larmor frequency of ν L = 14.0 MHz used by Tarasov et al. In the more recent paper by Sorte et al., 31 a 39 K NMR line at -10.9 ppm with F W HH = 800 Hz and a total spread of about 3 kHz is reported for a stationary sample. Under the same experimental conditions, Tarasov et al. T S ( 1 2 ) = 5.1 kHz. According to eqn (12), one would expect a total spread of the resonance line of about 4.92 kHz from the above determined parameters. Hence, we have to conclude that the 39 K NMR line reported by Sorte et al. We have shown that potassium aluminium tetrahydride KAlH 4 of high phase purity can easily be synthesized via a mechanochemical route. The thus obtained material crystallises in space group Pnma (62). We believe that a sufficient quality of the hydride sample is not only important for obtaining a convincing resolution in the MAS NMR spectra, but will be of paramount importance in future studies of dynamical properties and the decomposition process. Using a well-established procedure and spectral simulation we have derived precise data for the isotropic chemical shift and the quadrupole coupling for both nuclei studied. Apart from the quadrupole coupling data for 