Crack advance from short or long pre-cracks is predicted by the progressive failure of a cohesive zone in a strain gradient, elasto-plastic solid. The presence of strain gradients leads to the existence of an elastic zone at the tip of a stationary crack, for both the long crack and the short crack cases. This is in sharp contrast with previous asymptotic analyses of gradient solids, where elastic strains were neglected. The presence of an elastic singularity at the crack tip generates stresses which are sufficiently high to activate quasicleavage. For the long crack case, crack growth resistance curves are predicted for a wide range of ratios of cohesive zone strength to yield strength. Remarkably, this feature of an elastic singularity is preserved for short cracks, leading to a severe reduction in tensile ductility. In qualitative terms, these predictions resemble those of discrete dislocation calculations, including the concept of a dislocation-free zone at the crack tip. Conventional plasticity theories, such as J 2 flow theory, predict that the tensile stress state ahead of a mode I crack in an elastic-perfectly plastic solid is on the order of three times the yield stress σ Y . The factor of 3 arises from plastic constraint effects, and is explained in terms of the Prandtl stress field for a flat punch, see for example Additional physics is needed to explain the occurrence of cleavage failure in the presence of plasticity. As argued by The micromechanical basis for strain gradient effects is the elevation of dislocation-based hardening, and thereby of stress levels, as first appreciated by Such strain gradient strengthening can explain a wide range of phenomena such as the Hall-Petch size effect, see for example The Hall-Petch effect is based on grain-to-grain plastic anisotropy such that strain gradients are present at the grain-to-grain level when the macroscopic strain field is uniform (or non-uniform). Additional strain gradient effects arise when the macroscopic strain field is non-uniform, as near a crack tip, or in simple test geometries such as a wire in torsion Recently, the effect of strain gradients in elevating crack tip stress levels has been emphasized in a number of numerical investigations on stationary cracks gained into the role of strain gradients on the behaviour of short cracks. The present study is structured as follows. The constitutive model is presented in Section 2, including the phenomenological formulation of strain gradient plasticity, and the implicit finite element implementation. The asymptotic response at the tip of a stationary crack in a strain gradient solid is investigated in Section 3. Crack growth is explored in Section 4 in two steps. First, R-curves are computed for a long crack by means of a cohesive zone, and the relative role of energetic versus dissipative strain gradient terms is quantified. Second, the short crack case is examined and we compute the sensitivity of the macroscopic stress versus strain response to crack length a and to the material length scale l. The sensitivity of the tensile ductility to the presence of a short crack is emphasized: it is shown that strain gradients play a major role. Finally, concluding remarks are given in Section 5. We adopt a small strain formulation. The total strain rate εij is the symmetric part of the spatial gradient of the displacement rate ui , such that εij = ( ui,j + uj,i ) /2; εij decomposes additively into an elastic part, εe ij , and a plastic part, εp ij . Write σ ij as the Cauchy stress, q ij as the so-called microstress tensor (work-conjugate to the plastic strain ε p ij ) and τ ijk as the higher order stress tensor (work-conjugate to the plastic strain gradient ε p ij,k ). For a solid of volume V and surface S, the principle of virtual work reads, The right-hand side of Eq. ( and on S reads, 2.1.2. Constitutive description where the superscripts D and E denote dissipative and energetic, respectively. In general, the Cauchy stress σ ij , along with q E ij and τ E ijk , are derived from the bulk free energy of the solid Ψ. In the present study, we shall assume that q E ij vanishes and thus limit attention to a solid that displays isotropic hardening in the absence of a strain gradient. The significance of a finite value of q E ij (with τ D ijk ≡ 0) has been explored in the recent study of Here, C ijkl is the isotropic elastic stiffness tensor, μ is the shear modulus and L E is the energetic constitutive length parameter. Upon noting that the energetic stress quantities follow as Now consider plastic dissipation. For both the rate dependent case, and the rate independent limit, we define the plastic work rate as where Σ is an effective stress, work-conjugate to a gradient-enhanced effective plastic strain rate Ėp . The latter is defined phenomenologically as where L D is the dissipative length scale. Upon noting that the constitutive relations for the dissipative stress quantities read The effective stress Σ is readily obtained by substitution of ( to give A robust and efficient finite element framework is now presented in order to model crack propagation in a rate independent gradient plasticity solid. An implicit time integration scheme is developed for both energetic and dissipative higher order contributions. Gradient plasticity theories are commonly implemented within a ratedependent setting, thereby taking advantage of computational advantages and circumventing complications in the corresponding time independent model associated with identifying active plastic zones (see, for example, where the current flow stress σ F depends upon an initial yield stress σ Y and on E p via a hardening law. Here, we adopt the following isotropic hardening law, in terms of the Young's modulus E and strain hardening exponent N (0 ≤ N ≤ 1). Following in terms of a reference strain rate ε0 . A sensitivity study for a sufficiently small choice of ε0 is conducted to ensure that the rate independent limit is attained in all the results presented subsequently. The reader is referred to The finite element scheme takes displacements and plastic strains as the primary kinematic variables, in accordance with the theoretical framework. C 0 -continuous finite elements are adopted since the differential equations are of second order. The displacement field u i at position x is written in terms of the shape functions N n i and associated nodal displacements U n , where n denotes the degree of freedom, such that Here, D u is the total number of degrees of freedom for the nodal displacements. Likewise, the plastic strain field ε p ij is expressed in terms of the shape functions M n ij and associated nodal quantities ε n p as where D εp denotes the total number of degrees of freedom for the nodal plastic strain components. Quadratic shape functions are employed for interpolation of both displacements and plastic strains. Accordingly, the plastic strain gradient ε p ij,k and the total strain ε ij are related to the nodal plastic strains and displacements through M n ij,k and the strain-displacement matrix B n ij , respectively; see the Supplementary Material for further details. The non-linear system of equations is solved iteratively by the Newton-Raphson method from time step t to (t + ∆t) where the residuals comprise the out-of-balance forces, and the components of the consistent stiffness matrix K are obtained by differentiating the residuals with respect to the incremental nodal variables. Details are given in the Supplementary Material. The numerical scheme is implemented in the commercial finite element package ABAQUS by means of a user element subroutine. To the best of the authors' knowledge, it constitutes the first Backward Euler implementation of the We assume that small scale yielding conditions prevail and we make use of a boundary layer formulation to prescribe a remote K field. Consider a crack with its tip at the origin and with the crack plane along the negative axis of the Cartesian reference frame (x, y). The elastic response of the solid is characterised by the Young's modulus E and Poisson's ratio ν. Then, an outer K field is imposed by prescribing nodal displacements on the outer periphery of the mesh as where the subscript index i equals x or y, and the functions f i (θ, ν) are given by and in terms of polar coordinates (r, θ) centred at the crack tip. A representative value for the plastic zone size R p is given by the Irwin expression for a stationary crack in an elastic, ideally plastic solid. Upon exploiting reflective symmetry about the crack plane, only half of the finite element model is analysed. A mesh sensitivity study reveals that the domain is adequately discretised by means of 5200 plane strain, quadratic, quadrilateral elements. The characteristic element size is R p /7500 and the outer radius of the boundary layer is 5000R p , ensuring small scale yielding conditions. A representative small scale yielding solution is presented in Fig. for the case L D = 0, L E = 0, where (A, B) are functions of R p . In the present finite element study, it is also found that the plastic strain is finite at the crack tip when energetic higher order terms are present. We note in passing that the plastic strain is not sufficiently singular to contribute to the J-integral as the crack tip is approached. Instead, the J-integral is determined solely by the elastic strain state near the crack tip. The relative insensitivity of the stationary crack response in Fig. The tensile stress σ yy directly ahead of the crack tip is shown in Fig. The above results for the asymptotic crack tip fields are in marked contrast to those obtained by Consequently, an elastic K-field exists at the crack tip, such that the elastic strains and Cauchy stresses scale as r -1/2 . The finite element results fully support this finding, and reveal that the crack tip plastic strain is finite. In the current study, we investigate crack growth from either a short or a long crack by making use of strain gradient plasticity theory. In the long crack case, R-curves are obtained and the present study thereby extends the results of It follows directly from the surface work terms on the right hand side of (1) that, in general, a cohesive zone can support both tractions T i and higher order tractions t ij . We assume that the tensile traction T on the cohesive zone depends only upon the crack opening displacement δ. Further, we assume that the higher order traction t ij vanishes on the surface of the cohesive zone; this is a natural boundary condition in the finite element formulation. The use of a cohesive zone model embedded within an elasto-plastic solid gives insight into both ductile fracture and cleavage by suitable choices of the cohesive zone parameters σ and Γ 0 . We proceed to evaluate the influence of crack length, material length scale l of the strain gradient solid, and a representative fracture process zone size 4 on the fracture response. Regimes of behaviour are sketched in non-dimensional space (l/R 0 , R 0 /a) in Fig. We investigate crack initiation and subsequent growth in an edge-cracked plate loaded in uniaxial tension under plane strain conditions, see Fig. 4 R 0 corresponds to the plastic zone size in a conventional solid at the onset of crack growth. The same geometry is used for the study of long and short pre-cracks. The specimen has a height-to-width ratio of H/W = 4 and an initial crack length of a/W = 0.1. The cohesive zone model outlined above is employed to model crack initiation and growth. Following It is widely appreciated that elastic snap-back instabilities can arise when cohesive elements experience stiffness degradation, complicating the modelling of the post-instability behaviour. The simultaneous reduction of the remote load and the prescribed displacement inevitably triggers convergence problems in quasi-static finite element computations. A numerical strategy to overcome these instabilities lies in prescribing a quantity that increases monotonically throughout the loading history while making the remote load an output of the model The K calibration for the specimen geometry of Fig. Small scale yielding prevails when, in accordance with ASTM E1820. This places an upper limit on the value of u ∞ /H for small scale yielding; rearrangement of ( This condition was satisfied in the following determination of the R-curve under small scale yielding conditions. Consider a long crack subjected to a remote load K. Crack initiation occurs within the cohesive zone at a value of K equal to Dimensional analysis implies that the crack growth resistance for a long crack depends on the following dimensionless groups where 1 < m < ∞. They showed that the sensitivity of the R-curve to the material length scale l increases with increasing m. In the present study we consider the rate independent limit, m → ∞, and a high sensitivity of the R-curve to length l is, indeed, observed. The crack tip opening angle has been used as a criterion for crack growth resistance in metallic alloys Here, the crack opening angle α, as defined in the inset of Fig. The plastic field surrounding the tip of a crack propagating at steady state is examined in Fig. and its contours are plotted in Fig. This contrasts with the conventional plasticity case, see Fig. The dependence of K SS /K 0 upon σ/σ Y is given in Fig. is precluded for σ/σ Y > 4; the level of crack tip stress is unable to overcome the cohesive strength when σ/σ Y ≥ 4. In contrast, when strain gradients are taken into account, the crack tip stresses can attain any value of cohesive strength, and K SS /K 0 increases monotonically with increasing σ/σ Y . However, the degree of elevation of the R-curve, K SS /K 0 , decreases with increasing l/R 0 for any given σ/σ Y ; this is consistent with the results shown in Fig. We now turn our attention to crack advance from a short pre-crack, for which a/R 0 < 1, recall Fig. The cracks are sufficiently short for no K-field (or J-field) to exist and are accompanied by plastic collapse at the structural level. Thus, failure occurs at a stress level somewhat above the yield strength, and the question of interest becomes: what is the dependence of macroscopic failure strain (below the necking strain) on a/R 0 and l/R 0 ? First consider the case of a short crack of length a/R 0 = 0.38. Dimensional analysis implies, where σ ∞ is the macroscopic remote stress on a tensile specimen (recall Fig. In order to interrogate the source of the dramatic drop in ductility with increasing l we examine the stress field ahead of a stationary short crack, absent the cohesive zone. The tensile stress σ yy is plotted as a function of r/a in Fig. It remains to explore the dependence of failure strength σ f /σ Y upon crack length a/R 0 . It is anticipated that, for sufficiently large a/R 0 , small scale yielding applies and failure occurs at K = K SS for a long pre-crack, such that σ f ≈ K SS / √ πa. With diminishing crack length, σ f /σ Y rises until, for sufficiently small pre-cracks (a/R 0 < 25) the K-field ceases to exist and a J-analysis is necessary for a fracture mechanics assessment. A further reduction in a/R 0 leads to the short crack regime, and the full trajectory of a/R 0 is labelled as transition in Fig. The predicted failure strength σ f /σ Y is plotted as a function of a/R 0 in Fig. The dependence of a T /R 0 upon l/R 0 is plotted in Fig. Thus, the sensitivity of a T /R 0 to l/R 0 arises directly from the dependence of K SS /K 0 upon l/R 0 . The current study highlights the role of plastic strain gradients in influencing the R-curve for a long crack under small scale yielding and the tensile response in the presence of a short crack. An asymptotic analysis of the elastic-plastic stress state at the tip of a stationary crack in a strain gradient solid reveals that an elastic zone is present in the immediate vicinity of the crack tip. Consequently, the tensile stress immediately ahead of the crack tip displays an inverse square root singularity, in contrast to the HRR field of a conventional solid. This has immediate implications for a cohesive zone analysis of a growing crack: crack advance is predicted for cohesive strengths much greater than the yield strength. These predictions are consistent with observations of quasi-cleavage fracture with limited plasticity Our study also reveals that the elastic crack tip singularity persists for the short crack case. Consequently, the tensile stress ahead of the short crack can far exceed the yield strength and overcome the cohesive strength of a cohesive zone placed at the crack tip. In turn, this leads to a significant drop in tensile ductility. The This choice has the advantage that the consistent stiffness matrix, as defined in the Supplementary Material, remains finite as Ėp → 0. The code is made freely available at www.empaneda.com, hoping to facilitate research and enabling readers to reproduce the results.