Metal Chalcogenides have been known for important technological applications and have attracted continuous interest in their structure, electronic, thermal and transport properties. Here we present first principles calculations of the vibrational and thermodynamic properties of NiX (X = S, Se, Te) compounds along with inelastic neutron scattering measurements of the phonon spectrum in NiSe. The measured phonon spectrum is in very good agreement with the computed result. We also report the measurement of thermal expansion behavior of NiSe using X-ray diffraction from 13 K to 300 K. The change in the hexagonal c lattice parameter in NiSe is considerably greater as compared to a parameter. The ab-initio calculated anisotropic Grüneisen parameters of the different phonon modes in all the chalcogenides along with the elastic constants are used to compute anisotropic thermal expansion behviour, which is found in good agreement with experiments. The displacement pattern of phonons indicate that difference in amplitudes of Ni and X atoms follow the anisotropy of thermal expansion behavior along c-and a-axis. Transition metal chalcogenides, as important semiconductor materials, find technological applications in microelectronics Nanocrystallites of NiTe, CoTe are used in electorchemical applications for determination of uric acid and adenine in biological fluids Monochalcogenides have incomplete d shell of the component transistion metal atoms which produces a variety of structural, magnetic, thermal and electrical properties. NiS is found in rhombohedral millerite phase (β-NiS, R3m) NiSe and NiTe are found in the hexagonal phase at room temperature. There is ferromagnetic ordering below 20 K in NiSe and at about 130 K and 20 K in NiTe 1 . The electronic band structures in these systems are of interest to understand their catalytic activites. As the electronegativity of the chalcogen atom decreases down the series, degree of covalency in the metal-chalcogen bond increases (electronegativty of Te is less than Se) We have earlier conducted a detailed study of the phonon behavior and anomalous thermal expansion in NiSi and NiGe. Limited literature is available on selenides of Ni, Raman data on nanospheres Inelastic neutron scattering experiments to study the phonon density of states in polycrystalline NiSe sample have been carried out using the Triple Axis Spectrometer at Dhruva reactor, Trombay. A sample of about 20 grams of NiSe polycrystalline powder is used. All the measurements are carried out in the energy loss mode with constant momentum transfer (Q) geometry over a range of Q-values. The energy of the analyser in various scans was kept fixed at 25 meV or 34.4 meV. In the incoherent onephonon approximation Where the + or -signs correspond to energy loss or gain of the neutrons respectively and . The observed neutron-weighted phonon density of states is a sum of the partial components of the density of states due to the various atoms, weighted by their scattering length squares. Here b k , m k , and g k (E) are, respectively, the neutron scattering length, mass, and partial density of states of the k th atom in the unit cell. The quantity between <> represents suitable average over all Q values at a given energy. 2W(Q) is the Debye-Waller factor averaged over all the atoms. The weighting factors are normalization constants X-ray diffraction studies were carried out using rotating Cu anode based powder diffractometer operating in the Bragg-Brentano focusing geometry with a curved crystal monochromator. Data were collected in the continuous scan mode at a scan speed of 2 degrees per minute at an interval of 0.02 degree in the 2θ range of 20°-130°. All the data collections were carried out during heating cycles of the sample for powder x-ray diffraction measurement in the temperature range 13 to 300 K. The accuracy of the measured temperature during data collection was within ±0.2 K. The structural refinements were performed using the Rietveld refinement program FULLPROF The lattice dynamics calculations of NiX (X=S, Se and Te) have been performed using ab-initio methods. We have used the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) The phonon calculations are carried out in the relaxed configuration. That is the lattice constants as well as atomic coordinates of the atoms are fully optimized. The phonon calculation are perfomed using the supercell approach. A supercell of (3 × 3 × 2) dimension, which consist of 72 atoms has been used in the computations. The required force constants were computed by displacing atoms in different configurations of the supercell with (±x, ±y, ±z) atomic displacement patterns. NiSe crystalizes in hexagonal structure with space group P6 3 /mmc and lattice parameters are a h = 3.6613 (Å), c h = 5.3562 (Å), which is in very good agreement with literature The comparison between the experimental and calculated structure of NiX (X=S, Se and Te) is given in Table The calculated elastic constants of the compounds are given in Table The group theoretical decomposition of phonons at the zone centre is given as: The computed zone centre phonons have been given in Table The anisotropic thermal expansion behaviour can be computed under the quasiharmonic approximation. Each phonon mode of energy E qj (j th phonon mode at point q in the Brillouin zone) contributes to the thermal expansion coefficient. The anisotropic linear thermal expansion Where V 0 is volume at 0 K, s ij are elements of elastic compliances matrix (which is inverse of the elastic constant matrix) at constant temperature (0 K) and C V (q, i, T) is the specific heat at constant volume for i th phonon mode with wave vector q in the Brillouin zone. The calculation of the anisotropic thermal expansion behavior in a compound requires the information of the anisotropic linear mode Grüneisen parameters ( , and . The effect of change in volume of a compound on its vibrational properties is related by mode Grüneisen parameter (Γ). We have obtained the Grüneisen parameters from pressure dependence of phonon frequencies in entire Brillouin zone. , and are the anisotropic linear mode Grüneisen parameters of phonon of energy E q,j is given by, "# , $ = %-' () *,+ ' ( , -, ′ ; , / = , , ! & ≠ ′ (1) For hexagonal system = . The volume thermal expansion coefficient for a hexagonal system is given by: The calculations of # are performed by applying an anisotropic stress by changing the lattice constant 'a' and keeping the 'b' and 'c' parameters constant; and vice versa following eq.( In NiS, Γ a is less than Γ c till 21 meV, between 21 to 23 meV, Γ a is slightly more than Γ c ; and beyond that Γ a reduces while Γ c increases. In case of NiSe, Γ a is less than Γ c till 10 meV; Γ a is greater between 10 and 15 meV. Between 16 meV to 22 meV, both are comparable, while beyond 22 meV, Γ c increases two fold. In NiTe, Γ a < Γ c up to 10 meV; Γ c < Γ a between 10-15 meV, they are almost same between 16-21 meV; Γ c increase two fold from 22 meV. The average value of Γ a and Γ c in NiS is lower in comparison to that in NiSe and NiTe. The calculated thermal expansion coefficients are shown in Fig. The comparison between our experimental and calculated change in the lattice parameters with increasing temperature in case of NiSe is given in Figure The thermal expansion coefficient at a given temperature has contribution of phonon modes of different energies in the entire Brillouin zone. The contribution to anisotropic linear thermal expansion at 300 K from a phonon of energy E in the entire Brillouin zone is shown in Figure As shown in Fig. In order to understand the nature of phonons responsible for large anistotropic thermal In case of NiS, the contribution to u 2 of S atoms, along a-axis, from all the phonons in the entire energy range is greater than that of u 2 of Ni. However, along c-axis, the contributon of S atoms in the range of 10-15 meV is substantially higher than that of Ni. As shown in Fig. For NiSe, u x 2 of Ni is throughout higher and greater than that of Se. However, for phonons of In NiTe, mean square amplitude of Ni along a-axis is much greater than that of Te up to 18 meV. The Ni amplitude along a-axis peaks at about 10 meV. Along c-axis, u 2 of Ni is more than that of Te and peaks at 10 meV, 16 meV and 26 meV, which also correspond to peaks in α c. Further, as shown in Fig. The anistropic mean squared displacement of various atoms (Fig 8 ) gives the average nature of dynamics. In order to understand the microscopic mechanism of anistropic thermal expansion behaviour we have plotted displacement patterns of zone centre modes (Fig. The lowest energy E 1u zone centre optic mode involves (Fig. The fourth zone centre B 2g optic mode involves antiparallel displacements (Fig. In this paper, we report a comprehensive study of X-ray diffraction and inelastic neutron scattering experiments, lattice dynamics calculation in NiSe; along with theoretical lattice dynamics simulations in NiS and NiTe. The interest in these compounds originated from its various technological uses. Our ab-initio lattice dynamics studies in NiSe are found to be in very good agreement with the measured data of phonon density of states. We find slight differences in the partial densities of Ni and X (X = S, Se and Te) for all the three compounds, although they are structurally similar and have similar spectra. Our experimental measurement of the thermal expansion in NiSe is in very good agreement with the computed data. The difference in anistopy in thermal expansion coefficients in the three compounds is explained in terms of atomic displacement patterns as well as ratio of amplitudes of X and Ni atoms. Comparison between the experimental 1, 29 (at 293 K) and calculated structural parameters (at 0 K) of NiX (X = S, Se,Te). For hexagonal structure of NiX (space group P6 3 /mmc) the Ni and the S atoms occupy Wyckoff positions (0,0,0) and (1/3, 2/3, 1/4) respectively and their symmetry equivalent positions Table 