This study presents active beam steering and afocal zooming of light by incorporating liquid crystals (LCs) with graded index photonic crystal (GRIN PC). The GRIN PC structures are composed of low refractive index polymer annular rods having gradually varied radii of holes. To actively manipulate incident light, the annular rods are infiltrated with nematic LCs. By applying an external voltage to the infiltrated LCs, the effective index profile of the low-index GRIN PC structure is modulated without introducing any mechanical movement. The incident beam deflection and corresponding focal distance modulation are tuned only by controlling the applied bias voltage. In the present work, hyperbolic secant refractive index profile is chosen to design GRIN PC structures. To design GRIN PC structure with annular PCs, Maxwell-Garnett effective medium approximation is employed. Moreover, we analytically express the relation between infiltrated LCs and gradient parameter to show the physical background of the tuning ability of the proposed devices. Also, beam steering and afocal zooming devices are analytically investigated via geometrical optics and numerically realized with the help of the finite-difference time-domain method. A beam deflection with an angle change of Δθout= 44° and a light magnification with maximum x2.15 are obtained. LCs are inexpensive materials and work under low voltage/power condition. This feature can be used for designing an electro-optic GRIN PC device that can be useful in various optical applications. Recent developments in the area of photonic crystals (PCs) have revealed the ability of controlling, manipulating, transmitting and detecting the light by paving the way for the broad range of PC applications, such as waveguides In this study, the computational results are obtained for beam steering and afocal zooming applications. GRIN PC structures are composed by aligned polymer annular rods on air medium and filling them with nematic liquid crystals (LCs). By incorporating LC materials with the GRIN media, the active beam steering and afocal zooming of the incident light are achieved. First, the ray transfer analysis of proposed structures is analytically derived via geometrical optics. Then, the simulations are performed with the 2D finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method with appropriate boundary conditions. Good agreement between the analytical and numerical methods is observed. Photonic interconnectors are used for efficient light transmission between different optical elements. Here, the main challenging issue is the misalignment between input and output light guiding components. If one considers fiber-optic communication system, misalignment between transmitting and receiving components leads to increase of transmission losses that decrease the maximum data rate relatively. In this case, mechanical alignment of the elements can be quite complicated and inconvenient for durability of the system. For this reason, controlling of the alignment without any displacement of elements by mechanical intervention is crucial. In this case, by using beam steering mechanism this problem can be solved and via this approach, photonic interconnectors can be integrated easily to a system Another active light controlling concept that studied in this work is afocal zooming. The afocal zooming is the important optical effect for microscopy and imaging systems Hence, orientation of the nematic LCs can be tuned by applying external voltage and consequently the effective refractive index of the nematic LCs can be altered where θLC is the rotation angle of nematic LCs (the nematic LC molecules' orientation along xzplane is given as an inset in Fig. Here, the nematic LC molecules can be oriented by an electric field (or a magnetic field) when the field strength exceeds the Freedericksz transition threshold where, T is the operating temperature, Tc is the clearing temperature of the nematic LC material, β is an exponent and ∆n0 stands for the nematic LCs temperature dependent birefringence at T=0 K. Since high birefringence is needed to obtain broad range tunability, throughout this manuscript operating temperature is assumed equal to room temperature. It is important to note that in the case of temperature increase, depending upon the birefringence change, the tuning value will decrease. As it is well known, the light within the GRIN medium follows curved trajectories because of gradual change in refractive index. Hence, for optical phenomena such as focusing, diverging and collimating the GRIN medium can be used without introducing the curved front and back interfaces for the optical components. In this regard, the main concept of the study lies on merging GRIN optics with nematic LCs to achieve active control of propagation of light. Here, the gradient of the refractive index distribution of GRIN medium can be actively changed to obtain the desired steering and zooming effects. In order to form GRIN medium, two-dimensional (2D) annular PCs are employed. The substantial design parameters for the annular PCs are the radii of the dielectric rods (rrod) and the holes (rhole) that drilled into the dielectric rods. By gradually changing air holes' radii one can change dielectric filling ratio of the elementary PC cell, so that GRIN PC medium with desired refractive index profile can be obtained. In this study, hyperbolic secant (HS) refractive index profile is chosen to design GRIN PC lens. HS refractive index distribution is mathematically expressed as follows: ( ) ( ) where n0 is the refractive index value at the optical axis and α is the gradient parameter that represents the depth of the index distribution. The shape of the HS function closely resembles parabola and by tuning gradient parameter α one can control the sign of the parabola where ( ) is the filling dielectric filling ratio of annular PC rods. Also, εrod and εair are correspond to the permittivity of annular PC rod and air medium. Then, after some algebra, the variation formula of air holes' radii rhole for TM polarization can be expressed as follows: ( ) , where "a" is the lattice constant and neff (y) stands for HS refractive index function. It should be noted that the gradual variation of the air holes is achieved only along the transverse y-direction and the positions of the annular PCs cell are kept constant as unit distance a along the y-and xdirections. Herewith, by using Eqs. 5 and 6, one can design the square lattice GRIN PC structure for the desired refractive index distribution. For the design of GRIN PC structure, annular rods are assumed to be made of polymer with refractive index of np=1.80 In order to design the tunable GRIN PC structure, the air holes of annular PCs are assumed to be infiltrated by nematic LC molecules with no=1.59 and ne=2.22. Here, refractive indices correspond to phenylacetylene type LC material where εLC is the permittivity of the nematic LCs, The schematic representation of the LC infiltrated structure with its corresponding refractive index profile is given in Fig. Here, when the LCs' orientation is in the range of 0°≤ θLC<43°, the middle section operates as a converging lens. On the other hand, when the LCs' orientation varies as 43°<θLC≤90°, the middle section operates as a diverging lens. Consequently, adaptation of the beam diameter to the particular task can be achieved without introducing any mechanical motion of lens such as in Ref. In this section, the operating principle of the proposed beam steering and afocal zooming devices is analytically investigated via ray theory. For this reason, the GRIN media having effective refractive index profiles same as in Figs. where n is the refractive index of medium, n  is the gradient of the n, ( ) [ ( ), ( )] r s x s y s = is ray path and 22 ds dx dy =+ is the arc length along the ray path. By solving the ray equation for given refractive index distribution, ray trajectories can be obtained. In this regard, the ray trajectory function in a continuous HS GRIN medium with refractive index profile given in Eq. 4 is expressed as follows (see Ref. where y(x) is the ray trajectory function with respect to initial position u0 and incident angle 0 u . Here, for the gradient parameter α, the data calculated in Figs.   ( ) By using Eqs. 10 and 11 the ray trajectories through the HS GRIN medium are calculated and the corresponding ray propagations for beam steering application are plotted in Fig. In this study, we presented compact structures for tunable beam steering and afocal beam zooming applications by combining LCs and annular PCs. Since there is no moving mechanical part, the proposed structures are more compact and practical when they are compared with their conventional counterparts. The presented calculations show that for different frequency ranges, proposed beam steering and afocal zooming mechanisms supply broad tuning capability. For beam steering application, the deflection angle can be tuned linearly in the range of -12° to 30° by tuning the rotation angle of LCs under the normalized frequency a/λ=0.15. Similarly, adapting the beam diameter of the output beam from 1.64λ to 3.54λ is possible with the proposed afocal zooming structure under the normalized frequency a/λ=0.20. These beam diameters corresponds to x0.87 minimization and x1.88 magnification of the incidence ligth at a/λ=0.20. As a result, we investigated both analytically and numerically the beam steering and afocal zooming concepts. The designed LCs infiltrated PC structures can be implemented to various optical applications such as near-field scanning, vision correction, object tracking, optical communication, medical diagnostic, x-ray optics, space and atmospheric research, holography and imaging systems.