The discovery of unusual negative thermal expansion (NTE) provides the opportunity to control the common but much desired property of thermal expansion, which is valuable not only in scientific interests but also in practical applications. However, most of the available NTE materials are limited to a narrow temperature range, and the NTE effect is generally weakened by means of various modifications. Here, we report an enhanced NTE effect that occurs over a wide temperature range ( V  = -5.24 × 10 -5 °C-1 , 25-575 C), and this NTE effect is accompanied by an abnormal enhanced tetragonality, a large spontaneous polarization, and a G-type antiferromagnetic ordering in the present perovskite-type ferroelectric of (1-x)PbTiO3-xBiCoO3. Specifically, for the composition of 0.5PbTiO3-0.5BiCoO3, an extensive volumetric contraction of ~4.8 % has been observed near the Curie temperature of 700 °C, which represents the highest level in PbTiO3-based ferroelectrics. According to our experimental and theoretical results, the giant NTE originates from a synergistic effect of the ferroelectrostriction and spin-crossover of cobalt on the crystal lattice. The actual NTE mechanism is contrasted with previous functional NTE materials, in which the NTE is simply coupled with one ordering such as electronic, magnetic, or ferroelectric ordering. The present study sheds light on the understanding of NTE mechanisms and it attests that NTE could be simultaneously coupled with different orderings, which will pave a new way toward the design of large NTE materials. Negative thermal expansion (NTE) is an interesting physical property related to the interplay among the lattice, phonons, and electrons. Materials with NTE can be used to counteract the much more common positive thermal expansion (PTE) of ordinary materials, which usually suffer from mechanical degradation and structural instability under thermal shock. Accordingly, it is proposed that a large NTE could be obtained by improving the tetragonality (c/a) of PT. The flexible structure of PT allows it to achieve a large NTE by means of modulating its tetragonality with accommodating ferroelectric-active cations in the A and/or B sites. BiCoO3 and PbTiO3 are isostructural, but the polar structural distortion is more pronounced in BiCoO3, whose tetragonal distortion (c/a) of 1.27 is larger than that of PT (c/a = 1.065). The samples of (1-x)PT-xBiCoO3 (abbreviated as (1-x)PT-xBC) were prepared with a cubic anvil-type high-pressure apparatus. The stoichiometric powder mixture of PbO, TiO2, Bi2O3, and Co3O4 was sealed in a gold capsule and reacted at 6 GPa and 1100 C for 30 min. Then, 10 mg of the oxidizing agent KClO4 (approximately 10 wt% of the sample) was separately added to the top and bottom of the capsule. The obtained sample was crushed and washed with distilled water to remove the remaining KCl. The X-ray diffraction patterns of the samples were collected with a Bruker D8 ADVANCE diffractometer for phase identification. The detailed room-temperature crystal structures of all the investigated samples were extracted from the synchrotron X-ray diffraction (SXRD) data collected at the beam lines of BL02B2 (λ = 0.419552 Å) and BL44B2 (λ = 0.500000 Å) in SPring-8. The temperature-dependence of the crystal structure of (1-x)PT-xBC was determined by the SXRD data, which were collected at beam line 11-ID-C of the Advanced Photon Source. The wavelength of synchrotron light was λ = 0.11165 Å. The detailed crystal structure was refined based on the full-profile Rietveld method by using the software FULLPROF. The initial structural model corresponds to PT (space group P4mm, NO. 99). For the characterization of the local structure distortion of (1-x)PT-xBC as a function of temperature, Co K-edge X-ray absorption near-edge fine structure (XANES) spectra were collected in transmission mode on the 1W1B beam line at the Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Facility (BSRF). The pre-edge peak intensity was determined after the pre-edge subtraction and normalization of the XAFS spectra. The temperature-dependence of the magnetic susceptibility of 0.5PT-0.5BC was measured with a SQUID magnetometer (Quantum Design, MPMS XL) in an external magnetic field of 1000 Oe. Temperature dependent neutron powder diffraction (NPD) data were collected at the NIST Center for Neutron Research on the BT-1 high resolution neutron powder diffractometer with a wavelength of 1.53980 Å. The detailed crystal and magnetic structures were refined based on the Rietveld method by using the GSAS software package. The first-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed using the VASP code based on projected augmented plane-wave pseudopotentials. To further understand the metamagnetism presented in the system, we performed fixed spin-moment calculations in which the total energy was calculated as a function of the magnetic moment. The XRD patterns of the (1-x)PT-xBC compounds are presented in Figure As shown in Figure A different behavior in the temperature-dependence of the zA is observed. For 0.7PT-0.3BC, the zA decreases continuously with increasing temperature, and it exhibits a nonlinear behavior; conversely, for 0.5PT-0.5BC, the zA remains stable and exhibits a linear behavior. However, more interestingly, if we compare the overall relationship between the c-axis and zA, as reported in Figures The NTE behavior can be well interpreted by the concept of the SVFS (ωS), which can quantitatively describe how ferroelectricity contributes to the abnormal change in the ferroelectric phase volume. where Vexp and Vnm are the unit cell volumes of the experimental and nominal one, respectively. The nominal one of Vnm is basically estimated by the extrapolation from the PE to FE phase. Here, the ωS values for 0.7PT-0.3BC and 0.5PT-0.5BC are as large as 5.4% and 7.2% (Figure Theses results indicate that the CoO5 coordination of 0.5PT-0.5BC stabilizes in the ferroelectric phase and rapidly transforms to CoO6 coordination during the phase transition, with Co displacement toward the Oh symmetry. More interestingly, note that there is a general correlation between the Co K pre-edge peak intensity and the lattice parameter c of (1-x)PT-xBC for various compositions or temperatures (Figure As shown in Figure The obtained equilibrium volume using the Birch-Murnaghan equation of states (EOS) Likewise, the variation in the total energy as a function of the magnetic moment is shown for different unit cell volumes of 0.5PT-0.5BC in Figure The curves show that the energy difference between the HS and LS state is about 0.5 eV (f.u.) -1 in the ferroelectric phase in its equilibrium volume. Approximately 5% of the volumetric compression of the total energy curve shows that the LS state is lower in energy than the HS state, which indicates that this material undergoes a pressure-induced HS-LS transition. The orbital projected density of states (DOS) for Co shows the presence of Co 3+ in the HS state in the ferroelectric phase, whereas it is in the LS state in the paraelectric phase (Figure The supporting information includes details of the refined results, the temperature-dependence of lattice constants, XANES, magnetic characterization, first-principles calculations, and other related information. First-principle calculations. Our first-principles DFT calculations were performed using the VASP Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof generalized gradient approximation for the treatment of exchange-correlation. We chose a very large basis set of 800 eV for the plane wave cut-off to reproduce the structural parameters correctly 0.5PT-0.5BC. According to previous studies, it is generally believed that Co 3+ ions adopt a low spin (LS) state in octahedral CoO6 coordination environments and a high spin (HS) or an intermediate spin (IS) state in pyramidal CoO5 coordination environments at low temperature and ambient pressure conditions. *