The 12%-S doped FeSe system has a high Tc of 30 K at a pressure of 3.0 GPa. We have successfully investigated its microscopic properties for the first time via 77 Se-NMR measurements under pressure. The antiferromagnetic (AFM) fluctuations at the optimal pressure (∼ 3 GPa) exhibited unexpected suppression compared with the AFM fluctuations at ambient pressure, even though the optimal pressure is close to the phase boundary of the AFM phase induced at the high-pressure region. In addition, we revealed that the SC phase at an applied field of 6.02 T exhibited a remarkable double-dome structure in the pressure-temperature phase diagram, unlike the SC phase at zero field. Recently, iron chalcogenides, so-called 11 systems, have received much attention because of their unique phase diagrams. In particular, FeSe undergoes nematic and superconducting (SC) transitions at 90 K and 9 K, respectively, without any magnetism at ambient pressure The pressure-temperature (P -T ) phase diagram for FeSe is complicated as obtained from the resistivity measurements The phase diagram determined from the resistivity dramatically changes with sulfur (S) doping the high T c , the 12%-S doped sample is preferred to the pure sample because a high T c of over 25 K is attainable at low pressures (∼ 3 GPa), and is free from complex overlapping of nematic, SC, and AFM states. To date, microscopic properties of the SC state with a high-T c (∼ 25-30 K) have not been described. We have successfully investigated its microscopic properties for the first time via 77 Se-NMR measurements under pressure. Surprisingly, we found that the magnetic fluctuation at 3.0 GPa is weaker than that at ambient pressure, although the AFM phase is induced in the high-pressure region. To clarify the unexpected phenomenon, we carried out systematic NMR measurements under pressure and discovered an anomalous evolution of AFM fluctuations under pressure. We performed 77 Se-NMR measurements at 6.02 T up to 3.0 GPa on a 12%-S doped single crystal with dimensions of approximately 1.0 × 1.0 × 0.5 mm. We used a NiCrAl pressure cell Fig. We measured 77 Se-NMR (I = 1/2, γ/2π = 8.118 MHz/T) spectra on 12%-S doped FeSe with a fixed field of 6.02 T applied parallel to the crystallographic a axis. The 77 Se-NMR spectra at ambient pressure and 3.0 GPa are shown in Fig. The T dependence of 77 Se shifts at several pressures are shown in Fig. We measured the relaxation time T 1 with the inversionrecovery method. T 1 at each T for several pressures was determined from the nuclear magnetization M t using single-exponential function for I = 1/2: 1 -M t /M 0 = e -t/T1 , where M 0 is the equilibium nuclear magnetization. The effect of local distribution due to 12%-S doping was not observed. The relaxation rate provides a measure of low-energy spin fluctuations. When the wave vector (q) dependence of the hyperfine interaction is neglected, 1/T 1 T is expressed as where ω and χ(q, ω) represent the NMR frequency and dynamical spin susceptibility, respectively. Fig. In general, the AFM fluctuations determined from 1/T 1 T strengthens toward an AFM phase. However, the P evolution of 1/T 1 T in 12%-S doped FeSe is nonmonotonic. The results of the shift in Fig. According to recent inelastic neutron-scattering experiments for FeSe In summary, we investigated the SC state with a high T c of 25-30 K for the first time. We obtained the unexpected results; the AFM fluctuations at the optimal pressure are suppressed, although the optimal pressure is close to the AFM phase in the high-pressure region. However, the AFM fluctuation at ambient pressure is predominant. This implies that the dominant nesting vector may change with increasing pressure.