High performance lead zirconate titanate (PZT) ceramics with aligned porosity for sensing applications were fabricated by an ice-templating method. To demonstrate the enhanced properties of these materials and their potential for sensor and hydrophone applications, the piezoelectric voltage constants (g 33 and g 31 ), hydrostatic parameters ) and AC conductivity as a function of the porosity in directions both parallel and perpendicular to the freezing temperature gradient were studied. As the porosity level was increased, PZT poled parallel to the freezing direction exhibited the highest d h , -d 33 /d 31 and figures of merit d h •g h , d h •g h /tanδ compared to the dense and PZT poled perpendicular to the freezing direction. The g h , g 33 and g 31 coefficients were highest for the PZT poled perpendicular to the freezing direction; the g h was 150% to 850% times higher than dense PZT, and was attributed to the high piezoelectric activity and reduced permittivity in this orientation. This work demonstrates that piezoelectric ceramics produced with aligned pores by freeze casting are a promising candidate for a range of sensor applications and the polarisation orientation relative to the freezing direction can be used to tailor the microstructure and optimise sensitivity for sensor and hydrostatic transducer applications. Piezoelectric materials represent a popular class of active materials used in many areas The hydrostatic figures of merit can be calculated from measured piezoelectric and dielectric properties as follows: d h =d 33 +2d 31 , g h =d h /ε !! ! ε ! , where, d 33 and d 31 are the longitudinal and transverse piezoelectric charge coefficients, ε !! ! is the relative permittivity at constant stress and ε ! is the permittivity of the free space. These equations indicate that the important requirements for improved hydrostatic performance are a high hydrostatic charge coefficient (d h ) and low permittivity (ε !! ! ). For many dense ferroelectric ceramic materials d 33 ≈ -2d 31 which leads to a low d h , and when combined with the high permittivity of dense ferroelectrics this leads to dense materials exhibiting a low d h , g h , and d h •g h , thereby limiting their performance as transducers under hydrostatic conditions. For uniaxial sensor applications, the combination of a high piezoelectric charge coefficient and low permittivity is also beneficial since g 33 =d 33 /ε !! ! ε ! and g 31 =d 31 /ε !! ! ε ! . To date, a number of researchers have made significant efforts to reduce the permittivity of the sensor material by introducing porosity into the dense material nanofibers In this paper, we exploit the inspiration drawn from the high strength of natural nacre with a layered microstructure TBA-based 0.94Bi 0.5 Na 0.5 TiO 3 -0.06BaTiO 3 However, apart from our previous research on energy harvesting applications reports on the piezoelectric properties by freeze casting water-based piezoelectric suspensions and their assessment in both parallel and perpendicular directions for sensor and hydrostatic applications. ) and AC conductivity are assessed when the material was poled parallel and perpendicular directions to the freezing temperature gradient using a simple water-based suspension. Significant benefits will be demonstrated for many of the properties compared to the monolithic (dense) material, depending on the polarisation direction. The raw materials used for water-based freeze casting process to fabricate the aligned porous PZT were reported in our previous work on energy harvesting Normally, the particle size of the ceramic . The microstructures of the powders and sliced PZT ceramics were examined by a scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JSM6480LV, Tokyo, Japan). The apparent porosity was derived from the density data obtained by the Archimedes method with the error of ±1.5 vol.%. Each porosity was labelled with the integer value. The remnant polarization and coercive field of the ceramics were measured using a Radiant RT66B-HVi Ferroelectric Test System on initially unpoled materials. The longitudinal piezoelectric strain coefficient (d 33 ) and the transverse piezoelectric strain coefficient (d 31 ) were measured using a Berlincourt Piezometer (PM25, Take Control, UK) after corona poling by applying a DC voltage of 14 kV for 15 min at 120 °C. The AC conductivity, σ, of the sintered ceramics were carried out from 0.1Hz to 1MHz at room temperature using an impedance analyzer (Solartron 1260, Hampshire, UK) and calculated from equation (1) where Z ! and Z " are the real and imaginary parts of the impedance, A is the area of the sample and t is the sample thickness. Figure Interestingly, the PZT ║ with the porosity of 20 vol.% exhibited the lowest E c of 7.7 kV/cm compared to both the dense (8.7 kV/cm), and all the PZT ┴ materials, demonstrating easier switching of ferroelectric domains with applied electric field. The presence of a small amount of porosity (~20 vol.%) may initially provide a state of reduced internal stress or restriction of domain motion, while at higher porosity levels the applied electric field concentrates in the pore volume and leads to higher applied electric fields being required to provide domain switching. Therefore, although the existence of porosity can facilitate the switching of the domain walls to some extent In addition, due to randomness of the lamellar pores orientations perpendicular to the freezing direction in Fig. Figure The highest values of hydrostatic figures of merit were achieved for PZT ║ when the porosity increased to the maximum value of 60 vol.% in this work; this corresponded to hydrostatic figures of merit that were 2.7-10.2 and 2.0-10.9 times higher than the dense materials and PZT ┴ , respectively, as shown in Fig. although mechanical properties can be a concern at such low ceramic volume fractions. Figure and PZT perpendicular to the freezing direction (series-connected) σ ┴ , which can be calculated as , where v PZT and v air are the volume fractions of PZT and air, σ pzt and σ air are the electric conductivity of the dense PZT and air Similar situations can be also found in the piezoelectric and pyroelectric properties Freeze casting using a water based suspension has been utilised and demonstrated to be an effective method to prepare high performance porous PZT for sensor applications with unidirectional pore channels over a range of 20-60 vol. % porosity. The hydrostatic and sensor properties of PZTs poled parallel (PZT ║ ) and perpendicular (PZT ┴ ) to the freezing direction were examined in detail. Significant improvements in the hydrostatic figures of merit were observed compared to the dense monolithic material. In terms of d h •g h and d h •g h /tanδ, the PZT ║ and PZT ┴ were 2.7-10.2 and 2.0-10.9 times higher than that of the dense material. These highly attractive properties are due to their relatively high d 33 , reduced d 31 and significantly reduced permittivity. While the PZT ║ exhibited the best d h , d h •g h and d h •g h /tanδ, the PZT ┴ exhibited the highest g h , g 33 and g 31 coefficients which was attributed to the lower permittivity of the material in this orientation. In addition, the PZT ║ showed 1.3-1.5 times higher AC conductivity than the PZT ┴ at the frequency of 1 kHz. In addition, it is shown that the properties are improved compared to piezoelectric composite materials manufactured by more complex methods. The PZT ┴ exhibited the highest g h , g 33 and g 31 coefficients; up to 1.5-8.5, 2.3-12.5 and 2.5-14.7 times higher compared to the dense materials; this was attributed to the low permittivity of the material in this orientation. The coercive field increased with an increase in porosity for the materials, and this was attributed to the concentration of electric field concentration in the lower permittivity pore space. This work demonstrates water-based freeze casting provides an environmentally friendly and promising route to fabrication porous piezoelectric for both uniaxial and hydrostatic sensing applications with potential for control of the coercive field of ferroelectric materials. It is also demonstrated that changing of the poling condition relative to the freezing direction can enable control and optimisation of the relevant performance figures of merit for specific applications. In addition to varying the solid load levels, the ability of the freeze casting method to adjust the pore size, the thickness of the ceramic wall and the density of the ceramic wall in the aligned pore structures by tailoring the freezing rate, freezing temperature and temperature gradient provides significant versatility for this promising processing route to create new sensor materials. While the PZT ┴ materials exhibited relatively poor d h values it exhibits advantageous g h values that are 1.2 to 2.1 times and 1.5-8.5 higher than PZT ║ and monolithic dense PZT, respectively; see Fig.