We report on a novel approach to synthesize cubic-phase fast ionic conducting garnet-type solid state electrolytes based on Bi doped Li 7 La 3 Zr 2 O 12 (LLZO). Bi aliovalent substitution into LLZO utilizing the Pechini processing method is successfully employed to synthesize Li 7-x La 3 Zr 2- x Bi x O 12 compounds. Ionic conductivities up to 2.0 x 10 -4 S/cm are achieved in structures not fully densified. Cubic phase Li 6 La 3 ZrBiO 12 powders are generated in the temperature range from 650 °C to 900 °C in air. In contrast, in the absence of Bi and under identical synthesis conditions, the cubic garnet phase of Li 7 La 3 Zr 2 O 12 is not formed below 700 °C while a transformation to the tetragonal phase is observed at 900 °C for the un-doped compound. The critical role of Bi in lowering the formation temperature of the garnet cubic phase and the improvements in ionic conductivity is investigated in this work through microstructural studies and AC impedance measurements. We ascribe the effect of Bi doping in achieving these remarkable improvements to significant enhancements at lower temperatures in the kinetics of the solid-state reaction resulting in explosive grain growth and densification of the garnet. Moreover, XAS is utilized to identify the specific atomic site where Bi is incorporated in the LLZO garnet crystalline structure. Conventional liquid electrolyte-salt combinations in lithium batteries present inherent safety concerns due to dendritic growth and thermal runaway issues Li 7 La 3 Zr 2 O 12 (LLZO) garnet-type oxides have been shown to be promising materials for electrolyte applications on account of their relatively high ionic conductivity and good chemical stability LLZO has been typically fabricated utilizing ball milling of oxide precursors. Without dopants, it can require as much as 36 hours at 1230 °C for stabilization of the cubic phase and subsequent densification to achieve ionic conductivities on the order of 10 -4 -10 -3 S/cm x La 3 Zr 2-x Bi x O 12 (x = 0 -1.0) were calcined between 600 °C and 700 °C for 10 hours in an MgO crucible XRD was utilized to determine the influence of Bi on the formation of the cubic phase and the phase stability as a function of garnet composition. Figures Extended X-ray Absorption Fine Structure (EXAFS) was employed to investigate the site occupancy of bismuth in the garnet lattice. EXAFS measurements were carried out at the L 3edges of bismuth and lanthanum and the K-edge of zirconium at beamline 20-BM at the Advanced Photon Source (Supplemental Fig. Representative raw EXAFS spectra are shown in Fig. To evaluate Bi stoichiometric effects on microstructure and ionic conductivity, pellets were fabricated with compositions Li 7-x La 3 Zr 2-x Bi x O 12 (x = 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75 and 1.0) from precursor powders [Supplemental Fig. Bi additions to LLZO have a remarkable impact on grain growth and sintering as evidenced in the results of Fig. We further characterized our pellets using AC impedance spectroscopy from 0.0001 Hz -300 kHz employing a Solartron 1260 impedance analyzer. Complex impedance plots are provided in Fig. Complex impedance plots for pellets with different Bi amounts are displayed in Fig. As the Bi stoichiometry is varied, the Li + occupancy to vacancy ratio proportionally changes, with each Bi 5+ creating an additional Li + vacancy. Thus, it can be expected that each pellet composition studied, exhibits a different Li + sub-lattice occupancy ratio, resulting in electronic structure changes of the Li 7-x La 3 Zr 2-x Bi x O 12 garnets. The Li 6.25 La 3 Zr 1.25 Bi 0.75 O 12 exhibits the highest measured ionic conductivity. This sample corresponds to a Li stoichiometry of 6.25, this is slightly lower than that reported value of 6.5 by Zeier The substitution of Bi into the LLZO garnet oxide structure through the Pechini method allows for a lower temperature formation of the desirable high ionic conductivity cubic phase. Bi additions also serve to decrease the temperature required for rapid grain growth and densification. As the content of Bi in the garnet is incremented, the degree of grain growth and densification is enhanced. Furthermore, ionic conductivity in Li 7-x La 3 Zr 2-x Bi x O 12 garnet type oxides is found to be a strong function of dopant amount. As such, garnets oxides may require optimized heat treatments for specific stoichiometries to attain the highest possible ionic conductivity. 