The two-step dehydroxylation of illite is studied using the differential scanning calorimetry on powder samples with heating rates from 1 to 10 °C min -1 in a dynamic argon atmosphere. The values of apparent activation energy and pre-exponential factor are calculated using the Kissinger method. The determined values of apparent activation energy and pre-exponential factor of trans-vacant layer dehydroxylation are (227 ± 6) kJ mol -1 and (2.87 ± 0.09) ×10 13 min -1 , respectively. The results also show that this process can be characterized by 1D diffusion controlled reaction with instantaneous nucleation rate. For the cis-vacant layer dehydroxylation, the values of apparent activation energy and preexponential factor are (242 ± 10) kJ mol -1 and (5.37 ± 0.23) ×10 12 min -1 , respectively. The value of Avrami peak factor for this step indicates diffusion controlled growth of the new phase with zero or decreasing nucleation rate. Illite is a significant rock-forming mineral that is the main component of illitic clay During heating, in the temperature range of (450 -800) °C, the dehydroxylation of illite occurs according to the reaction: 2(OH)→H2O(↑)+Or (Or is residual oxygen) Thermogravimetric experiments show that this process proceeds in two overlapping steps. The most probable explanation seems to be that the individual steps correspond to dehydroxylation of trans-vacant (tv) and cis-vacant (cv) illite layers High-purity illitic clay mined in Füzérradvány location in North-Eastern Hungary For the analysis, the raw illitic clay was crushed and milled in planetary ball mill Retsch PM 100 to obtain a powder with grains size less than 100 μm. The measurements were performed using Netzsch DSC 404 F3 Pegasus in dynamic Argon atmosphere with a flow rate of 40 ml min -1 on samples with mass ~40 mg. The heating rates used in the experiments were 1, 3, 5, 7, and 10 °C min -1 . For the parameterization of the illite dehydroxylation, the Kissinger method where β is the heating rate, Tm is the temperature at which the process has a maximum rate, A is the pre-exponential factor, EA is the apparent activation energy, R is the universal gas constant, αm corresponds to the value of the degree of conversion at temperature Tm, and n is the kinetic exponent. The value of apparent activation energy can be calculated from the slope of the plot of the left-hand side of the Eq. ( For the calculation of pre-exponential factor, the value of n must be determined. It can be calculated as where S is the shape index. The S is defined as the absolute ratio of the slope of the tangents to the peak at the inflection points. It can be expressed analytically as where N denotes the value of measured quantity and t is time. T1 and T2 are frontal and terminal inflection points, respectively. The mechanism of the reaction can be determined using the Avrami peak factor nA which is defined as where w1/2 is a peak's half-width For the separation of overlapping peaks, the Fraser-Suzuki function where a0, a1, Tm and w1/2 are the peak height, shape factor, position, and half-width, respectively. Values of these parameters can be found by using numerical optimization. The results of DSC measurements with different heating rates in the temperature range of (30-1100) °C are shown in Fig. The value of apparent activation energy for cv-layer dehydroxylation is (242 ± 10) kJ mol -1 and the value of nA is 1.56 ± 0.08. The value of Avrami peak factor indicates diffusion controlled growth of the new phase with zero or decreasing nucleation rate The illite dehydroxylation was studied using differential scanning calorimetry in a dynamic argon atmosphere. The values of apparent activation energy and pre-exponential factor were determined using the Kissinger method, and the mechanism of each step of illite dehydroxylation was determined using the Avrami peak factor. The summary of the results is as follows:  The calculated values of apparent activation energy and pre-exponential factor for tv-layer dehydroxylation are (227 ± 6) kJ mol -1 and (2.87 ± 0.09) ×10 13 min -1 .  The value of nA determined for the tv-layer dehydroxylation indicate 1D diffusion controlled reaction with instantaneous nucleation rate.  The calculated values of EA and A for cv-layer dehydroxylation are (242 ± 10) kJ mol -1 and (5.37 ± 0.23) ×10 12 min -1 .  The value of the Avrami peak factor determined for this step indicate diffusion controlled growth of the new phase with zero or decreasing nucleation rate. Linear Fit 95% confidence bounds