A brief review of experimental and theoretical studies of half-metallic ferromagnets (HMF) and spin gapless semiconductors (SGS) is presented. An important role of non-quasiparticle states owing to electron-magnon scattering in transport properties is discussed. The problem of low-temperature resistivity in HMF is treated in terms of one-magnon and two-magnon scattering processes. One of directions in modern physics of magnetic phenomena and condensed state is to find and detect physical properties of new materials for spintronics (see, e.g., Disadvantages of conventional HMF-based Heusler alloys as the materials for spintronic and thermoelectric devices should be also noted: they possess metallic conductivity and small values of thermoelectric power. Therefore, it is important to study similar systems having properties close to the classical semiconductors. Recently, half-metallic ferromagnetism in high quality single crystals of doped HgCr 2 Se 4 has been reported According to the prediction by X. L. Wang One of the most important characteristics of spintronic materials is the degree of polarization of the current carriers -ideally it should be 100% at room temperature. It is believed that in SGS materials such polarization can be achieved. Besides, it is interesting to trace the transition from the ordinary (magnetic and nonmagnetic) metallic and semiconductor states to the HMF state, then to the SGS state, and back again. The main feature of HMF is the presence of a gap at the Fermi level for minority (spin-down) electron states and its absence for majority (spin-up) current carriers with a metallic conductivity (Fig. Apparently, the HMF energy gap should be manifested in electronic properties, in particular, in electronic transport. According to the mean-field picture, HMF can be regarded as a system of two parallel-connected conductors The mean-field picture is considerably modified when including non-quasiparticle (NQP) states owing to electron-magnon scattering The NQP states make considerable contributions to magnetic and transport properties The magnetic resistivity of usual ferromagnetic metals is determined by one-magnon processes which yield being the spin splitting (the energy gap). This contribution is absent for HMF since N ↓ (E F ) = 0. Two-magnon scattering processes In Ref. The band structure calculations for this compound To clarify the situation, precision investigations of the field and temperature dependences of the resistivity were carried out in , where 0  is the residual resistivity, A, B and C are the coefficients, and n is a power index. There are three temperature intervals in which the resistivity depends on temperature and magnetic field in different ways (Fig. and coefficient B H , and coefficient . The experimental results obtained indicate that in the temperature range 30 K < T < 60 K a power-law temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity with a power exponent and a linear negative magnetoresistance is observed. These facts appear to Fig. SGS have a number of unique properties associated with their unusual band structure, i.e. the presence of a wide (ΔE ~ 1 eV) gap at the Fermi level for carriers with spin down and zero energy gap for spin-up carriers (Fig. It was shown in 