GaN films with thickness up to 3 mm were grown by halide vapour phase epitaxy method. Two growth modes were observed: the high temperature (HT) mode and the low temperature (LT) mode. Films grown in HT mode had smooth surface, however the growth stress was high and caused cracking. Films grown in LT mode had rough surface with high density of V-defects (pits), however such films were crack-free. The influence of growth parameters on the pit shape and evolution was investigated. Origins of pits formation and process of pit overgrowth are discussed. Crack-free films with smooth surface and reduced density of pits were grown using combination of the LT and HT growth modes. Significant problem in GaN industry is a lack of widely available native substrates. One of the methods of producing thick GaN films is halide vapour phase epitaxy (HVPE). Macrodefects, namely cracks and pits, are main problem in producing thick GaN films by HVPE . Cracks are formed in GaN films during growth Pits are a common type of defects in epitaxially grown crystals, well known since early studies In this paper we studied the growth of thick (up to 3 mm) GaN films. We had found that at low growth temperature the main defects were pits, while at high growth temperature the main defects were cracks. GaN films with thickness from 10 μm to 400 μm were grown in a custom 6x2" wafer vertical HVPE reactor. GaN boules with thickness from 400 μm to 3 mm were grown in custom 1x2" vertical reactor optimized for long growth processes. The c-plane sapphire substrates were used. The substrate surface was nitridated in ammonia atmosphere at 1060 • C. Then low-temperature GaN buffer layer was deposited at 600 • C and total pressure of 250 Torr. The thickness of buffer layer was about 1 μm. After that the main growth process was conducted. The total reactor pressure during growth was 800 Torr. Nitrogen was used as a carrier gas. The growth rate (V gr ) was measured ex situ by weighting the grown film and was found to be proportional to the partial pressure of GaCl (P GaCl ). A series of more than 50 films with thickness in the range 30 -100 μm were grown in order to study the influence of growth parameters on the surface morphology. The growth temperatures ranged from 990 • C to 1140 • C. The growth rate was controlled by the flow rate of GaCl and varied from 10 μm/hour to 200 μm/hour. The surface morphology and the internal structure of the films were examined with optical microscope. To observe the pits optically polished cross-sections of the films were prepared. The cut was made as near as possible to the investigated pits. After that samples were lapped and polished to make the surface of the cut optically smooth. The type of observed morphology depended on the growth parameters, mainly temperature and partial pressure of GaCl. Two distinct types of film morphology corresponding to different growth modes were observed. These modes will be further referred to as a high temperature (HT) mode and low temperature (LT) mode. The dependence of the growth mode on temperature and growth rate is presented in Fig. Films grown in LT mode had rough surfaces covered by pits and hillocks, Fig. To study the transition between the growth modes a special substrate holder with nonuniform heating was used. The temperature across the substrate varied from 1045 • C near the basal cut of the substrate, to 1035 • C on the opposite side. The film grown on this holder is shown in Fig. The shape of the trace is determined by the relation of growth rate of the pit facet and the growth rate of the c-plane. If the angles of facets (α) and the trace of the pit (β) are measured, the relative growth rate can be calculated: It can be seen from Fig. According to our results and literature data Pits could be also developed as a result of incomplete coalescence of non-continuous films Sometimes pits can be healed via the overgrowth process. Two types of the pit overgrowth process have been observed. This first type of overgrowth was observed when the temperature was increased during growth process and the growth mode changed from LT to HT. The growth rate of pit facets in HT mode is higher than the growth rate of c-plane, and the pit is overgrown, Fig. Films grown in single stage at LT or HT mode had certain macrodefects: cracks for HT mode, pits for LT mode. The two-stage method Proposed model To explain the observed difference between the growth modes we suggest that the main difference between LT and HT modes could be the rate of two-dimensional nucleation. The nucleation rate is low in HT mode. The growth in this case proceeds by step flow, with steps provided by substrate misorientaition and screw dislocations. Decreasing temperature or increasing P GaCl increases the concentration of adsorbed species. When the critical concentration is reached, the nucleation rate rapidly increases. Therefore, the dashed line in Fig. Two growth modes (LT and HT) were observed in HVPE growth of GaN. Films grown in these modes differed by surface roughness, density and shape of the pits and the value of growth stress. A transition between modes took place in a very narrow area of process parameters. Surface roughness, density and shape of the pits and the value of growth stress change simultaneously when the growth mode is changed from LT to HT. The possible mechanisms for transition between growth modes and generation of growth stress are proposed.