Cuprous oxide (Cu 2 O) is a semiconductor with large exciton binding energy and significant technological importance in applications such as photovoltaics and solar water splitting. It is also a superior material system for quantum optics that enabled the observation of two intriguing phenomena, i.e. Rydberg excitons as solid-state analogue to highly-excited atomic states and dense exciton gases showing quantum degeneracy when approaching the phase transition to Bose-Einstein condensation. Previous experiments focused on natural bulk crystals due to major difficulties in growing high-quality synthetic samples. Here, we present Cu 2 O microcrystals with excellent optical material quality capable of hosting both quantum-degenerate excitons and excited Rydberg states. Growth of Cu 2 O with exceedingly low point defect levels was achieved on silicon by a scalable thermal oxidation process compatible with lithographic patterning. Using the latter, we demonstrate Rydberg excitons in site-controlled Cu 2 O microstructures, paving the way for a plethora of applications in integrated quantum photonics. Light-matter interactions in the direct-band-gap semiconductor cuprous oxide (Cu 2 O) are widely governed by excitons, quasi-particles arising from electron-hole Coulomb interactions, which can be observed up to room temperature due to their large binding energy. As a result of the unique excitonic properties, intriguing condensed-matter quantum phenomena have been demonstrated, e.g. quantum-degenerate exciton gases 1, 2 and giant Rydberg excitons 3 exhibiting signatures of quantum coherences 4 and quantum chaotic behavior 5 . As the exciton ground state -the so-called paraexciton -is decoupled from the radiation field in unstrained Cu 2 O, paraexcitons can reach lifetimes up to microseconds rendering them a prime candidate for excitonic Bose-Einstein condensation 6 . Apart from quantum optics, recent reports have reinforced the significant potential of Cu 2 O as a low-cost, non-toxic material in areas such as photocatalysis 7 , solar water splitting 8 and photovoltaic devices 9 . Various methods have been reported for the growth of Cu 2 O thin films and single crystals 10 , in particular molecular beam epitaxy In this work, we present Cu 2 O growth on silicon by a scalable thermal oxidation process, which resulted in high-quality microcrystal structures with exceedingly low point defect and impurity levels. We achieve a dense exciton gas in single Cu 2 O microcrystals at milli-Kelvin temperatures under continuous-wave excitation, showing quantum degeneracy close to the phase boundary to Bose-Einstein condensation. Furthermore, we demonstrate luminescence from excited np Rydberg states in lithographically site-controlled structures, exhibiting excellent agreement with a hydrogen-like quantum number dependence. Due to the exceptional optical material quality and the unique excitonic properties, our Cu 2 O microcrystals are highly promising for enabling new photonic device architectures relevant for quantum information processing and quantum sensing. The growth of Cu 2 O microcrystals relied on a scalable single-step thermal oxidation process schematically depicted in Fig. the top-view and cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy images. The Cu 2 O microcrystals showed terrace-like structures on the surface (Supplementary Fig. The optical material quality of the Cu 2 O microcrystals was initially assessed by means of room-temperature photoluminescence spectroscopy. Distinct free exciton emission was observed (Fig. Local deviations from the ideal cuprite crystalline structure, e.g. vacancy point defects, extrinsic impurities or microscopic strain, have a significant impact on the relaxation of excitons in Cu 2 O and the related photon emission. Photoluminescence spectroscopy experiments were conducted in a dilution refrigerator (sample stage base temperature around 40 mK) to assess the optical material quality of Cu 2 O microcrystals at milli-Kelvin temperatures. The results were compared to natural bulk Cu 2 O as benchmark (crystal originates from a geological sample used in previous literature Cu 2 O has been considered the prime candidate for excitonic Bose-Einstein condensation in three-dimensional semiconductors due to several favourable properties, including large exciton binding energies of 150 meV, small Bohr radii around 0.7 nm leading to high Mott transition densities, as well as the same positive parity of the highest valence band and the lowest conduction band decoupling the exciton ground state (paraexciton) from photon interactions. Paraexcitons are thus particularly relevant for experiments related to Bose-Einstein condensation and have been predominantly studied using strain-induced confining potentials realized by the Hertzian stress technique of pressing a spherical object against a flat Cu 2 O crystal surface Photoluminescence spectroscopy was performed on single Cu 2 O microcrystals in a dilution refrigerator using continuouswave green laser excitation (532 nm), in particular analyzing the lineshape of the X O -Γ - 12 phonon-assisted orthoexciton transition. Three spectra acquired at laser input powers of 50 nW, 5 μW and 500 μW are presented in Fig. Furthermore, we demonstrate that paraexcitons are also in the quantum-degenerate regime by analyzing the lineshape of the phonon-assisted X P -Γ - 25 transition. Three spectra acquired under laser input powers of 10 μW, 20 μW and 40 μW and the corresponding Bose-Einstein fits are shown in Fig. After initial experiments in the middle of the last century, Rydberg excitons in Cu 2 O have recently attracted considerable attention due to the experimental demonstration of principal quantum numbers up to n=25 in absorption measurements using natural bulk crystals Furthermore, site-controlled Cu 2 O microstructures (Fig. We have presented the growth of Cu 2 O microcrystals on silicon substrates, showing excellent optical material quality with exceedingly low point defect and impurity levels. The fabrication method for obtaining high-quality Cu 2 O films via a scalable thermal oxidation process has guiding significance for diverse areas where this low-cost, non-toxic material is employed, such as photovoltaics and photocatalysis. Cu 2 O microcrystals were identified as ideal host material for dense exciton gases at milli-Kelvin temperatures, in particular 1s ortho-and paraexcitons exhibiting kinetic energy distributions obeying Bose-Einstein statistics. Excitons in the quantum-degenerate regime were obtained through continuous-wave laser excitation of confined micrometer-sized geometries, which constitutes an entirely new approach for assessing the feasibility of excitonic Bose-Einstein condensation in this material. Furthermore, the demonstration of Rydberg excitons in Cu 2 O microcrystals and their integration on silicon have far-reaching implications for future applications in photonic quantum information processing. For instance, Rydberg states in Cu 2 O have been proposed for the realization of novel solid-state single-photon sources 