We report 3D-printed acoustic holographic lenses for the formation of ultrasonic fields of complex spatial distribution inside the skull. Using holographic lenses, we experimentally, numerically and theoretically produce acoustic beams whose spatial distribution matches target structures of the central nervous system. In particular, we produce three types of targets of increasing complexity. First, a set of points are selected at the center of both right and left human hippocampi. Experiments using a skull phantom and 3D printed acoustic holographic lenses show that the corresponding bifocal lens simultaneously focuses acoustic energy at the target foci, with good agreement between theory and simulations. Second, an arbitrary curve is set as the target inside the skull phantom. Using time-reversal methods the holographic beam bends following the target path, in a similar way as self-bending beams do in free space. Finally, the right human hippocampus is selected as a target volume. The focus of the corresponding holographic lens overlaps with the target volume in excellent agreement between theory in free-media, and experiments and simulations including the skull phantom. The precise control of focused ultrasound into the central nervous system is mainly limited due to the strong phase aberrations produced by refraction and attenuation of the skull. Using the present method, the ultrasonic beam can be focused not only at a single point but overlapping one or various target structures simultaneously using low-cost 3D-printed acoustic holographic lens. The results open new paths to spread incoming biomedical ultrasound applications including blood-brain barrier opening or neuromodulation. Holographic plates are surfaces that when illuminated by a wave, typically light, modify the phase of the transmitted or reflected wavefront in such a manner that a complex image can be formed In these applications, holographic lenses have demonstrated the ability to manipulate acoustic waves in free media, i.e., without inhomogeneities. However, when using ultrasound in biomedical engineering applications, acoustic beams encounter in their path multiple tissue layers of complex geometry with non-homogeneous properties. For instance, an accurate control of the focused beam is at the basis of focused ultrasound therapy techniques, e.g., as in high intensity focused ultrasound hyperthermia, thermal ablation or histotripsy, or in extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy To overcome these limitations, minimally-invasive techniques were developed in the past to design active focusing systems using the time-reversal invariance of the acoustic propagation Only few theoretical works have tackled the problem of beam focusing through aberrating layers using metamaterials In this work, we propose the use of 3D-printed holographic phase plates to produce ultrasonic fields of arbitrary shape into the human brain. The holographic lenses designed in this work allow the reconstruction of complex diffraction-limited acoustic images including the compensation of the aberrations produced by a skull phantom. In particular, we theoretically, numerically and experimentally demonstrate the generation of several holographic patterns, of increasing complexity, all with direct practical application to biomedical ultrasound: an arbitrary set of points, an arbitrary curved line, and an arbitrary volume. First, we provide the conditions to generate a simple holographic pattern, i.e., a set of diffraction-limited focal points, as sketched in Fig. In particular, we extend the use of holographic lenses to generate bifocal beams, matching both foci simultaneously the location of left and right human hippocampus. Second, we demonstrate that ultrasonic beams with curved trajectory along the internal CNS tissues can also be produced, as Fig. The process of hologram generation is composed of four steps. First, we extract the geometry and acoustic properties of a human skull from X-ray CT images, as shown in Fig. First, in order to model the skull geometry, we used the CT Datasets of a female human head with an isotropic resolution of 1 mm (interpolated to 0.22 mm for the numerical simulation) from the National Library of Medicine's Visible Human Project available for general use by the University of Iowa. Experiments were conducted in a 3D printed skull phantom, while, in addition, we included full-wave simulations using the acoustical properties of the skull bones. Thus, for the skull phantom simulations we used homogeneous acoustical parameters matching those of the 3D printing material, while for the realistic skull simulations we used the same geometry but the inhomogeneous acoustical parameters of the skull were derived using the same the CT data, converting the apparent density tomographic data in Hounsfield units to density and sound speed distributions using the linear-piecewise polynomials proposed in Refs. After, we used a human atlas made publicly available by the International Consortium for Brain Mapping (ICBM) from the Laboratory of Neuro Imaging We use two methods, of increasing complexity, to estimate the back-and-forward acoustic fields: a semianalytical method using Rayleigh-Sommerfeld diffraction integral and a pseudo-spectral time-domain simulation method. On the one hand, for theoretical calculations in homogeneous media, i.e, in water without the skull phantom, the acoustic pressure field given by p(r) at point r, generated by a moving surface S of arbitrary shape located at coordinates r 0 and vibrating with a complex particle velocity v 0 (r 0 ) normal to the surface, is given by the Rayleigh-Sommerfeld diffraction integral where ω = 2πf ; k 0 = ω/c 0 , c 0 and ρ 0 are the wavenumber, sound speed and density of water. Note that in Eq. ( where u is the acoustic particle velocity, d is the acoustic particle displacement, p is the acoustic pressure, ρ is the acoustic density, ρ 0 is the ambient (or equilibrium) density, c 0 is the sound speed, and L is a linear operator introducing the frequency-dependent absorption and dispersion where τ = -2α 0 c γ-1 0 and η = 2α 0 c γ 0 tan (πγ/2) and the absorption and dispersion proportionality coefficients. This operator is solved efficiently using the fractional Laplacian in the k-space. This simulation method was selected as it provides low numerical dispersion as compared with finite-differences methods Under the assumption of reciprocity, time-invariance and linearity of the system, a time-reversal (TR) technique together with a direct method was used to design the only-phase holographic lens. First, we set some virtual sources inside the skull phantom and the back-propagated field was estimated at a given surface outside the skull phantom. For the bifocal lens, two virtual sources were set as monopoles with same phase and amplitude, located at the center of mass of the two hippocampi (right and left), as sketched in Fig. Second, the recorded conjugated pressure distribution at the working frequency was used to design the physical lens. The lens surface was divided in squared pixels of different height, h(x, y) and uniform width, ∆h, as shown in Fig. where d is the distance from the bottom of the lens (z = 0) to the holographic surface, the normalized impedance is given by Z = Z L /Z 0 , and Z 0 = ρ 0 c 0 is the impedance of water and the impedance, wavenumber, density and sound speed of the lens material. In order to obtain the height of each pixel of the lens, an analytic inversion of Eq. ( Third, lens with an aperture of 2a = 50 mm were manufactured using 3D printing techniques. On the one hand, the bifocal holographic lens was manufactured by additive 3D printing techniques using Ultimaker 3 Extended (Ultimaker B.V., The Netherlands) with a resolution of 100 μm in both, lateral and axial directions and PLA material. As, in general, the height profile of the lens is smooth, we set the square pixel resolution to ∆h = 0.22 mm. The acoustical properties of PLA material were obtained experimentally using a pulse-echo technique in a test cylinder, resulting in a measured sound speed of c L = 1818 m/s and a density of ρ L = 1127 kg/m 3 , matching with those reported in existing literature The geometry of the skull phantom was extracted from the 3D CT images as described previously. The sound speed and density distributions were first estimated from the apparent density given by the CT images in Hounsfield units Finally, for the simulations using a realistic skull, the acoustical parameters were derived using the CT data, converting the apparent density in Hounsfield units to density and sound speed distributions using the linearpiecewise polynomials proposed in Refs. The details about the measurement system can be found in Appendix A. We start with the bifocal holographic lens. First, two points located at the center of mass of both left and right human hippocampi are selected. Second, we set this pair of points as the location of virtual sources for the TR method. For the lens designs in free media, i.e., without the skull, we make use of the Rayleigh-Sommerfeld diffraction integral (see Methods section for further details). For the lens designs of holographic surfaces including the skull-aberration layers we make use of low-numerical-dispersion simulations based on pseudospectral methods The field produced by the bifocal lens propagating through a human occipital/parietal skull phantom including the compensation for the aberrations of the skull is shown in Figs. The previous results show that holographic phase plates can retain phase information of multiple foci. Using this idea, we can set more complex targets following the shape of functional structures found in the CNS. Here, we set the target holographic pattern to a beam following a curved trajectory as those reported in homogeneous media without aberrating layers using active sources or metamaterials Finally, when the aberration layer of the skull phantom is included the corresponding holographic lens also reconstructs the target acoustic image with curved trajectory, as shown in Figs. Going further, we designed a holographic lens which produces an acoustic image that fits the right human hippocampus volume. The holographic surface was placed near the occipital/parietal bones to adapt the acoustic image to the elongated geometry of the hippocampus. However, we locate the lens at the center of the skull symmetry plane in order to demonstrate the steering capabilities of this holographic lens. The lens generation process is based on the TR method with multiple virtual sources covering the target area (see Methods section for further details). Figure On the one hand, Figs. On the other hand, the field distribution produced by acoustic holographic lenses including the skull phantom is shown in Figs. Note that the spatial bandwidth of the image is limited by the diffraction limit and the spatial bandwidth of the acoustic holographic lens It is worth noting here that the impedance of the available 3D printing material used to manufacture the skull phantom is soft compared with the skull bone. In this way, the phase aberrations produced by a real skull will be stronger than the ones observed in the previous experiments. To demonstrate the focusing performance of the proposed lenses in a realistic situation a set of simulations were performed using the acoustical parameters of skull bones. The parameters were derived using the same the CT data and were listed in Section II D. First, the results of the bifocal lens simulation using a realistic skull are summarized in Fig 7 . First, the sagittal cross-section of the absolute value of the pressure field at y = 0 mm is shown in Fig. Second, the results for the self-bending beam simulation inside a realistic skull are shown in Fig. We have shown that using 3D printed acoustic holograms it is possible to conform diffraction-limited ultrasonic fields of arbitrary shape compensating the aberra-tions of a the human skull. In particular, experimental tests using a 3D printed skull phantom and numerical simulations using a realistic skull were performed to accurately generate multiple focal holograms, self-bending beams and volumetric holographic fields overlapping a target CNS structure. The proposed approach using holographic lenses represents a step forward when compared with the existing solutions using phase arrays, since it opens new venues to develop reliable and cost reduced ultrasonic applications. The quality of the reconstructed acoustic images is related to the diffraction limit and the spatial bandwidth of the holographic lens, which depends on the spatial aperture of the lens, the number of pixels of the lens, and the frequency of the beam Phased-arrays are efficient but their high-cost can be prohibitive to spread out some of the incoming ultrasonic transcranial therapy treatments. Using phased arrays the ultrasonic beams can be adjusted in real time and monitored using MRI, obtaining a precise location of the acoustic focus into de CNS. Nevertheless, the number of elements of the phased-array systems can be insufficient to produce a complex volumetric ultrasonic field that matches a specific CNS structure. The use of holographic lenses present several advantages to produce complex volumetric patterns. First, the cost of a 3D printed lens is low as compared with phased-array systems. Second, each pixel in a holographic lens acts as an element of the phased-array with fixed phase. Due to the high number of passive sources in a holographic lens, more than 4000 for the small lenses considered here, complex patterns can be generated. However, once the lens is designed its focal distance and the spatial features of the holographic image remains fixed and, in principle, it is not possible to steer the ultrasonic beam in real time with accuracy. For this reason, the technique is specially relevant for the treatment using a single sonification of structures or in the sonification of large volumes. The concept shown in this paper opens new doors to optimize and widespread incoming therapy treatments such as ultrasound-assisted blood-brain barrier opening for drug delivery and neuromodulation, or ultrasonic imaging of the central nervous system using low-cost devices. Considering the emergence of metamaterials and their huge flexibility, we also advance incoming biomedical applications of active holographic metasurfaces for the generation of complex fields in the central nervous system. tions with an accuracy of 10 μm. For the bifocal lens experiment the scanning an area for the sagittal crosssections, p(x, z), covers from -40 mm to 40 mm in the x direction and from 82 mm to 143 mm in the z direction, using a step of 0.5 mm in both directions, for the transversal cross-section planes, p(x, y), covers from -40 to 40 mm in the x direction and from -10 mm to 10 mm in the y direction, using a step of 0.3 mm. For the selfbending lens, the scanned area covers from 20 to 50 mm in the z direction, from -5 to 5 mm in the x direction, and from -5 to 5 mm in the y direction, using the same spatial steps. Finally, for the volumetric holograms the scanned area covers from 65 to 135 mm in the z direction, from -45 to -5 mm in the x direction, and from -10 to 10 mm in the y direction, using the same spatial steps. All the signal generation and acquisition processes were based on a NI8176 National Instruments PXI-Technology controller, which also controlled the micro-positioning system. Temperature measurements were performed throughout the whole process to ensure no temperature changes of 0.5 • C.