We report the mechanism of cleavage crack deviation at grain boundaries. A fracture mechanics based model has been developed to combine the effect of tilt and twist angles between cleavage planes on the reduction in normalized energy release rate. Furthermore, electron back-scatter diffraction analysis on cleavage fracture surface has been carried out. The microstructural features associated with the presence of tilt and twist angle at the grain boundary have been identified and found to be consistent with the prediction from the analytical model. The phenomenon of catastrophic cleavage fracture in body-centered cubic (BCC) material limits its application at low temperature and high strain rate conditions. The resistance to cleavage fracture in BCC material can be improved by reducing grain size and increasing grain boundary misorientation angle (GBMA). The effect of reduced grain size on cleavage fracture resistance is well studied and understood Furthermore, the crystallographic nature of the cleavage plane can be obtained from inverse pole figure, if the cleavage facet is parallel to the macroscopic fracture plane, which is improbable mostly. A stereological correction before EBSD scanis necessary to characterize the crystallographic cleavage plane, as reported by Randle et al. In our previous work Understanding the role of grain boundary (GB) nature on crack deviation is crucial, and recently it has been reported that GB nature severely affects the overall impact toughness Standard Transverse-Longitudinal oriented Charpy impact sample, prepared from rolled and annealed plate of ferritic steel with a large grain size (60 μm), was subjected to impact loading at -1960C. To study the fracture surface of those specimens, they were cut along the plane parallel to the macroscopic fracture plane with roughly 2 mm thickness using a slow speed diamond cutter, followed by ultrasonic cleaning and drying. Special caution has been taken to keep the flat cut surface exactly perpendicular to transverse direction (TD), as shown in Fig. Cleavage crack follows a path of specific crystallographic planes during its propagation and deviates at GB depending upon the neighbouring grains orientations. Some earlier studies focused on the individual effect of either tilt or twist angle on crack driving Where,α is the tilt angle and ν, Poisson's ratio is assumed to be 0.33 Depending upon the orientation of the neighbouring crystal, GB plane and cleavage plane, one can obtain the tilt (α) and twist (φ) angle of the deviated crack from the following approach proposed by King et al. The resultant rotational matrix (R t ) due tiltand twist can be given by: Therefore, the normalized state of stress on new plane-2, Fig 1b due to remote mode-I loading can be obtained by the coordinate transformation as follows: Now, the ratio of local to remote stress intensity factor associated with facet-2, Fig. Finally, the reduction in normalized energy release rate (ΔG) can be given by: 1 Table1: Eulers' angle with the mean angular deviation (MAD) and misorientation angle(MA) as obtained from the point EBSD analysis on the cleavage facet. The cleavage facets of interest are indicated by region1 and2 in Fig. ).Evidently, the three combinations of cleavage planes, such as (100)-( .The experimental observation is also consistent with predicted values of the proposed analytical model, Table A ridge zone is observed between the two facets at regions3 and 4, Fig. Therefore, the analytical model indicates a high twist angle at the boundary which is consistent with observation made at the facet boundary, Fig. In summary for all three cases, the predicted ΔG is found to be minimum for the combination of cleavage plane where the tilt angle is minimum. It may be because the tilt angle has more influence on ΔG. But unlike tilt angle, twist angle at facet boundary creates an additional surface which is not considered in the proposed model. It (The consideration of twist angle) may be may be necessary for better understanding and will be addressed in our future work. The following conclusions can be derived from the above study: (a) The actual crack is found to propagate along the cleavage planes which possess the lowest possible ΔG, as predicted by the analytical model. (b) The tilt angle is found to have more influence on ΔG as compared to the twist angle which causes step formation at GB. (001)-(100) cleavage planes, Table