An ultrasonic transducer technology to generate wideband impulses using a one-dimensional chain of spheres was previously presented. The Hertzian contact between the spheres causes the nonlinearity of the system to increase, which transforms high amplitude narrowband sinusoidal input into a train of wideband impulses. Generation of short duration ultrasonic pulses is desirable both in diagnostic and therapeutic ultrasound. Nevertheless, the biggest challenge in terms of adaptation to biomedical ultrasound is the coupling of the ultrasonic energy into biological tissue. An analytical model was created to address the coupling issue. Effect of the matching layer was modelled as a flexible thin plate clamped from the edges. Model was verified against hydrophone measurements. Different coupling materials, such as glass, aluminium, acrylic, silicon rubber, and vitreous carbon, was analysed with this model. Results showed that soft matching layers such as acrylic and rubber inhibit the generation of higher order harmonics. Between the hard matching materials, vitreous carbon achieved the best results due to its acoustic impedance. Contact dynamics between two spherical elastic objects can be explained by Hertz's contact law with an exponential forcedeformation relation. Unlike a spring mass system, where F is proportional to deformation or displacement δ, in a system with Hertzian contact the relation between the force F exerted on spheres and the deformation δ is nonlinear; F ∝ δ 1.5 . An ultrasonic transducer technology is developed to utilize this nonlinear behaviour of one-dimensional chain of spheres It has already been demonstrated by Hutchins et al. and Yang et al. that it is possible to generate wideband impulses by coupling energy to harmonics from a fundamental ultrasonic frequency of 73 kHz Chain of spheres Fig. Models were developed to simulate wave propagation in infinite chains An analytical model created by Hutchins et al. was used to simulate the wave propagation through the chain. The existing model was modified as below to implement the effect of a vibrating thin plate instead of an infinite wall. The equation from where m is the mass of a single sphere, x n is the displacement of the last sphere for a n-sphere chain, x m is the displacement of the matching layer, and λ is the damping coefficient. Material properties are described with θ s and θ m as; (2) where E s is the Young's modulus, and ν s is the Poisson's ratio of the aluminium spheres. The same parameters for the matching layer are represented with E m and ν m . Overlap between two spheres, δ s,s , and overlap between the last sphere and the matching layer, δ m,s , are calculated as; . The matching layer was modelled as a flexible thin plate clamped from the edges and the equation of motion is where m m is the mass of the matching layer, and K m is the spring coefficient. The mechanism of wave coupling into water was modelled as a superposition of wave propagated through the matching layer and vibrations of a thin plate. The energy of the wave transmitted from the aluminium sphere into water was decreased due to the acoustic impedance mismatch as; where ẋs is the superposition of sphere and matching layer velocities. The first term in Eq. ( The system as shown in Fig. The chain of spheres was excited with a 25 cycle sinusoidal tone burst generated by an ultrasonic horn with a fundamental frequency of 73 kHz. The excitation signal was tapered and amplified with a Class A linear power amplifier (E&I Ltd., Rochester, NY) to reduce the level of harmonics introduced into the granular chain. This waveform generated a maximum output displacement of ±3 μm, which was measured with a Laser Vibrometer (Polytec, Germany) and used as an input into the analytical model described above. Fig. The predictions from the analytical model were consistent with the results achieved by hydrophone measurements for the system under static loading of 0.1 N for the vitreous carbon matching layer. The impulse shape and the harmonic content matches with the new model as shown in Fig. This study achieved the aim of generating wideband impulses close to biomedical ultrasound frequency range. Between the chosen matching layer materials, vitreous carbon allowed both the generation and coupling of higher order harmonics with a -20 dB bandwidth over 350 kHz and shows the feasibility of this new technology for biomedical applications. Generation and the use of these sub-and superharmonics in ultrasound as a diagnostic and therapeutic tool are favourable 