In this letter, we report the discovery of a new class of spintronic materials, namely spin semimetals (SSM), employing both theoretical and experimental tools. The band structure of this class of materials is such that one of the spin bands resembles that of a semi-metal, while the other is similar to that of an insulator/semiconductor. This report is the experimental verification of the first SSM, FeRhCrGe, a quaternary Heusler alloy with a magnetic moment 3 μB and a Curie temperature of 550 K. The measurement below 300 K shows nearly temperature independent conductivity and a relatively moderate Hall effect. SSM behavior for FeRhCrGe is also confirmed by rigorous first principles calculations. Band structure calculations also reveal that the spin up (semi metallic) band has combined features of type II Weyl and nodal line semimetal. As such, this study opens up the possibility of a new class of material with combined spintronic and topological properties, which is important both from fundamental and applied point of view. Introduction: Recent developments in magnetic Heusler alloys, such as the discovery of half metallic ferromagnets (HMF) have fuelled the area of spintronics research considerably. One of the necessary conditions for a spintronic material is to possess integer magnetic moment (M ), for which the density of states (DoS) should be zero for at least one spin bands. In this letter, we report the first spin semimetallic material, namely quaternary Heusler alloy FeRhCrGe, based on the confirmation from both experimental and theoretical investigations. We also confirm that this alloy shows type II Weyl nodes in the semimetallic band, resulting in the realization of Weyl fermions. FeRhCrGe belongs to a quaternary Heusler alloy (XX YZ) with space group F 43m. The structure can be seen as 4 interpenetrating fcc sublattices with Wyckoff positions 4a, 4b, 4c and 4d. The possible non-degenerate configurations for a general XX YZ quaternary alloy (fixing Z-atom at 4a-site) are (I) X at 4c, X at 4d and Y at 4b site, (II) X at 4b, X at 4d and Y at 4c site, (III) X at 4c, X at 4b and Y at 4d site. Configuration I turns out to be energetically the most stable one. Room temperature X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern along with the Rietveld refinement for the configuration I with 50% anti-site disorder between tetrahedral site atoms Fe and Rh is shown in Fig. Magnetization : According to the Slater-Pauling (SP) rule, Magnetization data (M vs. H and M vs. T) indicating ferromagnetic behaviour of FeRhCrGe is shown in Fig. Transport properties : Figure where, n i = n i0 e -∆Ei/kBT (i = e, h) are the carrier concentrations of electrons, holes with mobilities μ i . ∆E i are the energy gaps. A fit to σ in the zero field, high Tregion is shown in Fig. Specific heat : Figure , where γ is the Sommerfeld constant. The value of γ (12 mJ/mole-K 2 ), obtained from the fit, yields n(E F ) ∼ 5.05 states/eV-f.u., which is in good agreement with the simulated results (see Sec. II). Hence, it is quite evident that FeRhCrGe is neither a simple gapless semiconductor nor a SGS; instead it is very likely to be a spin semimetal. Computational details are given in Sec. C of SM. 14 Within ab-initio framework, all the three non degenerate configurations were fully relaxed with parallel spin moments on each magnetic ions and the results are shown in Table Figure Figure With inclusion of SOC, magnetic ground state of configuration I turns out to be collinear with total moment 3.0 μ B /f.u.. The moments on individual magnetic ions are nearly same as those obtained from collinear spin calculations. Figure In summary, we have discovered a new class of spintronic materials, termed as spin semimetals. Using detailed experimental and theoretical investigations, we show that FeRhCrGe is a spin semimetal with unique properties. Furthermore, careful band structure calculations show that this alloy acquire additional features of type II Weyl semimetal and nodal line semi-metal located close to Fermi level for the spin up band. In conclusion, we confirm the co-existence of spin semimetallic and Weyl semimetallic behavior in FeRhCrGe. This makes it the first candidate material in this new class which is interesting both from the fundamental understanding as well as applied perspective.