In this paper, we demonstrate a computationally efficient new approach based on deep learning (DL) techniques for analysis, design, and optimization of electromagnetic (EM) nanostructures. We use the strong correlation among features of a generic EM problem to considerably reduce the dimensionality of the problem and thus, the computational complexity, without imposing considerable errors. By employing the dimensionality reduction concept using the more recently demonstrated autoencoder technique, we redefine the conventional many-to-one design problem in EM nanostructures into a one-to-one problem plus a much simpler many-to-one problem, which can be simply solved using an analytic formulation. This approach reduces the computational complexity in solving both the forward problem (i.e., analysis) and the inverse problem (i.e., design) by orders of magnitude compared to conventional approaches. In addition, it provides analytic formulations that, despite their complexity, can be used to obtain intuitive understanding of the physics and dynamics of EM wave interaction with nanostructures with minimal computation requirements. As a proof-of-concept, 1 The field of nanophotonics has been the subject of extensive expansion due to the unique capabilities of photonic nanostructures to control the propagation of EM waves. Owing to their constituent nanoscale features, which spectrally, spatially, and even temporally manipulate the optical state of the EM wave, nanophotonic devices extend all the functionalities realized by conventional optical devices in much smaller footprints. Combined with the advances in nanofabrication technologies, these nanostructures have been used to demonstrate devices with enormous potential for groundbreaking technologies addressing major challenges in state-of-the-art applications, such as optical communications, 1 signal processing, 2 biosensing, Traditional design and optimization approaches for EM nanostructures rely on either using analytical (or semi-analytical) modeling More recently, design and optimization approaches based on DL techniques have been proposed and implemented for the design of nanostructures. Another challenge in using DL techniques to design complex EM nanostructures is the large size of the response and design spaces resulting in the need to train a large NN. As an example, to study the spatial and spectral response of a MS with reasonable accuracy, the response space must constitute the sampled EM intensity in a two-dimensional space and in frequency with spatial and spectral resolutions smaller than the smallest spatial and spectral features of the output response, respectively. This typically results in thousands of data points in the response space and quickly rises as the structures with sharper spatial and spectral features are designed. Combined with ever-increasing number of design parameters in the nanostructures of recent interest, this results in a very large NN, which is difficult to be trained, even for the problems with one-to-one optimization landscapes. In this paper, we demonstrate a new approach for designing complex EM nanostructures by addressing both the network-size issue and the non-uniqueness issue. Our approach is based on reducing the dimensionality of both the design space and the response space through training multi-layer NNs, called autoencoders. Figure than one set of design parameters can result in the same response. The original forward problem is shown by path 1 in Fig. In the next step, we reduce the dimensionality of the design space as much as possible (see path 4 in Fig. The heart of our approach is the effective implementation of the DR technique to maximally reduce the dimensionality of both design and response spaces, especially the former. Several DR techniques have been developed in machine learning to facilitate classification, data visualization, reduction of the computation cost, etc. Among different options, principal component analysis (PCA), Considering the features of these techniques, we believe that the autoencoder is the most suitable approach for solving inverse problems in general and designing EM nanostructures in particular. The general schematic of an autoencoder is shown in Fig. respectively(m < k), and s i contains the essential information of x i . To find the mapping from high-dimensional to low-dimensional data, the autoencoder in Assuming the output of the autoencoder structure in Fig. (1) Where ń represents the number of validation (or test) instances (not used for training) that are used to validate the trained autoencoder (but not used for training) . The number of layers and the topology of the NN is also found using an ad-hoc method (by trial and error). The training dataset for the design of EM nanostructures is obtained by using numerical simulation of the structure using a random set of input design parameters. In the approach shown in Fig. The NN in Fig. Fortunately, the encoder part of the pseudo-encoder in Fig. to reduce the complexity in solving the design problem. In this paper, we use the analytic relation between the original and reduced design spaces to completely search the original design space to find the point(s) that correspond to the desired point in the reduced design space. In addition to solving the non-uniqueness issue, the approach in Fig. To show the applicability of the design approach, we consider a simple design problem for the implementation of a reconfigurable multifunctional MS enabling high performance optical modulation as shown in Fig. As a result, the MS in this work has 10 design parameters (i.e., dimensionality of the design space is equal to 10) with different units (3 unit-less indices of refraction and 7 lengths with units of nanometers). As a simple functionality, we are interested in amplitude modulation of the incident light at λ = 1600nm with a considerable bandwidth around the central wavelength. The MS in Fig. In the next step, we use the training data to train a series of autoencoders with different numbers of hidden layers (ranging from 3 to 9) to study the DR of the response space from 200 to different values in the range of 1 to 20. For each autoencoder, MSE is calculated by finding the square of the norm of the difference between the reflectance vector obtained from the decoder part of the autoencoder and that obtained from the FEM simulations (also called ground truth data) for each one of the validation data. Note that each vector has 200 elements corresponding to the reflectance at 200 selected wavelengths in the 1250-1850 nm range. To form a platform for designing MSs with an arbitrary response, we first find the inverse of the network from the original response space to the reduced design space as shown in Fig. . This is not computationally extensive due to the one-to-one nature of the problem. For this purpose, the pre-trained encoder part of the DR algorithm for the response space (left side of Fig. Figure Figure designs with considerably different design parameters are also shown in Fig. A main advantage of our approach is the possibility of investigating the underlying physics of the device operation and obtaining intuitive information about the roles of different design parameters on its response. To show this capability, we use our approach with a pseudoencoder (10-4-10-50-20-10) to model the MS in Fig. The important observations about the role of different design parameters were obtained from our deep-learning approach without taking any information about the physics of the structure into account. Nevertheless, these observations agree with the physical intuition about the structure in Fig. To consider the effect of variation of the crystallization fractions (l c1 , l c2 , and l c3 ), we note that the reflection response of the overall MS is essentially the sum of three responses defined by the three plasmonic resonators in each unit cell. By combining three wideband resonances with different resonance wavelengths, a wideband reflection response is obtained. Figure Due to pronounced light-matter interaction of the supermode with the GST layer at the higher wavelength (i.e., 1650-1850 nm), we expect that most of the resistive loss occurs in the building block with high crystallization level (i.e., l c3 ) accommodating more free charge carriers. This effect is clarified in the inset of Fig. showing that a good portion of absorption takes place in the rightmost building block (i.e., l c3 ). Figure Note that obtaining this observation from the basic device properties was not as trivial as that of the role of h. While some of the conclusions about the role of design parameters in Fig. Figure A unique feature of our DR-based approach is the computation simplicity while appreciating the many-to-one nature of the problem. By not considering the latter explicitly, several other existing NN-based techniques are technically limited to only smooth-enough problems, or they require apriori assumptions to limit the search for the optimal solution in to a given region in the design space, where the relation to the response space is one-to-one (as discussed in Section 1). Nevertheless, by reducing the dimensionality of the problem, our approach requires less computation than any other alternative. For example, in the design problem studied here, we reduced a 10 × 200 dimensional problem to a 5 × 10 one. Compared to brute-force optimization approaches (e.g., exhaustive search), our technique requires far less computation. For example, by assuming only 10 possible values for the 7 analog variables (i.e., h, w 1 , w 2 , and w 3 , p 1 , p 2 , and p 3 ) and 11 values for the discrete ones Table CPU and 8 GB of random access memory (RAM). The main issue that can happen in the non-optimal use of the DR platform is the nonuniqueness (or non-one-to-one) relation between the original response space and the reduced design space in the platform shown in Fig. We demonstrated here a new DL-based approach for the design of EM nanostructures with a wide range of design possibilities. We showed that by reducing the dimensionality of the response and design spaces using an autoencoder and a psuedo-encoder, we can convert the initial many-to-one problem into a one-to-one (or in the worst case, close to one-to-one) problem plus a simple one-to-many problem that can be solved using brute-force analytical formulas. The resulting approach considerably reduces the computational complexity of both the forward problem and the inverse (or design) problem. In addition, it allows for the inclusion of the design restrictions (e.g., fabrication limitations) without adding computational complexities. It also provides valuable information about the roles of design parameters in the response of the EM structure, which can potentially enable novel phenomena and devices. Finally, this technique can be extended to solve many different optimization problems in a wide range of disciplines as long as enough data for training the incorporated NNs are provided. The full-wave EM simulations were carried out using the finite element method (FEM) enabled by linking the commercial software package COMSOL Multiphysics 5.3 (wave optics module) with MATLAB to expedite the design, optimization, and analysis processes. Floquet periodic and perfectly-matched layer boundary conditions were used along transverse x-axis and the z-axis in Fig. where c (λ 0 ) and a (λ 0 ) are the permitivitties of the crystalline and amorphous GST, respectively, and l c , ranging from 0 (amorphous) to 1 (crystalline), is the crystallization fraction