It was experimentally confirmed that if steel cyclic stress reduces to less than tensile yield stress values, i.e. in case of high-cycle fatigue, the mechanism of fracture changes from dislocation to vacancy one. This conclusion was based on the fact that steel density determined by the method of liquid displacement is less than that of steel in both initial condition and after fracture under the cyclic loads exceeding tensile yield stress values. In the latter case steel hardness increases, whereas the steels fractured under the cyclic stresses less than their tensile yield stress values show no change in hardness. It means that in such a case metal fractures without strain hardening, i.e. undergoes brittle fracturing developing by vacancy mechanism rather than by dislocation one. As a result such steel obtains the structure and properties similar to those appearing after its exposure to radiation, i.e. friability and brittleness. The results obtained allow us to explain the presence of a horizontal section in the Wöhler fatigue failure diagram. The hypothesis on changing the mechanism of fracture from dislocation to vacancy one under the cyclic stresses less than tensile yield strength has been experimentally confirmed by means of steel density estimation. It is demonstrated that the values of density can be used to determine and forecast the residual life period. To estimate the rate of a fatigue crack growth the author of To test the above assumptions a set of 3 mm thick flat "corset" specimens of 09Г2С (AISI A 516 55) and 20Х13НЛ (AISI 420) steel grades were subjected to cyclic testing. Instron 8801 testing machine was used to conduct these tests at zero-to-tension stress cycle (stress ratio R = 0) and cycling frequency of 20 hz. A part of the specimens was tested under maximum cyclic stress σ max less than tensile yield strength, others -at σ max higher than tensile yield strength. The cyclic tests were preceded by tensile tests to determine the tensile yield strength σ т = 360 MPa for 09Г2С and the offset tensile yield strength σ 0.2 = 255 MPa for 20Х13НЛ. After fracturing the specimens were used to cut out 35mm×30mm square blocks from their near fracture zones in order to determine their density and hardness. The density was determined by the liquid (distilled water) displacement method. The density assessment error was ± 1%. The hardness was taken as a mean value of five tests conducted on Instron Tukon 2500 machine under 1 kgf load. The error in the hardness assessment was ± 2.5%. The Table  In order to substantiate the hypothesis proposed it was experimentally confirmed that the mechanism of fracture changes form dislocation to vacancy one under the cyclic stresses less than tensile yield strength, i.e. under high-cycle fatigue conditions.  It was found expedient to use metal density as a test parameter for metal parts and structures on-line inspection conducted to estimate their residual operation life.