Electronic structure of the transition metal (TM) dopants in ZnO is calculated by first principles approach. Analysis of the results is focused on the properties determined by the intrashell Coulomb coupling. The role of both direct and exchange interaction channel is analyzed. The coupling is manifested in the strong charge state dependence of the TM gap levels, which leads to the metastability of photoexcited Mn, and determines the accessible equilibrium charge states of TM ions. The varying magnitude of the exchange coupling is reflected in the dependence of the spin splitting energy on the chemical identity across the 3d series, as well as the charge state dependence of spin-up spin-down exchange splitting. Current interest in ZnO doped with various dopants stems from the recognized potential of ZnO in various applications. In particular, the usage of transition metal (TM) impurities was considered in various contexts, including both tunable magnetic properties and improved optical/transport properties The present study is devoted to selected theoretical aspects of the physics of TMs dopants in ZnO. Our attention is focused on the role of the intrashell Coulomb coupling. To highlight characteristic features, we show the results obtained for the TM series from Ti to Cu, and discuss the trends displayed by their electronic structure, i.e., by energy levels, spin states, and accessible charge states. In a many body system, electron-electron coupling is realized through the direct as well as the exchange channel, the latter being a result of the antisymmetrization of the wave functions, and leading to the Hund's rule. Both channels determine the electronic structure of TM ions in ZnO. Majority of TM ions induce states in the band gap of the host ZnO crystal. The "deep" character of those states is reflected in the structure of the wave functions, which are mainly built up from the localized atomic-like d orbitals of the defect, while the contribution of the orbitals of its neighbors is smaller. Spacial localization in turn implies that the Coulomb repulsion between electrons occupying impurity levels is pronounced, and affects level energies by about 1 eV. (This is in contrast to the shallow and extended states, where the Coulomb energies are of the order of 0.01 eV.) In most cases, a TM impurity can assume several charge states depending on the Fermi energy, which differ by the number of electrons that occupy impurity levels, and thus by the varying Coulomb intrashell coupling. In particular, with the increasing (decreasing) occupation of the defect gap level, its energy increases (decreases) as a result of the increased (decreased) Coulomb repulsion. This effect determines the possible charges states of the TM ion in ZnO. A second consequence of the intrashell Coulomb coupling discussed below is the charge state dependence of the exchange coupling, revealed by the magnitude of the spin splitting of the TM levels. Finally, the third consequence of the strong localization of the wave function of the gap states is that the change of the charge state induces large variations of the distance between the TM ion and its nearest neighbors, which are of the order of a few percent. Such atomic relaxations affect the gap levels by about 1 eV. Experimental investigations of TM in ZnO include optical and transport studies. Optical transitions observed in both absorption and emission can be either intracenter, i.e. between two levels of the TM ion, in which case the charge state of TM does not change, or the ionization transition, which excites an electron from the center to conduction band minimum (CBM), or from the valence band maximum (VBM) to the TM level. In the case of intracenter transition, the bond length between TM and its neighbors remain practically the same, and the transition energy is well approximated by the difference of the one electron eigenenergies of the gap states. On the other hand, ionization transitions imply pronounced atomic relaxations, and non-negligible Frank-Condon effect. The calculations are done by employing the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) to the density functional theory Theoretical description of the electronic structure of TM ions in semiconductors must begin with an accurate band structure of the host. In fact, underestimation of the band gap, typical for the local density approximation (LDA) or GGA will result in erroneous properties of dopants. For example, an underestimated band gap leads to a distorted electronic structure of TM when the TM state is predicted to be resonant with the continuum of the conduction band instead of being the gap state. As a consequence, wrong optical transition energies, metallic rather than insulating conductivity, and a non-correct type of magnetic coupling between TM atoms are obtained From our previous results it follows that the U corrections for the d(TM) orbitals are smaller than that used for d(Zn) in pure ZnO. While the inclusion of U (TM) improves the agreement with experiment, it turns out that the fitted U values are relatively small, and so are the energy changes. Typically, agreement with experiment is obtained for U (TM) of about 2 -3 eV Transition level between various charge states of a defect is defined as the Fermi energy at which formation energies of these states are equal. Our calculations are performed along the scheme proposed in Ref. The ionization energies are calculated as the total energy difference between the final and the initial states of the system. The thermal ionization energy can be obtained directly from the position of the (+/0) level relative to CBM. The calculation of absorptionrecombination transitions for Mn ion are performed with fixed occupation matrices at the Γ point We begin by recalling that the electronic structure of a TM in a crystal follows from two effects. The first one is the exchange splitting of the d-electrons into spin up and spin down states following the Hund's rule. The second effect is the splitting of the d(TM) orbital quintet by the crystal field into a doublet and a triplet distant by about 1 eV. In the wurtzite ZnO, the latter is weakly split into a singlet and a doublet, typically by about 0.1 eV. This splitting is neglected in Figs Both exchange and crystal field splittings are clearly visible in Fig. The effect is exemplified in Fig. The presence of several one electron levels in the band gap (four levels in the case of Ni 2+ , see Fig. A second manifestation of the intrashell coupling is provided by the exchange induced spin-up spin-down splittings of the d(TM) levels, denoted as ∆ex in Fig. The calculated values of spin splitting of both e 2 and t 2 states, presented in Fig. The same argument explains the charge state dependence of the spin splitting. For example, we find that the splitting is reduced by about 1 eV, from ∆e 2 = 4.4 eV (∆t 2 = 4.1 eV) for Mn 2+ to ∆e 2 = 3.8 eV (∆t 2 = 3.1 eV) for Mn 3+ , which corresponds to an approximately linear scaling with the number of electrons. Similar results are obtained for Cr. In this case, the change of the charge state from Cr 2+ to Cr 3+ induces the change of the spin splitting from ∆e 2 = 3.6 eV (∆t 2 = 2.7 eV) to ∆e 2 = 3.3 eV (∆t 2 = 2.1 eV). Titanium. If the last nominally occupied level of both neutral and ionized TM ion is degenerate with the conduction band, a spontaneous autoionization takes place. Such a situation occurs for Ti, for which the e 2↑ level is above the bottom of the conduction band not only for Ti 2+ but also for Ti 3+ and Ti 4+ , as reflected by the transition level 2+/+ being above CBM, see Fig. Manganese. An interesting example of the role of the intracenter Coulomb repulsion is provided by Mn in ZnO, which exhibits a metastable behavior After photoionization of Mn 2+ , the ionized Mn 3+ relaxes to the equilibrium configuration Q 3 , in which the Mn-O bond lengths decrease by about 7 per cent. In spite of the fact that the t 2↑ level is below the CBM, the electron cannot recombine because in this configuration the energy of t 2↑ (Mn 2+ ) occupied by three electrons is above CBM. The energy of t 2↑ (Mn 2+ ) is below CBM Mn 2+ stable Mn 2+ unstable Mnt 2 levels (b) Mn 2+ (Mn 3+ , e CB ) FIG. when the barrier configuration Q B is reached. After recombination, Mn 2+ relaxes to Q 2 . Figure Iron. A problem of similar nature is present for Fe 2+ . As it was discussed in Ref. The same unphysical situation can occur for other TM dopants, which nominally are resonant donors with levels degenerate with the conduction band and close to the CBM. In contrast, when the d(TM) level is sufficiently high, i.e., in the case when the level is a resonance even after autoionization, the properties of the center and the allowed charge states are correctly described by theory. This is the case of Ti. Analysis of results of ab initio calculations of the electronic structure of TM ions in ZnO was conducted in order to reveal the role of the intrashell Coulomb coupling. Both one electron energies and thermodynamic transition levels were obtained. Discussion was performed for TMs ranging from Ti to Cu. Typically, TM ions in ZnO induce a rich spectrum of several d-derived one electron levels in the band gap. In spite of this, in most cases the number of possible charge states is limited to two. This is a result of the strong intrashell coupling, due to which gap levels shift by about 1-2 eV with the varying charge state of the ion. The strong intrashell Coulomb coupling explains in particular the observed metastability of optically excited Mn 3+ . Similarly, because of the pronounced intrashell exchange coupling, the magnitude of the spin splitting of the d electrons depends not only on the ion chemical identity, but also on its charge state. The charge state dependence of atomic configurations of ions is also pointed out. Details provided for Ti, Mn and Fe were aimed to illustrate typical characteristics of TM ions in ZnO.