In the field of spintronics, ferromagnetic/non-magnetic metallic multilayers are core building blocks for emerging technologies. Resonance experiments using stripline transducers are commonly used to characterize and engineer these stacks for applications. Up to now in these experiments, the influence of eddy currents on the excitation of the dynamics of ferromagnetic magnetization below the skin-depth limit was most often neglected. Here, using a coplanar stripline transducer, we experimentally investigated the broadband ferromagnetic resonance response of NiFe/Cu bilayers a few nanometers thick in the sub-skin-depth regime. Asymmetry in the absorption spectrum gradually built up as the excitation frequency and Cu-layer thickness increased. Most significantly, the sign of the asymmetry depended on the stacking order. Experimental data were consistent with a quantitative analysis considering eddy currents generated in the Cu layers and the subsequent phaseshift of the feedback magnetic field generated by the eddy currents. These results extend our understanding of the impact of eddy currents below the microwave magnetic skin-depth and explain the lineshape asymmetry and phase lags reported in stripline experiments. Resonance experiments are a powerful means to study physical systems and facilitate advances in material characterization and engineering. In the field of spintronics, ferromagnetic/non-magnetic (F/NM) metallic multilayers are core building blocks for emerging technologies. , where β 0 is the empirical residual experiment-related phaseshift. P can be calculated from: , where the magnetic susceptibility  is deduced from the Landau- Lifshitz-Gilbert equation. In this scenario relying on the use of homogeneous hrf out-of-plane, experiments conducted with stripline setups, with hrf in the sample plane, should not generate eddy currents in the conductive layers. However, it has been suggested that sample tilting would lead to an out-of-plane component, In this article, the incompletely understood impact of eddy currents is investigated and we unravel the contributions to lineshape asymmetry in stripline experiments. First, we discuss the spectrum asymmetry which gradually built up as the tCu increased (Fig. above and below a Cu layer. Further considering a phaseshift between hrf and hind, one can write: μe  . The superscripts '+' and '-' relate to the 'capping' and 'buffer' cases respectively. We get a situation similar to Ref. 17, described by Eq. ( . We considered that the eddy current was given by 2/  rf I S fh R  , where the numerator corresponds to the electromotive force due to variations of hrf over time. The resistance of the loop of length P, is given by / ( )  , where  is the width of the loop, the spatial profile of which depends on the sample's geometry in a nontrivial manner. . With regard to the phaseshift ( ) in Eq. ( . The two solid lines in Fig.  . From Fig. , where  shows a non-linear dependence on several parameters, thus producing non-linear dependences of  (from Eq. ( The non-trivial influence of the inductive contributions to the complex impedance can clearly be seen for f-dependent measurements. that eddy currents increase when the rate of change of flux rises, may be altered by complex inductive contributions, which are known to increase for higher frequencies and thicker films. In agreement with this information, we observe in Fig. We will now consider finite-size effects. Once again using Fig. ). A 4x3 mm 2 array of square dots with lateral size of 100 μm was fabricated. Following patterning, two effects compete with one another. First, the number of eddy current loops increases, and simultaneously, the path of each loop is constrained. The fact that patterning reduced  to a value close to 0  (Fig. We further assessed the dependence of  on the sample's geometry in Fig. Considering the limit case when eddy currents extend over the full sample (inset in Fig. we obtained a linear dependence on / SP (Fig. The results also show that rotating the sample in the plane of the stripline had no impact on the data (Fig. Before concluding the paper, we will briefly comment on Hres and Hpp. The total Gilbert damping,  was calculated from the slope of f-dependent measurements ( In conclusion, the main contribution of this paper is that it represents systematic experimental evidence of a stacking-order-dependent sign-change of the microwave phase in nanometer-scale NiFe/Cu bilayers. The effect could be ascribed to eddy currents generated in the Cu layer in the sub-skin-depth regime by the time varying magnetic fields in the experiment. Distinct sets of experimental data were consistent with a simple quantitative analysis encompassing the main features of the phenomenon. These results contribute to our understanding of the impact of eddy currents below the microwave magnetic skin-depth and explain the contributions to lineshape asymmetry and phase lags reported in stripline experiments commonly used to characterize and engineer materials for spintronic applications. They support a rational explanation to the use of the 'phenomenological' parameter accounting for lineshape asymmetry when extracting the spectral resonance field and linewidth from FMR data-fitting. The results also provide a straightforward way to detect the contributions of eddy currents from NM-adjacent conductors, as a caveat for the need in some cases to take these contributions into account when attempting to accurately determine damping 