The relationship between magnetism and superconductivity has been one of the most discussed topics in iron-based superconductors. Using the first-principles calculations, we have studied the electronic structure of 1144-type iron-based superconductor EuRbFe4As4. We find the crystal field splitting of EuRbFe4As4 is unique, such that the d z 2 orbitals are closer to the Fermi level ǫF than the dxy orbitals. The RKKY interaction strength is estimated to be approximately 0.12 meV in prestine EuRbFe4As4. Upon Ni-doping on the Fe site, the RKKY interaction strength is barely changed upon Ni doping due to the highly anisotropic FSs and multiband effect, despite of the drastically reduced d zx(y) DOS at ǫF . Finally, in both pristine and doped compounds, the RKKY interaction is primarily mediated through bands due to Fe-d z 2 orbitals.Our calculations suggest the RKKY interaction mediated by d z 2 orbital is probably responsible for the magnetism in EuRbFe4As4 and doesn't change upon Ni-doping. Over the last decade, enormous efforts have been put on the iron-based superconductors (FeSCs) since the first discovery of superconductivity in F doped LaOFeAs in 2008 Recently a new type of FeSC structure AeAFe 4 As 4 (AeA-1144; Ae=Ca,Sr; A=K,Rb,Cs) has been successfully synthesized by A. Iyo et al. In this article, we present a systematic first-principles study of EuRbFe 4 As 4 compound. We compare EuRbFe 4 As 4 with the CaRbFe 4 As 4 as well as the traditional BaFe 2 As 2 compound. The band structure of EuRbFe 4 As 4 resembles that of CaRbFe 4 As 4 , and there are 10 bands crossing the Fermi level in both compounds. However, for EuRbFe 4 As 4 , the d z 2 -band, which is much lower than the Fermi level in other FeSCs, is now elevated close to ǫ F around Γ point, thus the undoped EuRbFe 4 As 4 system is very close to a Lifshitz-transition. As a result, the d z 2 -orbital is more relevant in the process of electrical transport and magnetism in the EuRbFe 4 As 4 compound. By decomposing the J RKKY into contributions from different Fermi surface sheets, we find this interaction is primarily mediated by the outmost hole pocket due to d z 2 orbital around the Γ point, suggesting that this orbital is important to the Eu-magnetism. Under nickel doping, the RKKY exchange interaction is little affected, despite of the drastically reduced density of state from d xz and d yz orbitals. This may serve as a possible explanation why the magnetic transition T F M is relatively constant while the superconductivity T sc is quickly suppressed by Ni-doping in this compound. The crystal structure of EuRbFe 4 As 4 is tetragonal P4/mmm with lattice parameters a=3.89 Å and c=13.31 Å as illustrated in Fig. The band structures of EuRbFe 4 As 4 (red line), CaRbFe 4 As 4 (black line) and folded BaFe 2 As 2 (blue line, Γ-X) in paramagnetic (PM) phase are shown in Fig. The density of state (DOS) of EuRbFe 4 As 4 in FM phase are illustrated in Fig. To analyze the crystal field effect in EuRbFe 4 As 4 , we have employed the maximally projected Wannier function method In Fig. In Table The Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) exchange interaction was reported to be inseparably related with the magnetic order in 122-type EuFe 2 (As,P) 2 for the conduction channel n, where In these expressions, n is the conduction band index, |nk is the n-th Bloch state of conduction electrons at k, |w α is the α-th local wannier state for the conduction electrons, ǫ nk and ǫ f are the eigen-energies of the conduction channel and local f states, g n (ǫ F ) is the density of states at the Fermi level of the n-th conduction channel, and |w f denotes the local wannier state of the felectrons. The averaged Kondo coupling JK is roughly -0.73 meV whose magnitude is slightly smaller than EuFe 2 As 2 (-1.01 meV) ]) It should be emphasized that the RKKY interaction in our calculation starts from the normal state. In superconducting state, the interplay between RKKY interaction and superconductivity is more complicated. It has been illustrated by N. Yao et al. that the antiferromagnetic contribution from indirect spin exchange will be enhanced due to the formation of Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) bound states, provided the binding energy of YSR state is close to the middle of superconducting gap ∆ In order to investigate the Ni-doping effects, we have also calculated EuRbFe 1-x Ni x As 4 with x=6.25%, 12.5% and 100% under the Virtual Crystal Approximation (VCA). The DOS of these system are illustrated in Fig. We have also calculated the imaginary part of bare electron susceptibility (nesting function) under different doping levels (Fig. To evaluate the influence of doping on the crystal field splitting and the RKKY interaction, we naively calculate the 100% Ni-doping situation. With all the irons substituted, the energy level of d xy orbital rises, substantially higher than d z 2 orbital and even nearly degenerate with d zx(y) orbitals (Fig. In conclusion, we have performed first principles calculation on a typical 1144-type iron pnictide EuRbFe 4 As 4 . We analyze the detailed electronic band structure, density of state and Fermi surface as well as the distinction of electronic properties between EuRbFe 4 As 4 , BaFe 2 As 2 and CaRbFe 4 As 4 . Through detailed analysis of the crystal splitting with tight-binding Hamiltonian, the energy levels of d z 2 and d xy are reversed in EuRbFe 4 As 4 which makes the d z 2 orbital more important in electrical and magnetic transport. In addition, an extra electron pocket around the Γ point is mainly from this orbital, which is close to a Lifshitz-transition. Upon Ni-doping, the DOS of d zx /d zy orbitals at Fermi level as well as the spin fluctuation at (π,0) will be substantially suppressed, and both effects are detrimental to superconductivity. Finally, the RKKY interaction between Eu-layers is little affected by Ni-doping, and is mostly mediated through the outmost hole FS pocket around the Γ point due to d z 2 orbital. The calculations were carried out based on density functional theory (DFT) with Quantum ESPRESSO (QE) We have employed the experimental crystal structure to perform all the calculations, since a full structural relaxation will yield a 5.1% shorter c and wrong As-heights. This problem was known in other FeSCs The DFT results were then fitted to a tight-binding (TB) model Hamiltonian with maximally projected Wannier function method 