Automated analyses of the outcome of a simulation have been an important part of atomistic modeling since the early days, addressing the need of linking the behavior of individual atoms and the collective properties that are usually the final quantity of interest. Methods such as clustering and dimensionality reduction have been used to provide a simplified, coarse-grained representation of the structure and dynamics of complex systems, from proteins to nanoparticles. In recent years, the rise of machine learning has led to an even more widespread use of these algorithms in atomistic modeling, and to consider different classification and inference techniques as part of a coherent toolbox of data-driven approaches. This perspective briefly reviews some of the unsupervised machine-learning methods -that are geared towards classification and coarse-graining of molecular simulations -seen in relation to the fundamental mathematical concepts that underlie all machine-learning techniques. It discusses the importance of using concise yet complete representations of atomic structures as the starting point of the analyses, and highlights the risk of introducing preconceived biases when using machine learning to rationalize and understand structure-property relations. Supervised machine-learning techniques, that explicitly attempt to predict the properties of a material given its structure, are less susceptible to such biases. Current developments in the field suggest that using these two classes of approaches side-by-side and in a fully integrated mode, while keeping in mind the relations between the data analysis framework and the fundamental physical principles, will be key for realizing the full potential of machine learning to help understanding the behavior of complex molecules and materials. Atomic-scale modelling of matter, including molecules, materials, and biological systems has progressed tremendously over the past decade, owing to the constant increase of available computational resources, the development of electronic-structure methods and empirical force fields with better accuracy-to-cost ratios, and the implementation of efficient, highly-parallel codes. A few recent landmark achievements include the use of dedicated hardware to obtain millisecond-long trajectories of biomolecules 1 , the discovery of exotic phases of matter by enumeration of locally stable polymorphs 2 , the compilation of high-throughput databases of hypothetical materials Over the past decade, a diverse array of methods that can be grouped under the loosely defined label of "machine learning" (ML) have been applied and adapted to atomistic simulations of materials and molecules. Given a set of structures {A i } (inputs) and, possibly, associated properties {y i } (labels), these algorithms aim to perform different classes of tasks in a way that relies as much as possible on the data, and minimizes human intervention a) Electronic mail: michele.ceriotti@epfl.ch and prior bias. One can roughly classify ML schemes into unsupervised learning algorithms which only make use of the input points, and try to identify the organizing principles that underlie the data set and supervised learning schemes which also use the labels and make predictions on the relations between inputs and some target properties. Unsupervised algorithms can be further subdivided into clustering methods, that identify inputs that are closely related to each other; dimensionality reduction schemes that reduce the dimension of the feature vectors that represent the inputs; generative models that seek to construct new structures A that are somehow compatible with {A i }, or that are optimal in terms of parameter space exploration. Supervised schemes include classifiers that seek to partition the inputs based on their labels; regressors that try to predict the value of the property y for a new input A; inverse design methods that try to generate new structures that exhibit a specified or optimal value of the property y. Many of these tasks have been an integral part of the atomic-scale modelling workflow since the early days, and it is rather clear that it is mainly the data-centric, inductive mindset -as well as a certain degree of hype -that sets recent ML schemes apart. Put simply, the idea behind all these ML schemes is that, confronted with a sufficient quantity of high-quality data, an algorithm might be better at identifying the essential features of the problem than humans -who are pretty good at looking for patterns and correlations, but who often fall prey to biases and logical fallacies Many books provide a primer in the field of machine learning The typical workflow for the application of a ML scheme to an atomic-scale system is summarized in Fig. Even though atomic coordinates provide a complete description of each structure or environment, they are hardly ever used as the input of a ML scheme. Instead, they are usually converted into an appropriate representation, which is more suitable for the task at hand. A first reason why an intermediate description of the system can be advantageous is that it makes it possible to incorporate obvious physical invariances (rigid translations and rotations, permutations of identical atoms) so that configurations that are identical are recognized as such. A second reason -that is particularly relevant for unsupervised-learning applications geared towards simplifying the description of complex systems -is that the choice of representation provides ample leeway to incorporate prior knowledge or to otherwise restrict the scope of the analysis. For instance, one may want to focus solely on the backbone of a protein, or on reactants in solution. Obviously, opting for a specialized description of a system introduces some biases in the procedure. However, in many cases these restrictions are either straightforward, necessary to make the analysis meaningful, or originate from technical limitations of the input data. It is worth stressing that the representation of a struc-ture can take the form of a vector of features |X (e.g. all the backbone dihedrals in a protein, the coordination number of atoms in a cluster, etc.), a measure of similarity between pairs of structures that can be implemented as a distance d(X , X ), or the form of a kernel k(X , X ). In fact, these three ways of representing a data set can be used interchangeably (Fig. For each pair of inputs In other terms Eq. (1) reproduces exactly the value of the kernel for each structure in the reference set, and provides a practical approximation of the vector |X associated with the kernel for any other structure. While this construction is not always practical (e.g. because it is not possible to truncate the expansion to a small number of eigenvectors) Eqn. (1) embodies the core idea behind the kernel trick: the (generally non-linear) kernel provides, together with a set of representative points {X k }, a linear basis to describe new structures in terms of their relation to those chosen as reference. Once atomic configurations have been converted to a suitable representation, they can be fed to an appropriate machine-learning algorithm (Fig. Both supervised and unsupervised algorithms can generally be tuned by adjusting several so-called hyperparameters θ, in addition to those that enter the definition of the input representation. Optimization of these hyperparameters is often a separate task from that of training the machine-learning scheme on a given input set. In the context of unsupervised learning it is often performed manually, by trial and error, and constitutes one of the critical points to consider to keep the procedure truly unbiased. The problem of obtaining a complete yet concise description of a molecular or condensed-phase structure is central to many modelling techniques, including the sampling of rare events A first distinction between general-purpose representation schemes can be made separating between those that aim to describe a structure in its entirety, and those that instead focus on the description of fragments or local environments. Global representations and metrics include those based on matrices of interatomic distances Another central consideration that one has to make when comparing representation involves whether and how they incorporate some of the fundamental physical symmetries: permutation of identical atoms, rigid translations and rotations (Fig. When comparing existing representations from the point of view of symmetries, one can recognize another binary divide between different approaches. One class of representations starts from a description of structures or environments in terms of internal coordinates (typi-cally pair distances), that are naturally invariant to rotations and translations. Permutation symmetry is then included, either by summing over all possible permutations as in the case of permutation-invariant polynomials While the cost and effectiveness of different representations may vary, one can demonstrate that most of these schemes can be seen as a specific implementation of a very abstract density-based scheme, in which a ket |A is associated to each configuration where g(r) is a function peaked at atomic positions (e.g. a Gaussian) and |α i is a vector that describes the chemical nature of each atom. Symmetries can be incorporated in this framework by averaging tensor products of |A over the continuous translation and rotation groups, thereby obtaining symmetrized vectors that correspond to different n-body correlation functions between the atoms in each environment Clustering algorithms aim to recognize groups of input points that are related to each other, and different from other groups of inputs. For instance, clusters could represent different classes of molecules, or configurations of a given system that are separated by a sparsely-populated, or seldom accessed region (see Fig. The connection between density peaks and minima in the free energy makes density-based clustering methods (Fig. An alternative approach to identify clusters relies on making assumptions on the form of the underlying distribution, e.g. taking P (x) = i p(i)p (x|i), where p(i) corresponds to the fraction of probability associated with the i-th cluster, and p (x|i) is the distribution of values of x that is assumed for members of the cluster. Gaussian-mixture models (GMM) take the cluster probability distribution p (x|i) to be a multi-dimensional Gaussian (Fig. One of the simplest clustering methods, k-means clustering DBSCAN combines ideas from density-based clustering and hierarchical clustering methods, a family of algorithms that rely heavily on growing existing clusters starting from a core of closely-connected points. Agglomerative clustering In closing this brief overview, it should be stressed that all of these techniques depend crucially on the choice of the feature space, and/or the metric that is used to estimate the similarity between inputs. Non-linear transformations of the input space, or of the measure of similarity, introduce distortions that can easily split, merge, create and destroy local maxima in the probability distribution associated with the input set. As we will discuss below, the risk of introducing spurious features can be mitigated by using general-purpose, relatively simple functions of the atomic coordinates as the input representation, and by checking that clustering is insensitive to the choice feature space, kernel or metric. Clustering algorithms have been applied since the early days of molecular simulations to recognize (meta)stable configurations of complex molecules and biomolecules Clustering of structurally-related configurations is not only useful to obtain dynamic coarse-grained models. Automated structure searches The use of local, atom/fragment-based representations is also convenient to find recurring patterns in the building blocks of a structure, rather than in the overall configuration. This kind of analysis has a long-standing tradition in the context of (bio)macromolecules, e.g. to detect and classify binding pockets in proteins Clustering techniques identify agglomeration of data in the most significant regions of feature space, but do not offer an overall picture of the relations between different structures. Such relations can be determined, and represented, as edges connecting clusters that are structurally or kinetically adjacent to each other. In principle, the information on the absolute position of each input in space, and the relations between any given pair of inputs, are encoded fully in the feature vectors. It is however hard if not impossible to comprehend -not to mention visualize -the meaning or the relative positions of vectors in a high (or infinite) dimensional space. This is a problem that obviously transcends the specific application to chemistry, physics or materials science, and dimensionality-reduction methods have long been sought after for all sorts of data analysis applications. Principal component analysis (PCA) is probably the simplest of all dimensionality-reduction schemes, and can be taken as a paradigmatic example to summarize some of the fundamental ideas that underpin other dimension-ality reduction approaches. Given a set of D-dimensional input vectors x i associated with N structures or local environments, PCA identifies the d linear combinations of the feature components that capture the largest possible fraction of the variability of the dataset (Fig. PCA lends itself to alternative formulations, making it possible to link it to several classes of non-linear dimensionality reduction techniques. It can be seen as a problem of matrix approximation: the matrix of the scalar products between principal component vectors s i • s i is the best rank-d approximation of the Gram matrix of input feature vectors G ii = x i • x i (Fig. If one relaxes the assumption that s i is a linear projection of x i , the problem can be cast as a optimization of a loss function This corresponds to the simplest form of multidimensional scaling (MDS) F and f can be tuned to disregard short-range thermal fluctuations (which tend to be full-dimensional, if the feature space is non-degenerate) and focus the optimization of the loss on the intermediate range of distances that are usually the most relevant to describe the transitions between meta-stable states and then by imposing self-consistently that each point in low dimension should be a combination of its neighbors using the same weights (Fig. A last class of dimensionality reduction schemes deserves a separate mention. All of the methods discussed this far rely exclusively on the distribution of atoms in each structure. It is often the case, however, that the most relevant degrees of freedom for a system are those in which the dynamics are slower. For this reason, methods such as diffusion maps 9,77-79 try to link geometric data to the characteristic time scale of the system's motion. Diffusion maps essentially correspond to a kernel PCA, but the construction of the kernel and the interpretation of the principal components attempt to draw a link with the slowest eigenmodes of the Fokker-Planck equation for the diffusion of the system in feature space. The time-lagged independent component analysis method (TICA) The applications of dimensionality reduction schemes to atomistic simulations reflect the dual function of a coarse-grained representation, as a mean to simplify the description of a system to understand it better, and to explore more effectively its conformational space. On one hand, if you need to explain the behavior of a complex system, a picture is worth a thousand words, and paper tends to be two-dimensional -although it would be entertaining if scientific publishers would offer, for a fee, a pop-up book option for truly complicated graphics. On the other hand, dimensionality reduction lies at the heart of the vast majority of accelerated sampling methods, which try to beat the time scale problem of molecular simulations -that is, the enormous gap between the time scale of atomic vibrations and that of any interesting structural or phase transition. The former application has become particularly popular with the rise of high-throughput simulations and the construction of large databases of structures and materials The typical selling point of most applications of unsupervised learning to materials, molecules and in general atomistic modelling is that a "data-driven" identification of regular patterns in simulation data is more robust, and less prone to preconceived biases, than a manual analysis carried out by a human. I myself have often used this narrative, and written titles and abstracts including words such as "agnostic", "unbiased" and "automatic". In all honesty, most of the time the analyses did require a significant amount of human intervention, first in the design of the details of the classification/dimensionality reduction algorithm, and later in the choice of the hyperparameters that define the structural representation and tune the functioning of the machine learning scheme. The core issues are that: (1) the most straightforward unsupervised learning schemes detect correlations between data points in feature space, and so depend crucially on what representation is used, as well as on how the pattern recognition scheme defines proximity and correlations; (2) when working with actual data rather than synthetic data there is no "ground truth" in terms of what partitioning of the data, or low-dimensional representation, is performing best. It is then tempting to pick one own's arbitrary perception of what an "insightful" outcome of the analysis would be, and tune the representation and machine-learning scheme until the results reflect most clearly one's expectations. This is not to say that unsupervised learning techniques cannot offer genuine insight: in Ref. 84 we began our by looking for regularity in the stacking of pentacene molecules in different stable polymorphs. When considering the nitrogen-substituted analogues of pentacene, however, we found that the most clear-cut clustering was associated with in-plane H-bonding rather than with the stacking. As is the case for any scientific endeavor, approaching a problem with an open mind and a healthy dose of skepticism can help in obtaining a deeper, nonobvious understanding. In particular, one should be wary of using a data representation that is excessively finetuned to the problem at hand. General-purpose and systematically-convergent descriptions of chemical environments, such as those that are typically used to fit potentials or predict molecular properties In my opinion, the best way to address the problem of judging objectively how well a given structural representation reflects the structure-property relations for a certain problem involves checking how well that representation performs in a supervised learning task aimed at predicting that property. In the field of biomolecular simulations, the order parameters obtained by trial-an-error, or by unsupervised learning, are often benchmarked in terms of how well they perform to drive an accelerated sampling algorithm, or on how well they perform in terms of an analysis of the committor More generally, checking how accurately one can machine-learn the property of interest (cohesive energy, response properties, conductivity, . . . ) based on the structural representation that is used as the input for an unsupervised learning scheme can be a very informative exercise. For starters, it gives an idea of the limiting accuracy that can be expected when inferring structureproperty relations by application of unsupervised classification or coarse-graining schemes. In combination with an analysis of the learning curves 103 (the accuracy of the model when making a prediction, as a function of the size of the training set) it is possible to understand whether the problem is data-limited, or if the representation does not contain enough information to reflect the correlations between structure and properties. A critical assessment of the model performance as a function of the hyperparameters makes it possible to gauge the range of interactions 104 , or the locality of the physical phenomena underlying structure-property relations 105,106 for that system. The accuracy of the regression model also provides an objective metric to optimize the hyperparameters that define the representation 107 , and even to determine the most effective non-linear function of features that reproduces the target properties 108 . Choosing to describe the inputs using a feature vector that is not problem specific, and validating and optimizing it through a relevant supervised learning exercise, reduces substantially the amount of human intervention and the possibility of introducing preconceived biases when applying clustering and dimensionality reduction schemes. To an extent, combining supervised and unsupervised learning can be mutually beneficial. Clustering can be used to select the most relevant reference configurations from a database 109 , or to partition it into regions on which specialized models can be trained. 110 A low-dimensional representation of a dataset can help when it comes to identifying problematic regions, and understanding how a given representation "sees" a set of structures There is little doubt that the use of machine-learning techniques in atomistic modelling will outlive the hype, as the complexity of simulations is increasing for materials, chemical and biomolecular applications. Statistical learning will contribute to the increase of complexity by making it possible to side-step time-consuming electronic structure calculations, and obtain accurate interatomic potentials that can be evaluated on large systems, and for long trajectories. At the same time, automated data analyses will be necessary to make sense of the outputs of longer, larger and more complicated simulations, and single out regularities and correlations that might be far from obvious. The convergence between different classes of machine-learning algorithms is one of the most promising directions to achieve genuine progress in the field. Unsupervised schemes can help shed light on the functioning of supervised algorithms that are often opaque, and supervised schemes can help to formulate quantitative metrics to assess the performance of unsupervised learning.