We perform an ab initio modeling of amorphous copper-doped alumina (a-Al2O3:Cu), a prospective memory material based on resistance switching, and study the structural origin of electronic conduction in this material. We generate molecular dynamics based models of a-Al2O3:Cu at various Cu-concentrations and study the structural, electronic and vibrational properties as a function of Cu-concentration. Cu atoms show a strong tendency to cluster in the alumina host, and metallize the system by filling the band gap uniformly for higher Cu-concentrations. We also study thermal fluctuations of the HOMO-LUMO energy splitting and observe the time evolution of the size of the band gap, which can be expected to have an important impact on the conductivity. We perform a numerical computation of conduction pathways, and show its explicit dependence on Cu connectivity in the host. We present an analysis of ion dynamics and structural aspects of localization of classical normal modes in our models. Non-volatile memory devices based on resistive switching characteristics have been studied since the late 1960s In this paper, we use ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) to generate atomic models of a-Al 2 O 3 :Cu and investigate the microscopic origin of elctronic conduction in this material. The work presented in this paper shows that an increase in local Cu-concentration can result in stable conducting pathways due to the strong tendency of Cu atoms to cluster in the ionic host. This would lead to a highly stable low resistance state (LRS) for high copper concentration, which does indeed seem to be the case for copper-alumina devices The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II describes computational details used to create the structures and also the details of our method to obtain the SPC. Section III includes results where we discuss structural, electronic and vibrational properties of the models in different subsections. Section IV provides the conclusions. In this work, we use AIMD to generate four atomic models with the composition of (a-Al 2 O 3 ) 1-n Cu n with n = 0, 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3. We used a density of 3.175 g/cm 3 for a-Al 2 O 3 We performed a melt-quench simulation In the above equation ( Then suppressing the explicit dependence of σ on k and ω, the conductivity can be expressed as: (2) a form that reminds of the the current-current correlation function origins of Kubo's approach. If we define complex valued functions ξ α ij (x) = ψ * i (x)p α ψ j (x) on a real space grid (call them x) with uniform spacing of width h in three dimensions, then we can approximate the integrals as a sum on the grid. Thus, Eq. ( In the preceding, the approximation becomes exact as h → 0. If we define a Hermitian, positive-semidefinite matrix: we can spatially decompose the conductivity at each grid point as ζ(x) =| x Γ(x, x ) |. ζ(x) contains vital information about the conduction-active parts of the system To implement the method, we used VASP and associated Kohn-Sham orbitals ψ i,k . We divided the supercell into 36×36×36 (dimΓ = 46656) grid points and obtained the wavefunction at each point by using the convenient code of R. M. Feenstra and M. Widom As a test of validity of our models, we compute the total radial distribution function, g(r), on a-Al 2 O 3 models and compare with experimentally measured neutron scattering g(r) from , where the a ni 's are the contribution to eigenfunction ψ n from the i th atomic projected orbital obtained from VASP. Fig. By projecting the electronic states onto atomic sites, we observe that the states near the Fermi level for the doped models consist of Cu-orbitals. An example of the site projected EDOS, for 20% Cu, is plotted in Fig. The formation of Cu-cluster in a-Al 2 O 3 matrix leaves the Cu atoms in different charge states depending on the local environment of these Cu atoms with O and/or Al atoms. We performed Bader charge analysis In this section, we discuss relatively dramatic thermally-induced fluctuations in the HOMO-LUMO splitting and consider the electronic conduction mechanisms where D f is a matrix element of ∇ α between Kohn-Sham states near the Fermi level and N ( f ) is the density of states. So, for dc conduction to occur, there needs to be finite density of states at the Fermi level (to enable electronic transitions, as from Fermi's Golden Rule) and non-vanishing matrix elements | D f | 2 as in Eq. ( It is therefore interesting to visualize the conductionactive parts of the network for these different states. We selected two snapshots (shown by orange arrows in Fig. We investigated SPC by computing ζ(x) as described in section II B in our models. SPC values are evaluated at coarse 3D grid points inside the supercells. A graphical representation of SPC values in 3D grid points overlaid with the atomic configuration is shown in Fig. As a representative example, the 20% model was annealed at different temperatures 800 K and 1000 K for 15 ps, and the resulting ion dynamics were studied by calculating the mean-squared displacement for each atomic species as: where N α represents the number of atoms of species α, r i (t) represents the position of atom i at time t, and the represents an average on the time steps and/or the particles. The connection between mean-squared displacement and the self-diffusion coefficient is given by Einstein's relation r 2 (t) = A + 6Dt We study the lattice dynamics of these Cu-doped systems by the means of vibrational density of states (VDOS), species projected VDOS and the vibrational IPR. The properties are studied within the harmonic approximation using the first principles method. The dynamical matrix is obtained by displacing each atoms by 0.015 Å along ±x, ±y and ±z directions. The diagonalization of the dynamical matrix yields eigenfrequencies and the corresponding eigenmodes. The normalized VDOS and the partial VDOS are expressed as where ω n are the normalized eigenfrequencies (3N in total). Here, the sum over i is over all the atoms belonging to the species α and e n i corresponds to the displacement vector of atom i with Cartesian components e n iμ where μ = x, y and z. We approximate the δ function by a Gaussian distribution function of width 10 cm -1 . Among the 3N eigenmodes, we neglect the first three translational modes with frequency very close to zero. Figure In this paper, we studied realistic models of a-Al 2 O 3 :Cu, and showed that the Cu atoms have a strong propensity to cluster in the ionic a-Al 2 O 3 host. We observed a continuous filling of the optical gap by Cu levels, especially at 20% and 30% models. As the Cu-concentration increases (and Cu-Cu connectivity increases), the Cu levels band to enable metallic conduction. We observed the opening and closing of the HOMO-LUMO gap at an elevated temperature, and projected electronic conductivity into real space and visualized the conduction-active parts of the network. We showed that the connectivity of Cu atoms play a significant role in the electronic conduction. We studied the diffusion of Cu atoms in a-Al 2 O 3 at different temperatures and observed that the Cu atoms do not diffuse easily into the a-Al 2 O 3 in contrast with relatively covalent chalcogenides like GeSe 3 The results presented in this work on a-Al 2 O 3 :Cu show an interesting contrast with similar study performed on GeSe 3 :Ag V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS A simpler scheme is to just look at the structure of the Kohn-Sham eigenfunctions near the Fermi level to identify the conduction active parts of the network. While this is a sensible first approximation, it entirely neglects the current-current correlations that underlie the derivation of The Kubo formula from linear response theory. Here and elsewhere in this paper, electronic time evolution refers only to variation in Kohn-Sham eigenvalues/states on the Born-Oppenheimer surface -no attempt is made to solve a timedependent Kohn-Sham equation fluctuation in the value of the HOMO-LUMO gap with time.