We theoretically study magnetoelectric effects in a heterostructure of a generic band insulator and a ferromagnet. In contrast to the kinetic magnetoelectric effect in metals, referred to as the Edelstein effect or the inverse spin galvanic effect, our mechanism relies on virtual interband transitions between the valence and conduction bands and therefore immune to disorder or impurity scattering. By calculating electric field-induced magnetization by the linear response theory, we reveal that the magnetoelectric effect shows up without specific parameter choices. The magnetoelectric effect qualitatively varies by changing the direction of the magnetic moment in the ferromagnet: the response is diagonal for the out-of-plane moment, whereas it is off-diagonal for the inplane moment. We also find out that in optical frequencies, the magnetoelectric signal can be drastically enhanced via interband resonant excitations. Finally, we estimate the magnitude of the magnetoelectric effect for a hybrid halide perovskite semiconductor as an example of the band insulator and compare it with other magnetoelectric materials. We underscore that our mechanism is quite general and widely expectable, only requiring the Rashba spin-orbit coupling and exchange coupling. Our result could potentially offer a promising method of Joule heating-free electric manipulation of magnetic moments in spintronic devices. Electric generation and control of spin degrees of freedom has been a central issue in the field of spintronics. For over the decades, a number of researches have been dedicated to manipulation of ferromagnetic moments or domain walls by an electric current in semiconductors and metals towards realization of magnetic memory without need of a magnetic field As mentioned, the Edelstein effect, or sometimes called the inverse spin galvanic effect, refers to nonequilibrium spin accumulation by a current flow in noncentrosymmetric metals Meanwhile, from the quantum-mechanical perspective, the semiclassical picture in the Edelstein effect falls short of the thorough description of the electric field-induced magnetization, because it takes into account only the intraband contributions and omit the interband contributions coming from virtual interband transitions. Specifically, when time-reversal symmetry (TRS) is broken in the system, e.g., in proximity to a ferromagnet, the linear response theory indicates that the electric fieldinduced magnetization includes the intrinsic contributions stemming from the interband virtual transition processes These quantum-mechanical descriptions naturally offer a chance that electric field-induced magnetization could be available even in band insulators by relying on the intrinsic contributions. This current-free magnetoelectric effect in band insulators is distinguished from the kinetic magnetoelectric effects involving flow of an electric cur-rent, e.g., the Edelstein effect. The manifestation of the magnetoelectric effect is restricted by symmetry. Symmetry arguments dictate that the linear magnetoelectric effect, which is the magnetoelectric response linear to an external electric field, requires breaking of both spaceinversion symmetry and TRS In this work, we theoretically investigate the magnetoelectric effect in a heterostructure composed of a generic band insulator and a ferromagnet. Our model of twodimensional band insulators includes the Rashba spinorbit coupling stemming from breaking of the mirror symmetry due to the heterostructure as well as the exchange coupling between electrons in the band insulator and the ferromagnetic moment, which fulfills the symmetrical requirements for the linear magnetoelectric effect. By calculating the magnetoelectric tensor via the linear response theory, we find that the magnetoelectric effect is generally manifested in a broad range of the parameters in accordance with the inherent symmetry. We also reveal that the direction of the electric field-induced magnetization depends on the orientation of the magnetic moment in the ferromagnet, which is also explained by the symmety arguments. Furthermore, we show that the magnetoelectric effect can be resonantly amplified in optical regions. Finally, we estimate the magnitude of the magnetoelectric effect for a noncentrosymmetric hybrid halide perovskite (HHP) semiconductor CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 in a heterostructure with a ferromagnet and compare it with some known magnetoelectric materials. The rest of the paper is orgnaized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the models describing the heterostructures with a ferromagnet for a generic band insulator and a HHP semiconductor. We also represent the Kubo formula for the magnetoelectric coefficient. In Sec. III, we study the magnetoelectric effect in the generic band insulator. In Sec. III A, we study the case where the magnetic moment points along the out-of-plane direction, whereas in Sec. III B, we study the case with the moment canted away. We discuss these results in terms of symmetry in Sec. III C. Then we investigate the optical magnetoelectric effect for the out-of-plane magnetic moment in Sec. III D. In Sec. IV, we focus on a specific example of the magnetoelectric effect discussed in Sec. III, bringing up a HHP semicoductor. We estimate the magnitude of the magnetoelectric effect expected in the HHP semicoductor in Sec. IV A and compare it with other known magnetoelectric effects in Sec. IV B. Finally, Sec. V is devoted to a summary of our results. To capture the essential features of the magnetoelectric effect in band insulators, we construct a tight-binding model on a square lattice describing a heterostructure of a two-dimensional band insulator and a ferromagnet, where the Rashba spin-orbit coupling arises due to breaking of the mirror symmetry with respect to the interface. Here we set the z axis to the out-of-plane direction, while the x and y axes within the plane (see Fig. in the basis of {|1 ↑ , |1 ↓ , |2 ↑ , |2 ↓ }, where 1 and 2 denote the two orbitals, and ↑ and ↓ denote the spins. The intra and interorbital matrix components H ρ (k) (ρ = 1 and 2) and H 12 (k) are 2 × 2 matrices spanned in spin space, which are given by respectively. We set the lattice constant a to be unity (a = 1). Here σ i (i = x, y, and z) is the Pauli matrix, and I is the identity matrix. t ρ and t 12 are the intra and interorbital transfer integrals, respectively; λ ρ and λ 12 are the effective intra and interorbital transfer integrals arising from the Rashba spin-orbit coupling, respectively. ǫ 12 is the energy splitting between the orbitals 1 and 2 (ǫ 12 > 0); η(ρ) is defined as η(1) = -1 and η(2) = 1. We define the magnetic moment of the ferromagnet as M, whose length is normalized as |M| = 1. We assume M within the zx plane, parametrized as M = (M x , 0, M z ). J ex denotes the exchange coupling between M and the spins of the electrons in the band insulator. The detailed derivation of the model in Eq. ( In the following calculations, we set t 1 = 1, t 2 = -1, and λ 1 = 0.3. To estimate the magnitude of the magnetoelectric effect in a real material, we also perform the calculations on a noncentrosymmetric HHP semiconductor CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 as the band insulator in the heterostructure. This material is known to host a large Rashba spin-orbit coupling even in the bulk form, due to the ferroelectricity combined with the strong atomic spin-orbit coupling 2 ) hold. As we are interested in two-dimensional systems, our model assumes a (001)-oriented monolayer of CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 . The matrix components in Eq. ( where k = ( kx , ky ) is the momentum measured from the M point, represented as ki = k i -π/a. Here t σ ss , t σ pp , and t π pp represent the transfer integrals for the σ-type hopping between the s orbitals and σ-and π-type hoppings between the p orbitals; t σ sp is the interorbital transfer integral, and γ z sp and γ z pp are the transfer integrals activated by the mirror-symmetry breaking. ǫ 0 represents the energy of the J = 1 2 states measured from that of the S = 1 2 states. Following Ref. To calculate the response coefficient of the magnetoelectric effect, we employ the Kubo formula for the magnetoelectric tensor. In the linear response regime, the magnetoelectric tensor α ij is defined as where m i and E j denote the i component of the induced magnetization and j component of the external electric field. The magnetoelectric tensor α ij is obtained by using the Kubo formula as where μ B is the Bohr magneton (g-factor is set as g = 2), and K ij is given by Here ǫ nk and |u nk are the eigenenergy and eigenstate of H(k) with the band index n. e denotes the elementary charge, and V = (La) 2 is the volume (L: the linear dimension of the system, a: the lattice constant). where μ and T represent the chemical potential and temperature, respectively (k B : the Boltzmann constant). The velocity operator v i is defined as v i = ∂H(k)/∂k i . We note that since we treat band insulators, intraband contributions vanish in the summation of the band indices in Eq. ( The spin operator Σ i in Eq. ( in the same basis as in Eq. ( in the same basis as in Eq. ( A. Case with out-of-plane magnetic moment In this section, we discuss the magnetoelectric effect when the magnetic moment M points along the z axis [M = (0, 0, 1)]. We set the model parameters as λ 2 = 0.3, t 12 = -0.2, λ 12 = 0.2, and ǫ 12 = 8 in Eqs. ( Meanwhile, the observed magnetoelectric effect can also be viewed from a topological perspective. In analogy to the Thouless-Kohmoto-Nightingale-den Nijs (TKNN) formula for the Hall conductance Here Ωij nk , termed the mixed Berry curvature Hence, the formalism in Eq. ( Hitherto, we have focused on a particular set of the model parameters, but as we describe in the following, the magnetoelectric effect generally manifests itself in a broad range of the parameters. In Fig. The enhancement of K xx can be readily attributed to the decrease in the energy difference in the denominator in Eq. We also study the dependence of the magnetoelectric effect on the interband parameters t 12 and λ 12 . We note that the decrease in |t 12 | leads to enhancement of K xx , which can be attributed to shrinkage of the band gap. In Appendix B, we also discuss λ 2 dependence and find out that the magnetoelectric effect appears for general values of λ 2 , other than the case with λ 2 = -λ 1 characterized with particle-hole symmetry. Thus, the magnetoelectric effect generally appears without specific tuning of the parameters in the presence of the Rashba spin-orbit coupling and the exchange coupling, and the signal is roughly proportional to both coupling strengths. In this section, we discuss how the magnetoelectric effect in the band insulator evolves as the M direction changes in the ferromagnet. We consider a situation where M rotates in the zx plane with J ex = 0.1. Here we parametrize the M direction with the angle θ, which is defined as M = (M x , 0, M z ) = (cos θ, 0, sin θ). The other model parameters are identical to those in Fig. In this section, we qualitatively discuss the dependence on the M direction in terms of symmetry. In general, the form of the magnetoelectric tensor is restricted by symmetry inherent in the system. As often discussed in the context of multiferroics, the tensor form is decided by symmetry considerations on the electromagnetic free energy that is expanded with respect to the electric field E and the magnetic field H where α ij denotes the magnetoelectric tensor in Eq. ( In the following, we specify the form of α ij based on the symmetry inherent in the heterostructure. We denote the time-reversal operation as T , the mirror operation about the plane normal to the ξ axis as M ξ (ξ = x and y), and the 2π/p rotation about the z axis as C p (p: integer). As a common feature to all θ, the system retains the combined symmetry M y T , because M lies in the zx plane. Under the symmetry operation M y T , the electromagnetic fields are transformed as since E is a polar vector, whereas H is an axial vector. As the free energy is unchanged under the symmetry operation, the transformations lead to α xy = α yx = α zy = α yz = 0. This is consistent with the numerical calculations shown in Fig. We further dig into two specific cases of the M direction. When M points along the z axis (θ = π/2), the heterostructure is characterized with two additional symmetries M x T and C 4 . By considering the transformations similar to Eq. ( In this section, we study the optical magnetoelectric responses in the generic band insulator model in Eq. ( FIG. A. Estimations for out-of-plane magnetic moment In the previous sections, we have discussed the magnetoelectric effect on the generic model in Eq. In this section, we compare the results in Sec. IV A with several other kinds of the magnetoelectric effect. As we introduced in Sec. I, the large magnetoelectric effect has been predicted in quantum anomalous Hall insulators The large difference can be grasped in terms of the mixed Berry curvature, which was introduced in Sec. III A. As implicated from the Berry-curvature formalism of the magnetoelectric coefficient in Eq. ( Although our result is small as compared to the quantum anomalous Hall systems, it should be worth noting that the band gap of the HHP semiconductor (∼ 1.7 eV) is more than ten times larger than those in the quantum anomalous Hall systems (tens or hundreds meV) For reference, we also compare our result with the kinetic magnetoelectric effect in metals. In terms of the magnetoelectric coefficient, the magnitude of the Edelstein effect in typical two-dimensional Rashba metals is the order of 10 -13 -10 -12 m•S (see Ref. Finally, it is also insightful to compare our results with the linear magnetoelectric effect in multiferroic materials. Cr 2 O 3 is one of the oldest examples of the multiferroic materials In this work, we have theoretically demonstrated the magnetoelectric effect arising in heterostructures of a generic band insulator and a ferromagnet. The observed magnetoelectric effect solely relies on the interband contributions between the valence and conduction bands, and hence, it is dissipationless, in contrast to the Edelstein effect in metals. By carefully studying the parameter dependences, we revealed that our scenario applies to generic situations: the only ingredients are the Rashba spin-orbit coupling inherent in the heterostructure and the exchange coupling from the proximity to the ferromagnet. We also showed that the magnetoelectric signal is drastically enhanced around the resonant frequency corresponding to the band gap. Bringing up a HHP semiconductor as a candidate material, we uncovered a considerable magnitude of the magnetoelectric effect. Since the magnetoelectric mechanism in our results is quite general and readily expected in a wide range of band insulators in a heterostructure with a ferromagnet, our results could potentially offer a promising method for dissipationless electric generation and control of magnetization. Meanwhile, the exchange-coupling term in the tightbinding Hamiltonian is given by (A.12) Thus, via the Fourier transformation on the sum of Eqs. (A.2) and (A.12), we arrive at the momentum-space Hamiltonian shown in Eq. ( 