Strain has a strong effect on the properties of materials and the performance of electronic devices. Their ever shrinking size translates into a constant demand for accurate and precise measurement methods with very high spatial resolution. In this regard, transmission electron microscopes are key instruments thanks to their ability to map strain with sub-nanometer resolution. Here we present a novel method to measure strain at the nanometer scale based on the diffraction of electron Bessel beams. We demonstrate that our method offers a strain sensitivity better than 2.5• 10 -4 and an accuracy of 1.5•10 -3 , competing with, or outperforming, the best existing methods with a simple and easy to use experimental setup. Strain in materials is of extreme importance in a wide variety of technological applications and particularly in nanoelectronics where, besides impacting the devices' lifetime and performance, it is used deliberately for engineering the electronic transport properties When engineering nanomaterials, characterising nanostructures or current generation nanoelectronic devices, spatial resolution becomes paramount. Techniques such as X-Ray diffraction or μ-Raman spectroscopy are quite easily accessible methods and offer very good strain sensitivity (respectively, σ = 1×10 -53 and σ = 1×10 -44 ) but a spatial resolution too low to investigate strain within a single device Here we propose a new diffraction-based strain measurement protocol which can be applied on unmodified transmission electron microscopes by just replacing an aperture of the illumination system. It offers a simplified setup and performances approaching those of N-PED and clearly outperforming NBED, while providing excellent spatial resolution. A fundamental problem with electron diffraction experiments is dynamical scattering. Due to the very strong interaction between the electron beam and the sample, the electrons are scattered many times within the specimen leading to several unwanted effects, from nonlinearities in the intensity of the diffracted beams, to a non-homogeneous shape of the diffracted discs, complicating significantly the extraction of structural information By entering the sample under a shallow angle (below 2 degrees, but below 0.5 degrees for strain applications) with respect to one of the main crystallographic directions, the electrons are scattered more weakly and therefore multiple scattering becomes less common. While keeping the angle of incidence constant, the direction of incidence is varied azimuthally so that the pattern is averaged over the different configurations. This leads to quasi-kinematical diffraction patterns which are less sensitive to local sample variation (thickness, bending...) and are thus easier to interpret Our proposal is inspired by precession, but rather than using different incidence directions in a sequential fashion, we realise a hollow-cone illumination where the rays from the different directions are present simultaneously. This creates a different type of diffraction pattern where each spot is replaced by a ring which, for typical precession angles, overlap creating a more complex diffraction pattern (see figure The core idea behind this work was to implement a "parallel precession" experiment, which would have had a wide number of experimental advantages. To understand how our proposed setup is equivalent to precession, one can think of the ring diffraction pattern as a convergent beam diffraction pattern where one has removed the central part of the diffracted disks, as in figure The intensities of these points are identical to the intensities of the beams in a parallel-beam diffraction pattern with the same tilted direction of incidence Similar diffraction patterns have also been realised before with a PED system by not "untilting" the beam in the projection system While the resulting pattern is quite rich in details, it's worth remembering that strain measurement is a relatively simple problem. From all the wealth of details contained in this pattern we seek only to measure the three in-plane strain components: the two normal strain components xx and yy and the shear strain xy , which are linked to the spacing between the Bragg reflections. To this purpose we based our analysis on the autocorrelation function. For a two-dimensional signal f (q ⊥ ) its autocorrelation function A f (q ⊥ ) is: or, using the Wiener-Kinchin theorem: The autocorrelation function is essentially a measure of self-similarity, that is of similarity between different parts of the same signal (here, a diffraction pattern). For a signal containing a certain periodicity the autocorrelation function will display peaks corresponding to that same period, as shown in figure diffracted ring overlaps with the (0,0,0) ring of the original pattern. This superposition and integration of the ring intensities, in our approach, has a role riminiscent of the de-rocking procedure in conventional precession, averaging over the different parts of the rocking curve. It is also worth noting that in every circumstance the autocorrelation function is always centered (i.e. the overlap between two copies of the pattern is highest with no shift) and is centrosymmetric (as shown in equation 1), which simplifies its analysis. The peaks appear to be small and sitting over a large background, which is due to the fact that even when the rings of the copies of the pattern are not perfectly aligned, the overlap is still significant. To remove its effect we normalise the contrast radially by fitting the background's strength to a polynomial, then locate the peaks and fit their shape to a high-order polynomial surface, from which the peak's position is extracted with sub-pixel precision. Once these positions have been extracted, the problem is reduced to finding the affine transform that best overlaps them with those from a chosen reference. This is done by minimising: where q i = (q i x ,q i y ) are the detected peak positions in the diffraction patterns, and q i = (q i x ,q i y ) are the ones for the reference pattern. This allows to immediately obtain the strain com-ponents: Obviously the reference pattern also contains noise and any error in its analysis impacts the performance of the technique, since the fitting would determine the transformation necessary to adapt each diffraction pattern to an inaccurate reference. To reduce this effect we have averaged the positions extracted from several patterns, recorded in a region which is supposed free of strain. The resulting code is freely available under a GPLv3 Licence When applied to the simulated diffraction patterns, we get the results shown in figure We can see immediately that the input strain is recovered with good accuracy (∆ < 2×10 -3 ) and precision (σ = 4.6×10 -4 ), though the value is slightly too low. The performance in the simulations appears between those of NBED (σ = 11×10 -4 ) and N-PED (σ = 2×10 -4 ) 12 . We implemented this idea experimentally by fabricating an annular aperture, which, placed in the illumination system of a TEM, realises the desired hollow-cone illumination. The illumination lenses of the TEM focus the electron beam on the sample, generating a fine electron probe with a wave function given by the aperture's Fourier transform. Alternatively, the aperture constitutes the momentum spectrum of the impinging beam, and hence each point of the ring in the aperture corresponds to a tilted impinging plane wave. Such an aperture with a diameter of 20μm and an annulus width of 0.9μm was manufactured by milling a 2μm thick gold film with the focused ion beam of a dual beam instrument, and inserted in a probe-corrected Titan 3 operated at 300kV . The semi-convergence angle α needs to be chosen carefully, as it impacts greatly the obtained result. If α is too low (far below the Bragg angle θ B of the lowest -order excited reflection), the spatial resolution will be compromised. If α is much higher than θ B the very large number of overlapping rings makes the patterns difficult to analyze. We have found that values of α slightly below or equal to 2×θ B provide a good compromise between spatial resolution and overlap. In this case we have used α = 5.9mrad. The semi-convergence angle is widely tunable on any microscope with an illumination system made of three condenser lenses and it can also be tuned, with a few limits, on other microscopes, though in the last case larger variations may require a further aperture replacement. Since this microscope is not fitted with an image corrector, a direct observation of the probe shape might be unreliable, and the expected resolution is best estimated on theoretical grounds, then compared to the sharpness observed in the experimental features. For a conical illumination from an infinitely thin annular aperture, the probe shape is described by a Bessel auxiliary function J 0 (αk 0 r ⊥ ), though in a realistic situation with a finite-width annulus this is only an approximation and the probe shape needs to be simulated numerically For conventional non-aberrated electron probes the wave function is described by an Airy disc, and the resolution is assessed through the full width at half maximum of its probab-ility distribution. In previous experimental demonstrations of strain retrieval with NBED or N-PED, the resolution has been estimated at ≈ 0.9nm "tails" of the intensity distribution Using this setup, we test our proposed method on a well known and characterised sample: a stack of Si/SiGe layers grown on a silicon substrate The difference between the three plots appears small. Figure The difference at the layer's edges is presumably due to imperfections in our hypothesized probe shape, while the the peak height isn't considered as a measure of accuracy as it likely suffers from imperfections in SIMS data used in the FEM modelling, and a similar deviation is observed in both N-PED and Bessel diffraction. With this comparison we show how Bessel beam diffraction can detect strain with performances (precision 2.5×10 -3 , accuracy 1.5×10 -3 ) which appear superior to those reported for NBED and approach those of N-PED. While Bessel beam diffraction can't cover many other use-cases supported by PED (e.g. orientation mapping or determination of complex crystal structures) it does not require expensive specialised hardware and can be potentially implemented in any current generation TEM with minimal instrumental modifications (and thus disruptions) and downtime. Furthermore, the technique requires no further alignment beyond a standard STEM experiment and the analysis code is freely available C. Data Analysis: The data analysis was performed with the code written ad-hoc in python/numpy, capable of parallel execution and highly efficient. On our computer it can analyse 2500 diffraction patterns in approximately 3 minutes. This code is available under GPLv3 License at the address: https://bitbucket.org/lutosensis/tem-thesis/ D. Data Availability: The experimental data as well as the simulation results have been uploaded on the Zenodo repository at the address: http://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2566137 E. Intensity Profiles of Bessel and Airy probes: Comparison of intensity profiles extracted from HAADF-STEM images. The sample used in the paper was imaged in HAADF configuration. Images were acquired in a conventional high resolution STEM configuration with sub-angstrom resolution, as well as with a Bessel beam with a convergence angle of about 5.9 mrad such as those used in the strain measurement. A line profile over one of the layers is shown for the conventional high resolution image (in red, the profile has been averaged in the lateral direction over several unit cells to improve signal), as well as the same profile convoluted with a Gaussian with a width of 1.2 nm (in orange), and an intensity profile extracted from the image acquire with the Bessel beam (in blue), The match between the orange and blue profiles suggest that the resolution achieved is better than 1.3 nm.