We observe magnetic effects in ultra-high quality factor crystalline quartz Bulk Acoustic Wave resonators at milli-Kelvin temperature. The study reveals existence of hysteresis loops, jumps and memory effects of acoustical resonance frequencies. These loops arise as a response to the external magnetic field and span over few Hertz range for modes with linewidths of about 25mHz, which constitute a frequency shift of order 60 linewidths. The effects are broadband but get stronger towards higher frequencies where both nonlinear effects and losses are limited by two level systems. This suggests that the observed effects are due to ferromagnet-like phase of a spin ensemble coupled to mechanical modes. The observed coupling between mechanical and spin degrees of freedom in the ultra low loss regime brings new possibilities for the emerging class of quantum hybrid systems. Magnetic effects in mechanical resonators have become an interesting subject of research with many potential applications. In particular the combination of magnetic properties of solids and high quality factor mechanical resonators has set a new direction in the sensing technology To observe such effects in a high purity acoustic system, the most important property is to attain very high quality factors of mechanical resonances. The resulting very narrow linewidths become a very sensitive tool in the discovery of low concentrations of impurities whose effects would not be seen otherwise. Among all mechanical systems, quartz Bulk Acoustic Wave (BAW) resonators cooled to cryogenic temperatures provide the narrowest possible linewidths for many overtone (OT) resonances in the 5 -700 MHz frequency range In order to investigate response of the acoustic modes to external magnetic field, the quartz BAW cavity is enclosed into a block of Oxygen Free Copper attached to the 20 mK stage of a dilution refrigerator. Because the crystal is enclosed in an individual metallic package inside a copper block, any effects of spurious electric fields, caused by the magnet or other external sources will be shielded. The structure is assembled in such a way that the device under test is placed in the middle of a 7 T superconducting magnet. The resonator plate could be oriented either parallel or normal to the external magnetic field that are further referred as B p and B n respectively (Fig. Acoustic resonances are excited and detected using the piezoelectric effects with golden electrodes deposited on the structure supporting the cavity plate. RF fields are supplied via low loss microwave cables split with cryogenic DC blocks. Since the investigated BAW resonator is a single port device, all possible measurements are made in signal reflection where one uses an impedance or vector network analyser to probe the frequency response of the device via the single port. Although, in the case of ultra high-Q acoustic cavities, internal attenuation of typical network analysers is not enough to achieve the linear (small signal) regime. Indeed, it has been observed previously that for a number of ultra-high Quality factor overtones, one needs to greatly reduce the incident power to achieve the small-signal regime. In this case, the feeding and detection lines are split with a circulator that allows to introduce additional attenuation and amplification in the two port measurements as shown in Fig. To characterise the acoustic resonance in the magnetic fields, we employ the 37th overtone of the longitudinal mode of the plate resonator with the resonance frequency of 116.1642 MHz. For the small signal characterisation, the incident signal was reduced and distributed by a room temperature attenuator and circulator as depicted in Fig. The response of the resonant frequency of the 37th OT to the magnetic field oriented in parallel to the resonator plate is shown in Fig. (Hz) (T) FIG. Similar type of behavior is observed for the 33rd and 37th OTs in the normal orientation of the magnetic field as shown in Fig. In order to investigate the dependence of the magnetic hysteresis on absolute values of the frequency, the quartz resonator is probed directly with the Network Vector Analyser. Such simplified setup avoids circulators that allows to measure overtones of acoustic vibration in a very broad frequency range. As a result of impossibility to decrease the Network Analyser output signal strength below a certain limit, the device incident power is relatively strong on the order of -45 dBm or tens of nanoWatt. Such level of incident power results in ob-servable nonlinearity of the Duffing type. Results of frequency response to magnetic field B n sweeps for various resonant modes are shown in Fig. The response of quartz BAW resonators to the magnetic field at room temperature have been observed previously Coupling between mechanical and spin degrees of freedom may be accounted for several effects such as magnetostriction, Einstein-de Haas, Wiedemann and related effects. Although all of these phenomena require ferromagnetic materials, the class of materials quartz does not belong to. The evidence strongly suggests that the magnetic effects observed in this work originates in crys-tal impurities themselves. Traces of magnetic impurities have been observed in pure synthetic quartz crystals using whispering microwave modes Although, the ferromagnetic-like behaviour was not observed in quartz studies with Whispering Gallery Mode (WGM) resonators In summary, the magnetic effects observed in this work have only become apparent due to the phonon trapped acoustic modes reaching extremely high quality factors of a few billion. Indeed, with other technologies providing quality factors of less than one million or linewidths of a few hundreds of Hertz, such hysteresis loops observed in this work could not have been seen. These high acoustic Q-factors makes the phonon trapped BAW resonators a new tool to for studying solid state physics This work was supported by the Australian Research Council Grant No. CE170100009. 