Very recently we developed an efficient method to calculate the free energy of 2D materials on substrates and achieved high calculation precision for graphene or γ-graphyne on copper substrates. In the present work, the method was further confirmed to be accurate by molecular dynamic simulations of silicene on Ag substrate using empirical potential and was applied to predict the optimum conditions based on ab initio calculations for silicene growth on Ag (110) and Ag (111) surface, which are in good agreement with previous experimental observations. Silicene, as a 2D analogy of graphene, has recently aroused widespread concerns Clearly, lots of experimental efforts could be saved for preparing a desired 2D materials by VD, such as silicene, if the suitable surface of a substrate and the optimum temperature could be predicted theoretically. The predictions might be made in principle by calculations of the free energy (FE), but the calculation on condensed matter has been an open problem since the born of statistical physics by the end of 19th century, although some progress has taken place in the past 30 years Very recently, we developed a direct integral approach (DIA) for calculating the FE of 2D material on substrate, and the high calculation precision was confirmed by molecular dynamic (MD) simulations of graphene and γ-graphyne on Cu (111) surface at temperature up to 1300 K In the present work, the DIA was applied to calculate the FE (or partition function, PF) of silicene on Ag substrate at temperature up to 1300K. Firstly, we employed empirical potentials (Tersoff and Morse potential) to describe the atomistic interaction to test the accuracy of DIA on this system by comparing the internal energy derived from the PF with the MD simulations. Then ab initio calculations based on density function theory (DFT) were performed to describe the atomistic interaction for calculating the PF (or FE) by the DIA. Based on the calculated FE of a piece of silicene with different morphology on the (110) or (111) surface of Ag substrate at temperature up to 2000K, the optimum conditions (specific surface at certain temperature) for the growth of NRs or sheets were predicted, which are in good agreement with the experimental observations. The model for a 2D materials of N atoms on a substrate is shown in Fig. where U 2D is the potential energy of the 2D material with the coordinates of the atoms denoted by x 3N (x 1 , x 2 ... x 3N ), and V is the interaction potential between the 2D material and the substrate with its atoms denoted by X 3M (X 1 , X 2 ... X 3M ). The PF of 2D materials can be expressed as, where β = 1/k B T with kB the Boltzmann factor, and Q is the configurational integral By introducing a new set of coordinates, x i ′ = x i -q i , where q i is coordinates of the atoms in state of the lowest potential energy U 0 , Eq. ( where U ′ (x ′3N , X 3M ) is defined by According to our previous work where the effective length L i is defined as To obtain the effective lengths, the first step is to find the most stable structure of the 2D materials with lowest potential U 0 , which can be accomplished by common algorithms of geometrical optimization or dynamic damping methods For a piece of silicene sheet of 336 Si atoms on the (111) surface of an Ag substrate with 2640 Ag atoms arranged in perfect fcc lattices (Fig. Applying Eq. ( with ∆T = 0.1K. In order to test the accuracy of the above algorithm, a classical MD simulations was performed to produce the internal energy of the system with the same potentials As shown in Fig. ) is only 0.001% and gradually increases up to 0.021% for 1300 K. It may be expected that the relative error would get smaller if the effective length L i of the edged atoms was calculated, instead of replacing L i with the one of the center atom, for obtaining Q by Eq. ( In order to search for the optimum growth conditions for a given silicene grain on Ag one of the edges to form a band (or NR). For calculations of FEZ and FEA, the system was optimized firstly with the bottom layer of the Ag substrate fixed, and then the adhered Si atom (and one of the Si atom denoted by a square in Fig. where N 0 =35, the number of the Si atoms except for the adhered Si atom. As shown in Fig. For the growth on Ag (111) surface, a silicene grain of 25 Si atoms arranged in hexagons with a Si atom adhered at the zigzag edge (Fig. In summary, an approach for calculating the free energy (or partition function) of 2D material on substrate was further confirmed by classical MD simulations of silicene on Ag substrate, and was applied to search for the optimum conditions for silicene growth by ab initio calculations on silver substrate. Based on the calculated free energy for several silicene grains on Ag surface it was shown that the (111) surface is suitable for silicene growth by deposition of Si atoms while the (110) can only grow nanoribbons, which are in good agreement with previous experimental observations. This work paves a way to predict optimum conditions for preparing various 2D material by deposition of the atoms on substrates. No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors. 