Candidates compounds for new thermoelectric and superconducting materials, which have narrow band gap and flat bands near band edges, were exhaustively searched by a high-throughput first-principles calculation from an inorganic materials database named AtomWork. We focused on AgIn5Se8 which has high density of state near the Fermi level. AgIn5Se8 was successfully synthesized as single crystals using a melt and slow cooling method. The single-crystal X-ray diffraction analysis revealed the obtained crystal is high quality without deficiencies. The valence states in AgIn5Se8 were determined to be Ag 1+ , In 3+ and Se 2-in accordance with a formal charge by the core level X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis. The electrical resistance was evaluated under high pressure using a diamond anvil cell with boron-doped diamond electrodes. Although the sample was insulator with a resistance of above 40 MΩ at ambient pressure, the resistance markedly decreased with increase of the pressure, and a pressure-induced superconducting transition was discovered at 3.4 K under 52.5 GPa. The transition temperature increased up to 3.7 K under further pressure of 74.0 GPa. The idea of using informatics techniques in conjunction with the data-driven approach based on high-throughput computation for functional materials design, namely materials informatics, recently has been carried out in practice and also has produced remarkable outcomes We have performed the data-driven approach to explore new pressure-induced superconductors using a database and the DFT calculation One of the most interesting material is AgIn5Se8 in the screened-out candidates. There is no research considering this compound as a candidate of superconductor because of a relatively wide band gap To examine the appearance of superconductivity under high pressure, we have synthesized the sample of AgIn5Se8 in single crystals. The crystal structure, compositional ratio, and valence state of AgIn5Se8 single crystals were analyzed by the X-ray diffraction (XRD), energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDX), and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), respectively. The electrical resistance of the obtained sample was evaluated under high pressure using a diamond anvil cell (DAC) with boron-doped diamond electrodes Electronic band structures of the selected material AgIn5Se8 were calculated under various pressures up to 70 GPa. The details of our screening scheme in the high-throughput first-principles calculations were given in our previous paper Although the DOS at valence band edge increases with quite sharp peak like the van Hove singularity under 10 GPa, the band gap dose not decrease. The band gap gradually decreases with the increase of the pressure from 20 GPa, and completely closes at 50 GPa, indicating an insulator-to-metal transition. According to the insensitive response for the applied pressure, critical pressure for superconductivity in AgIn5Se8 would be higher than 10-20 GPa of SnBi2Se4 and PbBi2Te4. The Tc would be enhanced under further pressure because the DOS near the Fermi level increases from 50 GPa to 70 GPa. Single crystals of AgIn5Se8 were grown by a melt and slow-cooling method. Starting materials of Ag powders (99.99%), In grains (99.98%) and Se chips (99.999%) were weighed in the stoichiometric composition of AgIn5Se8. The starting materials were loaded into an evacuated quartz tube and pre-reacted at 500oC for 10 hours. The resultant tube was heated at 1000oC for 20 hours and then slowly cooled to 600oC in 20 hours, followed by the homogenizing anneal at 500oC for 20 hours. The single crystal XRD measurement was carried out by use of the XtaLAB mini (Rigaku) with Mo-K radiation ( = 0.71072 Å). The crystal structure was solved by the program SHELXT on the WinGX software and refined using the program ShelXle The valence state was estimated by the core level XPS analysis using the AXIS-ULTRA DLD (Shimadzu/Kratos) with monochromatic Al Kα X-ray radiation (hν = 1486.6 eV), operating under a pressure of the order of 10 -9 Torr. The samples were cleaved using scotch tape in a highly vacuumed pre-chamber of the order of 10 -7 Torr. A binding energy scale was established by referencing the C 1s value of an adventitious carbon. A background signal was subtracted by using the active Shirley method implemented in COMPRO software Electrical resistance measurements of AgIn5Se8 single crystal under high pressure were performed using an originally designed DAC with boron-doped diamond electrodes The single crystal structural analysis of AgIn5Se8 was successfully performed. The crystallographic data are given in supplemental tables SI-SIV. The final refinement with 22 variables using 1 restraint converged on the R1 value of 6.77% and the wR2 value of 15.14% for I > 2(I) with the goodness of fit of 1.297. The refinement well converged when all the site occupancies were unity. There was no significant difference in R1 values as the occupancy of a specific site was varied, indicating that the obtained AgIn5Se8 does not have any deficiencies at each site. The chemical composition of the obtained single crystal is normalized by the Ag element and then is estimated to be Ag:In:Se = 1:4.9(1):8.0(1) from the EDX analysis, which is consistent with the nominal composition of AgIn5Se8. This fact is different from the case of SnBi2Se4 which exhibits the deficiencies at Bi and Se sites The valence states of Ag, In and Se in AgIn5Se8 were investigated by the XPS measurement. displays In 3d core-level spectrum. A perfect fit to two peaks located at 444.7 and 452.3 eV are clearly observed, which can be attributed to the characteristic spin-orbit split 3d 5/2 and 3d 3/2 , respectively We focused on AgIn5Se8 from the viewpoint of the pressure-induced high DOS near the Fermi level, compared with the other candidates of SnBi2Se4 and PbBi2Te4 which was also chosen by the data-driven approach. The single crystal growth of AgIn5Se8 was confirmed by single crystal XRD and EDX analysis. The XPS analysis revealed that the valence state of all elements was consistent with the nominal value. The synthesized AgIn5Se8 showed insulator to metal transition at 24.8 GPa and superconducting transition at 52.5 GPa by the high pressure resistance measurement using DAC with boron-doped diamond electrodes in accordance with our scenario. The highest Tc was observed at 3.8 K under 74.0 and 85.2 GPa. The pressure-induced metallization and superconductivity were successfully observed in AgIn5Se8. According to the multi-steps of Tc above 74 GPa, it is necessary to perform the further studies for the crystal structural analysis under higher pressure. Note: The U 33 of Se2 is fixed at the appropriate value to stabilize the refinement. U eq is defined as one-third of a trace of an orthogonalized U tensor. Table Bond length (Å)