A time scale is a procedure for accurately and continuously marking the passage of time. It is exemplified by Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), and provides the backbone for critical navigation tools such as the Global Positioning System (GPS). Present time scales employ microwave atomic clocks, whose attributes can be combined and averaged in a manner such that the composite is more stable, accurate, and reliable than the output of any individual clock. Over the past decade, clocks operating at optical frequencies have been introduced which are orders of magnitude more stable than any microwave clock. However, in spite of their great potential, these optical clocks cannot be operated continuously, which makes their use in a time scale problematic. In this paper, we report the development of a hybrid microwave-optical time scale, which only requires the optical clock to run intermittently while relying upon the ensemble of microwave clocks to serve as the flywheel oscillator. The benefit of using clock ensemble as the flywheel oscillator, instead of a single clock, can be understood by the Dick-effect limit. This time scale demonstrates for the first time sub-nanosecond accuracy for a few months, attaining a fractional frequency stability of 1.45×10 -16 at 30 days and reaching the 10 -17 decade at 50 days, with respect to UTC. This time scale significantly improves the accuracy in timekeeping and could change the existing time-scale architectures. Time is a dimension in which events can be ordered from the past through the present and into the future. Many modern-day technologies rely on the ability to do this accurately and precisely, including navigation The microwave frequency of To test the MTSOC architecture, we conducted a campaign at NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology, USA) from October 2017 to April 2018. Over the five months, the Yb clock operated intermittently, for an average of 1.5 hours per day. The free-running microwave time scale AT1, composed of a few Hydrogen masers and a few commercial Cesium clocks, is steered to the Yb clock using a Kalman filter. We show that the MTSOC architecture exhibits unprecedented timing accuracy (0.40 ns, root-meansquare variation) and frequency stability (1.45×10 -16 at 30 days, 8.8×10 -17 at 50 days), despite only 6% optical-clock availability. These results highlight a robust and realistic approach to immediately capitalize on the enhanced stability of the best optical clocks for international timekeeping. Moreover, our architecture is flexible and could further benefit from the addition of other optical clocks and stable laser oscillators [*] The fractional frequency is a dimensionless quantity defined as ( measured frequency nominal frequency -1), which characterizes the frequency stability of a clock. In the following context, we may use "frequency" to stand for "fractional frequency" for simplicity, which can be easily identified from the unit. is plotted based on the simulations in Figure where f laser is the frequency of the laser signal that is frequency-doubled and locked to the Yb atom's quantum transition. The comb's carrier offset frequency f 0 is locked to 10 MHz. n is an integer. f rep is the frequency comb's repetition frequency which is in microwave region (close to 1 GHz). The beat frequency between the laser and the nearest comb tooth f beat is locked to 640 MHz. By Equation ( From the frequency counter data, we derive the fractional frequency difference between the Yb clock and the Hydrogen maser, i.e., y Yb-HMaser . As proposed in Section 1, the MTSOC architecture is more favorable than the HMOC architecture, because the free-running microwave time scale is less noisy than the maser which allows more aggressive steering. We observe that the existing microwave time scale AT1 is better than a single Hydrogen maser by approximately a factor of 2. Another advantage of this architecture is that it is more reliable than the HMOC architecture because the time scale is only minimally affected by the failure of one of its contributing member clocks The Yb clock ran regularly during the period of late October 2017early April 2018 (MJD 58054 -58214). Individual run times ranged from a few minutes to several hours, depending on the experimental arrangement. The total running time of the Yb clock was 241.8 hours. We obtain the average frequency difference y Yb-AT1 for each run using Equation (2), the results of which are plotted in Figure The error bars in Figure Based on the y Yb-AT1 result in Figure To evaluate the performance of AT1', we compare AT1' to UTC, via the chain of AT1'  AT1  UTC(NIST)  UTC. Remember that the frequency stability of "AT1' -UTC" is composed of the frequency stabilities of AT1', UTC, and the chain. Thus, the frequency stability of "AT1' -UTC" gives the upper-limit stability of AT1'. In fact, the frequency stability of UTC should be excellent though not perfect, since it is the most accurate time in the world based on global Cs/Rb fountains. Also, the links AT1'  AT1 and AT1  UTC(NIST) add negligible noise. Although the link UTC(NIST)  UTC suffers significant noise of ~4×10 -16 s/s over 5 days of averaging due to long baseline time-transfer methods In Figure The performance of existing Cs/Rb-fountain-based time scales, which are among the world's best, is also provided as a reference. At PTB (Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt, Germany), during the same time period (i.e., MJD 58054 -58214), two Cs fountain clocks Presently, there is no guarantee that an optical clock at NIST will operate once every few days. Here, we explore AT1' behavior when the optical clock stops running for an extended period and is subsequently reintroduced. A gap in data from Apr. 07, 2018 (MJD 58215) -May 02, 2018 (MJD 58240) provides a good opportunity to explore this issue (see Figure Based on these observations, to maintain time-and frequency-accuracy in AT1', it is necessary that the optical clock reference run intermittently. We speculate that the required run schedule may be somewhat relaxed via use of a free-running timescale with better long-term stability (e.g., Over the period of MJD 58054 -58214, the Yb clock was operated and measured an average of 1.5 hours per day. Considering the non-uniform run schedule over that time (e.g., no weekend Yb-clock operation) which degrades the performance of the optical-clock-based time scale, the real situation is more comparable to a simulation of running an optical clock just one hour per day. The dashed curves in Figure By comparing the simulation result with the real-data result in Figure From both simulation and observed data, it is clear that a better flywheel oscillator (i.e., maser ensemble) offers an optical-clock-based time scale improved stability. Following this same logic, other types of flywheel oscillators under development may offer better performance still. For example, incorporating nextgeneration low-drift cavity-stabilized lasers Alternatively, as noted earlier, higher optical-clock availability also offers time scale improvements. For example, with a consistent optical-clock availability at the 50% level, simulations indicate that our opticalclock-based time scale Beyond better local timekeeping, optical clocks offer improvements to International Atomic Time (TAI) and UTC This paper presents an optical-clock-based time scale (i.e., AT1') composed of an ensemble of continuously-operating microwave clocks and an intermittently-operating Yb optical clock. The new time scale, AT1', shows a root-mean-square variation of 0.40 ns with respect to UTC for more than 5 months; its frequency stability is 1.45×10 -16 at 30 days, and reaches the 10 -17 regime at 50 days. This level of performance would allow national metrology institutes to provide more accurate time. With more optical clocks contributing to AT1', the availability of optical data can be increased, yielding even better long-term stability. To further improve the performance of AT1', we anticipate incorporating high-performance optical cavities into the clock ensemble.