We show that using maskless photolithography and the lift-off technique patterned yttrium iron garnet thin films possessing ultra-low Gilbert damping can be accomplished. The films of the 70 nm thickness were grown on (001)-oriented gadolinium gallium garnet by means of pulsed laser deposition and exhibit high crystalline quality, low surface roughness and effective magnetization of 127 emu/cm 3 . The Gilbert damping parameter is as low as 5 × 10 -4 . The obtained structures have well-defined sharp edges which along with good structural and magnetic film properties, pave a path in the fabrication of high-quality magnonic circuits as well as oxide-based spintronic devices. Yttrium iron garnet (Y 3 Fe 5 O 12 , YIG) has become an intensively studied material in recent years due to exceptionally low damping of magnetization precession and electrical insulation enabling its application in research on spin-wave propagation 1-3 , spin-wave based logic devices 4-6 , spin pumping 7 , and thermally-driven spin caloritronics 8 . These applications inevitably entail film structurization in order to construct complex integrated devices. However, the fabrication of high-quality thin YIG films requires deposition temperatures over 500C 6,9-18 leading to top-down lithographical approach that is ion-beam etching of a previously deposited plain film whereas patterned resist layer serves as a mask. Consequently, this method introduces crystallographic defects, imperfections to surface structure and, in the case of YIG films, causes significant increase of the damping parameter. edge spin waves In this letter we report on ultra-low damping in the bottom-up structured YIG film by means of direct writing photolithography technique. In our case, the method allows for structure patterning with 0.6 μm resolution across full writing area. In order to not preclude the lift-off process, the pulsed laser deposition (PLD) was conducted at room temperature and since such as-deposited films are amorphous Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was applied to investigate surface morphology and the quality of structure edges. SQUID magnetometry provided information on the saturation magnetization and magnetocrystalline anisotropy field. Using a coplanar waveguide connected to a vector network analyzer, broadband ferromagnetic resonance (VNA-FMR) was performed to determine Gilbert damping parameter and anisotropy fields. All the experiments were conducted at the room temperature. The procedure of samples preparation was as follows. The (001)-oriented gadolinium gallium garnet substrates were ultrasonicated in acetone, trichloroethylene and isopropanol to remove surface impurities. After a 1 minute of hot plate baking for water evaporation, a positive photoresist was spincoated onto the substrate (Sample 1). Using maskless photolithography an array of 500 μm x 500 μm squares separated over 500 μm was patterned and the exposed areas were developed. Detailed parameters of photolithography process can be found in Ref. A comparison of this value with lattice parameter of a bulk YIG (12.376 Å) suggest distortion of unit cells due to slight nonstoichiometry. The surface morphology of the structured film was investigated by means of AFM. In Fig. we derived H a and the effective magnetization M eff , both comparable to the values determined using SQUID and close to the values of a bulk YIG (see Table ). The fitting according to Eq. ( Gilbert damping parameter α was obtained by fitting dependence of linewidth ΔH (full width at half maximum) on frequency f as shown in Fig. where ΔH 0 is a zero-frequency linewidth broadening. The α parameter of both samples is nearly the same, 5.32 × 10 -4 for Sample 1 and 5.05 × 10 -4 for Sample 2 on average (see Table However, recently reported LPE-YIG films of nanometer thickness, suffer from the increased damping as well (Table Although the structurization procedure required deposition at room temperature, the α parameter does not diverge from those reported for YIG thin films grown at temperatures above 500C. Using the plain, reference film fabricated along with the structured one, we have shown that structurization does not significantly affect structural nor magnetic properties of the films, i.e. out-of-plane lattice constant, surface roughness, saturation magnetization, anisotropy fields and damping. The structures obtained with bottom-up structurization indeed possess sharp, well-defined edges. In particular, our findings will help in the development of magnonic and spintronic devices utilizing film boundary effects and low damping of magnetization precession.