We perform a comparative study on thermoelectric performance of antiperovskite oxides Ae3T tO and nitrides Ae3P nN (Ae = Ca, Sr, Ba; T t = Ge, Sn, Pb; P n = As, Sb, Bi) by means of firstprinciples calculation. As for the oxides with the cubic structure, Ca3GeO with a sizable band gap exhibits high thermoelectric performance at high temperatures, while Ba3PbO with Dirac cones without the gap is favorable at low temperatures. The latter high performance owes to high valley degeneracy including the multiple Dirac cones and the valleys near the Γ and R points. For the nitrides with the cubic structure, insulator with strong quasi-one-dimensionality exhibits high thermoelectric performance. We also find that the orthorhombic structural distortion sometimes sizably enhances thermoelectric performance, especially for Ba3GeO and Sr3AsN where the high valley degeneracy is realized in the P nma phase. Our calculation reveals that antiperovskites offer a fertile playground of various kinds of characteristic electronic structure, which enhance the thermoelectric performance, and provides promising candidates of high-performance thermoelectric materials. Searching high-performance thermoelectric materials is a central issue in the study of themoelectrics. There are many promising compounds such as Bi 2 Te 3 Antiperovskites, in which the positions of constituent elements in a famous perovskite structure are interchanged as shown in Fig. In this paper, we perform a comparative study on thermoelectric performance of antiperovskite oxides Ae 3 T tO and nitrides Ae 3 P nN (Ae = Ca, Sr, Ba; T t = Ge, Sn, Pb; P n = As, Sb, Bi) by means of first-principles calculation. We find that several kinds of characteristic electronic structure play an important role in enhancing their thermoelectric performance: multiple Dirac cones, quasi-one-dimensional band dispersion, and high valley degeneracy induced by the structural distortion toward the orthorhombic P nma phase. Here, because the crystal structure of the antiperovskite oxides and nitrides exhibits some variations as presented in Tables I and II, we investigate the effect of the structural change onto their thermoelectric performance. Our study reveals a unique and fertile electronic structure of the antiperovskite oxides and nitrides, which is attracting also as thermoelectric materials, and provides possible promising candidates for high-performance thermoelectric materials. This paper is organized as follows. Section II presents [61] and [62], respectively, and others were taken from Ref. [63]. A transition temperature of Ca3GeO, Ba3SnO, and Ba3PbO, was reported to be around 350 K, around 150 K, and around 150 K, respectively First, we performed the structural optimization using the PBEsol exchange-correlation functional After the structural optimization, we performed firstprinciples band-structure calculation using WIEN2k code From the calculated band structures, we extracted the Wannier functions of the Ae-d, T t(P n)-p, and O(N)p orbitals using the Wien2Wannier and Wannier90 codes with the Fermi-Dirac distribution function f 0 , chemical potential μ(T ), energy ǫ n,k and group velocity v n,k of the one-electron orbital on the n-th band at the k-point k and the relaxation time τ , which was assumed to be constant in this study. By using K ν , the electrical conductivity σ, Seebeck coefficient S, and electrical thermal conductivity κ el are expressed as follows: where e (> 0) is the elementary charge. The power factor PF = σS 2 and the dimensionless figure of merit ZT = σS 2 T κ -1 were also calculated using these quantities. We assumed that the thermal conductivity κ can be represented as the sum of the electrical thermal conductivity κ el and the lattice electrical thermal conductivity κ lat , namely, κ = κ el + κ lat . In our study, τ and κ lat were assumed to be 10 -14 second and 2 Wm -1 K -1 , respectively, which are typical values for thermoelectric materials. In fact, the thermal conductivity of Ca 3 SnO was reported to be around 2 Wm -1 K -1 at room temperature To simulate the carrier doping, we adopted the rigid band approximation. Because an ARPES experiment on the Dirac semimetallic Ca 3 PbO 80 reported that the band structure for hole-doped Ca 3 PbO, to say, Ca 3 Pb 0.92 Bi 0.08 O, shows a very good agreement with the calculated band structure for the mother compound Ca 3 PbO, we can expect that the rigid-band approximation is valid against a certain level of the carrier doping, even for the narrow-or zero-gap systems. We only considered the hole carrier doping, which was realized in experiments for some antiperovskite oxides A. Oxides Ae3T tO with the cubic structure In this section, we investigated the electronic structure and the transport properties of the antiperovskite oxides Ae 3 T tO (Ae = Ca, Sr, Ba; T t = Ge, Sn, Pb), assuming the cubic structure with a space group P m 3m for all the compounds. Because some oxides have a distorted crystal structure as shown in Table Figure Quasi-one-dimensionality of the valence-top band structure of some materials is noteworthy. For example, the valence-top band structure of Ca 3 GeO shown in Fig. We note that, while each band dispersion has anisotropy along one of the x, y, and z directions, the coexistence of these three bands result in the isotropy of the transport property, which is naturally expected for the cubic structure. Even though the transport is in total isotropic, the situation is much different from the case when two isotropic heavy bands coexist with one isotropic light band. Because for the latter case, the carrier with a large DOS has a heavy effective mass along all the directions, and so is not accompanied with the large group velocity. For more detailed investigation of this kind of band structure, i.e., coexisting low-dimensional bands with anisotropy along different directions, we refer the readers to Ref. 81. We also note that, in real one-dimensional systems, technological applications are not straightforward because they require high orientation of samples, without which the conductivity is easily lost. Low-dimensionality owing to the anisotropy of the electron wave function realized in rather isotropic crystal structure, like our target materials here, is favorable from this perspective Before proceeding to investigation on thermoelectric performance among antiperoviskite oxides, we checked the consistency between our calculated values of the transport quantities and those reported in an experimental study. In Ref. 46, ρ = 7.3 mΩ cm and S = 94 μVK -1 were reported for polycrystalline Ca 3 SnO at 290 K. The carrier density was also estimated from the Hall coefficients, n = 1.44 × 10 19 and 1.43 × 10 19 cm -3 at 5 and 20 K, respectively. In our calculation for Ca 3 SnO, we obtained ρτ = 3.5 × 10 -14 mΩ cm s and S = 88 μVK -1 using the carrier density n = 1.43 × 10 19 cm -3 at 290 K. The agreement with the experimental Seebeck coefficient (94 μVK -1 ) is surprisingly good. In addition, we can roughly estimate the relaxation time τ as 4.8 × 10 -15 s, by taking a ratio of the calculated ρτ and the experimental ρ. This is a typical length of the relaxation time for thermoelectric materials. In the experimental study By using the carrier density (n = 1.43 × 10 19 cm -3 for Ca 3 SnO and n = 3.3 × 10 20 cm -3 for Ca 3 PbO) and the relaxation time at 300 K (τ = 4.8 × 10 -15 s for Ca 3 SnO and τ = 1.3 × 10 -15 s for Ca 3 PbO) estimated above, we can compare the temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity and the Seebeck coefficient between experiment and calculation. Figure A difference in the electrical resistivity between experiment and calculation shown in Fig. 290K is about 1.8 (= 1.8/1.0). On the other hand, the thermal conductivity of Ca 3 SnO reported in Ref. 46, which can be regarded as κ lat because the electronic contribution of the thermal conductivity was reported to be negligible, is around 2.9 and 1.7 Wm -1 K -1 at 120 and 290 K, respectively. Thus, κ lat,120K κ -1 lat,290K is about 1.7. Here, the calculated ZT within the constant relaxation-time approximation depends only on the ratio κ lat τ -1 because where both σS 2 T τ -1 and κ el τ -1 depend neither on τ nor on κ lat . Since κ lat τ -1 is expected to be roughly the same between T = 120 and 290 K as shown here, we can expect that the calculated temperature dependence of ZT is to some extent reliable. We note that the temperature dependence of τ and κ lat in the high-temperature region is at present not available in experiment. Therefore, the calculated temperature dependence of ZT beyond room temperature still has some uncertainty regarding these assumed values of τ and κ lat . Figure optimized for each point, and so depends on temperature in this plot. In the high-temperature region, Ca 3 GeO yields the highest ZT , where the quasi-one-dimensional band structure together with a finite band gap is realized as shown in Fig. On the other hand, in the low-temperature region, it is rather counterintuitive that Ba 3 PbO yields the highest ZT . In its band structure shown in Fig. To begin with, we investigated the effect of SOC on the thermoelectric performance. Figure To obtain more insight, we compared several transport quantities for three cases: Ba 3 PbO, Sr 3 PbO, and Ca 3 GeO. From here on, we again included SOC in the calculations. Among these three compounds, Ba 3 PbO and Sr 3 PbO have Dirac cones while Ca 3 GeO is an insulator with a gap as shown in Fig. By looking into the electrical conductivity σ and the Seebeck coefficient S shown in Fig. Before proceeding to the next section, we point out two issues regarding thermoelectric performance of the Dirac cone. First, one should pay attention to the applicability of the Boltzmann transport theory with the constant-relaxation-time approximation because it cannot appropriately deal with the inter-band scattering effects, which can affect thermoelectric properties of the systems where the bipolar effects are important such as those possessing the Dirac cone Next, we move on to the antiperovskite nitrides with a chemical formula Ae 3 P nN (Ae = Ca, Sr, Ba; P n = As, Sb, Bi). In the same manner as the previous section, we assumed the cubic structure with a space group P m 3m for all the compounds in this section. We shall see thermoelectric performance of these materials with other crystal symmetries in Sec. III C. Figure Calculated ZT values of the antiperovskite nitrides are shown in Fig. Why do the crystal structures that are unstable as the cubic structure exhibit high ZT values in calculation? A key is the correlation between the strong quasione-dimensionality of the band structures of Sr 3 AsN and Ba 3 P nN (P n = As, Sb, Bi) and their high ZT values shown in Fig. To see why these materials exhibit the strong quasione-dimensionality, we calculated band structures of Ca 3 AsN and Ba 3 AsN using our tight-binding model from which the As orbitals were excluded. In other words, the tight-binding Hamiltonian consisting only of the Ae and N orbitals was solved here. Obtained band structures are shown with red solid lines in Fig. In this section, we investigated thermoelectric performance of the antiperovskite oxides and nitrides with the orthorhombic and hexagonal structures. For this purpose, we first evaluated which structure among the experimentally observed space groups is the most stable for each nitride because some nitrides have yet to be synthesized in experiment, unlike the oxides. After that, we discussed the effect of the structural change from the cubic structure on thermoelectric performance. Temperature dependence of ZT for the most promising candidates we found are also presented. We investigated the structural stability of the P m 3m phase for the nitrides, by comparing its total energy with that of the P nma and P 6 3 /mmc phases. Figure ter means that the crystal structure becomes P m 3m in calculation even when one allows the crystal distortion that can take place for the P nma space group. To be more precise, when the total energy difference of these two phases is less than 0.1 meV f.u. -1 , we regarded the crystal structure of the P nma phase falls into the P m 3m phase. Materials with the P m 3m phase as the most stable structure are shaded by color in the figure. We note that, because P nma is a subgroup of Imma, we need not to calculate the total energy of the Imma phase for discussing the stability of the cubic structure. In addition, we have verified that the optimized crystal structures for AeAsN 3 and BaSbN 3 no longer have the full Imma symmetry, i.e., the crystal structure seems to fall into the P nma phase for these compounds. Our results presented in Fig. We next investigated thermoelectric performance of materials with the hexagonal and orthorhombic structures. On the basis of the above calculation results shown in Fig. Tables IV and V present the calculated ZT values for the orthorhombic (Imma and P nma, respectively) structures at 300 K, compared with those for the cubic (P m 3m) structure. Overall, the calculated ZT values are similar between the cubic and orthorhombic phases for each compound. However, we can see a notable increase in ZT by introducing the orthorhombic distortion for two materials: ZT increases from 0.06 in P m 3m to 0.18 (a axis), 0.20 (b axis), and 0.26 (c axis) in P nma for Ba 3 GeO, and from 0.12 in P m 3m to 0.18 (a axis), 0.20 (b axis), and 0.16 (c axis) in P nma for Sr 3 AsN. We then focused on these two materials in the following analysis. While Ba 3 AsN also exhibits large ZT values in the P nma phase, these values are similar to that in the cubic phase, and in addition, the total energy of the TABLE V: Calculated ZT values of the cubic (P m 3m) and orthorhombic (P nma) structures at 300 K. Calculation results are only shown for materials for which the P nma structure was experimentally reported or predicted to be stable by our calculation as presented in Fig. In Ba 3 GeO with the P nma phase, the structure of which is shown in Fig. Figure . 15(b) presents the calculated DOS of Sr 3 AsN in the P m 3m and P nma phases. While both phases have a gapped band structure, DOS near the valence-band top is again enhanced by the structural distortion, which is likely to be an origin of the high ZT . Because the overall shape of DOS is similar between these two phases, the increase in ZT for Sr 3 AsN is moderate compared with Ba 3 GeO. We also calculated the temperature dependence of ZT for Ba 3 GeO and Sr 3 AsN in the P m 3m and P nma phases, as shown in Fig. We have investigated the thermoelectric performance of the hole-doped antiperovskite oxides and nitrides by means of first-principles band structure calculation and the subsequent transport calculation based on the Boltzmann transport theory. For the cubic P m 3m phase, we have found that Ba 3 PbO at low temperatures (around room temperature), Ca 3 GeO at high temperatures, and Sr 3 SbN in the wide temperature region are promising candidates for high thermoelectric performance. In Ba 3 PbO, multiple Dirac cones with six-fold degeneracy and the existence of the other valleys near the Γ and R points with relatively close energy levels enhance ZT . In Ca 3 GeO and Sr 3 SbN, quasi-one-dimensional band dispersion originating from the orbital anisotropy of the p orbitals is a key for their high performance. When considering the other crystal structures, the hexagonal structure is not favorable at least from the perspective of the shape of the band dispersion. However, the orthorhombic distortion toward the P nma phase sizably enhances the thermoelectric performance of Ba 3 GeO and Sr 3 AsN, which are the most promising candidates within the materials investigated in this study. For both compounds, a crucial consequence of the structural distortion is the high valley degeneracy, which is considered to enhance their thermoelectric performance. For Ba 3 GeO, another important role of the structural distortion is the gap opening. Another promising candidate is Ba 3 AsN if synthesized as the P nma phase, which is slightly unstable compared with the hexagonal phase in our calculation. Our study will help and stimulate the experimental exploration of the high thermoelectric performance in antiperovskites oxides and nitrides, which offer a unique and fertile playground where various kinds of characteristic electronic structure take place. The optimal hole carrier density for ZT at T = 300 K is shown in Tables VI-X. hexagonal (P 6 3 /mmc) structures are discussed. This study is summarized in Sec. IV. 10 Thermoelectric performance: comparison with experiment