As the development of atom scale devices transitions from novel, proof-of-concept demonstrations to state-of-the-art commercial applications, automated assembly of such devices must be implemented. Here we present an automation method for the identification of defects prior to atomic fabrication via hydrogen lithography using deep learning. We trained a convolutional neural network to locate and differentiate between surface features of the technologically relevant hydrogen-terminated silicon surface imaged using a scanning tunneling microscope. Once the positions and types of surface features are determined, the predefined atomic structures are patterned in a defect-free area. By training the network to differentiate between common defects we are able to avoid charged defects as well as edges of the patterning terraces. Augmentation with previously developed autonomous tip shaping and patterning modules allows for atomic scale lithography with minimal user intervention. With the miniaturization of complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) technology approaching its fundamental limit, attention has been focused on developing alternatives built at the atomic level. The H-Si surface has found applications in the study of surface chemistry including selfdirected growth of ordered multi-molecular lines Defects found on hydrogen-terminated samples can take the form of sub-surface or surface charge centers which can affect the operation of nearby electric field sensitive atomic devices, Crystalline silicon is tetravalent and forms a diamond lattice; each silicon atom shares 4 bonds, two above and two below the atom. At the (100) surface, two of these bonds are unsatisfied so the crystal reorganizes to a lower energy configuration. The addition of atomic hydrogen to the silicon surface during the annealing process results in the formation of one of three possible phases. The likelihood of forming such phases can be controlled by the annealing temperature at which the sample is prepared. On a silicon surface with (100) orientation, the 2x1 phase forms at ~377 °C, the 3x1 phase at ~127 °C, and the 1x1 phase below ~20 °C. In order to train the CNN to recognize these surface defects, they must be labeled in a pixel-wise manner in the STM images. Our neural network is trained with seven different classes of defects. The first is regular, clean H-Si(100)-2x1 (Figure Dimer rows run perpendicular to the original direction above the step and the boundary of the step edge is often marked with 1x1 or 3x1 reconstruction. All experiments and were performed using an Omicron Low Temperature STM operating at 4.5 K and ultrahigh vacuum (4 x 10 -11 Torr). Tips were electrochemically etched from polycrystalline tungsten wire and resistively heated in ultrahigh vacuum to remove surface adsorbates and oxide, and sharpened to a single atom apex using field ion microscopy. Image and data acquisition was done using a Nanonis SPM controller and software. All training data was acquired at an imaging bias of either 1.3 V or 1.4 V with a tunneling current of 50 pA. The patterning automation routine was programmed in Python and Labview using the Nanonis programming interface library. The CNN was implemented using Keras (2.1.3) with TensorFlow backend. Data was labelled using LabelMe software. The architecture of the CNN was implemented to support semantic segmentation of the images. Semantic segmentation allows for both the localization and classification of objects in images. This can be used in many applications where the network must make a distinction between different objects in an image including use in self-driving cars The network training data set was compiled from 28 images (100 x 100 nm 2 with a resolution of 1024 x 1024). Each of the 28 images were divided into 64 smaller images (128 x 128). Each of the smaller images in the training set were rotated by 90°, 180°, and 270° as well as flipped along its axis and subsequently rotated increasing our training data by a factor of 8. Images were divided into training, testing, and validating images at a ratio of ~ 2/3:1/6:1/6 respectively (corresponding to 9560:2384:2393 images). Although all images used in the training set are of the same size, the network was designed to take images of varying sizes as inputs. The only restriction to the input images is that they all have the same resolution of 1024 pixels/100 nm. This ensures that each convolutional filter will extract the same feature profiles on a variety of STM images. We utilized the Adam optimization algorithm A subset of the outputs of our fully trained model can be seen in Figure Continuing on the path to fully develop atomically-precise fabrication tools, we have successfully implemented a routine that can assess the quality of a sample, identify a suitable area that is free of defects, and execute a hydrogen lithography procedure. The routine is based on a CNN which uses semantic segmentation to locate and differentiate between certain charged and uncharged defects that inhibit the manufacturing process or potentially alter the operation of patterned devices. We have demonstrated the applicability of our approach by training the neural network with images of defects commonly found on the H-Si(100)-(2x1) surface. Hydrogen lithography was shown by patterning an 8 DB structure on the H-Si surface. It is envisioned that defect-free regions adequate for fabrication of functional logic or memory units comprised of roughly one hundred atoms will exist and that interconnections between such units will be custom routed so as to avoid defects. In this way, defect-free surface areas will be connected to form larger, effectively defect-free circuit blocks. In addition to avoiding defects, erasure of certain defects identified using the neural network is expected to become fully automated in future works. The techniques shown here are applicable to any type of device fabrication or lithography using any form of scanning probe microscopy as well as subsets of semiconductor device fabrication where the quality of the materials used must be assessed to optimize the fabrication process. and was taken at a sample bias of 1.3 V and tunneling current of 50 pA. The surface shown in the bottom left was imaged using a rare tip contrast that the network was not very familiar with. A decrease in the accuracy of defect segmentation compared to the other five images can be seen. A variety of neural network architectures were trained to find a configuration which gave the best Dice score of the Test and Validation data. Figure Model 10 was a modification of model 1 without any downsampling layers. The removal of these layers made training the network much more time consuming which necessitated the removal of four convolutional layers. The two networks with the best Dice score were models 8 and 9 which used double convolution style encoder/decoder layers. Model 9 had the advantage of a quicker image processing time, however given that the current time scale to acquire an image is roughly 10 minutes, the additional 5 seconds saved will not significantly decrease the fabrication time. As a result, model 8 was chosen due to the slightly better performance at classifying T2s, DBs, dihydrides, impurities, and clustered defects as shown in the confusion tables of figure S6. Interestingly, the dice score for each defect remained relatively constant for each defect type lending to the discussion in the main text suggesting that the edge-to-surface ratio of the defects in combination with the large class imbalance place an upper limit on the dice scores achievable with this data set. In addition to neural networks, an attempt to classify surface defects using scale invariant feature transform (SIFT) descriptors 3 was also made. Training data was created from the already labelled data by taking 20 x 20 pixel cutouts of each the 6 defect types see in Figure 