It is well known that azimuthal spin wave modes of magnetic vortex state in permalloy nanodisks have circular symmetry. Intuitively, magnetic materials having magnetocrystalline anisotropy is not compatible with the circular symmetry of the azimuthal modes. In this article, however, we report cubic azimuthal modes in heterogeneous nanodisks consisting of a permalloy core and a Fe shell. The fourfold symmetry of azimuthal modes is due to the exchange, and magneto-static, interactions between the permalloy core and the Fe shell. In comparison to results of circular azimuthal mode, the vortex switching occurs considerably faster under the excitation of cubic azimuthal mode. The gyration path of vortex core turns into square under the influence of induced cubic anisotropy in the Py region. We find out periodic oscillation of the vortex core size and the gyration speed as well. Our findings may offer a new route for spintronic applications using heterogeneous magnetic nanostructures. Magnetic vortex (MV) is a common ground state for soft ferromagnetic thin-film structures, ranging from a few microns down to 100 nanometers or so. The core-shell nanodisk in study is illustrated in Fig. We use typical Py/Fe material parameters for micromagnetic simulations The sample is initially in a relaxed ground state with CCW magnetization curling sense and VC polarity p = +1, as shown in Fig. After identifying the azimuthal modes in this core-shell nanodisk, we apply an in-plane CW rotating field with amplitude of 8 mT and frequency of 9 GHz to excite the (n = 1, m = 1) mode. The snapshots of the mz spatial distribution shown in Fig. , in order for the system to keep its total energy low. A vortex-antivortex pair transforms from circular into square after t = 294 ps, when the VC is about 6.4 nm away from the disk center. Such transformation indicates that the VC interacts with growing induced cubic anisotropy as it moves toward the Py/Fe interface. Finally, Fig. The field amplitude varies from 10 mT to 30 mT, and the field frequency keeps in the range of 6 to 24 GHz. As expected, the VC switching occurs faster for higher field amplitude. The local minima coincide with the eigenfrequencies of azimuthal modes, a clear indication of resonant behavior. Note that the gyrofield acts constructively with the spin wave for the m = 1 mode, but destructively for m = +1. 