The quantitative evaluation of the carbon hybridization state by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) has been a surface-analysis problem for the last three decades due to the challenges associated with the unambiguous identification of the characteristic binding energy values for sp 2 and sp 3bonded carbon. While the sp 2 binding energy is well established, there is disagreement for the sp 3 value in the literature. Here, we compute the binding energy values for model structures of pure and doped-diamond using density functional theory. The simulation results indicate that the large bandgap of diamond allows defects to pin the Fermi level, which results in large variations of the C(1s) core electron energies for sp 3 -bonded carbon, in agreement with the broad range of experimental C(1s) binding energy values for sp 3 carbon reported in the literature. Fermi level pinning by boron is demonstrated by experimental C(1s) binding energies of highly B-doped ultrananocrystalline diamond that are in good agreement to simulations. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools for the characterization of carbon-based materials We have recently shown that absolute XPS peak positions can be predicted by facile spin-paired DFT calculations within the frozen core approximation For solid samples the Fermi energy is usually used as the reference energy level, Our DFT calculations were carried out with the GPAW Lower energy atomic states can be conveniently held fixed in their atomic form within the frozen core approximation, where we include the 1s electrons for C and the diamond dopant atoms B, N, and the 1s, 2s, 2p electrons for the diamond dopant atom P in our calculations. A similar approach is adopted to describe the core hole by lowering the occupation of the relevant state in the atomic calculation by one. The resulting self-consistently obtained Kohn-Sham orbitals in the presence of the core hole are then used to construct the frozen core The calculation of core-hole binding energies follows the methodology developped in Ref. 5, as illustrated in Fig. XPS energies for periodic systems as modeled here have to be treated in a mixed many-body and singleparticle picture. Experimentally, the core level energy is measured relative to the single particle Fermi level ε F (smaller than zero) that is aligned to the Fermi level of the detector by holding them at a common ground The computational difficulty of charged super-cells For a system without a band gap, ε F = ε L and hence conveniently E F B = E 0 B . Systems with a band gap pose several problems, however. The position of the Fermi level ε F is not defined in these systems which prohibits a defined value for E F B . In the first step, we consider the case of bulk diamond, which is the most problematic system due to its large band-gap. We model diamond by unit cells containing 64 atoms in tetrahedral configurations with the experimental lattice constant of 3.5669 Å One of the most common impurities in natural diamond gemstones is nitrogen Other common impurities are boron or phosphorus The two N in C 62 N 2 slightly disturb a high lying unoccupied (acceptor) levels near to the conduction band edge ε c and introduce a rather high occupied (donor) level above the valence band edge ε v The freedom of moving the Fermi level by slight charging is not the case anymore for the other models presented in Fig. The C(1s) XPS spectra corresponding to the defects are compared to pure diamond in Fig. The main C(1s) energy in C 63 B of 284.27 eV is in good agreement to the value of 284.4 eV measured for artificially boron-doped diamond Various side peaks appear for the different defects. In C 62 N 2 , there is a peak at slightly higher energy that comes from the six carbon atoms surrounding the two nitrogen atoms forming a N(CR 3 ) 3 like structure with an NC bond length of 1.45 Å very similar to the 1.46 Å in N(CH 3 ) 3 . In contrast, a lower energy peak from the four carbon atoms surrounding N is found in C 63 N. Here, the N has to share the bonds with four C due to symmetry. The NC bond-length is thus much longer (1.60 Å) exceeding the diamond CC bond. . Absolute XPS spectra for the models derived from the C64 models without and with defects and impurities. The broken line is without the correction to εF (i.e., E 0 B ) and the solid line includes this shift (i.e., E F B ). The spectra are obtained by convoluting with Gaussians of 0.24 eV full width at half maximum (FWHM). The broken vertical line indicates graphite C(1s) energy For the N impurity with a neighboring vacancy (C 62 N), the lower energy peak (283.2 eV) is from the three carbons surrounding the cavity and the higher energy peak (287 eV) from the three carbons connected to nitrogen. The NC bond-length of 1.48 Å is quite similar to N(CH 3 ) 3 again. The four carbon atoms surrounding the P atom symmetrically with a bond length of 1.70 Å in C 63 P produce the lower energy shoulder in the corresponding C(1s) spectrum. Similarly, the lower energy peak around 283 eV in C 63 B is from the four carbon atoms surrounding B. Structurally, the B impurity atom shares four equal bonds with large CB bond length of 1.59 Å as compared to 1.55 in CC. Besides these side peaks the main effect is the strong variation of the C(1s) peak with defect type. A defect in diamond dictates the C(1s) position of E F B even for carbon atoms far apart due to its influence on the Fermi level. Therefore we can conclude that diamond is a problematic system to define the sp 3 C(1s) energy as the C(1s) energy depends on the nature of defects that are omnipresent in real diamonds. This finding can contribute explaining the broad range of C(1s) values for diamond reported in the literature. The DFT calculations are in good agreement with experimental XPS data acquired on undoped and B-doped UNCD shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have shown that the sp 3 C(1s) binding energies determined from diamond are highly affected by the presence and nature of defects. This strong dependence of the binding energy of the characteristic C(1s) peak for sp 3 carbon on the type and number density of defects in diamond samples makes the use of diamond as reference material for XPS analysis potentially misleading. This is a consequence of the large gap, i.e. the insulating nature, 