We have performed a thorough examination of the reorientational relaxation dynamics and the ionic charge transport of three typical deep eutectic solvents, ethaline, glyceline and reline by broadband dielectric spectroscopy. Our experiments cover a broad temperature range from the low-viscosity liquid down to the deeply supercooled state, allowing to investigate the significant influence of glassy freezing on the ionic charge transport in these systems. In addition, we provide evidence for a close coupling of the ionic conductivity in these materials to reorientational dipolar motions which should be considered when searching for deep eutectic solvents optimized for electrochemical applications. In recent years, the so-called deep eutectic solvents (DESs) have attracted tremendous interest, being considered as a superior alternative to ionic liquids (ILs) concerning ease of preparation, low cost, sustainability, biocompatibility and low toxicity. In the present work, we investigate the dielectric permittivity and conductivity of two typical DESs, ethaline and reline, and further analyse experimental data on glyceline that were published previously. The chemicals urea (purity > 99 %), choline chloride (purity > 98 %) and ethylene glycol (purity > 99 %) were purchased from Alfa Aesar and used as received. The DESs ethaline (ChCl + ethylene glycol, 1:2 molar ratio) and reline (ChCl + urea, 1:2 molar ratio) were prepared by mixing appropriate amounts of the two components inside a glass tube using a magnetic stirrer for 24 hours at 350 K. In both cases, the result was a colourless liquid without residual crystalline particles. Before the dielectric and calorimetric measurements, the water content of both samples was tested by coulometric Karl-Fischer-Titration and determined to be significantly smaller than 1 wt%. At 350 K, the reline mixture was found to exhibit a dc conductivity of about 8 mS/cm, which is of similar order as the values reported by Abbott et al. To obtain broadband dielectric data, covering a frequency range of 0.1 Hz to about 3 GHz, a frequency-response analyser (Novocontrol Alpha-A analyzer) and an impedance analyser (Keysight Technologies E4991B) with coaxial reflectometric setup Figure While two dipolar molecules (choline and ethylene glycol) exist in this DES, obviously only a single dipolar -relaxation process is observed in Fig. In dielectric loss spectra, a dipolar relaxational process should lead to a peak, located at a frequency close to the point of inflection of the corresponding step in '(). However, in Fig. Fig. The spectra of reline (Tg from DSC  205 K; Fig. To extract the intrinsic relaxation parameters, we performed simultaneous fits of the ε′ and ε′′ data of Figs. previously demonstrated to enable a proper description of electrode effects in various types of ionic conductors, including ILs and plastic crystals. Here 0 is a pre-exponential factor, D is the so-called strength parameter Table Such VFT behaviour of (T) is a characteristic property of glassforming dipolar liquids For comparison, Fig. Urea, the main component of reline, unfortunately has not been investigated in its supercooled state until now, which may be difficult to access, requiring unrealistically fast quenching. The single data point of molten urea shown in Fig. As evidenced by Fig. To further examine the relation of the ionic charge transport and molecular reorientations, Fig. This implies that a certain reorientation rate of the dipolar molecules induces a similar resistivity value, independent of the type of the reorienting hydrogen-bond donor molecule (glycerol or ethylene glycol). In marked contrast, for reline lower resistivity than in the other systems is found for the same relaxation times, the difference reaching more than a factor of 10 at high  (i.e., at low temperatures). Moreover, dc and  exhibit a small but significant deviation from proportionality as indicated by the dashed line in Fig. and their dc for given  varies within about a single decade only, with reline still the "best" concerning its relative dc resistivity at low temperatures. It is rather astonishing that such different materials, partly comprising ions as sole dipolar species (the ILs) and partly with additional dipolar molecules (the DESs), exhibit such similar coupling of ionic translation and reorientational motions. Notably, while for the same relaxation time reline exhibits the highest conductivity of the three investigated DESs (Fig. In the present work, we have provided a thorough characterization of two typical DESs, ethaline and reline, using dielectric spectroscopy, covering the complete range from the low-viscosity liquid down to the deeply supercooled state close to the glass transition. We especially have concentrated on their only scarcely investigated reorientational molecular dynamics, Most importantly, we find a close coupling of the ionic translational motions, quantified by the dc conductivity, to the reorientational motions in these DESs. Further work, especially investigating the viscosity in larger temperature regions, are necessary to clarify the question whether this coupling arises via a revolving-door mechanism, as considered for other classes of ionic conductors with reorientational degrees of freedom, 