Recent experimental observations of Weyl fermions in materials opens a new frontier of condensed matter physics. Based on first-principles calculations, we here discover Weyl fermions in a two-dimensional layered electride material Y 2 C. We find that the Y 4d orbitals and the anionic s-like orbital confined in the interstitial spaces between [Y 2 C] 2+ cationic layers are hybridized to give rise to van Have singularities near the Fermi energy E F , which induce a ferromagnetic (FM) order via the Stoner-type instability. This FM phase with broken time-reversal symmetry hosts the rotation-symmetry protected Weyl nodal lines near E F , which are converted into the multiple pairs of Weyl nodes by including spin-orbit coupling (SOC). However, we reveal that, due to its small SOC effects, Y 2 C has a topologically nontrivial drumhead-like surface state near E F as well as a very small magnetic anisotropy energy with several μeV per unit cell, consistent with the observed surface state and paramagnetism at low temperatures below ∼2 K. Our findings propose that the Brillouin zone coordinates of Weyl fermions hidden in paramagnetic electride materials would fluctuate in momentum space with random orientations of the magnetization direction. As an emerging class of low-dimensional electron systems, electrides have attracted considerable attention because of their promising prospects in both fundamental research and technological applications Among several existing 2D layered electrides, Y 2 C containing two Y atoms and one C atom within the rhombohedral primitive unit cell [see Fig. In this Letter, based on first-principles calculations [27], we report that Y 2 C behaves as paramagnetic with nearly degenerate FM Weyl semimetal states. By analyzing the electronic structures of few-layer and bulk Y 2 C, we find that the FM phase begins to be stabilized from bilayer Y 2 C via the Stonetype instability, indicating that the confined anionic electrons between the two [Y 2 C] 2+ cationic layers are associated with the appearance of FM spin ordering. For bulk Y 2 C, the hybridization of Y 4d orbitals and anionic s-like orbital produces small orbital angular momenta, which in turn contribute to a magnetic anisotropy energy (MAE) of several μeV per unit cell. This extremely small MAE invokes FM fluctuations which can provide an explanation for the experimental observation We begin by examining the relative stability of the FM and NM phases in few-layer Y 2 C with increasing the number N of layers. Figure It is noteworthy that for bilayer Y 2 C, the partial DOS (PDOS) projected onto the Y 4d orbitals and the anionic slike orbital confined in the interstitial regions between the two [Y 2 C] 2+ cationic layers exhibits sharp peaks close to E F [see Fig. In order to explain why experiments have not observed ferromagnetism even at low temperatures below ∼2 K To conclude, based on first-principles calculations, we have predicted new FM Weyl semimetal states in a 2D layered electride material Y 2 C. By a systematic study of the electronic structures of few-layer and bulk Y 2 C, we identified that the hybridization of the Y d orbitals and the anionic s-like orbital confined between the two [Y 2 C] 2+ cationic layers comprises the vHs near E F , therefore inducing an FM spin ordering to produce a Weyl semimetal. In particular, it is revealed that, due to its small SOC effects, Y 2 C has not only a drumheadlike surface state near E F characterizing WNL semimetal but also a very weak magnetic anisotropy to invoke FM fluctuations, providing an explanation for the observed surface state and paramagnetism at ∼2 K. The present exploration of Weyl fermions hidden in an apparent paramagnetic electride Y 2 C manifests the intriguing combination of topology and electride materials. By applying an external magnetic field which can easily switch the magnetization direction of Y 2 C, it is possible not only to realize the emergence of FM Weyl semimetal states but also to tune the positions of Weyl nodes. Surprisingly, since the lanthanide carbides such as Gd 2 C, Tb 2 C, Dy 2 C, Ho 2 C, and Er 2 C 