Double-clamped bistable buckled beams, as the most elegant bistable mechanisms, demonstrate great versatility in various fields, such as robotics, energy harvesting, and MEMS. However, their design is always hindered by time-consuming and expensive computations. In this work, we present a method to easily and rapidly design bistable buckled beams subjected to a transverse point force. Based on the Euler-Bernoulli beam theory, we establish a theoretical model of bistable buckled beams to characterize their snap-through properties. This model is verified against the results from an FEA model, with discrepancy less than 7%. By analyzing and simplifying our theoretical model, we derive explicit analytical expressions for critical behavioral values on the force-displacement curve of the beam. These behavioral values include critical force, critical displacement, and travel, which are generally sufficient for characterizing the snap-through properties of a bistable buckled beam. Based on these analytical formulas, we investigate the influence of a bistable buckled beam's key design parameters, including its actuation position and precompression, on its critical behavioral values, with our results validated by FEA simulations. This way, our method enables fast and computationally inexpensive design of bistable buckled beams and can guide the design of complex systems that incorporate bistable mechanisms. Bistable mechanisms, featuring their two stable equilibrium states, have been under investigation for a long time. These mechanisms are ideal as switches because power is only required for switching them from one equilibrium state to the other but not for preserving current states. Meanwhile, their rapid and large-stroke transition between two stable states during snap-through motions makes them great candidates for actuators. Thanks to these advantages, bistable structures are extensively harnessed in various engineering domains, such as MEMS Among various types of bistable mechanisms, double-clamped bistable buckled beams (Fig. Moreover, an analytical expression of the relationship between the force applied at the beam's center and the corresponding displacement was derived, making the characterization and design of the mechanism easier. Nevertheless, most of efforts were put into the modeling of bistable buckled beams under center actuation; only a few works Still, off-center actuation possesses unique behavioral properties that make it suitable for many applications. For example, compared with center actuation, off-center actuation usually requires a smaller actuating force but a longer actuating stroke In addition, off-center actuation schemes highly pertain to applications with geometric constraints at the mid-span position of the beam The design of bistable mechanisms largely relies on their snap-through characteristics. Typically, the snap-through characteristics of a bistable structure can be primarily represented by three behavioral values, i.e. the critical force F cr and the critical displacement w cr at the bistable mechanism's switching point, as well as the travel w tr at the stable equilibrium point, on its force-displacement curve, as shown in Fig. These critical behavioral values are determined by design parameters, i.e. the geometry (including the length, width and thickness of the slender beam), precompression In this work, we develop a method for the rapid design of double-clamped bistable buckled beams. Similar to Vangbo's work • A generic model of double-clamped bistable buckled beams under center and off-center point force actuation based on the Euler-Bernoulli beam theory; • Analytical formulas of a bistable beam's critical behavioral values that characterize its snap-through properties, which give rise to a rapid and computationally efficient design method of double-clamped bistable buckled beams; • An analysis of the influence of design parameters on the snap-through characteristics of bistable buckled beams, with results validated by FEA simulations; The structure of the paper is as follows: the bistable buckled system is described in Section 2; the theoretical model of bistable buckled beams is presented and simplified in Section 3; the explicit analytical expressions of the beam's snap-through characteristics are derived in Section 4; our main results and discussion are showcased in Section 5, followed by conclusions and future work in Section 6. Here we consider a clamped-clamped and initially straight elastic beam, as shown in Fig. is the parameter that indicates the position at which F is applied to the beam. In this section, a theoretical model of bistable buckled beams is derived and subsequently simplified. This model allows for characterizing snap-through property of a bistable buckled beam and enables the derivation of analytical expressions of the beam's important snap-through characteristics. According to Euler's buckling model of a double-clamped slender beam, when the axially compressed beam is undisturbed (i.e. F = 0), its behavior can be described with the following differential equation: The eigenvalues of this homogeneous Strum-Liouville problem can be denoted in form of n i L, and these eigenvalues satisfy the equation: The eigenvalues give rise to a series of nontrivial eigenfunctions of Eq. 2: The amplitudes of the functions, A i 's, are arbitrary constants. When a force F is applied to the beam, its displacement w(x) can be described as a superposition of these eigenfunctions: When a force F is applied to the beam, the superposition of eigenfunctions that makes up the beam's displacement w(x) minimizes the energy of the system under the constraint of the beam's current length, L + d 0 -d p Combining Eq. 4 and 5, we have: The energy of the system can be written as: where the three terms refer to the bending energy of the beam, the potential energy of the force, and the compression energy, respectively Therefore, we solve for the A i 's that minimize U in Eq. 7 and conform to the constraint specified by Eq. 6. We introduce a Lagrange multiplier λ in order to find the equilibrium state of the beam under a force F . We consider: The solutions A i 's should satisfy: Solving Eq. 9, with λ chosen in the same way as in Vangbo's work, we have: , with η 2 = P EI Also, combining Eq. 4 and 10, we have: Eq. 10, 11, and 12 characterize the connections among the actuating force F , the beam's displacement w, and the axial load P (P = η 2 EI) applied to the beam from side walls. Importantly, the obtained force-displacement curve can be used to characterize the mechanical properties of the bistable buckled beam. As largely mentioned in related works Moreover, recall that P (η) = η 2 EI and that we have: where P 0 and P 1 represent the axial compressive load of the first-mode and secondmode buckling, respectively. Note that the switching of the beam always features an axial load greater than P 0 but not exceeding P 1 Generally, the three critical behavioral values, F cr , w cr , and w tr on the forcedisplacement curve, are sufficient for characterizing a bistable buckled beam and facilitating its design. Given the significance of these behavioral values, it is worthwhile to develop explicit analytical expressions for each of them. The magnitude of F cr can be considered the maximum of the function F (η) in Eq. 13 when 2π < ηL < 2.86π: To simplify Eq. 16, we take advantage of the fact that the thickness of the beam h is much smaller than √ d 0 L Hence, we can assume a simplified version of Eq. 16: Notice that we have: It can be observed from Eq. 18 and 19 that the value of η that maximizes P (η) (what we will later refer to as η) and thus the maximum of P (η) are only dependent on the parameter δ. In other words, we can denote the maximum of P (η) on [2π, 2.86π] as F 0 (δ) and write: where F 0 is some function of δ. To obtain an analytical form of F 0 , we vary δ from 0.1 to 0.5, the scope of this parameter within our consideration (note that by symmetry, we only need to consider one half of the beam), and calculate the corresponding values of F 0 . We then apply curve-fitting to obtain an analytical relationship between F 0 (δ) and δ. F 0 (δ) as a function of δ is visualized in Fig. The critical displacement w cr can also be written in form of an analytical expression of the basic parameters. From Eq. 14 and 21, we have: Since we have shown that η only depends on δ, we can conclude that w cr = 2 √ d 0 Lw 0 (δ) by substituting the bulk of Eq. 22 with w 0 , some function of δ. To obtain an analytical form of w 0 , we vary the parameter δ from 0.1 to 0.5 and calculate the corresponding values of w 0 (δ). w 0 as a function of δ is displayed in Fig. Again, the curve-fitting can be reperformed for alternative analytical expressions of w 0 . Moreover, it is important to note that the critical displacement is primarily dependent on L, d 0 , and δ, a result consistent with that of Bruch et al. The initial shape of an axially compressed beam can be approximated using the cosine curve featured in the expression of w 0 (x). Thus, we have w tr = w rise 2 [1-cos(2πδ)] by definition of the travel, where w rise is the initial rise of the beam's midpoint, determined by the degree of compression. Considering Eq. 5, since we have shown that d p << d 0 , we can ignore the term d p and approximate w rise from the following relationship: It can be calculated from Eq. 24 that , and so we have: One significant observation from Eq. 23 and 25 is that the value of wcr w tr only depends on the parameter δ. The key insight is that when designing a precompressed bistable mechanism, the possible constraints on these two behavioral parameters may uniquely determine its optimal actuation position. In this section, we consider a double-clamped bistable buckled beam with its parameters given in Table To validate our model, we compare our results, the F -w and P -w curves for both center and off-center actuation of a bistable buckled beam, with results from an FEA model implemented with ABAQUS. In our model, Eq. 13 and 14 combined give rise to the F -w characteristic, while the relationship P = η 2 EI and Eq. 14 combined yield the P -w curve. With δ set to 0.5, the F -w and P -w curves of the beam are graphed and compared to data from an FEA model, as shown in Fig. In both diagrams, point a1 and a2 represent the beam's two stable equilibrium states that feature first-mode buckling (P = P 0 , ηL = 2π). Point c1 (or c2) corresponds to its unstable equilibrium state that features second-mode buckling (P = P 1 , ηL = 2.86π). Point b1 and b2 are the switching points. There is a neat agreement between the actuating force F and the compressive force P calculated from our model and from the FEA model, with errors bounded within 7% and 6%, respectively. Note that the greatest discrepancy occurs around the switching points, where the critical force is modeled fairly accurately, while the critical displacement from our model is larger than that calculated from the FEA model. This means our model suggests a premature snap-through of the bistable beam. Under an off-center actuation (δ=0.37), the F -w and P -w curves of the beam are shown in Fig. Contrary to the center actuation, the off-center actuation from the two directions results in two distinct branches in the F -w curve, as shown in both diagrams. This indicates that the switching of the beam involves a branch jump Points b1 and b2 are the switching points of the bistable beam. The results from our analytical method are consistent with the FEA simulation data. Errors on the F -w and P -w curves with respect to the FEA results are bounded within 2% and 5%, respectively. The small magnitudes of these errors greatly demonstrate the validity of our model. To facilitate the rapid design of bistable buckled bistable beams, we discuss the influence of a bistable beam's key design parameters on its snap-through characteristics, namely its critical force, critical displacement, and travel. These results are also verified by an FEA model. The impact of δ on the critical force is visualized in the F cr -δ curve in Fig. Lastly, when the design parameters of the beam are held constant, the mathematical relationship between the travel w tr and δ simply features the cosine function discussed in Section 4.3, as shown in Fig. As depicted in the Fig. In order to increase the applicability of the following analysis, we define a parameter r = d 0 L 0 that denotes the precompression rate of a bistable buckled beam. Therefore, using the expressions d 0 = rL 0 and L = (1 -r)L 0 , we derive the relationships among the behavioral parameters and r for a bistable beam with the parameter δ set to 0.43. The relationships between F cr , w cr , and w tr and the precompression rate r can be derived from Eq. 21, 23, and 25. These relationships are shown in Eq. 26 and visualized in Fig. As shown in Fig. We have proposed a mechanism that can easily and efficiently characterize the response of a double-clamped bistable buckled beam to point force actuation. Based on the Euler-Bernoulli beam theory, we have established a theoretical model of bistable buckled beams and their behavior under an actuating force. Since we have extended our simulation to beams under off-center actuation, our model is able to guide the design of this class of bistable buckled beams. Moreover, through validation with an FEA model, we have demonstrated that our proposed model is highly accurate. Our more pragmatic contribution lies in the analytical expressions of the snapthrough characteristics of a bistable buckled beam (i.e. its critical force, critical dis-placement and travel) derived from our theoretical model after some simplifications. These analytical expressions enable rapid computation of critical behavioral parameters of a bistable buckled beam and thus make its design process more efficient. Based on these analytical formulas, we have also investigated the influence of key design parameters of a bistable buckled beam (i.e. its actuation position and precompression) on its snap-through characteristics and verified our conclusions with FEA simulations. There are several directions in which we can extend our work. One of our most interesting future directions is optimization. For instance, minimizing the total energy consumption of a bistable buckled beam's snap-through motion makes it possible to adopt more compact actuators in an integrated system. In addition, a possible extension of the present work involves building models of bistable beams with other boundary conditions. Most importantly, given the complicated relationships among their design parameters and snap-through characteristics, it is worthwhile to propose a computational pipeline that designs bistable buckled beams with the specified critical behavioral values. In conclusion, we believe that our proposed analytical model is a significant step towards the fast and computationally inexpensive design of bistable buckled beams, which will be easily incorporated into more and more mechanical structures.