The ternary nitride CaZn 2 N 2 , composed only of earth-abundant elements, is a novel semiconductor with a band gap of ~1.8 eV. First-principles calculations predict that continuous Mg substitution at the Zn site will change the optical band gap in a wide range from ~3.3 eV to ~1.9 eV for Ca(Mg 1-x Zn x ) 2 N 2 (x = 0-1). In this study, we demonstrate that a solid-state reaction at ambient pressure and a high-pressure synthesis at 5 GPa produce x = 0 and 0.12, and 0.12 < x  1 polycrystalline samples, respectively. It is experimentally confirmed that the optical band gap can be continuously tuned from ~3.2 eV to ~1.8 eV, a range very close to that predicted by theory. Band-to-band photoluminescence is observed at room temperature in the ultraviolet-red region depending on x. A 2% Na doping at the Ca site of CaZn 2 N 2 converts its highly resistive state to a p-type conducting state. Particularly, the x = 0.50 sample exhibits intense green emission with a peak at 2.45 eV (506 nm) without any other emission from deep-level defects. These features meet the demands of the III-V group nitride and arsenide/phosphide light-emitting semiconductors. TOC Figure Rapid exploration of novel functional materials, composed only of earth-abundant elements, has urgently been required for the future realization of a sustainable society. Furthermore, such functional materials will lead to highly efficient energy conversion, storage, and optoelectronic functionalities, such as electron transport and light emission, and will be able to replace those materials currently being used, such as heavy, rare, and toxic elements. To fulfill such a role, nitrides are promising candidates because they are environmentally benign and remain unexplored compared with other materials systems, such as oxides, chalcogenides, and pnictides (e.g., arsenides and phosphides). The primary reason for such exploration results from the very high stability of a nitrogen molecule with triple bonding compared with an oxygen molecule, chalcogen, or pnictogen. N 2 is therefore inactive even at high temperatures and under high pressures without appropriate catalysts, which has led to the historical reluctance for the wider exploration of nitrides compared with other compounds. This is the reason associated with the requirements of more active nitrogen sources, such as ammonia and discharged plasma, for novel nitride research, which themselves involve an immense amount of time and effort to obtain. Thus, the currently commercialized nitride semiconductors have mostly been limited to III-V group nitrides, GaN and its based alloys, with appropriate band gaps intentionally tuned by solid-solution alloying techniques. A light-emitting semiconductor with electron current injection is one of the key components in practical optoelectronic devices. Although such components have been commercially used, especially the III-V group alloy semiconductors, such as (Ga,Al,In)N-and (Ga,Al,In)(As,P)-based materials, there remains a strong demand on next-generation materials to exhibit a higher performance in terms of light brightness, quantum efficiency, and color accuracy (i.e., emission bandwidth) Recent progress of materials informatics, which combines comprehensive first-principles calculations with experimental validations, has led to an acceleration in the discoveries and/or predictions of novel ternary nitride semiconductors, such as ZnSnN 2 In this study, we focused on an earth-abundant Ca(Mg 1-x Zn x ) 2 N 2 (x = 0-1) complete solid-solution nitride system because its band gap is controllable in the range of ~1.9 eV to ~3.3 eV, following the computational prediction. Here we experimentally report the validity of the prediction; that is, its band gap is tunable, the x = 0.50 sample exhibits an intense green band-to-band emission without deep defect emission even at room temperature and it can be doped to a p-type semiconductor by 2% Na doping at the Ca site. Structure and phase purity of Ca(Mg 1-x Zn x ) 2 N 2 (x = 0-1) Figure , and 0003 of the Ca(Mg 1-x Zn x ) 2 N 2 main phase, which are surrounded by dotted squares in Fig. Figure Although the undoped sample with x ≥ 0.5 was chemically stable, the Na-doped sample with x ≥ 0.5 was quite sensitive to air exposure. The temperature dependence of ρ exhibited a thermally activated-type behavior, which implied that metallic zinc did not contribute to the electronic conduction. The inset of Fig. Three polycrystalline binary nitrides, calcium nitride (Ca 3 N 2 ), magnesium nitride (Mg 3 N 2 ), and zinc nitride (Zn 3 N 2 ), were used as starting precursors for undoped (Ca 1- y Na y )(Mg 1-x Zn x ) 2 N 2 (x = 0-1, y = 0, i.e., not hole carrier-doped) polycrystalline samples. Ca 3 N 2 powder was synthesized by heating Ca metal (purity: 99.99%), which was put on a rolled Fe foil in a silica-glass tube, at 900 °C for 10 h under a N 2 gas flow atmosphere (G1 grade, flow rate of N 2 gas = 100 mL/min.). For Mg 3 N 2 powder, Mg metal (purity: 99.5%) was reacted with N 2 gas in almost the same manner as that of the Ca 3 N 2 precursor. All these processes, including heating, were performed in an Ar-filled glove box (oxygen concentration ≤ 0.0 ppm, dew point < -100 °C) without exposure to air because both the binary nitrides are sensitive to air; that is, the silica-glass tube furnace was directly connected to the glove box. Such a direct nitridization process of alkali earth metals under N 2 atmosphere is similar with previous reports To synthesize polycrystalline Ca(Mg 1-x Zn x ) 2 N 2 (x = 0 and 0.12), a conventional solid-state reaction was employed. Stoichiometric mixtures of Ca 3 N 2 , Mg 3 N 2 , and Zn 3 N 2 precursor powders with the molar ratios of Ca 3 N 2 :Mg 3 N 2 :Zn 3 N 2 = 1:2(1-x):2x were pressed into disks (size: diameter of ~6 mm and height of ~7 mm) in the glove box, which were sealed in Ar-filled stainless tubes, followed by a heating process at 1050 °C for 24 h, as has previously been reported for CaMg 2 N 2 In contrast, to synthesize Zn-substituted nitrides with higher x, Ca(Mg 1-x Zn x ) 2 N 2 (0.12 < x  1) solid-solutions, we used a belt-type high-pressure apparatus The pressure and heating temperature of the high-pressure cells, including BN capsules and pressed disks in the glove box for the synthesis of undoped and Na-doped Ca(Mg 1-x Zn x ) 2 N 2 (0.12 < x  1), were commonly increased to 5.0 GPa and 1300 °C, respectively, and they were then kept for 30 minutes. The final size of the high-pressure-synthesized samples was a diameter of ~5.5 mm and thickness of ~2 mm (after polishing). More details of the experimental procedure and apparatus of the high-pressure synthesis is reported in Ref. Crystal structures of the samples, such as crystalline phases and lattice parameters, were determined by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) with the Bragg-Brentano geometry with a Cu Kα radiation source at room temperature, where an Ar-filled O-ring-sealed sample holder was used because the Mg-rich samples (x < 0.5) were sensitive to air. The lattice parameters of the main phase were determined by the Pawley method using the TOPAS ver. 4.2 program (Karlsruhe, Germany: Bruker AXS GmbH). Rietveld analysis was performed to estimate the volume fraction of each crystalline phase observed and x in Ca(Mg 1-x Zn x ) 2 N 2 [i.e., crystallographic site occupancy of the (Mg,Zn) site] using the TOPAS program after initially determining the lattice parameters by the Pawley method because it was difficult to exactly distinguish the main phase of Ca(Mg 1-x Zn x ) 2 N 2 from some impurity phases, such as Zn and Mg 3 N 2 , by conventional spectroscopic quantitative techniques, such as X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy and electron probe microanalysis. Diffuse reflectance (R) spectra were measured at room temperature with a spectrophotometer in the wavelength (λ) region of 200-2400 nm. The obtained R spectra were converted using the Kubelka-Munk function (1-R) 2 /(2R) = α/s 