We fabricate a microscale electromechanical system, in which a suspended superconducting membrane, treated as a mechanical oscillator, capacitively couples to a superconducting microwave resonator. As the microwave driving power increases, nonmonotonic dependence of the resonance frequency of the mechanical oscillator on the driving power has been observed. We also demonstrate the optical switching of the resonance frequency of the mechanical oscillator. Theoretical models for qualitative understanding of our experimental observations are presented. Our experiment may pave the way for the application of a mechanical oscillator with its resonance frequency controlled by the electromagnetic and/or optical fields, such as a microwave-optical interface and a controllable element in a superqubit-mechanical oscillator hybrid system. There are intensive efforts for interfacing the microwave and optical domains by using various systems including the opto-electro-mechanical systems In the opto-electro-mechanical resonator, the core element is the mechanical oscillator, which has been attractive for its promising applications in both classical and quantum regimes In this letter we report an experimental implementation of controlling the resonance frequency of a mechanical oscillator with microwave and optical fields instead of the electrostatic field. We fabricate a microscale elec-tromechanical system composed of a microwave coplanar waveguide (CPW) resonator and a mechanical oscillator, which is a suspended membrane. Under a microwave driving to the microwave subsystem, we observe a nonlinear and nonmonotonic frequency shift of the mechanical subsystem due to the radiation pressure force of the field. Also we use a laser beam pressing the mechanical part to modify its resonance frequency. Because the microwave signal passing through the microwave resonator is modulated by the motion of the mechanical oscillator, we demonstrate the switching on/off of the transmission of the sidebands of the microwave signal, which is a step towards bridging the microwave and optical signals without an optical cavity. The experimental observations are qualitatively reproduced with our theoretical models. The optical photograph of our sample is shown in Fig. where L x and L y are the length and width of the suspended membrane, respectively, and the spatial ranges of vibration are x ∈ [0, L x ] and y ∈ [0, L y ], and z 0 is the oscillation amplitude. The fundamental-mode frequency is evaluated as ω 11 = √ 2πP/ρ, where P and ρ are the tension per unit length and mass per unit area, respectively. The device is located in an Oxford Triton 400 dilution refrigerator below 20 mK, with magnetic shielding at both mK and room temperature (see Fig. The transmission characteristic S 21 of the CPW resonator is measured by a vector network analyzer shown in Fig. where Z l = 1/jωC m is the VGC impedance, Z 0 = 50 Ω is the characteristic impedance of the CPW resonator and γ is the propagation constant of microwave field in the vicinity of the resonance frequency. Under the superconducting condition and neglecting the loss, the propagation constant γ approximates to the phase constant. s is the physical length of the λ/4 CPW resonator. Using Imag(Z all ) = 0, s = 4500 μm and γ = 428.8 rad/m, we obtain C m = 1.0 pF, in consistence with the estimate from the fabrication parameters. After obtaining the resonant frequency of the superconducting microwave CPW resonator, we measure the frequency of the mechanical oscillator using the frequency down-conversion technology as described previously. As shown in Fig. The observed nonmonotonic frequency shift of the mechanical oscillator can be understood by treating the device as an electromechanical resonator. Its motion is governed by the Hamiltonian where ω c is the resonance frequency of the microwave resonator, m eff and ω m are the effective mass and the resonance frequency of the mechanical oscillator, p and z are the mechanical momentum and displacement operators, a and a † are the annihilation and creation operators of the microwave resonator. a † a is the corresponding photon-number operator. The input photon flux is determined by the driving amplitude as |α in | 2 = P in / ω c , related to the input power P in . The microwave resonator is driven by a microwave field with frequency ω in , yielding a detuning ∆ = ω in -ω c . The single-photon coupling rate of the electromechanical oscillator is g 0 = ∂ω c /∂z. For our device, g 0 ≈ -αω c /d, where d ≈ 20 nm. When considering the effective displacement of the whole area of the membrane, we have α < 0.4. In a realistic experiment, α can be even smaller. We use a rough estimate of g 0 /2π ∼ -80 MHz/nm. The microwave loss of the system includes two contributions: one due to the coupling to the input and output channel yielding a decay rate κ e , the other from the intrinsic loss causing a decay rate κ i . For simplicity, we consider the critical-coupling case, i.e. κ e = κ i . For a constant driving α in leading to all time derivatives ( ȧ(t), ṗ(t), ż(t)) vanishing small, we can find the stable solutions a(t) = ā and z(t) = z that where κ = κ i + κ e . Due to the displacement, the detuning now becomes ∆ = ∆ -g 0 z. By calculating the effective mechanical susceptibility, we obtain the effective resonance frequency of the mechanical subsystem under the driving α in as where . (6) In our case, the driving is strong that the frequency change of the mechanical subsystem can be even larger than its free oscillation frequency ω m . As a result, the commonly applied fluctuation approximation, i.e. ω 0 ω m , breaks. The effective frequency ω eff can be found by numerically solving the joint Eq. 4 and then substituting the solution into Eq. 6. In fact, when the input power increases, the intra-cavity photon number |α| 2 increases, and so does the displacement z. Thus, the value of ∆ + ω m decreases rapidly. For a certain input power, the frequency ω eff reaches its maximum. Crossing this point, ∆ + ω m approaches zero. As a result, the effective frequency reduces to a small value. Thus the effective frequency has a nonmonotonic dependence on the input power as observed in our experiment, which is also confirmed by the theoretical result in Fig. Then fixing the input microwave power at 19.2 dBm as schematically illustrated by the white arrow in Fig. To understand this optically-induced frequency shift, we consider an optical pressure on the suspended membrane of the electromechanical system. Unlike typical optomechanical system where F L = 2ξP L /c is the optical force on the mechanical oscillator applied by the control laser beam with power P L , ξ is a coefficient describing how effective the laser pressure acts on the moving part, and Γ m is the mechanical decay rate. Here we simply set ξ = 1. |α| 2 indicates the intra-cavity photon number. c is the vacuum light velocity. With this light force considered, the stable solutions, āL and zL , for the cavity mode a and the mechanical displacement z are determined by the joint equations Substituting the solutions into Eq. 5, we obtain the effective mechanical resonance frequency ω eff under the laser pressure. The force F L attributed to the laser beam is equivalent to the radiation pressure from the microwave CPW resonator. It also strongly modulates the mechanical resonance frequency. In this configuration, the mechanical oscillator vibrates initially at a resonance frequency, biased by the microwave input. When the laser beam is weak, the microwave radiation force is dominant. As the laser power increases, the light pressure presses the membrane and zL becomes larger and larger. Thus, the effective detuning, ∆ = ∆ -g 0 zL increases. As a result, the intra-cavity photon number rapidly reduces, leading to smaller radiation force from the microwave field. When the laser beam is weak, the microwave radiation force is dominant and the total force on the membrane reduces. Thus the effective resonance frequency of the mechanical oscillator decreases rapidly. At a certain laser power, the frequency ω m reaches its minimum. When the laser power increases further to become dominant over the microwave radiation force, the total force pressing the membrane increases again. Thus the effective mechanical resonance frequency increases but at a smaller rate. For a very strong laser beam, both the light pressure and the displacement zL increases at constant rates, resulting in the saturation of ω m . Numerically solving Eq. 8, we find the effective mechanical resonance frequency as a function of a constant laser power. As shown in Fig. With the laser, we can optically control the sideband signals of the probe microwave field in our device. The key idea is to apply a temporally modulated laser beam to the movable membrane and thus to change the capacitor C m . In doing so, we dynamically modulate the resonance frequency of the microwave CPW resonator and subsequently its sideband signals. Experimentally, a rectangular voltage pulse is used to modulate the laser power. When the rectangular voltage pulse is on a high level, a laser beam is applied to press the suspended membrane. This pressure causes a frequency shift to the mechanical resonator, and thus the sideband signals of the resonant frequency in the microwave CPW resonator. The duration of such "on"-state laser beam is controlled by the duty ration of the rectangular voltage pulse. The spectrum of down-converted microwave sideband signal is presented in Fig. Figure To summarize, we fabricate a superconducting electromechanical system and modulate its mechanical frequency with both the microwave and optical fields. We first drive the microwave resonator strongly with the microwave field and observe large but nonmonotonic mechanical frequency shifts. By applying a laser beam to the mechanical membrane, we further demonstrate the optical control of the mechanical frequency and thus the transmission of the sideband signals of the microwave through the microwave CPW resonator. The developed device may work as an interface for microwave and optical domains. Also, the scenario demonstrated here has the potential in controlling a superconducting qubit coupled to a mechanical oscillator 