The predictive modeling of lattice thermal conductivity is of fundamental importance for the understanding and design of materials for a wide range of applications. Two major approaches, namely molecular dynamics (MD) simulations and calculations solving approximately the Boltzmann transport equation (BTE), have been developed to compute the lattice thermal conductivity. We present a detailed direct comparison of these two approaches, using as prototypical cases MgO and PbTe. The comparison, carried out using empirical potentials, takes into account the effects of fourth order phonon scattering, temperature-dependent phonon frequencies (phonon renormalization), and investigates the effects of quantum vs. classical statistics. We clarify that equipartition, as opposed to Maxwell Boltzmann, govern the statistics of phonons in MD simulations. We find that lattice thermal conductivity values from MD and BTE show an apparent, satisfactory agreement; however such an agreement is the result of error cancellations. We also show that the primary effect of statistics on thermal conductivity is via the scattering rate dependence on phonon populations. Thermal transport properties are important for myriad materials, including thermoelectrics, (opto)electronics, photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical cells, and batteries. To facilitate fundamental understanding and materials design, the accurate prediction of thermal transport coefficients is critical. A multitude of methodologies have been introduced to facilitate such prediction. Of particular significance are two categories of methods, based either on considering atomic motion (molecular dynamics, MD) or collective vibrational excitations, i.e. phonons in solids (anharmonic lattice dynamics, ALD). Over the years, several MD-based approaches have been developed to compute the thermal conductivity in bulk crystalline and amorphous materials, nanostructures, and fluids, with the central premise of tracking heat flow through atomic motion. In the Green-Kubo (GK) method, based on the fluctuation-dissipation theorem, the thermal conductivity is calculated from the fluctuations of the heat correlation function during an equilibrium simulation, in the NVE ensemble. Non Equilibrium (NE) methods compute the thermal conductivity in the steady state from the response of the system to a perturbation. They can be classified according to the nature of the perturbation: in the older direct method it is a temperature gradient causing a heat flux Typically, GK calculations are performed using classical MD where the potential energy is given by an interatomic potential as a function of the positions of the atoms. Recently, Nonetheless, the GK method suffers from three deficiencies: (i) being based on classical MD, it is not known how to include quantum effects such as zero point energy or quantization of the phonon energy levels, leading to lower accuracy at low temperatures. This problem is of a theoretical nature and, to our knowledge, has not been solved, although semi-empirical corrections have been proposed We refer to The BTE-ALD approach is more advantageous compared with MD-based method in the following respect: (i) the quantum (Bose-Einstein) statistics is utilized, thus In an earlier study (3) Green-Kubo and direct molecular dynamics, to assess their validity. They pointed out that the lattice dynamics calculations tend to underestimate lattice thermal conductivity at above half of the Debye temperature. However, their lattice dynamics calculations excluded higher-than-third-order anharmonic phonon-phonon interactions. In addition, the impact of different statistics (quantum vs. classical) on calculated thermal conductivity was not clarified. In a follow-on study, the same authors In the current work, we aim to provide a controlled, comprehensive, and systematic comparison of MD vs. ALD-BTE based approaches for the prediction of lattice thermal conductivity. In order to accomplish a meaningful comparison, we select two representative systems: a small-gap semiconductor with low lattice thermal conductivity (PbTe), and an insulator with higher lattice thermal conductivity (MgO). These two materials have the further advantage of having simple structures. For each material, we use MD and BTE-ALD, with the same interatomic potential, to evaluate the temperature-dependent values of the lattice thermal conductivity well below, near, and well above their respective Debye temperatures. We further investigate the source of the differences between the two approaches by deriving lifetimes from MD simulations, enumerating heat capacities and phonon occupancies under different treatment of statistics, and using these quantities in the BTE expression. The goal is to determine the underlying physical reasons for divergences and convergences between the two approaches. To ensure that any differences in computed thermal conductivity arise solely from the treatment of heat transport (i.e. atoms vs. phonons), we used the same interatomic potential for both MD and BTE calculations. For MgO, we used the potential described in Ref. In the GK formalism, the thermal conductivity is given by where the brackets • indicate the thermodynamic average and J is the heat flux due to spontaneous fluctuations. All classical simulations were performed using LAMMPS Ref. Before starting our simulations, we compute the phonon frequencies and eigenvectors for the target temperature using the phonon renormalization (PRN) scheme described in Ref. where K and V are, respectively, the kinetic and potential components of the energy of the phonon mode. The kinetic component is calculated from the projection q of the phonon mode on the velocities v of the atoms. The potential component is calculated by projecting onto the displacement u of the atoms from their equilibrium positions r 0 , i.e. Here, l and b are indices over the primitive cells and the atoms inside a primitive cell, respectively. N is the number of atoms in the system, m b is the mass of atom b, and ω λ is the frequency of the phonon mode λ. The displacement u is given by u(t) = r(t) -r 0 (t). The vector e b,λ describes the direction and phase of the displacement of atom b due to the phonon with wavevector k and polarization λ. The lifetime of each phonon mode is then calculated from the normalized autocorrelation of the energy: In order to reduce the noise due to the tail of the autocorrelation, we compute the lifetime from a fit to the equation E λ (0)E λ (t) E λ (0)E λ (0) = e -t/τ λ Nose-Hoover thermostat. The approach described to obtain lifetimes relies on the definition of phonons in the quasi-harmonic approximation. The classical Hamiltonian of the system can be rewritten, in the harmonic approximation, as a sum of kinetic and potential energy over phonon modes: As a consequence of the equipartition theorem, the average kinetic and potential energy for each phonon mode is equal to k B T /2. Each phonon mode has an average energy and phonon number given by: From the procedure used to calculate the phonon lifetimes, described above, we can obtain the phonon energy averaged over time 10 -0.5 10 0. 10 0.5 10 1. 10 1.5 Frequency HTHzL Phonon population 10 -0.5 10 0. 10 0.5 10 1. 10 1.5 Frequency HTHzL Phonon population 10 -0.5 10 0. 10 0.5 10 1. 10 1.5 Frequency HTHzL Phonon population Frequency HTHzL Phonon population Frequency HTHzL Phonon population Our results for phonon numbers for MgO and PbTe at various temperatures are shown in Figure statistics. The computed distributions deviate significantly from those of the MB distribution, illustrating that classical phonons in MD are distributed not via MB but equipartition (EQ). The computed distributions deviate also from BE statistics but the agreement improves with increasing temperature, as expected. Phonon frequencies are dependent on temperature due to different degrees of atomic displacements from their equilibrium positions as a function of T, amounting to sampling different portions of the anharmonic potential energy surfaces. This change in phonon frequencies as a function of T (which we call shift in phonon frequencies relative to their T=0 value, or phonon renormalization) manifests in MD simulations. In our analysis, we compute the frequency shift from the kinetic part K λ (t) of the phonon mode energy. We fit its normalized time autocorrelation function to the equation where we added the dependence (T ) to the frequency ω λ . The frequency shift is then defined as the difference between the frequency obtained during MD simulations and that obtained from diagonalizing the dynamical matrix at T=0. Note that this procedure does not include effects arising from the temperature-dependent change in lattice constant, as we compute both frequencies at the same lattice constant. C. Anharmonic Lattice Dynamics and Boltzmann Transport Equation The Boltzmann transport equation (BTE) can be used to describe the time evolution of the positions and momenta of a system of particles, e.g. phonons. According to the BTE, at equilibrium the evolution of the occupation probability n λ of a specific phonon mode λ due to diffusion, scattering, and the presence of an external heat current must balance: Under the relaxation time approximation (RTA), the scattering term can be expressed as where n 0 λ and τ λ denote the equilibrium occupation probability and relaxation time, respectively. Under an external temperature gradient ∆T , the deviation of the occupation number from its equilibrium value λ is given by where v λ is the phonon group velocity vector. In the linear regime, the lattice thermal conductivity tensor is defined by where J α is the heat current along α direction and can be obtained as where k denotes the phonon wave vector. The resulting lattice thermal conductivity tensor within the RTA is where k B is the Boltzmann constant, V is the volume of unit cell, N is the total number of phonon wave vectors included in the summation, ω λ and v λ are the frequency and group velocity of phonon mode λ, with Cartesian coordinates indexed by α and β. Typically, ω λ and v λ are extracted from phonon dispersions in the harmonic approximation, assuming small atomic displacements, by computing second-derivatives of the potential energy with respect to atomic displacements. Within the framework of anharmonic lattice dynamics, τ λ is assumed to arise primarily from intrinsic phonon-phonon scattering events Most recently, Feng and Ruan . near/above the Debye temperature. Following their derivation based on Fermi's golden rule (FGR) with where V (3) ± and V ±± are in turn given by In the above equations, l, b, and α are indexes of primitive cells, basis atoms, and cartesian coordinates, respectively; m is the atomic mass, and r is the lattice vector of the primitive cell; k, n 0 λ , ω λ , and e λ are phonon wave vector, equilibrium occupation number, frequency, and eigenvector, respectively; 3 are the third and fourth order IFCs, respectively. In the three-phonon processes, ζ -represents the splitting process (λ → ) in the four-phonon processes 3,λ and τ -1 4,λ , respectively. In the BTE-ALD calculations, for both MgO and PbTe, we used 6×6×6 supercells to extract harmonic and anharmonic interatomic force constants (IFCs) up to the fourth order using compressive sensing lattice dynamics Phonon BTE under RTA can be linearized; when solved non-self-consistently, their solutions are within the so-called single mode relaxation approximation (SMRTA) and when solved iteratively, they are within the relaxation time approximation (IRTA), respectively. Within the SMRTA, scattering rates arise from both normal (N ) and Umklapp (U ) processes, which lead to underestimation of κ l since N processes do not introduce thermal resistance directly. For systems with significant N processes, an iterative solution to the linearized BTE should be pursued by accounting for nonequilibrium phonon distribution through iteratively refining phonon populations Several first-principles phonon renormalization (PRN) schemes based either on real or reciprocal space formalisms have been introduced to treat strong anharmonicity effects on phonon frequencies The temperature effects are taken into account via constructing temperature-dependent effective harmonic potential coefficients [ In the expression of the thermal conductivity obtained from the BTE, the phonon statistics enter both the definition of the heat capacity and that of the scattering rates (inverse of relaxation time). According to Bose-Einstein (BE) statistics, the phonon population of mode λ in equilibrium is which leads to a mode heat capacity of In the classical (equipartition) limit, each phonon mode has an energy of k B T and population of k B T / ω λ , thus giving rise to a temperature-independent mode heat capacity of k B . The classical limit always overestimates the heat capacity (see Fig. As rigorously derived by Feng and Ruan It is instructive to compare the phonon frequencies and their changes as a function of temperature obtained using the two different approaches. Fig. Fig. We compare the phonon mode-resolved scattering rates of MgO and PbTe obtained from MD and ALD at various temperatures in Fig. Scattering rates . temperatures. We notice that, for both MgO and PbTe, scattering rates of acoustic modes obtained from the two methods agree well with each other, while those of optical modes are found to be smaller from MD simulations, but with decreased discrepancy between MD and ALD at high temperatures. We note that the larger discrepancy associated with the high-lying optical modes at relatively low temperatures might be due to the break down of relaxation time approximation when equipartition is assumed for phonon population in the linearized BTE, while high temperature tends to reduce such discrepancy, as pointed out by by Feng and Ruan This agreement, however, may be accidental or suggest error cancellations. depend on the populations n of various phonon modes. The effect of these differences is rather difficult to estimate, even limiting ourselves to three phonon processes in the SMRTA, due for example to the form of equation 19, involving both a sum and a difference between different phonon populations. To reveal the role of the higher-than-third-order phonon scattering processes in determining overall phonon scattering rates, we show the decomposed total scattering rates by separating them into contributions from three-and four-phonon processes for MgO and PbTe in Fig. Here we discuss our finding, summarized in Table For PbTe, however, the agreement is only satisfactory (within 16%). This agreement is better than previous comparisons (e.g. Ref. One significant difference between the MD and BTE approaches is the inclusion of phonon scattering processes to all orders in MD, as opposed to the order-by-order expansion in BTE. Because the rate of scattering processes at different orders are summed, i.e. via Matthiessen's rule, the inclusion of higher order should reduce the lifetimes and therefore the thermal conductivity. Indeed, substituting lifetimes from MD into the BTE expression with the BE expression for heat capacity (A2) results in lower thermal conductivity values compared to using BTE lifetimes (A4), due to the inclusion of higher-order scattering processes in MD. Because of the computation of the lifetimes using energy autocorrelation functions, the dissipative vs non-dissipative effects of umklapp vs normal processes, respectively, are also preserved. The effects of statistics on the heat capacity and the corresponding effects on thermal conductivity can be made apparent by considering the changes in predicted values as the heat capacity is evaluated using equipartition (A1, A3, A5) or Bose-Einstein statistics (A2, A4, A6), when the treatment of the lifetimes is held constant. Since classical heat capacities are consistently higher, and especially so at low temperatures, than Bose-Einstein heat capacities, the thermal conductivity values are also higher in A1, A3, and A5 than in A2, A4, and A6, respectively. The difference decreases with increasing temperature as expected. Moreover, we find that using BE heat capacities with MD lifetimes (A2) worsens rather than improves the agreement with the BTE-ALD results (A4). In agreement with Ref. As mentioned above, phonon occupations also directly affect scattering rates calculated from three-and four-phonon scattering processes. This effect is apparent from a comparison between A4 and A6. It is seen that changing the occupation numbers to those corresponding to equipartition (A6) rather than the Bose-Einstein distribution (A4), without changing the heat capacity, changes the thermal conductivity significantly (up to 24%). Note also, that the effect of statistics on scattering rates is significantly larger than the effects of statistics on heat capacities. For example, the differences between A5 and A6 is smaller than those between A4 and A6. Interestingly, substituting MD lifetimes as well as heat capacities evaluated with equipartition into the BTE expression (A1) results in thermal conductivity values which are significantly different from those obtained from the Green Kubo expression (A7). The difference is likely due to the single-mode approximation used in the BTE approach. This highlights the fact that apart from treatments of lifetimes and heat capacities, the summation according to phonon modes in and of itself introduces a difference between BTE and MD methods for computing thermal conductivity. In conclusion, we have presented a detailed comparison between molecular dynamics (MD) and Boltzmann Transport Equation using anharmonic lattice dynamics (BTE-ALD) approaches for the computation of thermal conductivity. Improvements in BTE-ALD such as the inclusion of fourth-order phonon scattering processes, and treatment of temperaturedependent phonon frequency shifts (phonon renormalization) were included. Issues regarding the proper treatment of statistics in MD simulations, namely classical equipartition rather than Maxwell Boltzmann, were addressed. Thermal conductivity values were found to agree well between BTE-ALD and Green-Kubo (GK) MD, but a detailed analysis showed that such agreements are introduced by cancellations of different errors. By substituting lifetimes derived from energy-energy autocorrelation function from MD simulations into the BTE expression, we determined the effects of higher-than-4th-order phonon processes, the effects of statistics via the lifetimes and heat capacities, and the effects of single-mode relaxation time approximation itself, to the calculation of thermal conductivity. Significantly, we find that the effects of statistics on thermal conductivity is primarily due to effects on scattering rates. We also find that a full substitution of MD lifetimes and heat capacities in the BTE expression fails to reproduce GK results, indicating a significant effect of single-mode relaxation time treatment on thermal conductivity. One significant lesson from this comparison is that for integrated properties such as transport coefficients, apparent agreement may mask fundamental physical differences, thus caution is advised in the interpretation of the results. Supplemental Materials: Computational prediction of lattice thermal conductivity -a comparison of molecular dynamics and Boltzmann transport approaches . The essential ingredients for the calculation of τ -1 λ are harmonic and anharmonic interatomic force constants (IFCs). We utilized our recently-developed compressive sensing lattice dynamics (CSLD) where F is a vector composed of atomic forces calculated by DFT, and A is a matrix formed by the products the atomic displacements. The parameter μ is a tuning parameter used to control the relative weights of the force fitting error versus the sparsity of Φ components. Since (1) small μ leads to sparse solution of Φ at the expense of the accuracy of the fitted Φ ("underfitting") and ( Freqency HTHzL Different from Fig. 