We report on the structural and superconducting properties of nanocrystalline tungsten thin films growth by sputtering at room temperature with an N 2 :Ar mixture (N 2 from 3% to 50%). The crystalline phases were identified by comparing as-grown and thermal annealed thin films. For N 2 /(Ar+N 2 ) mixtures between 3 and 10 %, the films display nanocrystalline β-W phase. Coexistence of β-W and W 2 N phases are observed for gas mixtures with N 2 between 20 % and 40%. A detailed study of the superconducting properties as function of the thickness was performed for W films growth with 8 % N 2 mixtures. For this concentration, the nitrogen atoms increase the disorder at the nanoscale reducing the grain size and avoiding the crystallization of α-W. The superconducting critical temperature (T c = 4.7 K) is thickness independent for films thicker than ~ 17 nm. Below this thickness, the T c value decreases systematically being 3.1 K for 4 nm thick films. Our study provides a simple method for the fabrication of nanocrystalline β-W thin films with potential applications in superconducting devices. Tungsten is a metal with several applications in micro-electromechanical devices For example, nanocrystalline W thin films with coexistence of β-and αphases can be obtained by sputtering at room temperature In this work, we analyze the presence of superconductivity in nanometric grain size W thin films growth at room temperature in an N 2 /Ar mixture (N 2 from 3% to 50%). The results show that the microstructure, crystalline structure and the presence of superconductivity depend on the N 2 concentration in the gas mixture. The comparison between as-grown and thermal annealed films shows that the superconductivity can be related to nanocrystalline β-W phase and amorphous phases. We study in detail the superconducting properties for films growth with an 8% N 2 mixture. For this concentration, no features related with W 2 N were observed for X-ray diffraction in asgrown samples (nitrogen is mainly an interstitial impurity). The study of the superconducting properties was performed for films with thickness between 3 nm and 160 nm. The superconducting critical temperature (T c = 4.7 K) is thickness independent for films thicker than ~ 17 nm. Below this thickness, the T c value decreases systematically being 3.1 K for 4 nm thick films. The analysis of the upper critical fields H c2 indicates that the extrapolated value at zero increases as the films thickness decreases, which can be related to changes in the microstructure and reduction in the grain size average. W films were deposited on Si (100) wafers by sputtering in an Ar / N 2 mixture. The substrates (≈ 1x10 -4 m 2 ) were etched with HF 6%. The films were grown using a power of 50 watts with a 99.99% purity W target (diameter: 0.038 m). During the deposition, the substrate is positioned directly over the targets at ∼0.055 m. The substrate temperature was modified from room temperature (RT) to 673 K. The base pressure was ≈ 6.7x10 -5 Pa. The total pressure during the deposition of the films was kept constant in 0.67 Pa. The N 2 partial pressure was modified from 3% to 50%. Ultra-high purity Ar (99.999%) and N 2 (99.999%) were used as gas sources. The deposition rate is ≈ 23 nm/min for N 2 concentrations between 3 and 10 % and decreases systematically to ≈ 20 nm/min for gas mixtures with 50 % of N 2 . Thermal annealing was performed in a vacuum atmosphere (≈1.33x10 -4 Pa) at 973 K. Wherever used, the notation [dWX-T], indicates a tungsten film with a thickness of d [nm], and X nitrogen [%] mixture and T the growth temperature [K], respectively. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was used to characterize the crystal structure of the films (Panalytical Empyrean equipment). The structural analysis was performed based on Θ-2Θ scans under Cu Kα radiation operated at 40 kV and 30 mA using an angular resolution of 0.02°. The film thickness was calibrated by low-angle X-ray reflectivity (XRR). Profile fitting was done using the Parratt32 code Figure Most of the films display superconductivity with T c between 3 K and 4.9 K (see Fig. The exception is [155W20-RT]. The T c values are in the range of amorphous W Moreover, for N 2 mixtures lower than 10%, the fluctuations in T c are similar to that reported in ref. To analyze the influence of deposition temperature on the microstructure and the electrical transport, 160 nm thick W thin films were grown at different temperatures using an 8% N 2 mixture. Figure [160W8-573] and [160W8-673]. All the samples display a peak that can be attributed to the (210) β reflection. The peak is systematically narrow and shifted to higher angles when the deposition temperature is increased. The reduction in the peak width can be related with an increment in the grain size average. The shift in the peak position and the asymmetry to higher angles can be related with crystallization α-W and overlapping of the (210) β and (200) α reflections (see for example [160W8-673]). It is important to note that the asymmetry corresponding to the (200) α reflection is lesser evidenced at 673 K than 473 K. The differences may be related to an increment in the grain size and a better overlapping due to a reduction of the peak width. Figure H is related to the geometry -∝ To understand the influence of the dimension on the superconducting properties of nanocrystalline β-W thin films, we growth samples at room temperature using an 8% N 2 mixture with a thickness between 3 and 160 nm. The thicknesses were determined from the fits. Figure Figure The resulting growth rate average is of 21.0 (0.5) nm/min. Figure The temperature dependence of H in the thin films with thickness lower than approximately 4.4ξ can be analyzed in the 2D limits: with ξ (0) = (ξ 0 l) 1⁄2 (l is the mean free path and ξ 0 the coherence length in the clean limit). The equation consider that in the dirty limit ξ(T) = 0.855ξ(0) (1-(T/T c )) -1/2 Although the predicted temperature dependences of superconducting parameters are for T→ T c , they usually are valid over a much wider temperature range. The fits using eq. 2 for || 2 c H [8W8-RT] with ξ (0) = 6.0 nm and [17W8-RT] with ξ (0) = 6.4 nm are in good agreement with the experimental data. It is important to note that for [8W8-RT], || 2 c H (2.8K) = 16 T and the extrapolation to zero is above 26 T. These values are above to the Pauli paramagnetic limit H p ≈ 1.84 T c (in Tesla for T c in Kelvin) for isotropic BCS superconductors The superconducting and microstructural properties of W thin films fabricated by sputtering in N 2 :Ar mixtures were studied. The microstructure and phases are strongly affected by the gas mixture. Nanocrystalline β-W phase is obtained for N 2 concentration between 3% and 10 %. Thin films growth at RT using N 2 concentration between 20 % and 40 % display coexistence of β-W and W 2 N phases. It is important to note that for N 2 concentration up 10 %, the nitrogen stabilizes the β-W phase. This behavior is different to other metals such as tantalum The study of the superconducting properties is focused in nanocrystalline β-W thin films growth at RT using 8% N 2 mixtures. Coexistence of β-W and α-W phases can be induced by both thermal annealing and increment in the deposition temperature. The phase coexistence reduces the superconductor volume. The superconducting critical temperature (T c = 4.7 K) is thickness independent for films thicker than ~ 17 nm. The $ % 2 (T) dependences are well described by the WHH model for single band superconductors in the dirty limit. The extrapolated H c2 (0) values increase as the thickness reduces, which can be related to changes in the microstructure (small grain sizes for thinner films). On the other hand, the || 2 c H (T) dependences, depending on thickness, are well described considering surface superconductivity and the 2D model. Our study provides a simple method for the fabrication of nanocrystalline β-W with potential applications in superconducting devices. 