The electronic density of state and optical properties of the SI methane hydrates with three different configurations are calculated by first-principle, including (abbreviated as cI, similarly hereinafter), each cage is fully filled with only one methane molecule; (cII), only one of the small cage lacks its unique methane molecule; (cIII), only one large cage lacks its unique methane molecule. The results show that the hydrate is most stable in the cI due to its perfect structure, the cII is less stable, whereas the cIII is least stable owing to its larger structural distortion after the loss of methane. On the contrary, loss of a methane from cII causes negligible deformation. The electronic density of states and the energy band gap of the cII is almost the same with those of cI, differing obviously with those of cIII. Methane hydrate is only responsive to light in the ultraviolet region, revealing their similar properties, regardless of their structural discrepancies, or/and the different ratios of water and methane molecules, 46/8=5.75 versus 46/7=6.57. Our calculations demonstrate that the lack of one methane in the cII causes negligible influence to the lattice structure and therefore to the electronic and optical properties in comparison with the cI, whereas the lack of one methane in the cIII can cause detectable changes. These results might provide valuable reference to the industrial exploration. Since gas hydrate plays an important role in potential energy, global climate change, submarine geological environment, and natural gas pipeline transportation, it has been an important issue in recent years Hydrates have three different kinds of crystal structures, consisting of cubic structure I (SI), cubic structure II (SII), or hexagonal structure H (SH), respectively. Ideally, all cavities are filled with one methane molecule. For ideal hydrates, the hydration number of the structure I (the water molecule number per guest molecule) is 5.75 (46/8). Amadeu K. Sum et al In the detection of hydrate reserves in seabed sediments, seismic velocity techniques as well as bottom simulating reflections are the main remote means Unfortunately, these parameters are relatively lacking and controversial. In some literatures, the dielectric constant of hydrates is substituted by the dielectric constant of ice In this work, we use a first-principle method to calculate the electronic and optical properties of hydrates in order to obtain the important parameters such as dielectric coefficients. First principle method is widely used tool to study the solid state physics till now . Since hydrates are non-stoichiometric substances, it is required to consider the effects of different cage occupancy for these parameters. In addition to the calculation of the cI (the correspondent hydration number is 46/8 = 5.75), we also performed the same calculation for the cII and cIII (hydration number 46/7 = 6.57, the cage occupancy rate is 87.5%.). We intend to reveal the effect of cage occupancy to the optical and electrical properties. In this paper, the hydrate coordinates are determined according to the available literature The energy cutoff for plane-wave expansion was set to 600 eV. The first Brillouin zone sampling was chosen as 2×2×2 k-point mesh per unit cell . The optimized forces on all atoms were converged to below 0.02 eV/Å. Electronic relaxations were converged to within 1×10 -8 eV. The optical properties were calculated by CASTEP code We carry out first-principles calculations for three different types of SI-hydrate structures, including: (I), each cage is filled with methane molecules in the unit cell (46 water molecules, including 6 large cages, 5 The ideal structure is that each cavity is fully filled with one methane molecule, as shown in Figure The relaxed cell parameters are a=b=c=11.62 Å, with a cell volume of 1568.98 Å 3 , ===90.0゚. and one large cage (right), the nearly spherical shape of small cage is clearly seen. The relaxed cell parameters are shown in Table The fully filled cage (cI) has a distance of 3.77 Å between the C and O atoms in the small cage, slightly smaller than that of experimental data, 3.95 Å We calculated the electronic density of state (DOS) for the three configurations, as shown in Figure The real and imaginary components of the dielectric coefficient at different frequencies for the three configurations are shown in Figure eV in the methane absence of large cage, which results in the profile more flat and enhances the detectability. The static dielectric constants are 1.7 for the three configurations, far smaller than some literature reports ~58 [1,56], resulting mainly from the large contribution of proton disorder. The dielectric constant appears to be insensitive to the trapped methane molecules, depending mainly on the cage-shaped structure of the water molecule based on the general profile invariance nature. The proton disorder play a dominant role for the dielectric constant of ice or hydrate, and its calculation formula is [56-60] . Where ε0 is the optical dielectric constant and M is the electric dipole moment. The optical dielectric constant ε0 is set equal to 1.592 Here, the apparent dielectric constant is the dielectric constant of the mixture other than the pure hydrate. The is 4.0556 when the water content is zero. Our calculated dielectric constant is only involved for the electrons, which is equivalent to ε0, that is, the optical permittivity. Protons and their optical effects have been neglected. Obviously, the dielectric constant value of methane hydrate is still controversial. Since the protons disorder effects have been neglected, the results obtained here can be used as a reference to the value of ε0 in (1). The reflectivity index for the three configurations are shown in Figures 6. Similarly The absorption, refractive index, extinction spectrum and energy loss spectrum are shown in Figure The reflected light of the gas hydrate is distributed at the ultraviolet region, which is true in the other optical properties. The absorption peak reflects the transition of water 2p electrons. A wide platform of peak maximum totally agree with the complicated O 2p and H 1s DOS in cIII. Furthmore, the maximum absorption intensity is also decreased, originating from the decreased PDOS of water. The refractivity index presents similar variations with those of dielectric constant. In fact, the intensities of these four functions show strong structure dependence, that is, the general profiles remain almost unchanged. The intensity of conductivity index is substantially decreased and also present similar profile with that of absorption coefficient, agreeing with the fact of large energy level shift in PDOS of methane. The most sensitivity region locates at 6~8 eV for all these optical properties. It is therefore reasonable to infer that these properties are dominated by the host molecule cage framework structure. The guest molecule does not play decisive role in the optical properties. The lattice structure is more stable when a methane molecule is removed from a small cage than that of large cage because the small cage is nearly spherical symmetry and its equivalent chemical 