In this paper, we propose a microcavity supported by a designed photonic crystal (PhC) structure that supplies both tunability of cavity modes and cavity's quality factor. Low symmetric defect region provides a trigger effect for the frequency shifting by means of rotational manipulation of small symmetry elements. Deviation of effective filling ratio as a result of rotational modification within the defect region results in the emanation of cavity modes at different frequencies. Here, we numerically demonstrate the frequency shifting for each obtained mode with respect to defect region architecture. In addition to wavelength tunability, quality factor, mode volume, and Purcell factors are analyzed for the slightly modified structures. Also, electric field distributions of each mode that emerge at distinct frequencies have been also studied at adjusted frequency modes which are observed for all rotational modification scenarios as θ Rot = [0°, 15°, 30°, 45°]. After the investigations in 2D of silicon material (ɛ r = 12), 3D simulations are performed and the collected data is used for the stacking approximation of 3D structures to get the 2D, thus the crosschecking of the quality factor that acquired from the 2D simulation can be executed by comparison with 3D. Limited 3D results are projected to approximate 2D ones step by step and get an exponential trend which reaches in the limit to the ~10 8 value for Ԛ-factor. Besides, 2D and 3D simulations of alumina (ɛ r = 9.61) in terms of mode analysis and quality factor have been repeated considering the microwave experiments. Therefore, experimental analysis is compared with the numerical results and good agreement between the two is found. Photonic crystals (PhC) are novel structures which have the ability of manipulation of light. A conceived PhC structure can manipulate the light behavior in many appealing ways and cavity effect is an intriguing one so that the surge of interest has increased in last decays. A PhC cavity provides a medium for the localization of light inside the structure by utilizing localized defects. Light is gathered into a small mode volume approximately in optical-wavelength dimensions whilst it is passing through the PhC, this behavior results of horizontal and vertical localization effect which is triggered by Distributed Bragg Reflection (DBR) and Total Internal Reflection (TIR). As is known, TIR can be described by the way of the k vector placement according to the light cone, which is directly associated with photonic band structure. In accordance with approximation, frequencies which take part above the light line are not allowed to propagate along the structure and they are known by the name of radiation modes. Whereas, the frequencies below the light line represents allowed modes and they named by guided modes. The contribution of the TIR to performance of any cavity is related to allowed mode portion. Vertically confined guided modes, resulting of TIR and they come to exist owing to defects belonging the structure, which are controllable for all structures. Otherwise, 3D structures can not exploit from the light due to failure to provide the TIR requirements totally, despite small mode volumes are still consistent, they sense this phenomenon as a loss mechanism and consequently these out of plane losses cause drastic decline of the vertical performance of the cavity according to 2D systems, which ensure the vertical localization In the present work, two-dimensional square lattice PhC possessing defect region is investigated such that symmetry reduced configuration allows resonance mode tenability via rotational symmetrywithout any change in the filling ratio of the defect site. We will provide first numerical result both in frequency and time domains and microwave experimental verification is conducted. In this paper, we claim that the low symmetric PhC structures are good candidates to gather the cavity modes tunability owing to rotational tailoring without renounce of the performance of the cavity. In this stage, it has been observed that the equal x and y dimensions of structure help the light confinement and, enhance the cavity performance as a result of an effect which can be defined as symmetric mirror effect. By taking consider this clue, cavity design has been iterated on the way of structures that has equal x and y dimensions. Also, one of the further requirements to the occurrence of cavity effect is verification of an optimum layer number which surrounds the cavity region. After a series of the number of layer iterations, the optimum layer number is stated as 15a in this study. Eventually, the structural iterations which based on to find the ideal condition to establish a cavity region show that it has been achieved to the high-performance cavity design with a relatively compact array with 15a × 15a size. The mentioned regular PhC structure with a low symmetric defect region is shown in figure According to this relation, a convergence from the normalized frequency of bands to the wavelengths of the transmission can be possible. We introduce transmission peaks for each of rotational angle within a broad range to realize the mode shifts in wavelengths, these analyses have repeated for all existing modes for the designed structure. The mode identification has performed in an exact way with parallel analyses of electric field distributions, that we will discuss later. Without any hesitation, a big portion of peak shifting is observed at the second mode (M 2 ) which is used for telecom wavelength, which can be given as λ respectively. By considering the various type of wavelength tuning cavity studies in terms of modifications; position Investigations show that the most reasonable results are obtained for the M 2 which is supported by the wavelengths as λ 2 = [1561 nm, 1571 nm, 1589 nm, 1597 nm] for θ Rot = [0°, 15°, 30°, 45°] rotational angles. Therefore, it is decided that to focus for deeper investigations on this wavelength and three-dimensional (3D) analyses are carried out by considering finite thicknesses of the structure long the third dimension specifically out-of-plane direction. Before presenting the 3D analyses of cavity structure, it should be mentioned briefly the mode volume, which is related to Purcell and quality factors. To emphasize the relationship between these figure of merits, it will be beneficial to present the correlation equation which is called the Purcell factor where, λ c is the free space wavelength, n c is the corresponding refractive index of the using material in the cavity region at the operation wavelength, Ԛ is the quality factor, and V eff is the effective mode volume where the light localized. According to equation (1), it is clear that Purcell factor has a linear relation with quality factor while it is inversely proportional to mode volume. As an important expectation of the cavity performance, mode volume should be as small as possible while the quality factor should have high values to fulfill the requirement of high Purcell factor, which is the enhancement parameter of the cavity region. Here, we present the performance results of the designed cavity for onelayer 3D simulations by using FDTD simulations for each rotational angle at the mode M 2 , which gives the best results for prior analyses in table 1. It can be easily seen that, the light confines in a small volume as V (λ n ⁄ ) 3 = [2.9, 2.5, 2.2, 2.3] and has respectively small qualities factors Ԛ = [1263.5, 1248.5, 1216.0, 1260.5] for the rotational angles θ Rot = [0°, 15°, 30°, 45°], respectively. These results can be commented as small mode volumes by quoting references to cavity studies in the literature According to results, it seems that we are following an appropriate way to reach the 2D structure because an exponentially increasing trend of the quality factor appears whilst the number of layers increases. To be able to compare the numerical mode analyses with real world conditions, experimental analysis has been needed. When taking into consideration the experimental setup that includes alumina rods, new numerical analysis implementation obligation has been raised to alumina material ɛ r = 9.61 for Hpolarization. Thus, a new opportunity has emerged in terms of the evaluation of two different dielectric material (ɛ r = 12 and ɛ r = 9.61) behavior for the same cavity structure. Unlike the silicon dielectric material, the designed cavity structure with alumina supports only two modes. The disappearance of the rest of the modes, which has emerged near bandgap, can be explained as a shifting of these modes towards to the band region. According to the given numerical transmission results of the structure consisting of the ɛ r = 9.61 rods are given in figure After the numerical investigation is conducted, microwave experiments are performed to verify the overlapping between the real enviroment and our design. In the prepared setup that is for performing transmission measurement, Agilent E5071C type network analyzer, standard horn antennas as receiver and transmitter are used. While transmitter and receiver antennas are positioned outside of the center axis of the 15x15 sized PhC structure to adequate distances to be able to diagnose the operation wavelengths which cavity effect has emerged, the measurement position of the transmitter can be defined as a near-field range, see figure This study shows a roadmap to achieve the most ideal case for a cavity mode by investigating the performance in terms of various criteria and also includes a comparison between two different dielectric materials in the manner of cavity ability. Silicon takes part in the center of the study, and the investigations are conducted with frequency and time domain analyses. For silicon based structure frequency domain analysis exhibits that obtained four resonance modes shiftings have been had respectively better results for specified rotational angles θ rot = [0°, 15°, 30°, 45°] according to other studies. By using time domain analysis, such a high, ~10 8 , quality is achieved for 2D. In terms of 3D analysis, an ideal mode has been chosen in terms of providing a maximum wavelength shift 36nm, and the highest quality factor 2.296x10 8 at θ rot = 0°, among to the other modes. According to 3D results, quality factor decrease has been existed to 1263.5, as expected. To perform the experimental investigation these analyses have been repeated for alumina and quite similar outcomes have been acquired such as 1.607x10 7 quality factor and 37 nm wavelength shift. Additionally, the 3D analyses have been conducted for quality performance, Purcell factor and mode volume investigation to be able to do a reasonable comparison with silicon. Then, the experimental stage was carried out for two cavity modes, ideal mode selection was compatible that of numerical in terms of the quality factor and wavelength shift 492.2 and 0.0960 GHz, respectively. All the results show that our respectively compact and simple designed microcavity structure provides high tunability and control on several modes which operate on telecom wavelengths mostly.