The superconductivity in the Bi-II phase of elemental Bismuth (transition temperature Tc ≃ 3.92 K at pressure p ≃ 2.80 GPa) was studied experimentally by means of the muon-spin rotation as well as theoretically by using the Eliashberg theory in combination with Density Functional Theory calculations. Experiments reveal that Bi-II is a type-I superconductor with a zero temperature value of the thermodynamic critical field Bc(0) ≃ 31.97 mT. The Eliashberg theory approach provides a good agreement with the experimental Tc and the temperature evolution of Bc. The estimated value for the retardation (coupling) parameter kBTc/ω ln ≈ 0.07 (ω ln is the logarithmically averaged phonon frequency) suggests that Bi-II is an intermediately-coupled superconductor. Bismuth is element 83 in the periodic table. It is a brittle metal with a silvery white color. Its complex and tunable electronic structure exhibits many fascinating properties that often defy the expectations of conventional theories of metals. Most notably, measurements on Bismuth provided the first evidence of quantum oscillations and the existence of the Fermi surface, thereby experimentally confirming the underlying paradigm of all modern solid state physics. Upon cooling, all the above phases become superconducting with the transition temperature (T c ) of T c ≃ 0.53 mK for Bi-I, T c ≃ 3.9 K for Bi-II, T c ≃ 7 K for Bi-III and T c ≃ 8.5 K for Bi-V, respectively. This paper presents the results of an experimental and theoretical study of the Bi-II superconductor. The bulk Bi-II phase (T c ≃ 3.92 K at p ≃ 2.80 GPa) was stabilized by approaching it from the preformed Bi-III one (T c ≃ 7.05 K at p ≃ 2.72 GPa, Ref. 16). Muonspin-rotation (μSR) measurement reveal that the magnetic induction (B) in a cylindrical Bi-II sample (with the magnetic field applied perpendicular to the cylinder axis) is separated between normal state (B N = B c , B c is the thermodynamical critical field) and superconducting (B S = 0) domains thus indicating that Bi-II is a superconductor of type-I. The zero temperature thermodynamic critical field was found to be B c (0) ≃ 31.97 mT. The Eliashberg theory provides a good agreement with the experimental critical temperature (≃ 3.95 K), the zero temperature critical field (≃ 36.6 mT), and the temperature evolution of B c (T ). The estimated value for the retardation parameter k B T c /ω ln ≈ 0.07 (ω ln is the logarithmically averaged phonon frequency) suggests that Bi-II is an intermediately-coupled superconductor. The Bi sample and the pressure cell were the same as used in our previous experiments for studying Bi-III superconductivity, Ref. 16. The transformation of the Bi sample from Bi-III to Bi-II phase was made by allowing the sample volume to increase inside the pressure cell. 25 ac susceptibility (ACS) measurements reveal the presence of a sharp superconducting transition at T c ≃ 3.92 K at p ≃ 2.80 GPa. The amount of Bi-III phase admix- . Such distributions (without, however, the B = 0 line) were reported in earlier μSR measurements on type-I superconductors Sn, Pb and In, The temperature dependence of the thermodynamical critical field B c , as determined from the measured field value in the normal-state domain [B c = B N , see Figs. showing that similar B c (T ) can be obtained for different B ex 's. ). In the high frequency limit λ el-ph was estimated to be λ el-ph (ω → ∞) ≃ 1.02. The logarithmically averaged phonon frequency ω ln , representing a characteristic phonon energy mediating the pairing, and found to be ω ln = 4.69 meV. The dashed line in Fig. In order to better visualize the difference between the theory and the experiment, the deviation function Many thermodynamic quantities, like the condensation energy or the specific heat jump ∆C(T c )/γ N T c = C eS (T c )/γ N T c -1, can be expressed directly by using the derivative of D(T /T c ) as follows: 45 Here γ N is the electronic specific heat coefficient in the normal state (see the Supplemental part, Ref. 25, for γ N estimate) and C eS (T )/γ N T c is the electronic specific heat in the superconducting state. We proceed with the direct numerical calculation of C eS (T )/γ N T c within the Eliashberg theory (see the Supplemental part, Ref. 25). The heat capacity jump ∆C(T c )/γ N T c ≃ 2.40 was found, which is large in comparison with the universal BCS value of 1.43. Such a large jump in the specific heat for Bi-II is certainly accessible for calorimetric measurements. To conclude, the superconductivity in the Bi-II phase of elemental Bismuth was studied experimentally by means of muon-spin rotation, as well as theoretically using the Eliashberg theory in combination with Density Functional Theory calculations. Experiments reveal that the magnetic induction in the cylindrical Bi-II sample is separated into normal state and superconducting domains thus suggesting that Bi-II is a superconductor of type-I. The transition temperature and the zero temperature thermodynamic critical field were found to be T c ≃ 3.92 K and B c (0) ≃ 31.97 mT, respectively. The electronic, and the superconducting properties of Bi-II were computed from first principles. Following the phenomenological approach of Carbotte, Ref. 46, the strong coupling corrections were embodied via the retardation parameter k B T c /ω ln . Including retardation effects, the Eliashberg theory provides better agreement with the experimental data than the weak coupling BCS approach. The theory values for the critical temperature (T c,T ≃ 3.95 K) and the zero temperature critical field B c,T (0) = 36.6 mT, as well as the temperature evolution of B c (T ) are in agreement with the experiment. The specific heat jump, as estimated from the deviation function D(T /T c ), was found to be ∆C(T c )/γ N T c = 2.40, which is large in comparison with the universal BCS value of 1.43. The ab-initio calculations result in the value of the retardation parameter k B T c /ω ln ≈ 0.07 and put Bi-II in the category of intermediate coupling superconductors, being away from the very strong coupling limit k B T c /ω ln ≈ 0.25. Finally, our analysis reveals that the Cooper pairing in Bi-II is a consequence of balance between the electron-phonon attraction and a significant direct Coulomb repulsion. Compared to our previous study of Bi-III, 