The electric polarization induced by local polar domains of two types (phase separation domains of magnetic nature and structure-distorted domains) has been observed in YCrO 3 single crystals. These domains form a superparaelectric state. Below some temperatures, in the frozen superparaelectric state, the pyrocurrent maxima and the hysteresis loops with remanent polarization are observed as along axis c so in directions [110]. The polarization exists to the temperatures depending on the orientation of electric field with respect to the crystal axes. The sources of formation of such local domains are analyzed and their properties are studied. In The magnetic properties and the magnetic phase transitions in RCrO 3 were studied in detail before However, in this case, the well-defined free dispersion maxima of the dielectric permittivity were observed near T C , indicating the formation of the ferroelectric ordering. In In this work, the polar properties of YCrO 3 (YCO) single crystals with nonmagnetic R ion are comprehensively studied for the first time. The main objectives were a search for a possible electric polarization and establishment of its nature. Based on the studies of the dielectric permittivity, the conductivity, and the electric polarization by the pyrocurrent and hysteresis loop methods, the electric polarization in YCO was detected both along axis c and in direction In The YCO single crystals were grown by the method of spontaneous crystallization in a solution-melt and were characterized by symmetry Pbnm with lattice parameters a = 5.243 Å, b = 5.524 Å, c = 7.536 Å. They were 2-3-mm-thick plates with the area of 3-5 mm 2 . The developed planes were perpendicular to either axis c or direction The temperature dependences of the dielectric permittivity ε' in YCO along axis c and in transverse plane (110) for a number of frequencies are shown in Figs. We are dealing with the real part of the conductivity σ 1 = ωε''ε 0 Conductivity σ 1 (denoted σ) is dependent both on frequency and temperature. The low-frequency part of the conductivity is free dispersion and is referred to percolation conductivity σ dc . In our case, conductivity σ ac in both directions exhibits a frequency dispersion (the insets in Figs. In those works, it was shown that the formation of the phase separation domains is energetically preferable and is provided by the existence of the nearest pairs of Mn 3+ -Mn4 + ions and finite probability of tunneling of e g electrons of Mn 3+ ions to unfilled levels of the orbital doublet of Mn 4+ ions. However, the RMn 2 O 5 single crystals contain the same numbers of Mn 3+ and Mn 4+ ions. At the same time, the ideal YCO crystals contain only ions Cr 3+ . The abovementioned similarity of the properties of the local domains suggests that the real YCO crystals also contain neighboring pairs of Cr 3+ and Cr 2+ ions that lead to the formation of the restricted phase separation domains. Note that ions Cr 3+ are analogs of ions Mn 4+ (their 3d shells contain three t 2g electrons in the triplet state and an unfilled orbital doublet). On the other hand, ions Cr 2+ are analogs of ions Mn 3+ and they contain, in addition to three t 2g electrons in the triplet state, one e g electron at the degenerate orbital doublet. It would be reasonable to assume that ions Cr 2+ appear in YCO during growing the single crystal. To grow YCO single crystals, we used the PbO-0.005PbO 2 solvent. The important fact is that the growth of the single crystals was carried out at a constant high temperature 1350°C of the solution-melt. In this case, in addition to initial oxides Y 2 O 3 and Cr 2 O 3 , free ions Pb 2+ and Pb 4+ and also active oxygen ions O 2-that recharge Pb 2+ and Pb 4+ ions emerge in the solutionmelt. This leads to the change in the initial proportion of the Pb 2+ and Pb 4+ ions in the melt and the increase in the concentration of ions Pb 4+ . Oxide PbO 2 is introduced to the solution-melt to bond active oxygen during recharging Pb 2+ and Pb 4+ ions and prevent the damage of the platinum crucible, in which the single crystals are grown. We associate the formation of the restricted polar domains in YCO with the introduction of impurity Pb 2+ and Pb 4+ ions in the position of Y 3+ ions. The ionic radii of the initial and substituting ions in positions with the eight-fold oxygen surrounding (according Consider the measurement of the polarization by the pyrocurrent method. Figure During the second cycle, in the oppositely oriented field -E || c, the alone pyrocurrent maximum is seen. In this case, the values of P c measured during these two cycles, are not completely symmetric. This situation is reproduced during the measurement on another initial sample of YCO, when, during the first cycle, after applying field -E || c, the negative pyrocurrent maximum becomes split, and the secondary positive peaks is alone. We associate the splitting of the pyrocurrent peaks with the fact that the restricted phase separation domains of magnetic nature with small barriers forming near Pb 4+ ions are observed in YCO along the c axis at T ≤ T N . In the temperature range T N < T < 180 K, the high-temperature slopes of the phase separation domains and the low-temperature slopes of the structural domains containing ions Pb 2+ coexist (Figs. Figure Magnetic field H || c influences the magnetic phase separation domains in YCO. Field H || c increases moments Fz of Cr 3+-Cr 2+ ion pairs and the double exchange and, thus, increases the barrier height at the boundaries of these domains, which leads to an increase in the temperature of the beginning of increasing the values of ε‫׳‬ and σ (Fig. In the transverse direction [110], the structural restricted polar domains forming around individual Pb 2+ ions give the largest contribution to the electric polarization. In this direction, the formation of the phase separation domains at low temperatures is impossible because of the antiferromagnetic orientation of Cr ion spins (the double exchange is forbidden). However, at low temperatures T < 130 K, YCO has a low percolation conductivity (~10 -7 (Ohmcm) -1 ) (Fig. Note that the polarization in YCO formed predominantly by the structural domains around Pb 2+ ions (along axis c at T ≈ 216 K (Fig. [110] (Fig. In In these works, we observed a characteristic set of ferromagnetic resonances from individual layers of the superlattices for all RMn 2 O 5 independent of the type of ions R. Figure Thus, homogeneous ferroelectric ordering in YCO single crystals in the temperature range 5-350 K was not detected in any crystal directions. However, we observed the electric polarization induced by the local polar domains that were formed near impurity ions Pb 4+ and Pb 2+ substituting for Y 3+ ions when growing the single crystals. These impurity ions lead to the energetically beneficial processes of the formation of the local ferroelectric ordering in the isolated domains of two types in the YCO crystal matrix. They are the magnetic phase separation domains forming near Pb 4+ ions and the domains with the structural distortions forming near ions Pb 2+ . The polarity of the regions is due to the violation of the compensation of the antiferroelectric state inside the domains. The polar domains form the superparaelectric state in the centrosymmetrical YCO matrix. At temperatures T ≤T fr , at which kT fr ≤E A that is the activation barrier at the polar domain boundaries, the frozen superparaelectric state forms. This state is characterized by the observation of the pyrocurrent maxima and the hysteresis loops. The electric polarization anisotropy is due to the fact that the antiferroelectric state exists in plane (001) perpendicular to axis c. While the phase separation domains of magnetic nature can occur only with polarization along the c axis. The local polarization of the structural domains is significantly higher than similar polarization of the phase separation domains.