Shortcuts to Adiabaticity (STA) constitute driving schemes that provide an alternative to adiabatic protocols to control and guide the dynamics of classical and quantum systems without the requirement of slow driving. Research on STA advances swiftly with theoretical progress being accompanied by experiments on a wide variety of platforms. We summarize recent developments emphasizing advances reported in this focus issue while providing an outlook with open problems and prospects for future research. The understanding of quantum matter far away from equilibrium is a key problem at the frontiers of physics. Efforts to tailor and control nonadiabatic dynamics have an intrinsic interest and are further motivated by the development of quantum technologies. In this context, speeding up a given physical process is often desirable. An ubiquitous need is the mitigation of decoherence and uncontrolled error sources. Other prominent examples include the preparation of ground-state phases of matter in quantum simulators, boosting the power of quantum computers and thermodynamic devices such as batteries, engines, and refrigerators. Ideally, in any application the speedup is to be achieved without sacrificing the efficiency of the process. Shortcuts to adiabaticity achieve this goal in both classical and quantum systems: they accelerate the evolution of a physical system in a controlled way, stirring the dynamics towards a target state in a nonadiabatic fashion Among the different approaches to engineer STA, counterdiabatic driving Patra and Jarzynski have introduced a novel technique to engineer STA using flow fields STA have found applications in quantum thermodynamics Further progress in the engineering of superadiabatic thermal machines has been reported by Li et al. Quantifying the cost of implementing a given protocol (e.g., a STA) is a multi-faceted one with no unique answer. The implementation of driving protocols in the laboratory can impose constraints on the available values of a required control field, such as its amplitude, or the rate at which it can be changed. Auxiliary Hamiltonian terms used for the control are generally desirable to be local and given by a potential term (e.g., momentum independent). In many-body systems, controls that alter the interactions are ideally short-range and few-body. On theoretical grounds, one can opt for a wide variety of approaches an account, based on e.g., energetic, thermodynamic, information-theoretic considerations. See, e.g., The characterization of the thermodynamic cost of implementing STA, led to the discovery of work-time uncertainty relations in both the quantum Taking a thermodynamic approach, the usefulness of accounting for the work required to generate a control protocol in comparison to the work extracted has been discussed in The implementation of a given protocol in the laboratory often differs from the theoretical prescription due to uncontrolled perturbations and errors in the control fields. Realistic STA should therefore be robust. Mortensen et al. The characterization of the cost of STA is intimately related to the dynamics of the system. Techniques to engineer STA in quantum systems remain essentially restricted to isolated systems governed by unitary dynamics. In this context, the coupling to an environment is perceived as a limiting factor of the efficiency of the protocol. Levy et al. Further on enhancing the robustness of STA in the presence of noise is reported by Ritland and Rahamani A. Superconducting qubits High-fidelity single-qubit quantum gates assisted by STA have been designed and demonstrated in the work reported by Wang et al. using a superconducting Xmon qubit A Xmon qubit has been used as well to experimentally verify the work-time uncertainty relations Multiple tasks in trapped-ion quantum technology require the transport of ions. In this context STA has been proposed as a means to achieve superadiabatic transport. Further experimental progress towards this end has been guided by optical control protocols. STA may prove useful in heat pump extraction as discussed by Torrontegui et al. Further work on the use of STA in trapped-ion systems has been reported by Cohn et al. In either classical or quantum systems, progress on the engineering of STA for dissipative processes and in the presence of an environment remains highly limited, see e.g. Chupeau et al. Ultracold atoms are the experimental platform first used to demonstrate STA in the laboratory. STA for expansions with a thermal atomic cloud STA have proved useful in the manipulation of ultracold gases in processes other than expansions and compressions. One clear instance is in atom chip technology, where several applications have been limited by the long times required to change the location of the the Bose-Einstein condensate cloud. Corgier et al. The optimization of transport protocols by STA is as well the subject of Ness et al. The sped-up loading of a Bose-Einstein condensate into an optical lattice offers yet another scenario to exploit STA The dynamics of cold atoms in an optical lattice is as well the subject of the work by Weidner and Anderson Regarding theoretical progress, Masuda et al. All these works naturally prompts the question of whether similar control techniques can be applied to stronglyinteracting systems, in particular, in ultracold fermions. Progress in the use of STA in the strongly-coupled regime has been reported in scenarios assisted by dynamical symmetries (e.g. expansions and compressions of the atomic cloud governed by scale-invariance), using a three-dimensional anisotropic Fermi gas at unitarity Complex systems with many-degrees of freedom can be expected to be difficult to control. The complexity barrier is manifest in the application of STA. Access to the spectral properties of the system become prohibitive, preventing the application of techniques such as counterdiabatic driving. Focusing on the control of a reduced subset of degrees of freedom can pave the way for the use of STA, an ubiquitous strategy in the manipulation of ultracold gases just discussed. This aim is facilitated when the collective mode dynamics is governed exactly or in an approximate fashion by a dynamical symmetry The dynamics of a reduced set of modes can be further controlled when they are weakly coupled to the remaining degrees of freedom. Duncan and del Campo present in Previous research has shown that even when the spectral properties are available, the required control fields to guide the dynamics of a complex system involves highly nonlocal interactions. This understanding has been gained by analyzing critical quantum spin systems Suppressing excitations in many-body systems is manifestly challenging across a second-order or quantum phase transition, as the relaxation time diverges in the neighborhood of the critical point. This well-known phenomenon known as critical slowing down thus prevent the application of adiabatic strategies in this context. This has important implications in the preparation of ground-state phases of matter in quantum simulators. The Kibble-Zurek mechanism provides a convenient framework to analyze the breakdown of adiabaticity and predicts that the density of excitations scales as a universal power law on the time scale in which the transition is crossed In the crossing of a phase transition, local driving by spatially inhomogeneous fields can pave the way for defect suppression whenever the breaking of symmetry on a part of the system can subsequently bias the dynamics in the neighboring regions. The role of causality to assist adiabaticity in quantum systems was recognized in Local driving by a control field with a single inhomogeneous front has been recently discuss to favor adiabatic dynamics in disordered spin chains In the manipulation of many-body spin systems, other kinds of local driving may be of interest. Pyshkin et al. The development of STA to control quantum correlations in multi-partite systems constitutes an important application in which progress has somewhat restricted. Hatomura STA can be applied to the generation of other entangled states, including cluster states. Kyaw and Kwek This Focus issue reflects the pace of research on STA with an attractive balance between theoretical and experimental progress. As a control tool, STA can be expected to have manifold applications and one can anticipate further developments arising from an interdisciplinary approach, drawing ideas from different fields. Research on STA is likely to continue combining atomic and molecular physics, quantum information, ultracold quantum matter and optimal control. Exciting prospects arise in the combination with quantum computation and annealing, quantum communications, quantum chemistry, information geometry and machine learning, among other examples. On the classical domain, applications can be envisioned, e.g., in mechanical engineering, stochastic systems, soft-condensed matter and plasma physics. We hope that the collection of articles reported in this issue encourages the reader to pursue further research on the topic.