Measuring the mechanical properties of two-dimensional materials is a formidable task. While regular electrical and optical probing techniques are suitable even for atomically thin materials, conventional mechanical tests cannot be directly applied. Therefore, new mechanical testing techniques need to be developed. Up to now, the most widespread approaches require microfabrication to create freely suspended membranes, rendering their implementation complex and costly. Here, we revisit a simple yet powerful technique to measure the mechanical properties of thin films. The buckling metrology method, that does not require the fabrication of freely suspended structures, is used to determine the Young's modulus of several transition metal dichalcogenides (MoS2, MoSe2, WS2 and WSe2) with thicknesses ranging from 3 to 10 layers. We critically compare the obtained values for the Young's modulus and their uncertainty, finding that this simple technique provides results, which are in good agreement with those reported using other highly sophisticated testing methods. By comparing the cost, complexity and time required for the different methods reported in the literature, the buckling metrology method presents certain advantages that makes it an interesting mechanical test tool for 2D materials. Two-dimensional (2D) materials are promising candidates for future flexible electronics applications due to their combination of remarkable mechanical and electrical properties. Here, we apply the buckling-based metrology method to determine the Young's modulus of transition metal dichalcogenide flakes with thickness ranging from 3 layers up to 10 layers. We use optical microscopy to determine both the number of layers and the rippling wavelength, which is therefore very fast and simple to implement. We critically compare the results obtained with this method and demonstrate that despite its simplicity it provides results in good agreement with other techniques to study the mechanical properties of 2D materials. We believe that the buckling-based metrology method provides a fast route to determine the Young's modulus of 2D materials, being an excellent alternative to other existing nanomechanical test methods that are more technically demanding. The samples are fabricated by mechanical exfoliation of bulk layered TMDC crystals with adhesive tape (see Experimental section for details). The exfoliated material is then transferred onto a compliant elastomeric substrate (Gelfilm®, a commercially available polydimethylsiloxane, PDMS, film manufactured by Gelpac®) which is subjected to an uniaxial stress of ~20%. Right after the transfer, the stress on the elastomeric substrate is released, yielding to compressive uniaxial strain of the transferred flakes (Figure where h is the flake thickness, νs and νf are the Poisson's ratio of substrate and flake and Es and Ef are the Young's modulus of the substrate and flake respectively. This equation is valid under certain assumptions: (a) the flake should follow a sinusoidal rippling, (b) Ef/Es >> 1, (c) the substrate should be much thicker than the flake, (d) the amplitude of the ripples should be much smaller than their wavelength (thus the shear forces are neglected), (e) the adhesion between the flake and substrate is strong enough to prevent slippage and (f) all the deformations are assumed to be elastic. According to Equation [1] spatial wavelength of the ripples monotonically depends on the thickness of the flakes, as the other parameters are fixed and they only depend on the intrinsic mechanical properties of the substrate and flake materials. Figure The optical microscopy-based thickness determination method provides accurate thickness values for flakes in the 1 to 10 layers range. For thicker flakes the absorption starts to saturate and thus the thickness uncertainty rapidly increases. Using Equation [1], the Young's modulus of the deposited 2D materials can be determined by measuring the thickness-dependent ripple period provided that νs, νf and Es are known values. The Poisson's ratio of the Gelfilm (PDMS) substrate νs = 0.5 Because the PDMS Young's modulus values given in the literature show a large scattering (from 300 to 1000 kPa, strongly dependent on the curing process) That has been published in its final form: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/adma.201807150 7 slope of the linear relationship between the ripple period (λ) and the flake thickness (h) as follows: Figure GPa (see the Supporting Information for a discussion about the uncertainty determination). We observed a relatively large flake-to-flake variation of the ripple period (i.e. flakes with same thickness yield sizeably different ripple periods), which we attribute to the presence of small defects such as folds or wrinkles in some of the flakes. Therefore, measurements of several flakes with different thicknesses is needed to obtain a well-defined Young's modulus value with a low uncertainty. We found that measurements over at least 6-8 flakes (with ≥4 different thicknesses) are needed to determine the Young's modulus with an uncertainty comparable to that obtained with other mechanical testing techniques like nanoindentation (see the Supporting Information, Figure [ Table Brillouin scattering Bulk natural crystal 238 [25] Nanoindentation Exfoliation (natural) 5 to 25 290 ± 80 1 to 85 300 [30] 10 to 108 200 [33] ~8 315 ± 23 Table Lithography + flake transfer + high pressure chamber Micro-Brillouin scattering Lithography + flake transfer •• Modified micro-Raman spectrometer Air atmosphere Micro-tensile test Lithography + flake transfer Bimodal AFM • AFM Air atmosphere In summary, the buckling metrology method provides a fast and easy way of measuring the mechanical properties of 2D materials as compared with conventionally employed approaches (nanoindentation, nanomechanical resonators, blister test and micro-Brillouin light scattering). We demonstrate this method with MoS2 and found that it provides Young's modulus values in good agreement with the literature values. Because of its simplicity, the fast measurement speed and straightforwardness of the data analysis we believe that this method can be a highly attractive way to study the mechanical properties of 2D materials. This is the authors' version (post peer-review) of the manuscript: Nestor Iguiñiz et al. Advanced Materials (2019) https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201807150 That has been published in its final form: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/adma.201807150 13 NOTE: During the elaboration of this manuscript we became aware of a recent publication where another technique to measure the mechanical properties of supported (not freely suspended) 2D materials. [31] The mechanical properties of single-and bilayer MoS2 supported onto a SiO2/Si surface were measured with a bimodal AFM. The technique relies in the use of a multifrequency AFM in combination with finite elements analysis in order to extract Young's modulus. MoS2 samples were prepared out of a bulk natural molybdenite crystal (Moly Hill mine, Quebec, Canada). MoSe2 and WSe2 samples were prepared out of bulk synthetic crystals grown by physical vapour transport method (provided by Prof. Rudolf Bratschitsch). WS2 samples were prepared out of a bulk synthetic crystal grown by physical vapour transport method at Tennessee Crystal Center. The elastomer substrate used in this work is a commercially available polydimethylsiloxane-based substrate manufactured by Gelpak® (both Gelfilm® WF X4 6.0 mil and Gelfilm® PF X4 6.5 mil were used with identical results). The Young's modulus of the elastomeric substrate has been determined by means of a force vs. elongation experiment where different forces are applied to a Gelfilm® strip (63.5 mm × 10 mm × 0.165 mm) by loading different test masses at one end of the strip and monitoring the relative changes in length upon loading though a Canon EOS 1200D camera equipped with a EF-S 18-55 DC III objective lens. See the Supporting Information for more details. This is the authors' version (post peer-review) of the manuscript: Nestor Iguiñiz et al. Advanced Materials (2019) https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201807150 That has been published in its final form: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/adma.201807150 14 Optical microscopy images have been acquired with an AM Scope BA MET310-T upright metallurgical microscope equipped with an AM Scope mu1803 camera with 18 megapixels. The calibration of the optical magnification system has been carried out by imaging standard samples: one CD, one DVD, one DVD-R, and two diffraction gratings with 300 lines/mm (Thorlabs GR13-0305) and 600 lines/mm (Thorlabs GR13-0605). See details about the calibration in the Supporting Information. The quantitative analysis of the transmittance of the flakes and the rippling wavelength has been carried out using Gwyddion® software. The thickness determination has been carried out by extracting the transmittance of the blue channel of the transmission mode optical microscopy images and comparing it with the results of a reference (not-buckled) sample. See the Supporting Information for more details. Atomic force microscopy measurements were carrier out with an ezAFM from NanoMagnetics Instruments operated in tapping mode with cantilevers of 40 N/m and a resonance frequency of 300 kHz. [ Young's modulus determination for MoSe2, WS2 and WSe2 Table Material λ/h ν E (GPa) MoS2 322 ± 15 0.27 