2D conjugated polyphthalocyanines can be obtained as two distinctly different types of material with specific molecular structures and different morphological properties. It was believed that the temperature is the key factor affecting the chemical reaction, but we show that even at the optimal temperature (420°C), the reaction on vapor/solid interface and liquid/solid interface yields different products: while the former is well-polymerized and ordered, the latter is amorphous and cross-linked with the typical conjugation scale of single PC ring. IR spectroscopy is most sensitive tool for identifying the molecular structure, providing the information on polymerization degree, structural uniformity and content of terminal groups. We show that, unlike the ordered PPCs, the cross-linked product can be reproducibly obtained as continuous conductive material. 2D conjugated polyphthalocyanines (PPCs) are actively studied as promising materials for next generation batteries Several groups reported significantly different spectra of the material, produced by different techniques We study the reaction of PMTN with a series of transition metals (Cr, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu) as well as metal-free (H2) and show that the polymerization degree depends on the chemical set-up rather than on the metal. For a number of microelectronics-related applications, it is desirable to obtain the material in the form of continuous conductive film. This can be difficult, because such conventional processing techniques as spin-coating, sputtering or thermal evaporation cannot be applied to PPCs From the IR spectra, we can see significantly different products from the reaction at liquid/solid and at vapor/solid interfaces at the same temperature (at 420°C), fig. Similarity between the spectra of cross-linked PPCs and monomeric PCs is an evidence of low polymerization degree. Another important feature is high intensity of terminal groups (-C≡N) at ~2220 cm -1 in the spectra of cross-linked material as compared to the ordered one (fig. Raman spectra of PPCs are significantly different from those of the monomeric PCs (fig. IR spectra show pronounced difference in molecular structure between ordered and crosslinked materials. The corresponding difference at nanoscale is also observed in TEM images (fig. One unexpected finding was that the continuity and conductivity of ordered and cross-linked products was significantly different. The ordered polymer did not always give the conducting film, while the cross-linked material showed well reproducible conductivity. Together with the structural information, this fact provides understanding of the growth mechanism in the two regimes. Thin films from liquid/solid mode take the morphology of the PMTN layer as it melts and polymerizes. This makes it continuous and conductive. On the contrary, in the vapor/solid mode the growth proceeds along the crystal facets and/or catalyst particles, which does not always yield the continuous film. Another important factor that affects the morphology is the formation of the islands and loss of continuity of the few-nm metal film upon heating. Quantum-chemical calculations suggest that MePPCs are low-gap semiconductors with HOCO-LUCO energy difference of 0.02 eV The vapor/solid synthesis of MePPCs was done according to the previously reported procedure Deposition of few-nm metal films on the substrate was done with electron-beam evaporation system (Leybold L560), the procedure details are described elsewhere For the liquid/solid regime, the same CVD set-up was used. The difference was that the sample with a portion of PMTN was wrapped in aluminum foil instead of exposing to the PMTN vapor; the pressure of hydrogen was maintained at ~1atm. In the synthesis, hydrogen plays several roles: remove oxygen, suppress surface oxides and, in case of liquid/solid regime, to maintain the pressure. Both in our experiments and in the literature Electrical measurements were carried out by SourceMeter Keithley SMU 2450 in RTI optCRYO 105 cryostat cooled with liquid nitrogen. The temperature was controlled by multimeter system Keithley DMM 2701. Temperature was believed to be the key factor controlling the synthesis of 2D polyphthalocyanines. In this work we showed however that even at the optimal temperature, the reaction can be performed in two different regimes: heterogeneous (vapor/solid interface) and quasihomogeneous (liquid/solid interface). These two modes yield two kinds of polymers: ordered and cross-linked, correspondingly. The two products can be easily distinguished by the IR spectra, in which the cross-linked polymer shows spectral features resembling the monomeric PCs with intense signal from terminal groups (-C≡N), while the ordered one has less number of bands with narrower bandwidth and lower intensity of terminal groups. Raman spectral patterns of PPCs are also significantly different from those of the monomers due to extension of 2D electronic conjugation. For the well-ordered PPCs, the growth proceeds along crystal facets and/or catalyst particles, which does not always yield conductive films. On the contrary, the cross-linked PPC films are continuous and show well reproducible conductivity. The material has an electric behaviour of low-gap semiconductor.