We discuss the type of pairing in the hexagonal pnictide superconductor SrPtAs, taking into account its multiband structure. The topological chiral d-wave state with time-reversal-symmetry breaking has been anticipated from the spontaneous magnetization observed by the muon-spinrelaxation experiment. We point out in this paper that the recent experimental reports on the nuclear-spin-lattice relaxation rate T -1 1 and superfluid density ns(T ), which seemingly support the conventional s-wave pairing, are also consistent with the chiral d-wave state. The compatibility of the gap and multiband structures is crucial in this argument. We propose that the measurement of the bulk quasiparticle density of states would be useful for the distinction between two pairing states. The first hexagonal pnictide superconductor SrPtAs 1 (T c = 2.4K) has received attention, since the muonspin-relaxation (μSR) experiment 2 observes the internal magnetization below T c . The result suggests the spontaneous time-reversal symmetry (TRS) breaking in the superconducting state. From the group theoretical consideration We address this issue in this paper and show based on the multiband quasiclassical formalism 14 that observed T -1 1 and n s (T ) are consistent with the chiral d-wave pairing as well as the s-wave one. The point is that the density of states (DOS) and root mean square of the Fermi velocity in the 3D band with nodal excitation are less dominant, There are two distinct honeycomb-shaped PtAs layers (l = 1, 2) in the unit cell of SrPtAs. , where β(= 1, 2, 3) indicates the unsplit band, a klσ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of an electron with the wave vector k and spin σ = ±1 in the l-th layer of the unit cell, ǫ and , -a/2, 0), and T 3 = (-√ 3a/2, -a/2, 0) the inplane nearest-neighbor bond vectors (a and c are in-plane and inter-layer lattice constants). Employing the unitary transformation a kγσ , where is the normal-state energy spectrum. Using the tight-binding parameters suggested by the LDA calculation, We utilize the quasiclassical formalism for the multiband superconductor. where k βγ F is the Fermi wave vector and ∆ k βγ F the gap function. We simply assume where , with δ = 1.05, and shown in Table We may introduce phenomenologically the quasiparticle damping (the smearing factor of the quasiparticle DOS) η via the analytic continuation to obtain the re- tarded and advanced Green's functions For simplicity, we neglect the band dependence of η. We therefore have two fitting parameters, ∆ 0 /k B T c and η, in the following calculations. 1 The relaxation rate is 14 where f (ǫ) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function, and Ns (ǫ) and Ms (ǫ) denote DOS and anomalous DOS of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle normalized by the entire DOS at the Fermi level in the normal state N (0). For the multi-band spin-singlet superconductor, 14 The gap amplitude at T = 0.5Tc is used in this estimation. We see that the 3D band ("3-"-th band) is less dominant. We note additionally that the gap maxima, which determines the peak location, of the point nodal gap function ∆(T )φ k 3- F is larger than that of the other nodeless gap functions due to the normalization condition for the Fermi surface average |φ βγ k F | 2 F βγ = 1 (see also Eq. 4). where is the Fermi surface average. The results for both s-wave and chiral d-wave states are shown in Fig. It is renown that Ms (ǫ) from the coherence effect appears only for the s-wave state and contributes to the HS peak significantly. We therefore cannot distinguish between s-and chiral d-wave states from T -1 1 . We then propose that the measurement of the bulk quasiparticle DOS would give a decisive distinction. It should be emphasized that we need to reduce η for the chiral d-wave state to compensate the absence of the contribution from Ms (ǫ). Namely, the reduction of η causes the significant difference of Ns (ǫ) for s-and chiral d-wave states (see Fig. Superfluid density normalized by its zero-temperature value n s (0) is 14 for the f -wave state. Here, k = k/|k|, δk = k βγ F -k0, and k0 = (0, 0, k βγ F z ). "1 ± "-th "2 ± "-th "3 + (H)"-th "3 + (H ′ )"-th "3 -(H)"-th "3 -(H ′ )"-th φ k βγ F of f -wave (3δ k2 x -δ k2 y )δ ky (3δ k2 x -δ k2 y )δ ky where is Yosida function. The parameter is taken as ∆ 0 /k B T c = 1.5 for both states. We have shown based on the multiband quasiclassical formalism 14 that observed T -1 1 and n s (T ) in the superconducting phase of SrPtAs We comment on the f -wave pairing suggested as the other possibility. 