Li-ion batteries gradually lose their capacity with time and use; therefore, ageing forecasts are key to designs of battery powered systems. So far, cell-type-specific studies without standardised testing practices have lead to a variety of ageing models in which generality, simplicity, and accuracy seem exclusive. Previous studies hint to an interplay of multiple mechanisms leading to capacity loss, which depend on cell chemistry and are affected by temperature, state of charge, and cycling rate. Here we show that, despite this complexity, the time dependence of the actual capacity follows a unique master curve, for several cell types aged under various different conditions. We discuss the statistical origin of this common behaviour, and the testing practice required for the characterisation of a model. The master curve is a stretched exponential that describes many other phenomena in nature and is theoretically justified within a diffusion-to-traps depletion model. These findings provide a simple and broadly applicable framework for accurate life-time predictions. Ageing of rechargeable Li-ion cells is characterised by the loss of cycleable lithium, and internal resistance increase Lithium losses result from trapping (reactions), either involving the SEI growth or elsewhere in the cell Motivated by the need for more efficient battery modelling tools, we performed extensive ageing experiments on cells from four different manufacturers (referred here on as Type 1-4). By means of a testing protocol that allows us to control the stress rate, it was found that the capacity retention as a function of time follows a unique master curve for all four types, independent of the ageing conditions. We show here experimental evidence of this uniform behaviour for the first time. The master curve equally applies to cells that were cycled, as to those stored at a constant state of charge. We discuss a physical interpretation of this uniform behaviour, and its relation to a universal form of relaxation. We also propose a generalization of the master curve in order to account for variable stress rates and predict capacity fade under arbitrary load profiles. The article is organised as follows. Experimental evidence of the uniform fading law for three cell types is presented in section II. In section III, we discuss the physical origin of this behaviour. Firstly, in III A we revise the diffusion-to-traps model Our first encounter with a previously unnoticed uniformity happened during the analysis of 22 identical cells (of Type 1), stressed in pairs according to 11 different ageing programs described in section VII A, Table Requesting a certain amount of charge from a system with less capacity causes a larger stress. Thus, one needs to scale down the charge throughput with the available capacity. In FIG. with exponent β ≈ 0.6. Note that in a Weibull plot any SE appears as a straight line with slope -β. Every trajectory is determined by its time constant τ . Curves with shorter τ appear towards the lower left of the graph; those with longer τ , towards the upper right. In FIG. If Eq.( We It turns out that Eq.( to describe the conductivity relaxation in ion-, and electron-conductors close to the metalinsulator transition The exponent β only takes a few discrete values depending on the dimensionality of the space and constitutes a unique example of magic numbers in classical physics The diffusion-to-traps model consists of particles diffusing in a d-dimensional space where traps are randomly distributed. A particle that falls in a trap is considered lost. In the case of batteries, the particles are the Li-ions and the traps are the points where these ions can be irreversibly bound. The number of traps N per volume V is clearly an important parameter; but their random distribution plays an essential role too, as we show later. There are many ways in which N trapping points can be randomly located in a volume V . Let S denote an arrangement of traps, P (S) its probability, and ρ S (x) the corresponding trap density function, where x is the position vector in the d-dimensional space. The probability density, ρ(x, t|S), of finding an ion at position x after time t, given that traps are in configuration S, is the solution of the partial differential equation where K(x ′ -x) is the trapping rate, D is the diffusion coefficient, ∂ t is the partial derivative with respect to time, and ∇ 2 is the Laplace operator. The total survival probability q(t) is the fraction of particles that remains un-trapped after a certain time. It is obtained from with initial condition ρ(x, 0|S) = δ(x). Although solving Eq.( The initial decay rate, -1 q dq dt | t=0 , can be computed exactly giving where is the global density of traps. Ions within the action range of traps are lost at a constant rate τ -1 0 . The same result is obtained for t > 0 in the mean-field approximation. That means, if one neglects the correlation between ρ(x, t|S), and ρ S (x) by imposing that ρ(x, t|S)ρ S (x ′ ) = ρ(x, t|S) ρ S (x ′ ) , the solution of Eq.( However, as time passes, the exact solution to Eq.( Trapping becomes a diffusion-limited process. In section VII B we derive that q(t) ≥ A d exp -[t/τ ] β , where and A d , and τ are also constants. This can be understood with a simplified reasoning. Due to the randomness in the location of the traps, the probability that there are no traps within a distance R to an ion can be derived from the Poisson distribution. This gives ) , and Γ(d/2 + 1) is the complete gamma function. The probability that the ion does not travel further than R within the interval t is calculated solving the diffusion equation. For long times, it is proportional to exp(-γ 1 Dt/R 2 ), where γ 1 is a number of order 1. This probability increases with R, while P 0 (R) decreases strongly as R increases. The meaning is that large regions without traps are less probable than smaller ones, but in those large regions the ions survive longer times. The product is the typical distance travelled by a particle until it becomes trapped. In contrast to the case with homogeneous trap density ρ S (x) ≡ n S (mean-field) where R 0 would be a constant , here R 0 increases with time. While the former case would lead to an exponential decay, the time dependent R 0 (t) leads instead to a SE decay as in Eq.( and β given by Eq.( The evidence from ageing of Li-ion cells presented in the previous section suggests that their capacity fade is governed by this same dynamic. The experimentally found exponent β ≈ 0.6 is in perfect agreement with the theoretical prediction of Eq.( So far the model has been described as if one could follow q(t) from an absolute time t = 0 in which particles and traps were uncorrelated. However, the level of correlation at the beginning of an experiment is unknown in practice. The model should account for the observed SE decay with arbitrary starting time t 0 . Therefore, we must reformulate it (if possible) in a from that is compatible with the multiplication of probabilities, q(t, 0) = q(t, t 0 )q(t 0 , 0). We should also clarify why the capacity fade of cycled batteries exhibits the same time dependence as that of stored ones. One would think that cycling erases any correlation by redistributing the particles. In the following, we address these points by looking at analytical properties of q(t), and taking into consideration the ion dynamics during cycling. The short-and long-time limits of q(t) given by Eq.( with a crossover time t c = that depends on the microscopic parameters as To find the relation between the decay rate κ(t) = -1 q dq dt and particle-trap correlation, we formally calculate dq dt using Eq.( Since Eq.( without losing generality. Ω is a constant with units of volume/time. This allows us to formally evaluate the right hand side of Eq.( where is the normalized correlation function. Eq.( At t = 0, κ takes its maximum value κ(0) ≡ τ -1 0 = n S Ω and C(0) = 0. The decrease in the decay rate as time passes is mirrored by the development of negative correlations -1 < C(t) < 0, due to the lower particle density in regions with higher density of traps. κ(t) decreases gradually without a characteristic cut-off time. For t ≫ t c , it follows a (scale-invariant) power law κ(t) ∝ (t c /t) 1-β . The crossover time, t c , depends on how fast particles move. In the hypothetical limit of infinitely fast diffusion D → ∞, distances become irrelevant, t c → ∞ and Eq.( (1) and Fig. (5). We have found that τ > 10 8 s, which corresponds to f < 10 -20 . With f , and with the trapping rate at a trapping point (ν 0 ), we can estimate τ -1 0 = ν 0 f and t c according to Eq. (10). Since ν 0 correspond to molecular time scales ν 0 ∼ 10 3 THz, one finds that τ 0 ∼ 10 5 s, and t c ∼ 1 s. In order to generalise Eq.( Rewriting Eq.( with t ′ c = t c + t 0 , and τ ′ 0 = τ 0 (1 + t 0 /t c ) 1-β . This shows that the functional form of q(t, t 0 ) is invariant to time shifts if one simultaneously scales the microscopic parameters (t ′ c for t c , and τ ′ 0 for τ 0 ). A decay observed after t = t 0 will display the same functional form as when observed from t = 0, but will have smaller decay rates and a longer crossover time. However, the most useful property is that q(t, t 0 ) has a memoryless lower bound q lb (t -t 0 ) ≤ q(t, t 0 ), because (t ′ c ) 1-β /τ ′ 0 = (t c ) 1-β /τ 0 = β/τ β does not depend on t 0 . Furthermore, over long observation periods, ∆t ≫ t 0 + t c , q(t, t 0 ) → q lb (∆t). The analysis presented above can be summarised as follows. During a process of particles diffusing in a space with traps, the global trapping rate decreases with time, since the overlap of trap-and particle-density decreases faster than the total number of particles. This process has memory, because the level of overlap (and correlation) depends on the time measured from the initialization moment, when particles were randomly distributed. The exact solution for the survival probability satisfies the multiplication of probabilities q(t, 0) = q(t, t 0 )q(t 0 , 0), but in order to compute q(t, t 0 ) exactly, one needs information that is generally unavailable. That is, one needs to know the trapping rate 1/τ ′ 0 and the crossover time t ′ c at the starting point t 0 . Fortunately, q(t, t 0 ) has a time-invariant lower bound given by Eq.( The SE decay has been theoretically explained within the framework of a diffusion-totraps model, which relies on two basic assumptions: (i) short-range traps are randomly distributed, and (ii) particle movement is governed by the diffusion equation. The latter implies a linear scaling of the mean-square-displacement of the ions with time, MSD ∝ t. Thus, whether cycling can change the functional form of the decay or not, reduces to whether it changes this scaling. The answer is found in impedance spectroscopy studies published elsewhere To further support Eq.( The planned ageing programs are described in Table In the upper half of FIG. However, in terms of the cycle number N Cyc , the gaps in time are closed and each q(N Cyc ) follows approximately a straight line with the same slope -0.6. Note that during cycling N Cyc ∝ ∆t. Therefore, the capacity fade in terms of time intervals is well represented by Eq.( By arbitrary load profiles we refer to operating conditions in which one or more of the cycling parameters change with time. This can mean for instance, changes in the cell temperature, in the electric current, or variations in the average state of charge and cycle depth. Under an arbitrary load profile, a battery will spend time intervals in different conditions, each of which is characterised by a τ value. Therefore, τ becomes time dependent and the model should be generalised to compute such cases. Eq.( A generalisation of Eq.( is also not appropriate because the integrable singularity u β-1 at u = 0 causes numerical instabilities. The problem is resolved if, instead of starting from a lower bound, we rewrite the exact relation in Eq.( and take into account that t 0 ≫ t c . Eq.( which provides q(t, t 0 ) only using the τ s obtained from experiments under various regular conditions, and an estimate of the cell age, t 0 . Note that any value given to t 0 , smaller than the actual age of the system, will result in a lower bound to Eq.( Taking into account that for life time predictions ∆t ∼ 0.1Min[τ ], we can show that |δq| q < 0.04 . That is, uncertainties in the age of the battery have small effects in the capacity fade predictions. We have shown that the capacity fade of at least four different Li-ion cell types follow the same functional form, for all tested conditions. This includes at different temperatures, with or without cycling. We have also shown that the diffusion-to-traps model explains this uniformity, with perfect agreement between the experimentally found exponent β = 0.6, and the theoretical prediction β = d/(d + 2) for d = 3 dimensions. The decay function is the same stretched exponential that governs a wide variety of relaxation phenomena in natural and social sciences. The strength of the model for battery applications is further supported by the fact that a single adjustable parameter τ , suffices to describe four cells types under many different conditions. To our knowledge, models found in the literature contain more parameters and have been tested with less experiments, giving often worse fitting quality Within the diffusion-to-traps model, the functional form of the capacity fade derives from the scaling properties of diffusion, and the stochastic character of ions finding traps randomly distributed in space. Capacity fade is a diffusion-limited process, whichever the trapping mechanism is. This is often overlooked in other models According to the presented evidence, the difference between calendar and cycling ageing seems to come mainly from the amount of movement of the ions, resulting in a different time τ required for an ion to fall in a trap. There is a single function describing the capacity fade, whether the cell is cycled or not. The scaling of the mean-square-displacement of ions with time is always linear in a diffusive transport. Therefore, it is not affected by cell chemistry. We may then expect that Eq.( Cell-specific parameters that govern the ageing are all contained inside a single quantity τ . A complete ageing model for a battery type is therefore built in two steps. In the first step, the τ s corresponding to several ageing conditions are determined from fittings with Eq.( In the second step, an equation must be found that describes the dependence of τ on the ageing conditions. This equation will contain the cell-type specific parameters. Through the dependence of τ on ageing conditions, τ becomes time dependent for cell ageing with arbitrary load profiles. Fade forecast can be made for arbitrary load profiles inserting the time-dependent τ in Eq. (21). Examples of such models will be presented in more specific publications in the future. We have tested four different commercially available cells from four different manufacturers under different aging conditions. Tables below give an overview of the tested parameter sets. The cells are used in applications like photo-voltaic (PV) storage, uninterrupted power systems (UPS) and electric buses. Whether the cells were produced in the same lot, and in the same factory is not known. All tests are started with a reference performance test (RPT) which includes a full discharge and full charge with nominal current. During the RPT the cells are charged and discharged at the upper and lower voltage limit with a constant voltage until the current drops below 1/10 of the nominal current. In order to monitor capacity fade, RPTs are performed periodically at intervals of not more than 100 full equivalent cycles, or two weeks for experiments with only calendar ageing. The measured charge capacity is used as the new actual capacity for the control of depth of discharge (cycle amplitude) in the following cycles. After each RPT, the cell is discharged to the upper state of charge limit of the corresponding test, before the actual cycling starts. The cycling amplitude is controlled by the Ah throughput given by the actual capacity multiplied with the corresponding depth of discharge. A 10 s idle time is introduced after each discharge and charge. Hence, the tests are 100 % continuous cycle ageing with negligible idle calendar ageing. The C-rates are in some cases asymmetric between charge and discharge, because the application is asymmetric, or because the cell does not allow higher charging current. The temperatures given in the tables correspond to values measured by the control system of the temperature chamber. The actual temperature inside the cell can be up to 10 K higher than the nominal chamber temperature, especially for tests with the highest C-rate. The ageing tests were performed over a period of typically six months. Within this time the capacity of cells with high temperatures and wide cycles decreased to about 80 %. distribution that where c d = π d/2 Γ(d/2+1) and a the action reach of a trap. The solution for ρ ′ 0 (x, t) is where φ i (x) and λ i are the eigenfunctions and eigenvalues, respectively, of the partial differential equation ∇ 2 φ i (x) + λ i φ i (x) = 0, with boundary condition φ i (R) = 0, and |φ i (0)| < ∞ 32 . For any d, the eigenvalues are λ i = γ i /R 2 , with γ i dimensionless numbers, independent of R. In three dimensions (d = 3), γ i = iπ, ∀i ∈ N * . The long-time behavior of ρ ′ 0 (x, t) is dominated by the smallest eigenvalue λ 1 ; thus Substituting Eq.( where A d = φ 1 (0) d d xφ 1 (x) is a number that depends on d, but not on R. Since the choice of R is arbitrary, the best lower-bound to q(t) is obtained with the R that minimises the exponential argument. The minimising R is and therefore the best lower bound to q(t) is with β, and τ -1 given by Eq.( The statistical significance of R 0 (t) is shown in FIG. In FIG. The fitting quality with Eq.( 