A new class of deep eutectic solvents are presented which exhibit all of the physical characteristics of classical deep eutectic solvents, with the exception that one of the components is volatile when exposed to the atmosphere at room temperature. This enables a premeditated, auto-destructive capability which can lead to novel crystalline identities. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this concept through the room-temperature crystallisation of a broad range of organic molecules, with a particular focus on pharmaceuticals, that possess a variety of functional groups and molecular complexity. Furthermore, we show how, through the simple altering of the eutectic composition, polymorphism in paracetamol can be controlled, enabling the elusive metastable form II to spontaneously crystallise at room temperature. Born from the class of solvents known as ionic liquids, the deep eutectic solvents (DES), named from the Greek "εu" (eu = easy) and "τήξις" (teksis = melting), have been an increasingly wellresearched class of solvents for the last two decades. They have been a boon to catalysis, extraction processes, electrochemistry, organic synthesis and in the creation of more efficient batteries and dye-sensitized solar cells. normally composed of two or three molecular species which are able to associate through extensive hydrogen bonding When developing an API, one of the primary considerations for bringing a new chemical entity to market is the complete understanding of its polymorphic landscape. A sudden change in polymorphic form can result in radical changes to intermolecular interactions and the crystal surface chemistry which can detrimentally affect solubility, dissolution rate and intestinal permeability. Here we introduce a new class of deep eutectic solvent which, through spontaneous reversal of the eutectic liquidation, affords the potential for either (i) polymorphic control, (ii) macromorphological control (iii) or the creation of a novel solvate of an API, depending on the API's molecular structure. This concept of a self-destructing deep eutectic solvent has not been previously explored. We show the efficacy of these volatile deep eutectic solvents (VODES) by crystallisation of APIs via a liquid-based method which is scalable and works at room temperature and pressure. Furthermore, we discuss the molecular features of the API that give rise to either polymorph control, macromorphological control or solvate formation and suggest general features that should make our method applicable to the controlled crystallisation of all small organic molecules. The creation of a VODES involves a volatile HBD and stable HBA component (in this work the ratios 1:1-10:1 -HBD:HBA, respectively were used) which, when simply mixed together as solids, produces a liquid (Figure In particular, phenol and phenolic compounds have been widely explored as the hydrogen bond donating component in eutectic systems for both extraction processes and pharmaceutical applications. When in the para position there are a wider range of approach angles available for the phenol to hydrogen-bond with the API, thereby enabling the formation of a stable VODES at lower HBD:HBA ratios. In contrast to this, when in the ortho position in OAP, the proximity of the hydroxyl group to the amine precludes hydrogen bonding around the molecule in numbers sufficient to make a stable liquid. VODES systems created from PAP and MAP however are so easily formed that they allow crystals to be grown from a solution with API concentrations inaccessible by many common organic solvents. We demonstrate that in the case of PAP, the most efficacious polymorph (form II) currently considered commercially unsuitable for production due to difficulties discussed above, will emerge from a VODES spontaneously at room temperature and pressure. Evaporation of the volatile phenol component from all HBD:HBA ratios, leads to the formation of PAP polymorphs over a 2-day period. Analysis of resultant crystals from phenol:PAP ratios from 4:1 -9:1 show a stark difference in crystal habit, usually between the ratios 6:1 and 7:1. Powder X-ray diffraction analysis shows that this difference is due to different polymorphs being formed, namely form I (4:1 -6:1) and form II (7:1 -9:1) of which each crystal habit observed is characteristic; diamonds in the case of form I and feather-like needles in form II (Figure In contrast to PAP, MAP retains a single crystal structure throughout all VODES composition ratios tested however there is still a stark division between two crystalline morphologies upon VODES destruction. There is a statistically clear divide between the ratios of 7:1 and 8:1 (phenol:MAP) at which the morphology changes from rods to silky needles. Regardless of morphology however, in all experiments, only a single polymorph of MAP, form I, is observed (Figure What is deeply intriguing is that there is a VODES ratio in PAP where one polymorph consistently forms and not the other, despite the fact that as the phenol evaporates, a VODES of higher concentration must presumably pass through the same phenol:API ratio as one of a lower ratio that gives a different polymorph. For example, phenol:paracetamol of a ratio of 8:1 consistently produces form II, despite passing through an (e.g.) 5:1 ratio as the phenol evaporates, before crystallising. Starting with a phenol:paracetamol ratio of 5:1 however consistently produces form I. This phenomenon can be understood to be indicative of the fact that for each starting ratio, the HBD:HBA interaction that is established from the start is likely to be subtly different from each other. It follows therefore, that from the start of the evaporation of the phenol, both systems contain distinct molecular environments and would therefore not be expected to undergo crystallisation in the same way. Each system may possess characteristic pre-nucleation clusters from the start, which persist until crystallisation occurs; indeed, such clusters have recently been observed in APIs. With the knowledge that the number and propensity of HBD:HBA interactions are critical to the successful formation of a VODES, the benzamides are appropriate pharmaceuticals to serve as model systems, as this structural motif is common to many drugs. Phenol:benzamide mixtures within the range 3:1 -10:1 all resulted in a homogeneous, clear liquid being produced at room temperature. Thermal analysis determined the lowest recorded melting points of benzamide, 2MB and 2EB phenol-VODESs to be -32.89 °C (5:1), < -70.00 °C (4:1) and < -70.00 °C (4:1), respectively (Table An understanding of the root cause in the variation in eutectic behaviours can be gleaned from thermal analysis of the three related benzamides. Thermograms of higher ratios of VODES containing benzamide show complex features with multiple thermal events on warming that suggest the benzamide-phenol mixture has at least one hitherto unisolated metastable phase (Fig It is likely that the formation of the difficult to obtain pure form III benzamide results from cases where the transient phenol structural motifs lead to the inclusion of phenol molecules into the lattice, as has been reported for seeded growth utilising nicotinamide molecules, To understand the extent of melting point depression in these deep eutectic solvents and to determine the presence of intermediate phases, DSC was performed on all compositions and ratios of phenol:API between 1:1 -10:1 that produced a stable liquid (Figs. In the case of PAP there is no indication of a difference in thermal behaviour as the phenol:API ratio is changed, highlighting that the intermediate phases that lead to the resultant polymorph are not necessarily crystalline in nature and are forming in the liquid state. To evaluate how the differences in pre-nucleation dynamics may change with phenol:API ratio, molecular optimisation calculations were carried out in ORIENT, The successful formation of a VODES was observed in a range of pharmaceuticals. Table Overall, thermal analyses of each VODES reveals varying levels of complexity from system to system. Where carbamazepine and verapamil hydrochloride appear as simple glasses, other systems like benzamide show multiple crystallisation and melting events, implying the formation of unknown crystalline forms of either each component or co-crystals of varying stoichiometries and transitions from form to form. This is suggestive that the effects seen, polymorphlogical or morphological, are a function of the strong interactions with volatile component of the VODES. Systems that have had transient co-crystals isolated and solved appear to demonstrate this and others that have had metastable crystals observed during crystallisation do indeed appear to transform in situ leaving the ultimate polymorph. Interactions between components in a VODES are dynamic and are facilitated by an array of possible bonding motifs. For example, the inception of crystallisation of a 1:1 co-crystal dramatically changes the concentrations of the liquid in the system, which must lead to a change in the nature and number of molecular interactions throughout the whole system. This complexity will be manifest in systems even where no co-crystal has been detected at ratios beyond 1:1. The mere fact that some co-crystals have been isolated and solved, provides a likely route for the structural control exhibited by some of these systems, both polymorphological and morphological when grown out of a VODES. In this study, we prepared a range of volatile deep eutectic solvents as binary mixtures of an API and a hydrogen bond donor. The deep eutectic solvent is then left to self-destruct through diffusion of the more volatile component out of the system leaving the less volatile pharmaceutical to crystallise. As we have demonstrated, suppression of the melting point in the optimum deep eutectic ratio leads to a crystallisation temperature typically 40 ̊C below room temperature (60 ̊C below that of phenol) and often greater than 100 ̊C below room temperature. It is clear that the mechanisms of crystallisation from a deep eutectic solution are inexorably linked to both the molecular structure of the API and the packing within the resultant crystals. The propensity for potential hydrogen-bonding in each system appears to be pivotal in determining how likely an API is to form a VODES and at what ratios, before there is crystallisation of either the API at one extreme or the co-former at the other. This is exemplified in the case of PAP, MAP and OAP; as the available locations for hydrogen-bond interactions decreases, so do the concentrations of API in the solvent. In the benzamide based systems, spontaneous formation of a stable liquid is again facile with 2-methoxybenzamide, where there are both a carboxamide and ester moieties present, in contrast to benzamide and 2-ethoxybenzamide, whose ester is more sterically hindered. The resultant crystals show that there is a rich and complex interaction between the API and HBD which is system specific. We have shown here that volatile deep eutectic solvents afford a novel route of crystallisation from liquids of APIs at high concentrations at room temperature. This new crystallisation route provides a potential vector for polymorph selectivity in APIs simply through a change in concentration. When this route is achieved via accessing intermediate solvates, it may also lead to the creation of new porous macromorphologies, thereby enabling the kinetics of dissolution to be altered. These volatile deep eutectic solvents have opened the door to the possibility of controlling organic crystal growth in a scalable way at room temperature, with the additional possibility of creating previously unforeseen polymorphs and solvates. The control over polymorphism and/or the creation of novel polymorphs and solvates in this way has immediate and far-reaching implications for the pharmaceutical industry, where the successful granting and defending of patents relies on having full knowledge of the crystallisation landscape of any given API. All VODESs in this work were made using ratios -HBD:HBA, which when mixed together as solids, spontaneously produce a liquid (Figure Methanol and ethanol were supplied by Fisher Scientific (UK). All other chemicals were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used as received. DSC analyses was performed using a TA Instruments Q2000 and Discovery 25 both with refrigerated cooling systems. The DSC cell was purged with nitrogen. Samples were analyzed in hermetically sealed aluminum pans. A small volume of liquid (~ 2-5 uL) was added to the hermetic pan and sealed. All liquid samples were cooled from 25 °C to -70 °C and then cycled to 70 °C all at 10 °C/min. The instruments were calibrated using a pure indium standard. Novel crystal structures were solved using single crystal X-ray diffraction. Crystals that were of sufficient size (> 0.2 x 0.2 x 0.2 mm) were isolated during VODES destruction and mounted on a glass fibre. Intensity data for crystal structures were collected at 100 K on a Bruker Kappa Apex II diffractometer, using molybdenum Kα radiation (λ = 0.7136 Å). Data were processed using Bruker APEX2 v2.0 and Olex2 v1.2.7 software. For all structures a symmetry-related (multi-scan) absorption correction was applied. Structure solution followed by full-matrix least squares refinement was performed using the WINGXv2014.1 suite of programs throughout. Deep eutectic solvents are ubiquitous in the fields of synthetic and materials chemistry owing to their stability, non-volatility and environmentally friendly nature. In this work a new class of them is presented, where one of the two components is volatile when exposed to the atmosphere. Whilst seemingly oxymoronic, the effect of one component leaving the system forces crystallisation with novel results. Jason Potticary 1 , Charlie Hall 1,2 , Victoria Hamilton 