The effect of the presence of electron-phonon (e-ph) coupling in the S iC, GeC and S nC hybrids is studied in the framework of the ab initio perturbation theory. The electronic bang gap thermal dependence reveals a normal monotonic decrease in the S iC and GeC semiconductors, whereas S nC exhibits an anomalous behavior. The electron line widths were evaluated and the contributions of acoustic and optical phonon modes to the imaginary part of the self-energy were determined. It has been found that the e-ph scattering rates are globally controlled by the out-of-plane acoustic transverse mode ZA in SiC while both ZA and ZO are overriding in GeC. In S nC, the out-of-plane transverse optical mode ZO is the most dominant. The relaxation lifetime of the photo-excited electrons shows that the thermalization of the hot carrier occurs at 90 f s, 100 f s and 120 f s in S iC, GeC and S nC respectively. The present study properly describes the subpicosecond time scale after sunlight illumination using an approach that requires no empirical data. The results make the investigated structures suitable for providing low cost and high-performance optical communication and monitoring applications using 2D materials. The graphene synthesis revealed exceptional properties for this material such as, high ambient temperature mobility, ambipolar effect, Klein tunneling, anomalous quantum Hall effect, etc The materials consisting of column IV-elements of the periodic table are gapless in the absence of spin orbit coupling. This fact makes them less interesting for optoelectronic applications such as photovoltaic cells and light emitting diodes, which require a material with a nonzero band gap In a large group of semiconductors, a monotonic decrease of the energy gap has been observed as the temperature increases The temperature dependence of the electronic energies originates partially from the volume expansion Attention to the study of properties related to electron-phonon couplings (EPC) using ab-initio computation has become more and more common for 2D materials. The obtained results subsequently explain many phenomena observed in honeycomb materials. The presence of Kohn anomalies in graphene and in the low buckled silicene is associated with their highest-branched optical modes Therefore, understanding the EPC from imaginary self energy, electron life time and carrier mobility in 2D hybrids is highly desirable and essential in order to facilitate their further applications. Considering the interest for graphene-based hybrids: GeC, SiC and SnC, this work studies the electron-phonon coupling involved in the temperature effect on the gap behavior. Using an ab initio approach based on the density functional theory (DFT), we investigate the behavior of the electronic bang gap thermal dependence in the three carbon based hybrids in the presence of electron-phonon interaction at constant volume. With the exception of SnC, which shows a non-monotonic anomaly, both GeC and SiC exhibit no anomalous behavior in their gap variation. To calculate the electron lifetime in these 2D materials, the imaginary part of electron's self energy around the Fermi level and the corresponding scattering rate are determined in detail. The phonons contribution to the linewidth for an electron initially at the conduction band minimum (CBM) and the valence band maximum (VBM), as well as the variation of their corresponding lifetime with respect to the electron energy are discussed. , The present paper is organized as follows. In section II, we present the computational method required for the calculation of the reported data. In section III, we start by a comparative description of the temperature effect on the gap value. Then, we report a complete description of the behavior of SiC, GeC and SnC electron linewidth with respect to the electron energy and the temperature. From the plot of the scattering rate, we compute the electron lifetime and elucidate the role of phonon modes. Finally, in section IV, we end with a conclusion. In this work, three planar carbon-based hybrids are studied. The unit cell of each crystal contains 2 atoms: C and X (X=Si, Ge and Sn). As displayed in Fig. The vibrational frequencies, ω qλ , and the derivatives of the self-consistent Kohn-Sham potential with respect to the atomic displacements are calculated on 16×16×1 q-point grids using density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) The many body perturbation theory (MBPT ) is used to describe the behavior of electronic states as a function of temperature where n is the Kohn-Sham ground-state eigenenergies of the frozen atoms, Fan is the Fan contribution to the self energy given by: and Σ DW is the Debye-Waller term expressed as follows with N qλ and f n represent the distribution functions of Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac, while ω λ and N are the phonon frequencies and the number of q-points taken randomly to better map out the phonon transferred momentum The first order electron-phonon matrix elements g qλ nn k , which represent the probability amplitude for an electron to be scattered with emission or absorption of phonons are given by: , where n and n are initial and final electron band indices with wavevectors k and kq, respectively, and ∂ qλ is the derivative of the self-consistent potential associated with a phonon of the wavevector q in the branch λ. To calculate the imaginary part of the electron's self-energy using the Electron-Phonon coupling using Wannier functions code (EPW) Assuming the quasiparticle approximation (QPA), one can expand in first-order the self-energy frequency dependence around the bare energies. It follows that the temperature dependent quasi-particle energy is given by where the renormalization factor is expressed as follows: We note that the imaginary part of the Fan's self-energy ( Fan nk ) provides information on the rate of e-ph processes responsible for hot carrier thermalization, which is related to the intrinsic quasiparticule lifetime. The real part, however, informs us about the energy renormalization shift. Thus, in order to obtain the associated e-ph scattering rate, one should first compute the linewidth (Γ nk ) which just means that the quasiparticle lifetime corresponds to the inverse of the scattering rate τ -1 . Eq.4 states that the single particle energy E nk depends on temperature as follows The energy ∆E nk (T ) involves two contributions, namely: The first term results from pure electron-phonon interactions and represents the harmonic contribution at constant volume. The second term corresponds to the effects flowing from the lattice expansion (variable volume). According to equation 8, it is obvious that the harmonic and anharmonic terms have some contribution in the energy shifting. At constant volume, the effect of the electron-phonon interaction is usually the major contribution, so by setting ∆E nk (T )| anhar << ∆E nk (T )| har , only the harmonic effect will be considered. In order to understand the gap behavior as function of temperature, one should first compute the generalized Eliashberg spectral function. The spectral function g 2 F nk (ω) is expressed as follows Λ qλ nn k gives information about the phonon mode contributions to the electron-phonon harmonic term ∆E n (T )| har given by: Now that the correction to the single particle state E nk is related to the Eliashberg function, one can estimate the correction to the band gap, E g (T ), by defining band-edge Eliashberg function, F g , which is simply defined where the sub-indices CBM and V BM refer to a given conduction and valence state. The equation 10 reveals that a positive (negative) region of g 2 F would then lead to an increasing (decreasing) gap as function of temperature in contrast to a negative region stands for a decreasing E g (T ). This part investigates the electron-phonon interaction in order to calculate and describe the temperature dependence of the electronic gap (E g ) for SiC, GeC and SnC hybrids. The projected phonon density of state in Fig. (3) reveals that the heavier is the atom the smaller is his contribution to the optical modes. In the three hybrids, all optical modes are mainly dominated by carbon atoms, while the acoustical modes are mostly dominated by the heaviest atoms, namely Si, Ge and Sn in SiC, GeC and SnC respectively. To shed more light on the gap behavior for the three binary compounds, Fig.( Generally, the Eliashberg function, defined in eq(9) is positive for the valence band maximum and negative for conduction band minimum. This opposite trend leads to the reduction of the gap. Regarding equation 10, a positive region of g 2 F corresponds to a temperature increasing of the gap energy while its negative region stands for a decreasing of E g (T ). For the carbon based hybrids, one deduces that in SiC, the VBM and CBM Eliashberg functions are all normal for all phonon modes leading to a gap decreasing. For GeC, the CBM contributions are negative for all phonons while for the VBM, the contribution for the Eliashberg function are positive except for phonon with frequency around 250cm -1 . Therefore, the resulting Eliashberg function arising from VBM and CBM contribution show a gap decreasing. Finally, the curve associated to the SnC sheet shows a strong anomalous behavior for the VBM due to the contribution of the high optical phonon modes. This anomalous behavior leads to the non monotonic variation of the gap when increasing the temperature. The following part investigates the electron linewidth arising from the electron-phonon interaction and determines the electron lifetime for all structures. Fig. At 0K, the variation of electron linewidth as a function of the electron energy is plotted in Fig.( Recall that the imaginary part Γ nk of the Fan's self-energy provides information on the rate of e-ph processes responsible for hot carrier thermalization At 300K, Figs. Fig. To shed more light on the k-dependence of the imaginary part of the self energy in the three binary compounds, Figs.( For electron state at the V BM, the examination of acoustic modes contributions plotted in Fig. For electron state at the CBM, Fig. Finally, by evaluating the linewidth over the typical edge of the Brillouin zone in SiC, GeC and SnC, one can deduce that there exists a large variation in the magnitude of the electron-phonon coupling along the different crystallographic directions. Using ab-initio calculations, we reported a theoretical description of the electron-phonon coupling effects on the gap, linewidth and scattering rate in two-dimensional SiC, GeC and SnC materials. In addition to the study of the thermal sensitivity of the linewidth, we investigated its k-resolved behavior. This type of study is important for transport phenomena where phonons play a crucial role and therefore has an impact on the engineering concepts of devices based on nanostructures. While the band gap in SiC and GeC showed a normal monotonic dependence to temperature, its behavior was rather anomalous in the SnC semiconductor. It has been found that the out-of-plane acoustic transverse mode ZA efficiently couples to the electronic states at the SiC band edge, while the linewidth mainly arises from the ZA and ZO modes in GeC. In SnC, the optical mode, namely ZO, was predominant. The hot carrier thermalization losses in SiC, GeC and SnC under solar lighting were also calculated. It was found that, under sunlight illumination, the hot carriers thermalize within 90 fs, 100 fs and 120 fs for SiC, GeC and SnC respectively. This work highlights the microscopic origin of the thermalization of hot electrons, which is difficult to deduce from experiments and opens the way toward the study of materials for renewable energies by means of ab intio calculations of hot electrons.