This paper describes the open Novamag database that has been developed for the design of novel Rare-Earth free/lean permanent magnets. The database software technologies, its friendly graphical user interface, advanced search tools and available data are explained in detail. Following the philosophy and standards of Materials Genome Initiative, it contains significant results of novel magnetic phases with high magnetocrystalline anisotropy obtained by three computational high-throughput screening approaches based on a crystal structure prediction method using an Adaptive Genetic Algorithm, tetragonally distortion of cubic phases and tuning known phases by doping. Additionally, it also includes theoretical and experimental data about fundamental magnetic material properties such as magnetic moments, magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy, Permanent magnets (PMs) are materials with an internal structure capable of creating an external magnetic field by themselves. Nowadays, these materials play an important role in critical sectors of our advanced society as transport, energy, information and communications technology In many of these technologies, most efficient designs are frequently achieved using PMs. For instance, the omission of gearboxes in wind turbines based on PM generators considerably reduces maintenance, service costs and overall material utilization At macroscopic scale, a magnet is described by extrinsic properties that are deduced from the hysteresis loop and determine its performance. These properties are the maximum energy product (BH) max (related to the maxi-mum magnetostatic energy stored and obtained from the second quadrant of the B(H) hysteresis loop), saturation magnetization M s (total magnetization that is achieved in a strong external magnetic field H that aligns all magnetic domains), remanence M r (net magnetization after H is removed) and coercivity H c (magnetic field that reverses a half of the magnetization reducing the overall magnetization to zero, it determines the "resistance" against demagnetization by external magnetic fields). The larger (BH) max , the smaller amount of material is needed to generate a required magnetic field strength, so high values of (BH) max are desired. Energy product and coercivity depend on the magnet's shape due to its own demagnetizing field. The theoretical upper limit of energy product (BH) max = μ 0 M 2 r /4, where μ 0 is vacuum permeability, can be ideally reached for a magnet shape with demagnetizing factor D = 0.5 and The macroscopic behavior is tightly linked to the microscopic properties called intrinsic. Main magnetic intrinsic properties are atomic magnetic moment μ at (the magnetic moment per volume gives the maximum theoretical M s ), exchange interactions J ij (which determine the magnetic order and T C ) and magnetocrystalline anisotropy K 1 (that can enhance H c and it is indispensable in modern magnets to get H c > M r /2) Presently, a magnetic material needs to have quite demanding extrinsic properties in order to be considered as a high-performance PM. Desirable values might be μ 0 M s > 1 T, μ 0 H c >1 T and (BH) max > 200 kJ/m 3 , with cost lower than 100 $/kg Aiming to find new clues, the experimental exploration of new PMs begins to be assisted and guided by computational approaches thanks to their advances in calculation speed, accuracy and reliability Current databases based on MGI like AFLOW or Materials Project provide information of atomic magnetic moment, but other relevant magnetic properties are missing, like magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy (MAE), exchange integrals, T C , coercivity, energy product, etc which are needed for screening and discovering new high-performance Rare-Earth free/lean PMs. In this work, we describe the Novamag database which aims to complement and extend these databases for the case of PMs by making publicly available many theoretical and experimental results of magnetic materials studied in the H2020 European project Novamag In this section the technologies involved in the development of Novamag database are described. One mandatory requirement present in each decision in the design and implementation of this database is that every component has to be free and widely supported by the community. The application consists of two main modules: i) a web application that uses Phyton ecosystem technologies to show and search the materials and their related information and ii) a data loader application that uses Java ecosystem technologies to insert new items in the database (i.e., NOVAMAG Java Loader Application). These new items are in JSON format. Fig. Both developments are publicly available in two GitHub projects. The Web Application is in Ref. These applications share the same PostgreSQL database • The database schema and data items relationships are simple enough to be represented by a relational system. In fact, the schema consists of a main table (i.e., items) containing almost all information about the materials, and a very small set of tables containing information about chemical composition, attached files, and authors. The open Novamag database has a Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) licensing and the link to access it is given by Ref. This application is a utility that can read JSON files containing information about one or several materials and load it into the database. The JSON file can reference some attached files, which are supposed to be located in the same path as the JSON file. The application also can cope with zip files containing a subdirectories tree. This subdirectory tree can contain several JSON files and their attached files. Again, the attached files of a JSON file must be located in the same path as the JSON file. The loader application is invoked by the database administrator from the operative system command line specifying the path of the JSON or ZIP file as a command line argument. Because it is a Java application, it can be invoked both within Unix or Windows operative systems. If remote execution for the database administrator is needed, FTP with SSH for Unix, or a Windows remote terminal for Windows, can be used. JSON format was adopted because the data is presented in form of aggregation. An item can contain several file references, some arrays like the magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy, or some more complex structures like the atomic positions. XML and JSON are the most extended solutions for this level of complexity in the data representation. XML is a much heavier format than JSON, therefore JSON was considered as the best choice. Presently, efforts are being made to develop a common format for Computational Materials Science Data based on JSON file Nowadays, Java is one of the most widespread programming languages. Given that the Loader Application source code is free and available for the community, a very popular language was needed. Application portability for Linux and Windows without recompilation is another issue that was taken into account when Java was chosen. Java is an Object Oriented language. It is very mature and has a lot of libraries and resources. Once Java was chosen for the development of the loader, many of the rest of technologies were determined by such election (i.e., JDBC, JNDI and JUnit). A logger was used to record the messages the application throws into a log file. Some messages can be eventual error messages, and some others can be confirmations that everything was performed properly. Apache Log4j is one of the most extended loggers for Java, Log4j2 is its newest version. It is a software from Apache Foundation, so its support over the next years is guaranteed. Even being Log4j a very popular logger, SLF4J was used as facade increasing the compatibility with other loggers. That is, the Java loader program only interacts with SLF4J. Then SLF4J receives the Java loader program invocations and translate them into Log4 invocations. In this way, the application does not depend on Log4j and can work in the future with any other logger supported by SLF4J. Finally, Eclipse was adopted as IDE (Integrated Development Environment) because it is probably the Java most extended IDE. The Mars version was the newest version at the beginning of the development of this application. The web application allows to query the information available from the previous importation process. It has been developed using a web framework named Flask. Flask is a microframework for Python based on Werkzeug and Jinja 2, and it is BSD licensed. Python is one of the language with greatest growing in the last years, as can be consulted in the Tiobe Ranking (see Ref. The dynamic web pages are developed using the Model-View-Presenter design pattern using the following Python/Flask libraries: • Werkzeug: collection of various utilities for Web Server Gateway Interface (WSGI) applications and has become one of the most advanced WSGI utility modules (Presenter). WSGI is a simple calling convention for web servers to forward requests to web applications or frameworks written in the Python programming language. • Jinja 2: a modern and designer-friendly templating language for Python, modelled after Djangos templates. It is fast, widely used and secure with the optional sandboxed template execution environment (View). • SQLAlchemy: is the Python SQL toolkit and Object Relational Mapper that gives application developers the full power and flexibility of SQL. It gives data access model with generated SQL from the persistent model in the database (Model). The web requests are processed by a Werkzeug class, that loads the data and redirect the request to the appropriate Jinja2 template, that renders the HTML dynamically using the previous data. The data are loaded using SQLAlchemy code. All the SQL code is automatically generated from a persistent model extracted from the PostgreSQL schema to Python code, using a tool named sqlacodegen (see Ref. In the first stage of the database development, a set of theoretical and experimental properties to be included in the database was agreed by the Novamag consortium. Fig. A friendly Graphical User Interface (GUI) has been developed to use and explore the Novamag database easily. Fig. Alternatively, users can also perform advanced search by clicking on the button Advanced Search [51], that is placed on the top of home webpage, see Fig. These filters are very useful to identify promising materials for permanent magnet development in a first screening stage. To this end, we recommend to select uniaxial space groups (from 75 to 194) because they might exhibit a welldefined magnetocrystalline anisotropy easy axis, saturation magnetization above 1 Tesla, negative unit cell formation enthalpy (in order to reject very unstable phases), atomic species like magnetic elements (Fe, Ni, Co) and non-Critical Raw Materials (that could be light elements to induce tetragonal distortions and phase stabilization like B, C, N, P, etc or/and transition metals with high spin-orbit coupling as Ta, Hf, etc), species count (binaries, ternaries, etc) and stoichiometry corresponding to Fe-rich compounds (with Fe content above 50 % at.) to enhance saturation magnetization and Curie temperature. Additional filters as Curie temperature, coercivity or maximum energy product can also be useful in a second screening stage, and might be implemented in the future. Some general search strategies through the database are discussed in Section 5. Once the search settings are ready and submitted, then the list of items that fulfill these criteria are presented, see Fig. In order to see more details of a compound that is in the list one should click on the corresponding material identification number (called Mat.Id, at the first column). Then, all available data of this compound will be shown, see Fig. On the left hand side of the name of each field or property, there is a small black icon with label "i", by clicking on it one can see more information about the definition and physical units of that property. Finally, material metadata files like crystallographic information file (.CIF), JSON file used in the database to upload it, CONTCAR (output file of VASP code that describes the relaxed unit found and downloaded in section "Additional information" (at the end of the webpage of each material). This section gives a brief overview of the data available in Novamag database. Additional theoretical and experimental contributions from the Novamag consortium, not shown or mentioned here, are expected to be uploaded into the database in the near future. One of the most important and difficult step in the computational highthroughput technique for materials design is the prediction of new stable crystal phases. Here, we make use of an Adaptive Genetic Algorithm (AGA) where E(.) is the energy, a and b are the number of atoms of X and Y in the formula unit X a Y b , respectively. Fig. The amount of generated data of each structure depends on the number of atoms in unit cell and on the number of AGA generations. We may consider as representative a compound with 12 atoms/unit cell, which may generate up to 100GB of data for 650 structures, or about 150MB/structure. We can estimate the overall amount of generated data to be about 2TB, that are stored and backed-up in office computers, external hard drives and Relational Database (PosgreSQL). A back-up of all data is done every month. One of the key intrinsic properties of modern PMs is MAE because it can greatly increase the coercivity. In this section, we discuss about three computational high-throughput strategies performed in the Novamag project for finding magnetic structures with high easy-axis MAE. Only a small amount of phases from the large set of theoretical uniaxial magnetic structures close the enthalpy hull line might exhibit a high easy-axis MAE. Hence, a computational high-throughput approach is needed in order to analyze Once the energy of an uniaxial unit cell is calculated, constraining the atomic magnetic moments at different polar angles θ, then first and second anisotropy constants K 1 and K 2 are obtained by fitting the energy data to 2nd order function A final procedure, written by bash scripting, was also prepared to upload the large amount of generated data from this approach to the database automatically. As an example, in Fig. Enlightened by the work of Burkert et. al. on tetragonal FeCo alloys, Another interesting computational high-throughput strategy to find promising PMs is to try different dopants on known magnetic structures in order to tune and improve their properties. For instance, the Novamag database provides data of first principles calculations for the RE-free modified Fe 3 Sn compound The high temperature phase of Fe 3 Sn has a hexagonal crystal structure with space group P6 3 /mmc (#194). The 1×1×2 supercell of Fe 3 Sn comprising of 12 Fe and 4 Sn atoms, one of which was substituted by a dopant (see Fig. Structures were relaxed using VASP The calculated MAEs were plotted as a function of the number of valence Calculated MAE of system with increased Sb content, i.e. Fe 3 Sn 0.5 Sb 0.5 with 28.5 valence electrons per formula unit, was found to be close to the value for Fe 3 Sn 0.75 Te 0.25 with the same number of valence electrons (see opaque circle in Fig. Though the increase of Mn content leads to the increase of absolute value of MAE. Another important intrinsic property of magnetic materials is the exchange energy, which is typically described by the classical Heisenberg Hamiltonian, where J ij are the exchange parameters and s i is the unit vector along the magnetic moment of atom i-th. The factor 1/2 takes care of the double counting in the summation. This is the convention adopted in the database, but note there are many works and codes where Eq. 3 is defined without the factor 1/2, so in these cases the J ij parameters are 2 times smaller than those from Eq. 3. A warning message is displayed in the database's field "exchange info" when a different convention is used in order to avoid any misunderstanding. From J ij one can determine the magnetic order (ferromagnet, antiferromagnet, etc), roughly estimate the T C using mean-field approximation (MFA) or random phase approximation (RPA), and build atomistic spin dynamics (ASD) models First principles calculations of J ij have been calculated and uploaded to the database for some promising Rare-Earth free PMs such as MnAl τ -phase Exchange parameters for the known SmFe 10 V 2 system, as well as for the newly stabilized SmFe 11 V 3 without factor 1/2, so the following results are based on the convention used in this code. The electronic exchange and correlation effects were treated by the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) in the Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof (PBE) form where k B is the Boltzmann constant. Here T C is proportional to the on-site exchange parameter J 0 where J 0 = Σ i J 0i , i.e. the sum over all coordination shells. T C s are rather similar in both compounds and well above the room temperature. Note that we only took into account Fe interactions for T C and possible contributions from Sm 4f are not included in the approximation since 4f are treated as spin-polarized core. where E is the energy, V is the volume of the material, θ is the angle between magnetization and the easy axis (along z-axis), μ 0 is the vacuum permeability, D is demagnetization factor (which can be a value between 0 and 1) and H is the external magnetic field applied along the easy axis. The first two terms describe the magnetocrystalline energy (discussed in Section 4.2), the third term is the shape anisotropy created by the demagnetizing field of the magnet and the last term is the Zeeman energy. In this model the remanence equals to saturation magnetization (perfectly rectangular hysteresis loop). Here, we define the anisotropy field as the minimum field needed to overcome the magnetocrytalline energy barrier (to reverse magnetization in the absence of shape anisotropy) Note that there are other possible definitions This model describes well nano-size magnetic materials. Taking into account nucleation processes, one arrives to Brown relation The value of coercivity corresponding to uniform magnetization reversal by coherent rotation; generally, it is much lower than the anisotropy field, at best about 25% of H K . On the other hand, the energy product reads Note this value can only be reached if H C > M S /2 (hardness parameter κ > 1/2) In real magnets, to approach theoretical maximum energy product and coercivity it is essential to have an optimized microstructure. The intergranular structure between the grains plays a significant role determining the magnetic properties, especially if the grain diameter is in the nanometer scale. Hard magnetic phases may be distorted locally near grain boundaries (GBs), because of the different lattice constant of the grain boundary phase. The distorted lattice may give rise to locally different intrinsic magnetic properties. Moreover, surface defects located at GB are sources of strong local demagnetizing fields, which act as nucleation centres. On the other hand, defects close to the GB can pin domain walls during the magnetization's reversal process. Nucleation and pinning mechanisms strongly affect extrinsic properties of hard magnetic phases, as the coercivity Typically, it leads to an increase of the coercive field. Novamag database contains theoretical results of extrinsic properties calculated with micromagnetic simulations considering optimized microstructures, constructed with the open-source 3D polycrystal generator tool Neper The comptutational high-throughput techniques described in previous sec- real bulk PM. On the other hand, there are also several high-throughput experimental screening techniques as reactive crucible In order to provide this kind of valuable information, the database is being extended with experimental results obtained in Novamag project, such as synthesis routes and the structural and magnetic characterization for CRMfree Fe 3 Sn, FeNi and MnAl alloys From a theoretical point of view, determining the stability of a predicted phase is a hard task that requires an accurate calculation of the full phase diagram at finite temperature (free energy) The above described strategy can be reversed. For instance, let's consider well-known phase Fe 3 Sn (P6 3 /mmc, space group 194) that exhibits an easy plane MAE. As indicated in Section 4.2.3, in this system it is necesseary to find a way to switch MAE from easy plane to easy axis in order to make it suitable for PM applications. To this end, we can use the search advanced tool of Novamag database[51] with the following filters: (i) space group=194, (ii) negative formation enthalpy ∆H F < 0, (iii) μ 0 M S > 1T, (iv) K 1 >1 MJ/m 3 , (v) binary alloy, and (vi) Fe content equal to 75 at.%. Doing so, it found two promising phases Fe 3 A with A=Ta,Ti that fulfill these requirements. Hence, it suggests to explore the ternary line Fe 3 Sn 1-x A x . A preliminary theoretical analysis using DFT calculations, following the steps described in Section 4.2.1, with software VASP shows that replacing 50% of Sn by Ti or Ta in the Fe 3 Sn phase might be enough to switch MAE from easy plane to easy axis, see Fig. Finally, concerning the cubic phases in which a tetragonal distortion can induce a large MAE (see Section 4.2.2), we think that adding light interstitial atoms such as H, B, C, and N in these compounds might be a likely way to achieve it in practice Presently, it is also being updated with the results of a high-throughput calculation of MAE for a large set of uniaxial magnetic structures predicted with AGA, as well as for tetragonally distorted cubic phases and tuned known magnetic materials. In order to illustrate these methods, we have reported some interesting phases with high MAE and M S , such as FeAl, Fe 16 B 2 and Fe 4 Hf 2 , tetragonally distorted Mn 3 Pt and Mn 2 RhPt, and doped Fe 3 Sn. Examples of available multiscale theoretical and experimental data about other relevant magnetic properties (exchange integrals, T C , anisotropy field, coercivity, maximum energy product, etc.) were also shown, which can be helpful for the design of new promising high-performance RE-free/lean PMs. Aiming to link the computational high-throughput results to experiment, we presented some possible strategies to exploit most promising theoretical materials found in the database. Further results from the consortium of Novamag project are expected to be uploaded into the database in the near future, as well as possible new features and improvements.