The electron dynamics in the CuO chains has been elusive in Y-Ba-Cu-O cuprate systems by means of standard angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES); cleaved sample exhibits areas terminated by both CuO-chain or BaO layers, and the size of a typical beam results in ARPES signals that are superposed from both terminations. Here, we employ spatially-resolved ARPES with submicrometric beam (nano-ARPES) to reveal the surface-termination-dependent electronic structures of the double CuO chains in YBa2Cu4O8. We present the first observation of sharp metallic dispersions and Fermi surfaces of the double CuO chains buried underneath the CuO2plane block on the BaO terminated surface. While the observed Fermi surfaces of the CuO chains are highly one-dimensional, the electrons in the CuO-chains do not undergo significant electron correlations and no signature of a Tomonaga-Luttinger liquid nor a marginal Fermi liquid is found. Our works represent an important experimental step toward understanding of the charge dynamics and provides a starting basis for modelling the high-Tc superconductivity in YBCO cuprate systems. Identifying the role of the CuO chains is fundamentally important to understand superconductivity in high-T c yttrium-barium-copper-oxide (YBCO) superconductors, in which quasi-one-dimensional (1D) CuO chains and two-dimensional (2D) CuO 2 planes coexist. Due to the low dimensional electronic nature of the CuO chains, the electrons are generally expected to be strongly correlated because their motion is confined along the atomic chains Many experimental efforts using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) have been devoted on the single CuO-chain system, YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ (Y123), while the results and interpretations of the electronic structure has been not straightforward These micro-ARPES results demonstrated that one of the CuO chains exposed on the CuO-terminated surface is insulating, while the other (subsurface) CuO chain is conducting. Although the mechanism of the electronic reconstruction resulting in the insulating chains is unknown, the reported CuO-chain states are representative of surface properties and distinct from those in the bulk, in which they are conductive and contribute to superconductivity In this Letter, we present the state-of-the-art ARPES study utilizing sub-micrometer probe spot (nano-ARPES) to clarify the termination-dependent electronic structure of the CuO chains in Y124. We observe the metallic dispersions of double CuO chains, buried underneath the CuO 2 plane on the BaO-terminated surface, for the first time. The metallic behaviour of these double CuO chains is consistent with the bulk transport properties High-quality single crystals of Y124 (T c = 82 K) were grown by the flux method at ambient pressure Figure Having thus characterized the CuO-chain or BaO-layer terminated surface regions, we perform nano-ARPES measurements on each termination [red region for the CuO-terminated surface and the blue region for the BaOterminated surface in Fig. The constant energy planes shown in Figs. where μ is the chemical potential, and t a and t b are hopping parameters across and along the chain, respectively (see also Supplementary We confirmed that the carrier concentration is almost maintained for the CuO-terminated surface while extra hole-doping is present in the case of the BaO-terminated surface (see Supplementary Our experimental observations of the metallic CH SS BaO states provide important insights into the in-plane charge dynamics on the 1D CuO chains in the Y124 system. According to ch-DMFT calculations for the coupled 1D chains The observed strong hopping anisotropy in the CuO chain, on the other hand, should enhance the 1D directionality of the CuO-chain electronic states, which may lead to characteristic 1D electronic excitations of a Tomonaga-Luttinger liquid (TLL). However, we did not observe the power-law depletion of spectral weight in the vicinity of E F In summary, we present the termination-dependent electronic structure of Y124 using nano-ARPES. The observed electronic properties of the CuO chains are quite different between the CuO-and BaO-terminated surfaces. The exposed CuO chains (CH TS CuO ) on the CuO termination show gapped features reflecting significant surface effects, consistent with the earlier reports using micro-ARPES results 