Execution of Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy (RUS) for accurate measurement of elastic constants lies primarily on a perfect matching in the calculated and measured mode frequencies of free vibration. Calculation of these frequencies require estimated values of the elastic constants of the material under study, and one has to depend on other experiments for these data. The present work proposes and demonstrates an alternative to derive initial guess values of essential parameters for an isotropic and homogeneous material from the acquired RUS spectra itself. Specimen samples are taken in the shape of rectangular parallelepiped having nearly same cross-sectional dimension but with different lengths. For particular compressional (shear) mode corresponding to length , the frequency is inversely proportional to . The slope of versus 1/ plot equals to half of the compressional (shear) velocity and this in turn gives an estimate of ( ). With these parameters as the input guess parameters, RUS fitting method is executed to find out the best fit results. Elastic constants of commercially available specimens of aluminium, copper, lead, steel and brass are measured in this technique assuming macroscopic homogeneity. Results show good agreement with available literature values. Determination of elastic constants in specimens of relatively small size, dimension ~ a few mm 3 , has been made possible with Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy (RUS) Commercially available aluminium, copper, lead, brass and steel are taken as test samples. The samples are polycrystalline. In general, polycrystalline samples are aggregates of crystal grains of different sizes and shapes situated with random orientations inside the material. The macroscopic behaviour of these materials may be considered as isotropic and homogeneous and their elastic properties can be obtained from single crystal properties by averaging over all possible grain sizes and crystal orientations. Voigt The background theory is outlined in sec. 2, experimental method and results along with available literature values are presented in sce. 3, results are discussed in sec. 4 and sec. 5 gives concluding remarks. For an isotropic solid, the elastic property is completely described by Lamé constants λ and μ. The elastic tensor is given by, is compressional modulus and = is shear modulus. Resonant mode frequencies for free vibration depends on sample shape, size, density (ρ), and the constants . In the present experiment, samples are taken in the shape of a rectangular parallelepiped of length , breadth and height h. Among the various possible vibrational modes, there are compressional modes whose frequencies ( ) are integral multiples of / 2 ⁄ and shear modes having frequencies integral multiples of / 2 ⁄ . Here may be any one of , and h. Thus, for a particular shear or compressional mode, vs. 1/ plot will be a straight line. The gradient is = / 2 ⁄ for shear mode frequencies and for compressional mode frequencies it is = / 2 ⁄ . Thus, identification of proper mode frequencies enables one to find out and from the RUS spectra acquired for different sample lengths. The experiment is done using Magnaflux Quasar Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy system. The samples are taken in the shape of rectangular parallelepiped having nearly same cross-sectional dimension but with varying lengths. The resonance frequency modes are detected starting from the lowest frequency, for at least three samples having different lengths ( ). The frequency is plotted against 1/ . For a particular sample, the frequency points will lie on a vertical line. For larger , lower will be the mode frequencies. Further, the lowest frequency mode is expected to be a shear mode. In the vs. 1/ plot the lowest frequency points for different samples will lie on a straight line and = can be determined from the slope of this line. For compressional modes difficulty arises in identifying the mode frequencies due to overlap with other possible mode frequencies. However, a few guess values may be found out by identifying frequency modes lying on a straight line with slope > √2 and any of these may be a logical guess for or . Each of these sets of and may be considered as an input to run the RPR fitting program in the RUS to get the final output parameters with minimum and rms error. The dimensions and densities of the samples under study are listed in Table-I. The purpose of the present work is to demonstrate the applicability of RUS for any sample even if there is no idea about its elastic constants. The acquired RUS spectra are good enough in estimating input guess parameters to run the RPR fitting code. As such, commercially available samples are chosen without going to the minute compositional details and crystalline properties. The slopes of linear fits LF1, LF2 and LF3 (fig. From fig. For brass the slopes LF1, LF2 and LF3 as obtained from fig. Among the five samples studied, agreement between experimental and literature data are very good for steel and Cu, and reasonably good for brass. For Al and Pb the agreement is not so satisfactory. The reason may be their soft and malleable nature. Sample hardness is one of the important criteria for RUS to get good result. The calculated mode frequencies depend on sample shape and dimension. For soft samples there is every possibility of shape deformation in handling them during experiment. As a consequence, calculated mode frequencies will differ considerably from their actual values leaving scope for convergence towards inappropriate final parameter values. Another important point to note is that, the output value of shear modulus does not differ too much from its guess value determined from the vs. 1/ plot. The difference is within 25% of the final result. Since the shear mode is low frequency mode, it is relatively easy to identify these for varying sample lengths and then finding out the linear fit LF1. On the other hand, longitudinal modes are mixed up with other possible modes creating uncertainty in identifying the right frequencies and consequently finding linear fits LF2 or LF3. However this is not a serious issue, at least for the present study. The guess parameters determined from the vs. 1/ plot are found good enough to run the RPR fitting program towards convergence. In the present study a method for the extraction of input guess values for the elastic constants from the acquired RUS spectra itself has been proposed. It is shown that guess parameters and can be calculated from vs. 1/ plot. Not only that, the final results show that obtained in this method is a reasonably good guess. However, confusion arises in estimating , but this does not appear to be a serious issue. Among the five samples studied in this method, very good results are obtained for Cu and steel, reasonably good results are obtained for brass and results for Al and Pb are not so satisfactory. The reason is attributed to the softness and malleability of Al and Pb samples that may cause shape deformation in handling the samples during experiment.