We report on a study of charge transport in EuTiO 3-δ single crystals with carrier density tuned across several orders of magnitude. Comparing this system with other quasi-cubic perovskites, in particular strontium titanate, we draw a comprehensive picture of metal-insulator transition and dilute metallicity in this ABO3 family. Because of a lower electric permittivity, the metal-insulator transition in EuTiO 3-δ occurs at higher carrier densities compared to SrTiO3. At low temperature, a distinct T 2 resistivity is visible. Its prefactor A smoothly decreases with increasing carrier concentration in a similar manner in three different perovskites. Our results draw a comprehensive picture of charge transport in doped quantum paraelectrics. During the last decade, the metal-insulator transition (MIT) in weakly doped SrTiO 3 has attracted renewed interest. The pure compound is a highly insulating quantum paraelectric In order to investigate these phenomena in other systems, EuTiO 3 is a prime candidate, because both materials are similar in many aspects. Sr 2+ and Eu 2+ have almost the same ionic radius The research on n-doped EuTiO 3 is sparse. To our knowledge only five publications exist: One report deals with poly-and single-crystalline EuTi 1-x Nb x O 3 with x ≤ 0.3 The EuTiO 3 crystals were grown by the floatingzone technique. We used polycrystalline powders of Eu 2 O 3 (chemical purity 99.99 %), TiO (99.5 %), and TiO 2 (99.99 %) as starting materials. The powders were mixed for 1 h and the mixture was pressed to a cylindrical rod at 50 MPa. In order to avoid emergence of Eu 3+ via oxygen capture, we skipped preliminary powder reactions and put the pressed rod directly into the floatingzone system. Centimeter-sized single crystals were grown in argon atmosphere using a growth speed of 10 mm h -1 and a relative rotation of the rods of 30 rpm. X-ray powder diffraction measurements verified phase purity and Laue images confirmed single crystallinity. The as-grown crystal was cut into cuboid pieces with all faces being {100} planes. In order to induce electron doping, the samples were annealed in sealed fusedquartz tubes with low argon pressure ( < ∼ 10 -5 mbar) and titanium metal powder (99.99 %) acting as oxygen n (a) Resistivity ρ(T ) of semiconducting pristine EuTiO3 determined by DC measurements (black dashed line) and dielectric spectroscopy (green solid line) in comparison to metallic EuTiO 3-δ which were cut from the same single crystal and oxygen reduced. (b) Charge carrier concentrations n of all samples deduced from Hall effect measurements at various temperatures. The upper inset in (a) shows Arrhenius plots of n(T ) and of the conductivity σ(T ) together with linear fits (dotted lines). The lower inset is an enlarged view of the ρ(T ) anomalies at TN = 5.5 K, which is n independent, in agreement with a previous report catcher. The quartz tubes were heated for 10 h at temperatures between 650 • C and 850 • C depending on the intended carrier concentration. In order to have an indicator for homogeneity, in each run two samples with different thicknesses (0.2 mm and 0.4 mm) were annealed simultaneously in the same quartz tube. Resistivity and Hall effect measurements were carried out by a standard four-probe and six-probe method, respectively, using a home-built dipstick setup and a commercial 3 He insert (Heliox, Oxford Instruments) for wet cryostats. Figure To induce a MIT, the aforementioned annealing technique is used. Annealing temperatures below 600 • C seem to have no effect on the oxygen content, since the ρ(T ) curves remain unchanged (not shown). For annealing temperatures above 750 • C we obtain metallic samples with temperature-independent carrier densities that cover a range of 10 20 cm -3 to 10 21 cm -3 (see Fig. The absence of homogeneous samples between pristine and metallic EuTiO 3-δ hinders an exact determination of the MIT. The lowest carrier density of 10 20 cm -3 yields an upper boundary for the critical carrier density n c of the MIT and is about four orders of magnitude larger than the corresponding one (≈ 10 16 cm -3 ) of SrTiO 3 Of course, these values were obtained for pristine EuTiO 3 . For doped samples, one defines an effective Bohr radius a * B = a B εm e /m * , which renormalizes a B ≈ 0.5 Å of the hydrogen atom by taking into account the permittivity ε and the band mass m * . The so-called Mott criterion ) T ( K ) 2 . 9 x 1 0 1 9 Effective Bohr radius a * B versus critical charge carrier density nc of various doped semiconductors (taken from Figure The increase of α is a natural consequence of a threeband system. If we consider the most simple case of three parabolic bands with band minima at energies E i , effective masses m i , and densities of states to the total electron density n(E F ) = i n i (E F ). We use the band masses m 0 = m 2 = 1.5m e and m 1 = 3.5m e from Shubnikov-de-Haas measurements of SrTiO 3-δ Appendix A: Dielectric Spectroscopy The dielectric and transport properties of pristine EuTiO 3 towards higher resistivities were determined by contact based impedance spectroscopy. These measurements were performed in a commercial 4 He-flow cryomagnet (Quantum-Design PPMS) on crystals in capacitor geometry with metallized surfaces A ≈ 4 mm 2 and thickness d ≈ 0.5 mm along a cubic [100] axis. We used a high-impedance frequency response analyzer (Novocontrol) and a vector network analyzer (ZNB8, Rohde&Schwarz) to cover a joint frequency range 1 Hz ≤ ν ≤ 100 MHz with voltage stimulation below 1 V rms . As expected for semi-conductors, Schottky-type depletion layers at the contact interfaces cause a capacitive contribution C C , which together with the contact resistance R C form an RC element in series with the intrinsic sample impedance. This gives rise to Maxwell-Wagner-type relaxational effects EuTiO 3 is a quantum paraelectric where long-range order is prevented by quantum fluctuations. The fingerprint of quantum-paraelectric behavior is a Curie-like rise of the permittivity with decreasing temperature followed by a saturation at an elevated ε(T → 0), which can be modeled by the well known Barrett formula Here, T Ω represents the influence of quantum fluctuations and T 0 is the paraelectric Curie-temperature. The fit of the high-frequency data of ε(T < 200 K) reveals T Ω 160 K and T 0 -190 K. The value of T Ω agrees with a previous report 