Precise control of the conductivity of semiconductors through doping has enabled the creation of advanced electronic devices, similarly, the ability to control the conductivity in oxides can enable novel advanced electronic and optoelectronic functionalities. While this was successfully shown for moderately insulating oxides, such as In 2 O 3 , a reliable method for increasing the conductivity of highly insulating, wide bandgap dielectrics, such as aluminum oxide (Al 2 O 3 ), has not been reported yet. Al 2 O 3 is a material of significant technological interest, permeating diverse fields of application, thanks to its exceptional mechanical strength and dielectric properties. Here we present a versatile method for precisely changing the conductivity of Al 2 O 3 . Our approach greatly exceeds the magnitude of the best previously reported change of conductivity in an oxide (In 2 O 3 ). With an increase in conductivity of about 14 orders of magnitude, our method presents about 10 orders of magnitude higher change in conductivity than the best previously reported result. Our method can use focused ion beam to produce conductive zones with nanoscale resolution within the insulating Al 2 O 3 matrix. We investigated the source of conductivity modulation and identified trap-assisted conduction in the ion damage-induced defects as the main charge transport mechanism. Temperature-dependency of the conductivity and optical characterization of the patterned areas offer further insight into the nature of the conduction mechanism. We also show that the process is extremely reproducible and robust against moderate annealing temperatures and chemical environment. The record conductivity modulation, combined with the nanoscale patterning precision allows the creation of conductive zones within a highly insulating, mechanically hard, chemically inert, and bio-compatible matrix, which could find broad applications in electronics, optoelectronics, and medical implants. Correspondence: hmohseni@northwestern.edu Aluminum oxide (Al 2 O 3 ) is one of the most widely employed dielectric materials, thanks to its excellent insulating properties The process schematic of our method is presented in Figure Defect-assisted conduction. Several theoretical and experimental studies have advanced the hypothesis that damage-induced defects in electronic materials can create deep trap states in the bandgap, which intrinsically act as dopants, enabling electrical conduction in otherwise highly insulating materials To further evaluate the nature of the charge transport mechanism, we performed temperaturedependent conductivity characterization of the implanted devices. Figure where α is a fitting parameter, k B is Boltzmann's constant and E ACT is the activation energy in units of electron-Volt. Within the range of temperatures investigated, two conduction regimes are observed: one dominated by thermally activated phonons, at higher temperatures (T > 200K), and one by direct hopping at lower temperatures; hence a good fit to the experimental data (R 2 = 0.994) is only possible by adding two functions of the form of eq. 1, with estimated activation energies of 96 meV and 50 meV. Optical characterization. We also evaluated the effect of the implantation on the optical properties of the sapphire substrate. Figure We reported a novel method for nanopatterning of conductive zones in Al 2 O 3 matrix using focused ion beam irradiation. The implanted wires exhibit ohmic conduction with an average conductivity of 10 -2 Scm -1 . Based on a large number of measured devices, we showed that the presented nanopatterning process has excellent uniformity and nanoscale spatial resolution, while allowing for modulation of the electrical conductivity through control of the ion dose. The electrical, optical, and chemical characterizations provide strong evidence that the conduction mechanism is due to the formation of trap states within the oxide bandgap. All processed devices showed stable performance during several months, and after heating to 100 • C and immersion in liquid solvents. The present method shows great potential for application in sensing technologies that require electrical contacts embedded in a mechanically hard, chemically inert, and electrically insulating dielectric matrix. Examples of such applications include photon sensors, low-energy interconnects, and micro/nano-implantable medical devices. The majority of the devices presented were implanted in a 300 μm thick, double-side polished < 0001 > crystalline sapphire substrates. Some of the devices were implanted in an Al 2 O 3 film deposited on both silicon and sapphire substrate using a Cambridge NanoTech Savannah S100 atomic layer deposition from Trimethylaluminum and water vapor precursors at 150 • C. An 80 nm Cu layer with alignment mark pattern was deposited on the sample before implantation using photolithographic lift-off techniques. The metallic layer was connected to ground during implantation. A FEI Nova 600 NanoLab dual-beam microscope with a Sidewinder Ga+ ion column and a 100 nm resolution piezomotor X-Y stage was employed for the wire implantation at ion beam energies of 5 and 30 keV and currents of 100 pA, 3.2 and 6.3 nA, yielding estimated spot sizes ranging 20 to 60 nm. The instrument was combined with a RAITH Elphy 4.0 interface with integrated 16-bit DAC pattern generator, which enables large area patterning and write-field alignment, accounting for stitching and drift, and allows for precise dose control via beam blank and deflection. The Elphy interface allows for a multi-pass patterning technique, which help contrast the strong charging in dielectrics. Nevertheless, we estimate the effective dose to be lower than the nominal value, due to sputtering and localized charging deflecting the incident ions. The Ti/Au contacts were subsequently deposited with photolithographic lift-off techniques, and electrical testing was performed with a 4point probe station equipped with Agilent 4285A LCR meter. Photoluminescence spectra were acquired using a HORIBA LabRAM HR Evolution confocal Raman, equipped with 473 nm, 532 nm, 633 nm and 785 nm lasers for excitation. Bianconi et al. | Arχiv | February 20, 2019 | 1-8