The present article reports the governing influence of substituting the M 2+ site in nanoscale MFe 2 O 4 spinel ferrites by different magnetic metals (Fe/Mn/Co/Ni) on magnetorheological and magneto-elastoviscous behaviors of the corresponding magnetorheological fluids (MRFs). Different doped MFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles have been synthesized using the polyol-assisted hydrothermal method. Detailed steady and oscillatory shear rheology have been performed on the MRFs to determine the magneto-viscoelastic responses The MRFs exhibit shear thinning behavior and augmented yield characteristics under influence of magnetic field. The steady state magnetoviscous behaviors are scaled against the governing Mason number and self-similar response from all the MRFs have been noted. The MRFs conform to an extended Bingham plastic model under field effect. Transient magnetoviscous responses show distinct hysteresis behaviors when the MRFs are exposed to time varying magnetic fields. Oscillatory shear studies using frequency and strain amplitude sweeps exhibit predominant solid like behaviors under field environment. However, the relaxation behaviors and strain amplitude sweep tests of the MRFs reveal that while the fluids show solid-like behaviors under field effect, they cannot be termed as typical elastic fluids. Comparisons show that the MnFe 2 O 4 MRFs have superior yield performance among all. However, in case of dynamic and oscillatory systems, CoFe 2 O 4 MRFs show the best performance. The viscoelastic responses of the MRFs are noted to correspond to a three element viscoelastic model. The study may find importance in design and development strategies of nano-MRFs for different applications. Magnetorheological fluids (MRFs), which are colloidal dispersions of magnetic nanoparticles, can be dubbed as 'smart fluids' due to their magnetic field dependent tunable viscosity. Conventional MR fluids consist of magnetic submicron particles dispersed stably in nonmagnetic liquids and these fluids show altered rheological behavior in presence of external stimulus (magnetic field) Therefore, in-depth understanding of the fundamental rheological behavior of MRFs is essential for design and development of such field-responsive systems. When the MRFs are exposed to a magnetic field, the dispersed magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) coalesce to form a fibrillar microstructure. Under the action of shear, these fibrils or chains resist hydrodynamic deformation forces, leading to improved rheological parameters It has been theorized that attachment and detachment of the sidechains from dense clusters of particles is responsible for the dynamic viscoelastic behaviors of MRFs Zubarev et al. have suggested a few analytical models to explain the rheological behavior of ferrofluids Since the morphology and structure of MNPs influence the magnetoviscous responses of the MRFs, selection of proper magnetic nanocolloids have strong implications on the overall rheological behavior. Binary transition metal oxides (BTMOs) (denoted by AB 2 O 4 , where A, B = Co, Ni, Fe, Mn) have attracted considerable attention in this field due to their strong size and shape dependent magnetic properties If the M 2+ occupies only the tetrahedral sites, the spinel is termed as direct, whereas when it occupies the octahedral sites only, the spinel is called inverse The present study explores the magnetoviscous and magneto-elastoviscous responses of The base chemical ingredients, such as FeCl and PVP (polyvinyl pyrrolidone) were procured and used as is (Loba Chime Pvt. Ltd., India). Ethylene glycol and poly-ethylene glycol (MW 400) were procured from Spectrochem, India, and NH 4 F from Sigma-Aldrich, India. MFe 2 O 4 nanoparicles were synthesized using the polyol assisted hydrothermal method X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns for the nanomaterials were recorded in the 2θ range of 5°-80° with a scan rate of 2°/min (PAN analytical X'PERT PRO diffractometer, the Netherlands) using Cu Kα radiation (λ=0.1542 nm, 40 KV, 45 mA) (Fig. The crystallinity, phase purity, and successful formation of all the ferrite samples were confirmed by Powder X-ray (P-XRD) diffraction in the range of 2θ (5°-80°). All the samples exhibit reflections at 2θ = 30.27°, A non-polar liquid, silicone oil (SO) (procured from Avra Synthesis Ltd., India) was used to prepare the MRFs. The SO has a Newtonian viscosity of 350 cSt at 25 °C. Anhydrous FNPs were dispersed in the SO as per concentration requirements (40 wt. % in the present studies) and stirred mechanically and ultrasonicated to obtain a homogeneous colloid. To prevent moisture adsorption, the MRFs were stored in a desiccator. The MR properties of the colloids were measured using a rotational rheometer (MCR 102, Anton Paar, Germany) with parallel plate configuration at constant gap of 1 mm. The rheometer is connected to a Magnetorheological module, capable of generating magnetic fields up to 1 T for sample thicknesses of 1 mm and lower. The MRFs are tested at four different magnetic field intensities (0, 0.35, 0.7, and 1 T). During the experiments, the sample temperature has been maintained constant at 300K using a Peltier controller. The rheological behavior is obtained by measuring the shear stress and viscosity as a function of shear rate from 0.01 to 100 s -1 . The viscoelastic responses have been studied in terms of storage modulus (G'), loss modulus (G"), dissipation (loss) factor (tanδ), and the complex viscosity (η*). To probe the dynamic rheological response, oscillatory tests with strain amplitudes of 0.01 to 1 % and frequencies of 1 to 100 Hz have been performed. Measurements of stress relaxation behaviors and magnetoviscous hysteresis have also been performed. The typical uncertainty involved in the measurements was within ±5%. Figures SF4-SF7 (Refer supplementary) illustrates the role of magnetic field in modifying the static rheological behaviors of the colloids. The increase in viscosity is due to the formation of chain-like structures by the nanoparticles within the colloids under the action of magnetic field. At lower magnetic field strengths, the chains or fibrils formed within the MRF are typically linear. With increase of field strength, the number densities of chains improve with increasing aspect ratio of the fibril structures where, χ is the magnetic susceptibility of the material The yield stresses of the MRFs also reveal similar magnetorheological behaviors (fig. where 0  is the permeability of the vaccum, c  is the relative permeability of the carrier fluid. In eqn. 2,  is the contrast factor, defined as where p  is the relative permeability of the particle. For instance the  of Fe 3 O 4 based MRF comes around 2.7 The augmentation of yield stress is pronounced in the linear regime of magnetization where, τ y is the yield stress at magnetic field H. In eqn. where, the shear stress (  ) is related to the yield stress ( y  ), the plastic viscosity ( pl  ) and the imposed shear rate ( ). The apparent viscosity app  for the MRF is defined as Introducing the non-linear nature of the plastic viscosity, the apparent viscosity can be remodeled in terms of the infinite shear viscosity as It is shown by reports that pl  would ultimately be equal to   , especially at high shear limits where,  is a constant which is determined from fitting the experimental observations to the eqn. 9. The Mason number ( Mn ) is the ratio of the hydrodynamic shear forces to magnetic (ferrodynamic) forces in MRFs and is expressed as MRFs at different shear rates (0.01 s -1 to 1 s -1 ). The viscosity enhances with increase in magnetic field and saturates at high fields, irrespective of the magnitude of the shear rates. The magnetic field leads to formation of the chained fibrils by the aligned nanoparticles within the MRFs. Such structure induces localized elasticity to the fluid phase and leads to enhanced shear resistance, or viscosity. The number density of the fibrils reach a maximum at a particular field, and beyond that, no additional fibril formation takes place. Thereby, the magnetoviscous behavior reaches a plateau. The MRFs show hysteresis in the magnetoviscous effect (fig. where, f 0 is the frequency of domain flipping, whose value has been assumed to be 10 9 Hz for magnetic particles in non-polar media It can be observed from fig. Oscillatory rheological responses of the MRFs have been examined to understand their dynamic behaviors. Fig. and loss (G") moduli for the different MRFs are obtained from frequency sweep tests at different magnetic field strengths at constant strain amplitudes. In absence of magnetic field, for the entire range of frequencies, the G" is higher than the G', signifying predominantly liquid behavior. Under the influence of magnetic field, the improvement of G' component indicates microstructure elasticity within the MRF. The particles within an MRF experience rotational resistance when in the presence of a magnetic field, due to competition between magnetic and hydrodynamic torques where, σ is the stress, ε is the strain and η is the viscosity of the fluid. However, such a Newtonian three element fluid model fails to replicate the experimental viscoelastic moduli. This is atypical for the present case, as prominent linear viscoelastic regimes were not identifiable from the amplitude and frequency sweep studies. A fractional order time derivative q is introduced in the constitutive equation of the dashpot to provide a realistic representation of a non-linear, non-Newtonian fluid system. For a non-linear, non-Newtonian dashpot, the stress is expressed as   where, E is the elastic modulus of the associated spring component within the Voigt element. The stress within the dashpot which is placed in series with the Voigt element is as (the index p governs the fraction response of the series dashpot) The total strain ε within the 3 element system is determined via Laplace transform as The final form of the stress-strain relationship in the frequency domain is Expanding the eqn. 19 in terms of the storage and loss moduli yields [63] where, sin( / 2) Additionally, the relaxation modulus (G(t)) also can be deduced from eqn. 16 and can be expressed as Where, c t is the time constant and follows the relationship Substitution of eqn. 23 in the eqn. 22 leads to the simplified form of the relaxation modulus as 2 () 