Thin-film solar cells suffer from various types of recombination, of which leakage current usually dominates at lower voltages. Herein, we demonstrate first a three-order reduction of the shunt loss mechanism in planar methylammonium lead iodide perovskite solar cells by replacing the commonly used hole transport layer poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly-(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) with a better hole-selective polyarylamine. As a result, these cells exhibit superior operation under reduced light conditions, which we demonstrate for the extreme case of moonlight irradiance, at which open-circuit voltages of 530 mV can still be obtained. By the shunt removal we also observe the V OC to drop to zero after as long as 2 h after the light has been switched off. Second, at higher illumination intensities the dominant losses in the PEDOT:PSS-based cell are ascribed to surface recombination and are also proven to be substantially minimized by instead employing the polyarylamine. We attribute the reduced shunt and surface recombination to the far better suited semiconductor character of the polyarylamine, compared to that of PEDOT:PSS, efficiently blocking electrons from recombining at this electrode. S olar cells are generally developed for operation under intense illumination such as direct sunlight or even using light concentrators. There are, however, numerous conditions in which the light intensity is lower because of nonideal orientation, sunrise or sunset, cloudy days, or indoor conditions. Importantly, to fully understand recombination mechanisms in solar cells, it is essential to also evaluate them under as large a range of illumination intensities as possible to assess which recombination pathway becomes dominant under each corresponding carrier concentration. Because recombination of excited charge carriers in photovoltaic devices are to various extents dependent on the charge carrier concentration, the rates accordingly depend on the illumination intensity itself. The general Shockley diode equation is of vital importance for solar cells because it defines how the total recombination processes depend on the internal voltage in a device. The relation between recombination current and voltage is usually described more accurately by the inclusion of an ideality factor (n), which varies depending on the dominant recombination mechanism. However, the Shockley diode equation is, even with the inclusion of an ideality factor, usually not sufficient to describe all processes that contribute to the overall recombination current dependency on the actual external voltage, V. Therefore, a more generalized Shockley equation (eq 1) accounting for both series and shunt resistances (R Series and R Shunt , respectively) is required: where q is the electronic charge, k the Boltzmann constant, and J 0 the dark saturation current. To identify the internal voltage drop over a diode it is important We manufactured 16 planar perovskite solar cells for each of the three device configurations presented in Figure The PEDOT:PSS/polyTPD-based cells (device B) shows a very commonly observed shunt resistance of ∼70 MΩ providing a leakage current of around 0.45 mA m -2 at 0.2 V. A 70 MΩ resistor well describes the entire voltage range of the losses due to the shunt path. Such values are also representative for organic solar cells likewise employing PEDOT:PSS. Letter reduced leakage current and a corresponding shunt resistance as high as 15 GΩ, comparable with the Si photodetector. However, the assumption of the shunt being solely described by an ohmic resistor might not fully apply for device C, as we note minor deviations from linear behavior in the forward sweep. While it is indeed possible to better fit a larger voltage range with a proposed Evaluating the double-sweep J-V curves of Figure As comparison, we also include the OCVD traces for the Si photodiode obtained when employing either the built-in megaohm of the oscilloscope or the gigaohm load for the longer time scales and lower voltages. The rapid voltage drops observed in those cases are occurring over the employed measurement instrumentation and not inside the Si diode itself. All perovskite cells are instead evaluated with a high load resistance, and the voltage drop occurring after around 1 s is therefore due to the shunt resistance of the cell itself. Device C, using only polyTPD as the hole-selective layer, does not display such a drop at all but decays instead over at least three more decades in time compared to the PEDOT:PSS-based cells. Device C retains a V OC of 0.25 V even 3 min after the light has been switched off and does not reach 0 V until after 2 h. The large differences in time it takes for the voltage to reach zero clearly highlight the influence that the often observed "leakage current" generally has on the behavior of solar cells. The equivalent circuit of the solar cell is described in the inset of Figure Letter capacitive charges that can decay via either the parasitic pathway that the shunt represents, that is, over an RC component with a traditional monoexponential decay characteristic, or via the wide bandgap semiconductor diode that the bulk of the perovskite itself represents. Depending on the value of the shunt resistance, the full voltage decay of Figure where V t=0 is the starting steady-state voltage value; n and I 0 are the ideality factor and dark saturation current of the diode, respectively. We emphasize here that this diode-capacitor decay is very different from a RC decay, because it follows a linear behavior with the logarithm of time for the larger part of the time axis. Accordingly, we have chosen to plot the OCVD decay in Figure Very long decay end times can therefore be reached only by shunt-free devices such as device C and the Si reference cell, whereas the other perovskite devices enter a faster RC regime at much earlier times, when the shunt starts to rule the dynamics. Ions have earlier been assigned to be responsible for the hysteresis, but recently also to anomalously long-lived charges. Having confirmed that the voltage decay is indeed extremely slow at lower voltages, when the leakage recombination path has been so effectively removed, we can justify the observed "V OC in the dark", in the low-voltage reverse sweep of Figure The labeling "leakage current" can also be somewhat misleading as it may be interpreted as an extra current flow originating purely from the applied voltage of an external electrical power source. To emphasize that leakage current over shunt paths, irrespective of their origin, indeed represents a true low-light intensity recombination mechanism, the steady-state open-circuit voltage under a large set of illumination intensities is presented in Figure Letter decay measurements (Figure For the higher-intensity regime in Figure The clear presence of low energetic transitions allowed in PEDOT:PSS cannot be identified in polyTPD. This shortcoming of PEDOT:PSS allows a non-negligible part of the perovskite electrons to be parasitically extracted via midgap states, We note also that device B, with the PEDOT:PSS underneath the polyTPD, apparently partly removes the excellent low leakage current of device C. Optical microscopy (see the Supporting Information) reveals micrometer-sized spots located underneath the uniform perovskite film of device B. We attribute these to limited wetting of polyTPD on PEDOT:PSS, and we propose these sites, not visible in scanning electron microscopy images (see the Supporting Information) of the perovskite surface itself, also act as possible shunt formations. Similar features were recently In conclusion, our message with this contribution is threefold: We first suggest to exclude PEDOT:PSS as a hole transport material because of its semimetallic nature and corresponding abundancy of intergap states that increases recombination at this interface and further leads to large leakage currents. We conclude that this loss mechanism prevents the difference of the two perovskite quasi-Fermi levels from maintaining a high value at both high and low irradiance levels, but for rather different reasons. At low voltage values, the shunt loss rules, while at higher values, a pronounced contribution of surface recombination instead becomes dominant. PolyTPD does not show any of these features but acts instead as an almost perfect hole-selective layer that excellently inhibits electron recombination at this side of the device, independent of voltage. Second, from our OCVD measurements, we conclude that the shunt-free devices show a capacitive contribution to voltage that remains for up to 2 h after the light has been switched off and that can be fully described with a capacitor discharging over a diode. Third, we propose the steepness of band edges as determined from sensitive absorption profiles as a figure of merit for a good charge-selective layer. The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsenergylett.6b00719. Experimental details of the manufacturing procedures, device statistics, and measurement methodology details; SEM and optical images of the manufactured devices taken after the top electrode has been delaminated; equivalent circuit fitting of the OCVD; J-V sweep alterations; J-V characteristics of the four devices evaluated under a set of selected familiar light intensities. (PDF) Letter ACS Energy Lett. 2017, 2, 424-430