In this study, the effect of rhenium (Re) addition on microstructural evolution of a new low-density Co-Ni-Al-Mo-Nb based superalloy is presented. Addition of Re significantly influences the γ' precipitate morphology, the γ/γ' lattice misfit and the γ/γ' microstructural stability during long term aging. An addition of 2 at.% Re to a Co-30Ni-10Al-5Mo-2Nb (all in at.%) alloy, aged at 900°C for 50 hours, reduces the γ/γ' lattice misfit by ~ 40% (from +0.32% to +0.19%, measured at room temperature) and hence alters the g' morphology from cuboidal to round-cornered cuboidal precipitates. The composition profiles across the γ/γ' interface by atom probe tomography (APT) reveals Re partitions to the g phase (K "# = 0.34) and also results in the partitioning reversal of Mo to the g phase (K *+ = 0.90) from the γ' precipitate. An inhomogeneous distribution of Gibbsian interfacial excess for the solute Re (Γ "# , ranging from 0.8 to 9.6 atom.nm -2 ) has been observed at the γ/γ' interface. A coarsening study at 900°C (up to 1000 hours) suggests that the coarsening of γ' precipitates occurs solely by an evaporation-condensation (EC) mechanism. This is contrary to that observed in the Co-30Ni-10Al-5Mo-2Nb alloy as well as in some of the Ni-Al based and high mass density Co-Al-W based superalloys, where γ' precipitates coarsen by coagulation/coalescence mechanism with extensive alignment of γ' along <100> directions as a sign of microstructural instability. The γ' coarsening rate exponent (K / ) and γ/γ' interfacial energy are estimated to be 1.41 ́ 10 -27 m 3 /s and 8.4 mJ/m 2 , which are comparable and lower than Co-Al-W based superalloys. γ/γ' based superalloys are a class of high temperature alloys that are critical for fabricating parts and components in the aero-and land-based gas turbine engines Commercial Ni-Al based superalloys contain 8 to 12 alloying elements that provide an excellent combination of physical, mechanical and corrosion/oxidation properties even at temperatures equal or greater than 1100°C The recently developed Co-Al based alloys with the γ/γ' microstructure have demonstrated comparable high temperature creep than the second generation Ni-Al based superalloys The effect of Re addition to these alloys is limited The addition of Re could have an important role for the long term microstructural stability of Co-Al based superalloys. However, the role of Re in the coarsening behavior of cobalt based alloys, in particular that of the low-density Co-Al-Mo-Nb/Ta based superalloys, has not been explored rigorously. Some studies on the kinetics and associated models have been reported for Re added Ni-Al based superalloys The present work reports a detailed study on the effect of Re addition on a low density W-free g/g¢ Co-Al based superalloys. Microstructural evolution, mechanical properties at high temperatures and γ' coarsening kinetics have been elucidated. Advanced characterization tools such as atom probe tomography (APT) for atomic compositional partitioning across γ/γ' and scanning/transmission electron microscopy (SEM and TEM) have been used for measuring the temporal evolution of γ' precipitate size and number density. Subsequently, modified LSW models for concentrated multicomponent alloy have been validated in terms of temporal exponents and coarsening rate constants. These were compared with reported results for Ni-Al based and Co-Al-W based superalloys. The alloy ingot of 50 grams with the nominal composition Co-30Ni-10Al-5Mo-2Nb-2Re (all in at.% and named as 2Nb2Re) was prepared using pure metals (99.99% purity) in a vacuum arcmelting unit equipped with water cooled copper hearth and a tungsten electrode under argon atmosphere. The alloy was melted 8 times with flipping after each cycle for homogenous melting throughout the ingot. The melted alloy ingot was cast in the form of rods (diameter, f-3 mm, length, L-80 mm) under argon atmosphere using a split water-cooled copper mold in a vacuum suction casting unit. The cast rods were solution-treated at 1250 °C for 20 h in a tube furnace operating under a vacuum of 10 -3 Pa followed by water quenching. The solutionized cast samples were aged at 900 °C for 50 h, 200 h, 300 h, 500 h and 1000 h followed by water quenching for studies on temporal evolution of the γ' precipitates. The composition of the alloy was measured by energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) and it is shown in Table The microstructures of the heat-treated alloy samples were observed in a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Helios NanoLab 460) equipped with a field-emission gun (FEG) source. The samples were polished with standard metallography procedure using 800 to 3000 Si grit papers. The final sample surface preparation was carried out by chemo-mechanical polishing technique using colloidal silica in vibratory polisher (VibroMet TM 2, Buehler). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) for the heat-treated samples was carried out using an FEG TEM microscope (Tecnai F-30, FEI) operated at 300 kV. For TEM samples, disk-shaped specimens were prepared from the heat treated cast 3 mm rods cut in 1mm-thick slices and subsequently mechanically polished to a thickness less than 100 μm. These discs were electro-polished using an electrolyte of 5% perchloric acid in methanol solution at a temperature of -38 °C and a voltage of 16 V to get the transparent regions for TEM studies. The X-ray diffraction measurements for the determination of the lattice misfit between γ and γ' were performed at room temperature using a Rigaku Smart lab high-resolution X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation equipped with Johansson optics that eliminates the contribution from Kα2 and Kβ components from the source. The asymmetric 200 reflections from the γ and γ' phases have been obtained by performing asymmetric q-2q scans using a four-circle goniometer in a Eulerian cradle. Prior to the scan, the alignment conditions for the in-plane rotation and lattice inclination (out-of-plane) were determined by performing phi (Φ) and chi (χ) scans, respectively. The data was collected for 0°-360° with a step of 3° phi (Φ) and tilting 52.5°-57.5° with a step of 0.1° in chi (χ) range. The q-2q scan was collected at an angular range of 50°-53° with a scan step of 0.001°and time per step of 1°/minute. The peak positions corresponding to the γ and γ' phases were determined by deconvolution of the measured diffraction profile using a pseudo-Voigt function in a Fityk peak analysis program. Among all the possible combination of peak fits, one with best R 2 value was chosen. The compression tests for the aged (900°C, 50 hours) samples were carried out in a servo-hydraulic driven universal testing system (UTS, DARTEC make) under a constant strain rate of 10 -3 s -1 and at temperatures of 25 °C, 470 °C, 570 °C, 670 °C, 770 °C, 870 °C and 970 °C. The cylindrical samples for the compression tests were cut from the 3mm diameter rods by keeping the height/diameter (H/D) ratio 1.5 to 2.0. The transformation temperatures for the heat treated 2Nb2Re alloy were determined using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC, STA449F3 NETSCH make). Samples weighing 80 to 100 mg were cut from the heat treated rods and heated at a rate of 10 °C/min till 1450 °C followed by cooling to room temperature at the same rate. The g¢ dissolution temperature was determined from the point of intersection between extrapolated base line and inflectional tangent at the beginning of the dissolution peak in the DSC heating curve. The density of the alloy was measured at room temperature following the ASTM standard (ASTM 311-17) which is based on Archimedes principles. Prior to the measurement, the sample weighing ~ 10 grams was soaked overnight in the acetone and subsequently dried. The atomic scale compositional measurements for the heat-treated 2Nb2Re samples were carried out using atom probe tomography (APT). Specimens for the APT measurements were extracted from the polished samples using a dual-beam SEM/focused-ion-beam instrument (FIB, Helios Nanolab 600) in conjunction with an in-situ lift-out protocol described in the reference The Ga ion milling was carried out in multiple steps at 30 kV with reduced ion current in each successive step to obtain a sharp needle. Finally, the cleaning of the prepared tips at 2 kV with 8 pA current was carried out to remove the severely damaged regions due to Ga ion source. APT measurements were performed in LEAP TM 5000XR (Cameca instruments Inc., Madison, WI) in laser-pulsing mode. The ultraviolet picosecond laser pulses were applied at a repetition rate of 125 kHz with a pulse energy of 50 pJ. The detection rate was maintained at 5 detection events per 100 pulses. The specimen's base temperature was kept at 50 K. The data analysis was performed using the IVAS TM 3.8.0 software package. In addition, an in-house APT data treatment routine developed in Mathworks MATLAB was applied to accurately quantify the segregation of solutes at the γ/γ' interface. More details about this routine can be found in the reference The γ' precipitate sizes (< r >) and their volume fraction (f g¢ (t)) were measured from SEM images of Where, Ap is the calculated precipitate area and rp is the equivalent circle radius of the precipitate The average precipitate size <r> was calculated from the precipitate size distribution which fits well with the normal size distribution. The error in the average precipitate size measurement is calculated by the relation as follows Where, s / is the error in the precipitate size (< r >) measurement, s ?@A is the standard deviation of the average precipitate size (width of the precipitate size distribution) and N is the no. of precipitates considered for the average precipitate size measurement. Equation The precipitate volume fraction [f g¢ (t)] was calculated stereologically for each aging condition by using line intercept method in at least 5 SEM micrographs which was acquired from 5 different Where, N C is the precipitate number density and < r > is the average precipitate radius The average precipitate center to center distance [< λ HIH (t) >] is determined by the relationship The average precipitate edge to edge distance [< λ #I# (t) >] can be calculated as follows We first briefly introduce the coarsening model adopted herein. The classical matrix diffusion limited precipitate coarsening model proposed by separate works of Lifshitz, Sylozov and Wagner (commonly known as LSW model) X , where < r > is average precipitate size and t is time. 2) N C (t) ∝ t IW , where N C (t) is precipitate number density. ( Typically, superalloys are multicomponent alloys with non-dilute phases and have precipitate volume fraction often approaching 70 to 80%. Several modifications as well as extended models to the LSW theory have been proposed to take care of the assumptions on the precipitate volume fraction and multicomponent non-dilute solutions 1) < r(t) > \ -< r(0) > \ = K / t, where K / = ]^_ g¢ a bc g (WIa bc g )s d"e(a bc g¢ Ia bc g ) f < r(t) > and < r(0) > are the average precipitate size at time t and at the onset of coarsening. K / is the precipitate coarsening rate constant, s is the interfacial energy between γ and γ', D is the diffusivity of the slowest diffusing species in the matrix, V h g¢ is the molar volume of g¢ precipitate, C #i g is the equilibrium solubility of solute in the g matrix, C #i g¢ is the equilibrium solubility of solute in the g¢ precipitate, R is the universal gas constant, and T is the absolute temperature. 2) N C (t) ≅ 0.21 where, f #i is the equilibrium volume fraction of g¢ precipitates where, ∆C n g is the difference between the concentration of an element i in matrix at time t, (< C n g (t) >) and the average equilibrium concentration(< C n g (¥) >). K n is the coarsening rate constant for the matrix supersaturation. In equation ( solutionising and aging at 900°C, 50 hours Fig. where, K n is the partitioning coefficient of element i, C n [t and C n [ is the composition of element i in g' and γ. The compositions and K n values are listed in Table where, a g¢ is the lattice parameter of the g¢ precipitate and a g is the lattice parameter of the g phase. As the lattice parameter of g' (3.594 Å) is more than the g matrix (3.587 Å), the calculated constrained lattice misfit for the 2Nb2Re alloy is positive with the value of δ = +0.19%. The Re addition to 2Nb alloy (δ = +0.32%) lowers the lattice misfit by 40% and in the inset of Figure Fig. The temporal evolution of the γ' precipitates was studied for the 2Nb2Re alloy after long term aging at 900 °C. Figs. precipitates become coarser and the inter-precipitate distance increases. Fig. However, the effect of Re is more pronounced during long term aging. The γ' volume fraction in the 2Nb2Re alloy does not change significantly with the aging time even after 1000 hours, the f W~~g ¢ measured to be ~ 48 ± 3%. In contrast, the γ' volume fraction in 2Nb alloy reduces to as low as ~ 25% after 1000 hours of aging at 900 °C due to continuous dissolution of g' precipitates The similar dissolution is also seen in Ni-Al based superalloys where the long term aging at temperatures close to the solvus temperature leads to the dissolution of the γ' precipitates Thus, Re addition to 2Nb alloy plays a role of imparting microstructural stability by averting the g' dissolution on long term aging up to 1000 hours at 900°C. From the BSE images in Fig. The change in the mean γ' precipitate size (<r>) with the aging time at 900°C for 2Nb2Re alloy is plotted in Fig. precipitates coarsen at later stages (300 to 1000 hours), the distribution becomes wider with an extended tail towards larger values of the normalized radius. The peak also transitions into a plateau within a specified range of r/<r> values. However, the center of the plateau still remains close to 1. The change in PSD of γ' precipitates from being narrow to broad during aging is also reflected in the standard deviation mentioned in Table The change in compositional partitioning of solutes across the g/g¢ interface for 2Nb2Re alloy upon aging at 900°C from 50 to 1000 hours is obtained by APT. Supplementary Figs. Table In the scenario of steady-state coarsening, the increase in mean precipitate size (<r(t)>) with the aging time (t) is given by equation 9. The value of the coarsening exponent (n) can be determined by the slope of the line from a plot between log [E/(@)F] [E/(~)F] vs log (t). Fig. In Fig. The interfacial energy between the g phase and the g' precipitate in the 2Nb2Re alloy is calculated by using the experimental coarsening data and the modified LSW coarsening model given by Calderon et al. The theoretical prediction for the γ' precipitate number density evolution with time is shown in ) value of 6.7 ́ 10 26 s/m 3 . The calculated amplitude value by keeping the estimated rate constant Kr ~ 1.13 ́ 10 -27 (m 3 /s) is found to be ~ 1.0 ́ 10 26 s/m 3 , which is of the same order of magnitude as determined by the slope of the plot between N C (t) and t IW.W] . Thus, we show a reasonable agreement between rate constant values (Kr) obtained from the evolution of γ' precipitate size and the number density. In the γ/γ' Ni-Al based superalloys (2 nd and 3 rd generation), slow diffusing Re is a crucial alloying element to impart microstructural stability at high temperatures. The prime motivation behind this work is to evaluate the effect of Re in the new γ/γ' Co-Al based superalloys, in particular, the low density Co-Ni-Al-Mo-Nb based alloy (2Nb). The main results of the present study can be laid out through the following crucial points: 1) Re strongly partitions to the γ matrix with respect to the γ' precipitate and also shown to have influence in reversing the partitioning behavior of Mo solute in 2Nb2Re alloy. 2) Re addition led to a significant reduction of the γ/γ' lattice misfit by around ~ 40% that resulted in a change in the γ' morphology from cuboidal to round-cornered cuboidal precipitates. 3) The solvus of the 2Nb2Re alloy increased by ~ 10°C. Although, the density of the 2Nb2Re alloy increased to 8.78 gm/cc, the alloy exhibits similar 0.2% PS and superior specific 0.2% PS values even at high temperatures compared to Co-Al-W-based superalloy. 4) Re is shown to have significant influence on the γ' stability even up to 1000 hours of aging at 900°C in terms of γ' volume fraction, their morphology and their size distribution (PSD). We shall now discuss these results in the following sections. The equilibrium morphology of coherent g¢ precipitates in the γ matrix depends upon the two competing factors that contribute to the total free energy such that it achieves a minimum value. These factors are the g/g¢ interfacial energy (chemical term, ∝ r 9 , r is the precipitate radius) and the elastic strain energy (strain term, ∝ r L ) arising from the lattice misfit across the g/g¢ interfaces. Here, the γ fcc matrix is elastically anisotropic and hence, the g¢ precipitates grow in the elastically soft In addition to the Re partitioning to the γ phase, we also have an evidence of segregation of Re and Mo to the g/g¢ interface in the 50 hours aged sample, Fig. We have shown in section 3.2, the detailed evolution of 1) γ' precipitate morphology by calculating the probability distribution function (PDF) of aspect ratios, 2) γ' precipitate size (<r>) by calculating the precipitate size distribution (PSD) as a function of normalize precipitate radius (r/<r>), and 3) the change in mean edge to edge distance (< λ #I# (t) >) between the γ' precipitates with the aging time up to 1000 hours at 900°C. All these measurements show that the coarsening of γ' precipitates in the 2Nb2Re alloy occurs by evaporation-condensation (EC) mechanism which is driven by the minimization of total interfacial energy through reduction of total interfacial area. This lead to the growth of bigger particles at the expense of shrinking particles Further, the mode values of PDF remain near 1.1 when the sample is aged for 1000 hours at 900°C. The γ' precipitates in this case also coarsen without any directional alignment in the γ matrix phase. This is in contrast to the case of 2Nb base alloy, where, extensive alignment of γ' precipitates along <100> directions and their growth through coagulation/coalescence could be observed S3(a-e) show that the peak of the normal distribution is achieved at the normalized radius value of ( / E/F ) = 1.0 for all the aging times. This value indicates that a steady-state coarsening regime has been achieved after 50 hours of aging at 900°C. The PSD after 50 hours of aging is narrower and becomes wider with time up to 1000 hours that further supports that the precipitate coarsening is not occurring through the coalesce and coagulation mechanism. This is also supported by the continuous increase in the γ' precipitate edge to edge < λ #I# (t) > distance with the aging time at 900°C. The calculated exponent value during the temporal evolution of precipitate number density is -1.18 ± 0.04, which is in good agreement with the theoretical value of -1 as predicted by various modified LSW models for non-dilute multicomponent systems. The slight variation suggests that the quasi-stationary state of coarsening regime has been reached. precipitates along a particular direction during coarsening is referred to as γ' rafting Rafting can occur with or without external stress at high temperatures. The γ' rafting along elastically soft <100> type directions during annealing (without external stress) has been shown in Ru containing Co-Al-W superalloys The coarsening exponent (n) can be estimated from the slope of the plot between log [E‹(OE)F] [E‹(~)F] vs. log(t), as shown in Fig. As mentioned earlier, in section 4.1, the enrichment of Re and Mo near the γ/γ' interface could be observed for the 2Nb2Re alloy after aging at 900°C for 50 hours. During the growth of the γ' precipitates, the Re and Mo atoms get ejected from the γ' precipitates and diffuse towards the γ matrix. This interfacial segregation at the γ/γ' interface results from the sluggish diffusivities of heavy Re and Mo atoms in the γ matrix as the system aims to reach a local equilibrium. The sluggish kinetics prevents the system from reaching a global equilibrium in the initial stages of aging. Only after long term aging at 900 °C is the equilibrium Re and Mo compositions achieved at the matrix-precipitate interface. This is evidenced in the composition profiles of Re and Mo across the γ/γ' interface that show no segregation effects for samples aged > 200 hours at 900°C (see supplementary Fig. The strength of the 2Nb2Re alloy remains similar to the base 2Nb and Co-Al-W based superalloy up to a temperature of 570°C. Beyond this, the 0.2% proof stress of Re containing alloy have comparatively higher values. This suggest that the Re addition influences the high temperature mechanical behavior of these Co-Al based superalloys. In Ni-Al based CMSX-2 superalloy, addition of 6wt.% Re (CMSX-10) increases the creep rupture life from 250 hours to 2500 hours at a temperature of 750°C and a stress level of 500 MPa However, evidence of Re clusters were not found by APT In summary, this work elucidates the pronounced effect of Re on microstructural evolution of new Co-30Ni-10Al-5Mo-2Nb based alloy. Based on the obtained results the following major conclusion can be drawn: 1. The Re addition to the base Co-30Ni-10Al-5Mo-2Nb (2Nb) changes the g' precipitates morphology from cuboidal to round-cornered cuboidal shape by reducing the γ/γ' lattice misfit i.e. from high misfit (+0.32%) to low misfit (+0.19%) 2. In 2Nb2Re alloy, the Re strongly partitions to the g matrix (K "# = 0.34) and reverses the partitioning of Mo from g' precipitates to the g matrix. In 900°C, 50 hours aged sample, Re is shown to have inhomogeneous segregation at the γ/γ' interface with a Gibbsian excess value, Γ "# ranging from 0.8 to 9.6 atom.nm -2 . We also observe interfacial excess of Mo solute in a few regions of the γ/γ' interface. These segregation effects reduce after 200 hours of aging at 900°C. During prolonged aging at 900°C, the coarsening of γ' precipitates in 2Nb2Re alloy occurs by evaporation-condensation (EC) mechanism. In contrast, the γ' precipitates in the base 2Nb alloy show coarsening through coagulation/coalescence mechanism with extensive directional alignment of γ' along <100> directions 4. The coarsening rate constant value (K / ) for the γ' precipitates, as predicted by the modified LSW model of non-dilute solution, estimated to be 1.13 ́ 10 -27 (m 3 /s), which is comparable to the high-density Co-Al-W based superalloys. The g/g' interfacial energy for 2Nb2Re alloy is estimated to be ~ 8.4 mJ/m 2 at 900 °C. This value is lower than the values for other Ni-Al based and Co-Al-W based superalloys (10 mJ/m 2 to 48 mJ/m 2 ). evolution of microstructural characteristics of g¢ precipitates, namely precipitate mean size, maximum and minimum precipitate diameter (diameter of the largest and smallest circles) and aspect ratio