Integration of electrical contacts into van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures is critical for realizing electronic and optoelectronic functionalities. However, to date no scalable methodology for gaining electrical access to buried monolayer two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors exists. Here we report viable edge contact formation to hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) encapsulated monolayer MoS 2 . By combining reactive ion etching, in-situ Ar + sputtering and annealing, we achieve a relatively low edge contact resistance, high mobility (up to ∼30 cm 2 V -1 s -1 ) and high on-current density (>50 μA/μm at V DS = 3 V), comparable to top contacts. Furthermore, the atomically smooth hBN environment also preserves the intrinsic MoS 2 channel quality during fabrication, leading to a steep subthreshold swing of 116 mV/dec with a negligible hysteresis. Hence, edge contacts are highly promising for large-scale practical implementation of encapsulated heterostructure devices, especially those involving air sensitive materials, and can be arbitrarily narrow, which opens the door to further shrinkage of 2D device footprint. Two-dimensional electronic devices made from transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) have gained prominence in recent years for next-generation integrated electronics 1 and nanophotonics applications. In particular, MoS 2 combined with other 2D materials into vdW heterostructures, appears as an attractive candidate for future transistor architectures In TMDC heterostructures assembled without any encapsulation layer, further limitations arise when electrical contacts are made in a conventional top-contact geometry. In this scenario, the contact electrodes come in direct physical contact with a TMDC layer over a finite area. Since such a methodology inherently requires performing lithography on unprotected TMDC layers, it exposes them to foreign chemical species which are difficult to remove. Additionally, bare TMDC surfaces in air are susceptible to O 2 and H 2 O adsorption Therefore, for enabling a viable usage of TMDCs in integrated electronics, better contact techniques are needed that allow for encapsulation before contact patterning, in order to preserve the intrinsic material quality and achieve superior performance. Moreover, encapsulation is also essential for long-term ambient stability since it is well-known that most TMDCs, including MoS 2 , MoSe 2 and WS 2 undergo gradual oxidation in air at room temperature In order to circumvent the issue of making electrical contacts to hBN-TMDC-hBN heterostructures, a common practice is to embed additional layers of graphene We will now discuss the fabrication strategy that we developed. Detailed process parameters can be found in Supporting Section S1. Bottom hBN flakes were exfoliated directly on p + Si/SiO 2 (100 nm) substrates. 1L-MoS 2 and top hBN flakes were separately exfoliated on GelPak ® PDMS (poly-dimethylsiloxane) stamps and transferred sequentially onto a suitable bottom hBN flake, as illustrated schematically in Figs. For device fabrication, bubble-free areas were chosen and patterned into rectangular sections by e-beam lithography (EBL) with PMMA (poly-methylmethacrylate) and reactive ion etching (RIE). Contact trenches were defined in a second EBL step and the exposed hBN-MoS 2 -hBN was etched away by RIE to create MoS 2 edges for making contacts, as depicted in Fig. Hence, immediately before metal deposition, MoO x and any adsorbed O 2 or H 2 O were removed by in-situ Ar + sputtering at ±15°tilt angle to expose a fresh MoS 2 edge (Fig. where C G = 27.8 nF cm -2 is the gate capacitance per unit area and it is the interface capacitance per unit area, we estimated the density of interface trap states D it = 1.7 × 10 11 eV -1 cm -2 . This value is at least an order of magnitude lower than for unencapsulated, lithographically exposed MoS 2 on SiO 2 59,60 and ZrO 2 1 . Note that in this sample, the SS is primarily limited by the back-gate dielectric thickness (100 nm SiO 2 + 24 nm hBN). From Eq. (1), it is evident that for a larger gate capacitance (thinner dielectric), a smaller SS approaching the room temperature thermionic limit of ∼ 60 mV/dec is anticipated. The I D -V GS characteristics of a second device on the same sample are plotted in Fig. To investigate the influence of the metal-MoS 2 contact edge cleanliness on carrier injection, a set of three control devices that were not Ar + sputtered, were also fabricated on the same hBN-MoS 2 -hBN stack shown in Fig. Next, we want to characterize the intrinsic carrier mobility (μ 0 ) and contact resistance (R C ) of our devices. For an ideal long-channel nMOSFET operating in the strong inversion regime, a linear dependence of I D on V GS is expected, given by where V T is the threshold voltage and the internal drain (V DS,int ) and gate (V GS,int ) voltages are equal to the externally applied bias. Typically, μ 0 is extracted from the slope of linear I D -V GS characteristics with the help of Eq. ( Note that V T also gets modified to V T + δR C V GS but the drain-induced barrier lowering (DIBL) factor δ is small enough to be neglected in our long-channel devices. Equation ( Rearranging Eq. ( By plotting Y vs. V GS and using Eq. ( Figure Interestingly, these numbers are very similar to room temperature R C values reported for graphene top contacts on hBN encapsulated 1L-MoS 2 devices (20 kΩ•μm) For completeness, it should be clarified that in our analysis R C is assumed to be independent of V GS whereas in conventional contacts, it decreases asymptotically with increasing carrier density for low V GS near the onset of inversion, and slowly saturates at high V GS . Such a behavior arises from the fact that in Ti-MoS 2 top contacts with an interfacial oxide (often unintentional), increasing V GS reduces the sheet resistivity of MoS 2 below the contact region and also lowers the potential barrier for electron injection into MoS 2 Besides the device in Fig. We further characterized another edge contacted 1L-MoS 2 device at low temperatures inside a liquid nitrogen filled cryostat and is presented in Fig. Strictly speaking, the true bandstructure of a semiconductor is defined for a lattice with an infinitely repeating unit cell. At MoS 2 edges and grain boundaries, dangling bonds and Mo-, S-vacancies perturb the MoS 2 bandstructure and give birth to additional localized 'edge states' within the bandgap, as measured experimentally Interactions between the contact metal and MoS 2 at the atomic scale and structural characteristics of the contact interface play a significant role in governing the performance of any contact. For edge contacts in particular, where carrier transfer is restricted to a single atomic edge, an optimum metal-MoS 2 interface is crucial. This makes them more challenging to fabricate compared to top contacts which impose fewer constraints and can tolerate local non-idealities to a greater extent due to the availability of a finite area. Our main achievement here lies in the development of an optimized process for realizing low resistance edge contacts with a high density of current injection per atomic site. Further studies are needed nevertheless to unravel the rich physics and chemistry occurring at the contact interface. Atomically resolved cross-sectional transmission electron microscope (TEM) imaging can be performed to gain better insights into the contact morphology, interface quality and atomic configuration of edge contacts. This would lead to a deeper understanding of the transport behavior and provide valuable guidelines for further improvement of the contact performance. It is possible that unpassivated edge states at interface voids still undermine the performance of our devices It should be emphasized that even though ∼μm long Ti-Au Lastly, the possibility to encapsulate 2D materials before processing with chemicals remains the biggest advantage of edge contacts for building clean devices. Fundamental studies rely on high interface quality and macroscopic homogeneity for uncovering new physical phenomena, which can benefit from edge contacts fabricated after encapsulation. Edge contacts are especially promising for 2D materials unstable in air for which fabrication of top contacts is challenging due to restrictions imposed by encapsulation inside an inert atmosphere before being exposed to air. Often such heterostructures are built in a top-down manner and the need to make contacts to buried layers demands pick-up of additional graphene sheets. In such scenarios, edge contacts provide a much higher flexibility in heterostructure assembly and can be scaled-up to integrated circuits employing multiple metal layers separated by insulating dielectric layers. Thus, we envision that edge contacts will bring devices based on 2D materials one step closer to practical implementation and open up new pathways in 2D materials research. Supporting Information. Detailed description of the fabrication procedure, plots showing the influence of annealing, data from additional devices, pure Au edge contacts without Ti, edge contacts without Ar + sputtering, quantum transport simulations. Edge contact fabrication. See Supporting Section S1 for a step-by-step process flow. Electrical characterization. I-V measurements were carried out using a Keithley 2602B source meter in two-probe configuration. All devices were measured in air at room temperature (except those shown in Fig. hBN-MoS 2 -hBN heterostructure assembly: Bottom hBN flakes were directly exfoliated on O 2 plasma cleaned p + Si/SiO 2 (100 nm) substrates using a blue tape (Nitto). Naturally occurring MoS 2 crystals (SPI Supplies) were exfoliated on viscoelastic PDMS stamps (Gel-Film ® PF-40-X4 sold by Gel-Pak ® ). We found that PDMS often has a significant amount of uncrosslinked (or 'loosely bound') dimethylsiloxane oligomers on its surface 1 that can contaminate 2D materials exfoliated on PDMS Bulk MoS 2 crystals were then exfoliated on the clean PDMS stamps after 2 h and monolayer flakes were identified in an optical microscope. For transfer, PDMS stamps with MoS 2 were placed on a transparent quartz plate and aligned on top of suitable bottom hBN flakes on SiO 2 using a SÜSS MicroTec MJB4 mask aligner. All transfers were carried out in air. Upon coming in contact, the hBN-MoS 2 stacks were heated to ∼65 • C for 2 min with a Peltier module kept underneath the Si/SiO 2 substrates. After allowing for a few minutes to cool down, the PDMS stamps were then slowly detached. The transferred MoS 2 flakes on hBN were annealed at 200 • C for 3 h in high vacuum (<1 × 10 -5 mbar) to remove any remaining PDMS residues and release transfer induced compressive strain as well as accumulated bubbles/wrinkles in MoS 2 Clean, bubble-free areas in the hBN-MoS 2 -hBN heterostructures were chosen and patterned into well-defined rectangular channels by EBL (RAITH150 Two) with a bilayer of PMMA 50k (4% in chlorobenzene) and 950k (4.5% in anisole). Each layer was spin-coated at 5000 rpm for 45 s and baked at 180 • C for 4 min. After EBL (electron dose: 400 μC/cm 2 at 30 kV), PMMA was developed in MIBK:IPA (1:3) for 60 s and the exposed areas were etched away by reactive ion etching (RIE) in an Oxford Plasmalab 80 Plus system. For making edge contacts into the rectangular channels, EBL and RIE were repeated again. RIE was performed with either (a) CHF 3 + O 2 plasma (40 + 4 sccm, 50 W power and 37.5 mTorr pressure, etch rate: ∼36 nm/min) 4 or (b) SF 6 + Ar plasma (20 + 20 sccm, 50 W power and 100 mTorr pressure, etch rate: >90 nm/min) This is the most critical part of our fabrication process. As discussed in the main text, etched MoS 2 edges have a large number of dangling bonds that can host in-gap edge states Post metal-deposition annealing is commonly employed to lower the contact resistance (R C ) in 2D material devices. We tested several temperatures for this purpose and found that for edge contacts annealed in Ar + H 2 (380 + 20 sccm), I D improved remarkably with increasing temperatures up to 400 • C, as shown in Fig. Thus, we can conclude that annealing is indispensable for edge contacts. In addition to Ar + H 2 , we also tested annealing of edge contacts in a high vacuum environment (<1 × 10 -5 mbar), but the former resulted in a slightly better performance. Several processes can occur simultaneously during annealing: metal-MoS 2 covalent bonding, reduction of interfacial oxides and sulfur atoms by H 2 molecules, inter-diffusion of edge atoms (metal into MoS 2 or vice-versa), defect migration and edge reconstruction. Presently, it is unclear what processes dominate in case of edge contacts and are responsible for the reduction of R C upon annealing, although Fig. V GS (V) Here we show I-V data from devices in which edge contacts were etched with SF 6 + Ar. The MoS 2 flake shown in Fig. In addition to Ti-Au, we also fabricated edge contacts with pure Au (i.e. without any Ti adhesion layer), since Au has been reported to result in low resistance contacts to MoS 2 To gain further insight into carrier transport through edge contacts, we performed ballistic ab initio quantum transport simulations based on density functional theory (DFT). The non-equilibrium Green's function (NEGF) formalism was used for this purpose, which involves solving the following equation, for the momentum k z and energy E dependent retarded Green's function G R (E, k z ) and boundary self-energy Σ RB (E, k z ). The Hamiltonian matrix H MLWF (k z ) was expressed in a maximally localized Wannier function (MLWF) basis. It was constructed according to the upscaling technique described in Ref. 10 for the Ti-MoS 2 edge contact structure depicted schematically in Fig. ) could be computed, from which the charge density and electronic current were derived. Here, G A (E, k z ) is the advanced Green's function and Γ 11/N N is the broadening function corresponding to the first (index 1) and last (index N) unit cell of the contact geometry. The resulting spatially-and energetically-resolved DOS(E) = k z DOS(E, k z ) is displayed in Fig. The relative temperature insensitivity of the current can be traced back to the underlying carrier injection mechanism and the shape of the transmission function T (E). In case of Ti-MoS 2 edge contacts, the largest contribution to the current does not come from thermionic processes but instead from quantum mechanical tunneling through the Schottky barrier, which does not heavily depend on temperature. Furthermore, the magnitude of the transmission function from Ti to MoS 2 does not vary much around the Fermi energy such that the current I D for large V DS can be approximated as, I D ≈ e ∫ ∞ 