Monolayer WTe 2 attracts rapidly growing interests for its large-gap quantum spin Hall effect, which enables promising apllicaions in flexible logic devices. Due to one-dimensional W -W chains, 1T ′ -WTe 2 exhibits unique anisotropic structure and promising properties, which can be modified by simply applying strains. Based on the first-principles simulations, we show that phonon branch undergoes soft down to negative frequency at special q points under different critical strains, i.e., ε a = 11.55% along a-axis (with W -W chains) direction, ε b = 7.0% along b-axis direction and ε ab = 8.44% along biaxial direction. Before each critical strain, the Raman-shift of A 1 g , A 3 g and A 4 g modes, corresponding to the main peaks in Raman spectra of 1T ′ -WTe 2 , shows anisotropic response to uniaxial strain but most sensitive to biaxial strain. Interestingly, we find that the frequency shift of A 3 g mode show parabolic characters of strained 1T ′ -WTe 2 , then we split it into two parts and it shows a Raman-shift transition at ∼ 5% strains. While for the A 1 g and A 4 g modes, the frequencies change linearly. Through careful structure and vibration analysis, we try to explain these Raman irregularity in strained 1T ′ -WTe 2 . In a robust two-dimensional materials family of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) Strain engineering in different orientations can lead to anisotropic modifications to the structure and properties of monolayer 1T ′ -WTe 2 , which could play important roles in the application of flexible logic devices Based on the first-principles calculations, we provide a thorough study on the changes of structures, phonon spectra, and Raman-active modes of monolayer 1T ′ -WTe 2 under uniaxial (parallel or perpendicular to the W -W chains, respectively) and equibiaxial tensile strains. Here, we only focus on 1T ′ -WTe 2 under tension since a 1T ′ -1H phase transition will occur under compression Our calculations are based on density functional theory (DFT) and density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) in pseudopotential plane-wave formalism, as implemented in the Quantum ESPRESSO package The primitive cell of 1T ′ -WTe 2 is indicated by green rectangle, and its primitive vectors, , the irreducible representation of the normal modes at Γ point is 6A g + 3A u + 3B g + 6B u , in which only 9 modes are Raman-active among 18 phonon modes based on the symmetry analysis of calculated atomic displacements. These nine Rman-active modes as shown in Fig. Owing to strongly anisotropic mechanical properties of 1T ′ -WTe 2 , we expect that the three Raman-active modes exhibit diverse characteristics for WTe 2 under different-direction tensions. Therefore, we then calculate the phonon dispersion relations of strained monolayer WTe 2 along a-axis, b-axis as well as ab-biaxis direction, respectively. Interestingly, as red curves shown in Fig. Finally, we analyse the response of Raman-active modes (A 1 g , A 3 g and A 4 g ) on the three direction strains before 1T ′ -WTe 2 rupture. Due to A g modes containing double-rotation symmetry-axis operation C 2 (z) based on the character table for point group C 2h , they belong to tangential shear modes with opposite direction vibrations of W -W or T e-T e pairs. Moreover, the vibration displacements of A g modes (see Fig. For A 1 g and A 4 g modes, their frequencies decrease almost linearly with applied strains as shown in Fig. In conclusion, by using DFT and DFPT simulations, we have systematically obtained the Raman spectrum of monolayer 1T ′ -WTe 2 under tensile strains. Our results demonstrate that A 1 g , A 3 g and A 4 g modes, corresponding to the main peaks in Raman spectra of 1T ′ -WTe 2 , are more sensitive to uniaxial strain along b-axis direction than that along a-axis (containing W -W chains) direction, exhibiting anisotropic Raman-strain response. In particular, biaxial strain induces the largest red-shift of the Raman modes compared to the uniaxial strains. Through careful structure configuration analysis, we reveal that the irregularity comes from the dramatic change of the W -W bond length as well as the vertical distances in two pairs of Te atoms under biaxial strain. More interesting, A 3 g mode undergoes a Raman-shift transition at about 5% for both uniaxial and biaxial strains, different from the A 1 g and A 4 g modes whose frequencies show linear dependence on tensile strains. The underlying symmetry rea- son is revealed to be that the competition and cooperation of the relative motions between W -atom pairs and T e-atom pairs modify the shape of 1T ′ -WTe 2 . The revealed Raman modes responses to tensile strain are useful for tracing or detecting operations on 1T ′ -WTe 2 based flexible devices.