Recently, a honeycomb borophene was reported to grow successfully on Al(111) surface. Since the metallic σ-bonding bands of honeycomb boron sheet play a crucial role in the 39 K superconductivity of MgB 2 , it is physically interesting to examine whether similar property exists in this material. We have calculated the electronic structures and the electron-phonon coupling for honeycomb borophene by explicitly considering the substrate effect using first-principles density functional theory in conjunction with the Wannier interpolation technique. We find that the sp 2 -hybridized σ-bonding bands of honeycomb borophene are metallized due to moderate charge transfer from the Al substrate, similar as in MgB 2 . However, the electron-phonon coupling in honeycomb borophene is much weaker than in MgB 2 due to the hardening of the bond-stretching boron phonon modes and the reduction of phonon density of states. Nevertheless, the interlayer coupling between Al-associated phonons and electrons in borophene is strong. Based on this observation, we predict that a 6.5 K superconducting transition can be observed in a free-standing borophene decorated by a single Al layer, namely monolayer AlB 2 . Accordingly, similar superconducting transition temperature could be expected in honeycomb borophene on Al(111). Boron possesses rich chemistry like carbon. Since the discovery of graphene, great effort has been made to synthesize two-dimensional (2D) boron sheet, namely borophene. In sharp contrast to graphene, it was suggested from theoretical calculations that a borophene favors a triangular lattice structure with a special vacancy order, exemplified by the so-called α-or β-sheet structured borophene Searching for superconductivity in 2D compounds is of great interest, because it has potential application in constructing nanoscale superconducting devices with single-electron sensitivity Different from these zero-gap or gapped 2D compounds, borophenes, including b-B 2 , β 12 -B 5 , χ 3 -B 4 , are all intrinsic metals Layered transition-metal dichalcogenide (TMD) is another family, whereas superconductivity has been extensively studied. For semiconducting TMDs (2H-MoS 2 , 2H-MoSe 2 , 2H-MoTe 2 , 2H-WS 2 , 1T -TiSe 2 , and 1T -TaS 2 ), superconductivity can be induced by applying chemical intercalation Recently, a honeycomb borophene (h-B 2 ) was successfully grown on the Al(111) substrate (abbreviated as h-B 2 /Al(111) hereafter) In this paper, we explore the possible superconductivity in h-B 2 /Al(111) by calculating its electronic structure, lattice dynamics, and EPC using the first-principles density functional theory and the Wannier interpolation technique. The influence of the Al substrate is fully considered in our calculations, which allows both the charge transfer and strain effects to be more preciously determined. After full optimization, we find that h-B 2 /Al(111) has a buckling lattice structure with a tiny buckling height of 0.035 Å. The sp 2 -hybridized σ-bonding bands of h-B 2 /Al(111) are partially filled, but the intra-boronlayer EPC in this material is weak due to the hardening of phonons and the reduced phonon DOS. However, there is a strong coupling between Al phonons and electrons in h-B 2 . Based on this property, we propose a monolayer AlB 2 material with an EPC constant λ about 35% larger than in MgB 2 In the calculations, the first-principles package, Quantum-ESPRESSO, was adopted In the construction of slab model, if only one borophene layer is deposited on Al surface, another surface of Al, namely fracture surface, will be exposed to the vacuum (see Appendix A for the results calculated with semi-infinite slab). To avoid the influence of Al surface states on the fracture surface, we employed a slab model with inversion symmetry to simulate h-B 2 /Al(111) [Fig. The maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWFs) The EPC constant λ was determined by the summation of the momentum-dependent coupling constant λ qν over the first Brillouin zone, or the integration of the Eliashberg spectral function α 2 F(ω) The coupling constant λ qν reads N q and N k represent the total numbers of q and k points in the fine q-mesh and k-mesh, respectively. Similarly, we can also define a k-and band-resolved coupling constant λ kn From λ qν or λ kn , we will identify which phonon mode or electronic state has larger contribution to the EPC. The Eliashberg spectral function α 2 F(ω) was calculated with Here ω qν is the phonon frequency and g nm k,qν is the probability amplitude for scattering an electron with a transfer of crystal momentum q. (n, m) and ν denote the indices of energy bands and phonon mode, respectively. ǫ n k and ǫ m k+q are the eigenvalues of the Kohn-Sham orbitals with respect to the Fermi level. N(0) is the density of states (DOS) of electrons at the Fermi level. It is noted that above formulas can not be directly used to evaluate the intrinsic EPC of h-B 2 , since there is significant N(0) from the Al substrate. We will present the strategy about how to extract the EPC of h-B 2 from slab calculation in section IV. This extraction is based on a fact that the boron and Al phonons are separated in frequency. The superconducting transition temperature is determined by the McMillian-Allen-Dynes formula in which μ * is the Coulomb pseudopotential, ω log is the logarithmic average frequency, From the calculation, we find that the crystal structure of h-B 2 /Al(111), with boron atoms occupying the hollow sites of the triangular lattice of outmost Al layer [Fig. The vibrational patterns of strongly coupled phonons at the Γ point above the frequency gap are schematically shown in Fig. The Eliashberg formula was established for a superconductor with translational symmetry. Attention, however, should be paid in the calculation of EPC in 2D compounds using this formula when a metallic substrate is included. In particular, Al is a good metal with a large bandwidth. More Alassociated electronic bands would appear around the Fermi level if the thickness of Al substrate gradually increases in the slab model that we used to simulate h-B 2 /Al(111). The contribution of h-B 2 to the EPC will be submerged by the significant reduction of boron atoms to the DOS around the Fermi level. As a result, the EPC of h-B 2 /Al(111) supercell will approach to the EPC of bulk face-centered-cubic (fcc) Al Since the boron and Al phonon vibrations are well separated in frequency, we can regard the EPC generated by boron phonons as the EPC of h-B 2 if the interfacial coupling between the boron phonons and the electronic states from the substrate can be properly deducted. We calculated λ kn in the frequency region from 50 to 140 meV. It is found that the σbonding electrons of h-B 2 contribute 39.1% (62.6%) to the EPC caused by the out-of-plane (in-plane) boron phonons. So the α 2 F(ω) in the intervals The usage of inversion slab with two h-B 2 sheets may raise the question about the double counting. The validity of our calculations lies in the fact that these two h-B 2 sheets will be decoupled when the substrate is sufficiently thick. The ap- FIG. bulk AlB 2 . The accumulated λ(ω) is computed using the formula 2 pearance of both the doubly degenerate σ-bonding bands and the nearly doubly degenerate boron phonon modes indicates that the interaction between these two h-B 2 sheets is extremely weak. To further justify the decoupling assumption made in our current slab model, we also calculated the band structure and phonon spectrum for a thicker slab with 19 Al layers and two h-B 2 sheets. After relaxation, the substrate is as thick as 40.65 Å. We find that the σ-bonding bands of h-B 2 are entirely unchanged. For strongly coupled phonons modes at the Γ point, the frequency of E g modes has the largest relative deviation, whose value is only about 0.11% in comparison to the result of the current slab model. Hence, the coupling between these two h-B 2 sheets in current slab model can be ignored. The EPC of h-B 2 behaves differently from that in MgB 2 , although the metallic σ-bonding bands of h-B 2 are preserved in h-B 2 /Al(111). At the Γ point, detailed analysis shows that the EPC matrix elements of the bond-stretching modes (E u and E g ) in h-B 2 are indeed comparable to those of E 2g modes in MgB 2 . However, the phonon DOS per h-B 2 near the E g modes is compressed with respect to that around the E 2g modes in MgB 2 Motivated by the existence of a strong coupling between boron and Al atoms, we calculated the EPC in a monolayer structured AlB 2 , including a h-B 2 and a single Al layer. shows the calculated spectrum of α 2 F(ω). In comparison with h-B 2 /Al(111), the peak of α 2 F(ω) arisen from the Al phonons shifts from 35 meV to a lower frequency in this monolayer AlB 2 . The high-frequency peaks of α 2 F(ω) in monolayer AlB 2 are also red-shifted, because the lattice constant for monolayer AlB 2 is 2.5% larger than that of h-B 2 /Al(111). As a consequence, a dramatic enhancement in λ (1.01) and a reduction in ω log The Coulomb pseudopotential μ * is commonly used as a free parameter to fit experimental T c . To predict the T c for the monolayer AlB 2 more accurately, we deduce the value of μ * from the bulk AlB 2 . The spectrum of α 2 F(ω) for the bulk AlB 2 generated by Wannier interpolation is shown in Fig. Compared with bulk AlB 2 , the superconductivity in monolayer AlB 2 is closely related to the distance (h Al-B ) between Al and honeycomb boron sheet, with h Al-B =1.37 Å in monolayer AlB 2 , and 1.63 Å in bulk AlB 2 Based on the first-principles density functional theory and the state-of-the-art Wannier interpolation technique, we calculate the EPC for h-B 2 grown on an Al(111) substrate. We simulate the substrate effect using a slab model. Similar as in MgB 2 , we find that the σ-bonding bands are also metallized in h-B 2 /Al(111). However, the EPC constant λ in h-B 2 is significantly smaller than in MgB 2 , due to the blue shift of the bondstretching boron phonons and the reduction of phonon DOS. Furthermore, we find that the interlayer coupling between Alassociated phonons and electrons on the h-B 2 is quite strong. Based on this observation, we predict that a borophene decorated by just one Al layer, i.e. monolayer AlB 2 , could become a superconductor below 6.5 K. We also suggest that similar superconducting T c can be detected in h-B 2 /Al(111). , self-consistent with the softened acoustic phonons. Thus strong EPC and small ω log will be obtained. As expected, we find that the EPC constant and ω log are 1.26 and 8.27 meV, respectively. The α 2 F(ω) of h-B 2 can also be extracted from h-B 2 /Al(111) SI following the procedure in the main text. Similarly, we find that the σ-bonding electrons of h-B 2 contribute 38.1% (68.5%) to the EPC caused by the out-of-plane (in-plane) boron phonons. As a result, the α 2 F(ω) in the intervals 