As all-solid-state batteries (SSBs) develop as an alternative to traditional cells, a thorough theoretical understanding of driving forces behind battery operation is needed. We present a fully first-principles-informed model of potential profiles in SSBs and apply the model to the Li/LiPON/LixCoO2 system. The model predicts interfacial potential drops driven by both electron transfer and Li + space-charge layers that vary with the SSB's state of charge. The results suggest lower electronic ionization potential in the solid electrolyte favors Li + transport, leading to higher discharge power. All-solid-state batteries (SSBs) have recently attracted widespread attention due to increased safety and energy density A comprehensive first-principles model is noticeably absent. Prediction of space-charge layers in solid electrolytes with heterogeneous interfaces has been attempted by lattice models The application of this model to the Li/LiPON/Li x CoO 2 system leads to the important discovery that the polarity of the space-charge layer and the sign of the potential drops vary with the state of charge (i.e. Li concentration in Li x CoO 2 ). This new physics insight unifies the seemingly contradictory experimental observations The model starts from the assumption of equilibrium open-circuit conditions. In an SSB, the insulating solid electrolyte blocks the flow of electrons between electrodes, but lithium ions (Li + ) are free to move. As a result, the lithium ion electrochemical potential (the lithium atomic chemical potential minus the electron electrochemical potential) reaches a constant, which is referenced to zero. μLi + = μ Li -μe -= 0 . ( The difference in μ Li between anode and cathode is the driving force behind battery operation. This chemical potential difference is the open-circuit voltage (OCV) of the battery, given by the Nernst equation: where superscript a indicates the anode and c the cathode. The OCV can be calculated as an average for a redox reaction, such as CoO 2 + x Li → Li x CoO 2 , using the equation where E is the total energy calculated with density functional theory (DFT) and e is the electron charge. When electrodes are brought into contact through a solid electrolyte, Li + will flow until the buildup of positive charges in the cathode increases the electrostatic (Galvani) potential φ, blocking further ionic transfer and establishing the open-circuit equilibrium. This may be seen mathematically by noting that μ Li = μe -(Eq. 1) and substituting the definition of electrochemical potential (μ e -= μ e --eφ) into Eq. 2: The second term arises from ionic charge accumulation, and is thus called the "ionic part" of the OCV: . The first term is the "electronic part": V e -= (μ a e --μ c e -)/e, where μ e -is the chemical potential of electrons in the bulk material in absence of any external potential The μ e -in the SSB may be approximated through the work function ψ with respect to the anode (see [S.III] in the Supplemental Material Therefore Eq. 1 can be rewritten: This key equation forms the basis of the potential profile model, which is constructed through the following procedure: First, a μ Li profile is built. We choose zero as the μ Li reference in the anode, so by Eq. 2, μ Li = -eV in the cathode. V is calculated using DFT from Eq. 3. In the solid electrolyte, μ Li is constrained by thermodynamic stability conditions [S.I]. The model accepts various assumptions for the μ Li profile in the solid electrolyte [S.II]. A sensible one (which is used in this work) is that μ Li is at its upper limit in the electrolyte near the anode and at its lower limit near the cathode. The μ Li profile is completed by interface regions which interpolate μ Li in the electrolyte and electrodes. For the purposes of this model, the interface is reduced to the net changes that occur in potentials; predictions of the spatial width and microscopic structure of the interface will be left to future work. Second, the bulk properties of the battery materials are calculated via DFT. To facilitate vacuum alignment, IP Finally, the results of the previous steps are used with Eq. 5 to calculate the φ profile. Interfacial band bending is caused by bending of the local vacuum level E vac = -eφ + ψ a (referenced to the anode Fermi level), so a band profile may also be derived from φ. This completes the potential profile model. We now apply this general model to the Li/LiPON/Li x CoO 2 SSB system. Our DFT calculations use vasp LiPON electrolytes are typically amorphous and have widely varying stoichiometry, but are generally characterized by oxygen-decorated P-N-P chains ionically bonded to lithium. In order to determine the direction of ion transfer at interfaces and the Fermi level inside LiPON, the forma- I. Top: bulk quantities relevant to Eq. 5 for SSB materials, calculated using DFT. Electronic and ionic parts of OCV (Eq. 4) with respect to Li metal are shown for LixCoO2. Bottom: band offsets and electrostatic potential drops for SSB interfaces (Eq. 8). tion energies of point defects must be calculated and compared for both LiPON and Li x CoO 2 . The formation energy of point defect X in charge state q is given by The μ Li has already been discussed in detail. Other atomic chemical potentials are set by thermodynamic stability [S.I]. Supercell artifacts from charged defect calculations are corrected using the Freysoldt method A thorough inventory of point defects in LiCoO 2 [S.IV, Fig. S Since the electrolyte exists in between the Lirich and Li-poor extremes of the electrodes, the defect formation energies are considered as a function of μ Li . This allows calculation of the E F as a function of μ Li through the requirement of charge neutrality. The results are shown in Fig. Defect formation energies also determine the direction of Li + transfer at interfaces. At the Li/LiPON interface, Li + is the dominant carrier in LiPON. The energy change of the reaction Li + i [Li] → Li + i [LiPON] determines the direction of Li transfer: i will tend to move from lithium metal into LiPON. At the LiPON/LiCoO 2 interface, the dominant lithium carrier is V - Li , so the relevant reaction is . The reaction energy is -0.28 eV, so V - Li moves from LiPON into LiCoO 2 . For x = 0.5, the reaction energy is 8.52 eV. This represents a very strong tendency for V - Li to migrate from Li 0.5 CoO 2 into LiPON. These results indicate the direction of Li flow at the interface depends on the Li concentration in Li x CoO 2 , i.e. the battery's state of charge (SOC). In addition to Li + , transfer of electrons or holes may contribute to interface dipoles. The net charge transfer is caputred by the electrostatic potential drop ∆φ at each interface, which causes electronic band bending. ∆φ may be extracted from the full potential profile that will be calculated using Eq. 5, but it is worthwhile to examine ∆φ directly in the context of an interface. Eq. 5 shows that the electrostatic potential drop is given by the changes in bulk quantities across the interface: This equation may be recast in terms analogous to traditional band-bending theory at semiconductor heterojunctions Based on E F , IP , and μ Li on either side of interfaces, the ∆E I , ∆E B , and ∆φ at three interfaces are calculated, as shown in Table Our results explain the different directions of Li + transfer observed at the LiPON/Li x CoO 2 interface. Experiments showing Li + transfer into Li x CoO 2 The direction of Li + transfer and the interface dipole in SSBs have important implications for device performance Based on this model, several methods can be suggested to reduce the interface resistance of SSBs during discharging. One approach is raising the electrolyte valence band. This tends to lower ∆φ, maintaining a favorable interface dipole for discharge across a wider range of lithiation and thus increasing power output without sacrificing capacity. This could be done by tuning LiPON growth methods In conclusion, we have presented a new technique for building a potential profile in a model SSBs based on inputs from first-principles calculations. This model predicts various key properties of the interfaces between electrodes and electrolyte. At the Li x CoO 2 interface, our results suggest that the interfacial potential drop is driven by electron transfer, and the direction of e -and Li + transfer depends on the degree of lithiation of the cathode (equivalently the SOC of the battery). These results unify the conflicting Li-transfer trends observed in experiments, and suggest design rules for improving power output by minimizing discharge barriers at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces. The methodology developed in this work is broadly applicable to modeling other all-solid-state battery systems. Thanks to K. Leung at Sandia and A. Van der Ven at UCSB for helpful suggestions. This work was supported by the Nanostructures for Electrical Energy Storage (NEES) center, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences under Award number DESC0001160. This work was supported in part by Michigan State University through computational resources provided by the Institute for Cyber-Enabled Research.