The interatomic Auger transitions in compounds containing atomic components with core levels close in energy are studied theoretically and experimentally. The Coulomb transitions of a hole between such levels lead to a resonant enhancement of the Auger spectra (with respect to the energy difference between the levels). Interatomic Auger transitions involving high lying levels are formed by shaking up electrons due to the dynamic field of photo holes produced during the transition. These effects were observed experimentally in XPS and Auger spectra of CuInSe2 type materials. The study of interatomic Auger transitions is of fundamental importance for understanding the evolution of excited states in matter. It was stated Let us consider the scheme (Figure / | | e  r r between electrons inside the atom is much smaller than the interatomic distance. We will show that the intensity of the interatomic Auger transition substantially increases if the neighboring element has a core level close in energy to the level of the central atom. In our example, this is an In4p level (B1, with a binding energy of 73.5 eV, which is shifted by only 1.5 eV from the energy of the Cu3p level. In this case, the possibility of the real (in the final state) transition of a hole from one atom to another (Figure Here In the lowest order, the amplitude of the Auger transition is equal to the matrix element of the Coulomb interaction between the initial and final states With reference to the diagram in Figure In the following, the matrix element of the Coulomb electron transfer between the levels of atoms 1 and 2 (numerator in (4)) will be briefly denoted by the symbol W, while the matrix element (3) by the symbol V. We get the intensities of the Auger transitions in different orders of scattering theory by calculating the terms of the series in the interaction. The intensity of the Auger line as a function of the kinetic energy of the electron ( ) I  and its integral intensity S (line power) in the lowest order are given by the equalities The value shows the deviation of the kinetic energy of the Auger electron Ef from the value at maximum intensity. Lifting holes from level A1 to the neighboring atom level B1 (Figure and gives a spectral line of the form The virtual hole transition between levels 1↔2 (Figure Finally, the transfer of a hole from level A1 to adjacent level B1 of the accounting virtual transition B1↔ A1 generates the line Figure The presence of resonance (with a close energy) level on the neighboring atom substantially increases the probability of Auger transition. Contributions from the high-energy level deform the line in the direction of the increasing kinetic energy. Virtual excitations make the spectrum narrower. It should be considered that the final states represent a multiplet in real atoms, therefore usually there are not one but several lines with different energies. Single crystalline ingots of CuInSe2 were grown by the vertical Bridgman technique from near stoichiometric mixes of 99.999% purity elements in quartz ampoules sealed under vacuum without using any transport agent. Single crystalline bulk samples were taken from the middle parts of the ingots. The structure and the unit cell parameters have been characterized by the x-ray diffraction (XRD) technique as described in detail in Ref. Figure Figure On the XPS spectrum of CuInSe2 (Figure The model developed in the previous section is applicable to the interatomic Auger transitions CuL3M2,3InN4,5 and CuL3InN2,3N4,5 directly. The intensity of the transitions is enhanced due to the resonant interaction of the levels of Cu3p and In4p, which are close in energy. Now look for the mechanism of amplification of the CuL3InN4,5V transition. In the next section, it will be shown that the transition to the final state with an In4d hole is likely due to electron shaking up in the Auger process. The non-adiabatic process of hole creation gives rise to the appearance of the infinite number of electron-hole pairs near the Fermi energy in normal metals, which may emerge in spectra as singularity near the absorption and emission edges. This problem is dealt with in numerous publications reviewed in Ref. where V is the matrix element of the Cu2p transition to the free state f when the photon with energy  is absorbed, the photoelectron energy measured relative to its value in the absence of losses, 4 16 eV is the excitation energy (in general, many-electron state), and W stands for the Coulomb interaction of the suddenly produced Cu2p hole with In4d electron. Figure is the addition to the energy of the intraatomic Auger transition with the matrix element V. The energy loss Δ varies within a few eV, beginning with the minimum value  , which is equal to the energy difference of the valence electron and the In4d electron. Estimating the magnitude of the correction (9) to the main process (5), one can see that in the case of excitation energy Δ = 16 eV and the level half-width γ = 1 eV, the second-order transition probability is very small. It should however be borne in mind that the formulas were obtained in the adiabatic approximation, while the x-ray excitation of the atom is strongly nonequilibrium process. A photo-hole appears in a very short time τ, so it has a dynamic effect on surrounding electrons in a wide frequency range . The dynamic nature of the hole can be approximately considered by the introducing an alternating field of a hole, which significantly reduces difference Δ. It is possible to replace it with an effective 9), which substantially increases the shakeup process. Figure Shaking in the Auger process is even greater than in photoemission because there are not one, but two holes born there. The proposed mechanism explains the appearance of appreciable interatomic CuL3InN4,5V Auger transitions in the compounds based on СuInSe2. The obtained experimental XPS spectra of compounds based on chalcopyrite CuInSe2 show intense interatomic CuL3M2,3InN4,5 and CuL3InN4,5V Auger transitions. The resonance enhancement of the interatomic Auger electron emission CuL3M2,3InN4,5 is described by the multiple scattering theory with allowance for the energy proximity of Cu3p and In4p levels. The sudden appearance of holes in the photo and Auger emission creates a dynamic field with a wide frequency spectrum, which causes the shaking of electrons in the neighboring atoms. This process substantially increases the probability of the interatomic CuL3InN4,5V Auger transition. In compounds with a narrow valence band (for example, 3d type) and a strong internal level with a not very high binding energy (In4d, 17 eV), a strong Coulomb interaction arises between electrons and holes on the neighboring atoms, which creates the favorable conditions for the appearance of intense interatomic transitions in the soft x-ray range.