HyperSurfaces (HSFs) are devices whose electromagnetic (EM) behavior is softwaredriven, i.e., it can be defined programmatically. The key components of this emerging technology are the metasurfaces, artificial layered materials whose EM properties depend on their internal subwavelength structuring. HSFs merge metasurfaces with a network of miniaturized custom electronic controllers, the nanonetwork, in an integrated scalable hardware platform. The nanonetwork receives external programmatic commands expressing the desired end-functionality and appropriately alters the metasurface configuration thus yielding the respective EM behavior for the HSF. In this work, we will present all the components of the HSF paradigm, as well as highlight the underlying challenges and future prospects. Metasurfaces, thin planar artificial structures, have enabled the realization of novel components with engineered and even unnatural functionalities for the RF, THz and optical spectrum; applications include EM invisibility, total radiation absorption, filtering and steering of impinging waves, as well as ultra-efficient, miniaturized antennas for sensors and implantable communication devices |HSF tiles are envisioned as planar structures that can host metasurface functions with programmatic control. Each tile comprises a stack of virtual and physical components, shown in Fig. |The HyperSurface (HSF) is scalable planar metamaterial platform that bridges the gap between hardware and software, enabling programmatic control of the EM scattering properties over its surface. Meta-atoms are designed with specific metasurface functionalities in mind, which are tunable over a parameter range (e.g. operating frequency, incidence direction, polarization) and controllable by custom mm-sized chips constituting a nano-network. Each HSF tile is composed of a set of such tunable meta-atoms, e.g. 2525, controlled by a single Gateway which serves as the interface between the software and hardware components of the platform, and handles the communication between other tiles and with the end-user (e.g. a computer). The HSF paradigm is a step towards the Internet of Materials, extending the metasurface concept, making it accessible to a wider audience and infusing it with novel functionality. The ambition of the HSF paradigm comes with interesting challenges. From an EM design perspective, the tunability range of metasurfaces needs to be maximized following a co-design approach that takes into account the requirements of all the layers of the HSF. Another challenge the HSF design has to deal with is the intra-and inter-tile networking as the frequency increases. Various powering and communication schemes for the nodes (gateways or chips) are currently being researched 