Ice plasticity has been thoroughly studied, owing to its importance in glaciers and ice sheets dynamics. In particular, its anisotropy (easy basal slip) has been suspected for a long time, then fully characterized 40 years ago. More recently emerged the interest of ice as a model material to study some fundamental aspects of crystalline plasticity. An example is the nature of plastic fluctuations and collective dislocation dynamics. 20 years ago, acoustic emission measurements performed during the deformation of ice single crystals revealed that plastic "flow" proceeds through intermittent dislocation avalanches, power law distributed in size and energy. This means that most of ice plasticity takes place through few, very large avalanches, thus qualifying associated plastic fluctuations as "wild". This launched an intense research activity on plastic intermittency in the Material Science community. The interest of ice in this debate is reviewed, from a comparison with other crystalline materials. In this context, ice appears as an extreme case of plastic intermittency, characterized by scale-free fluctuations, complex space and time correlations as well as avalanche triggering. In other words, ice can be considered as the paradigm of wild plasticity. The fascination that icy objects (glaciers, ice-sheets, sea ice) provoked to mankind for millennia turned into scientific curiosity by the end of the XVIIIth century when de Saussure climbed the Mont Blanc to discover and analyze glaciers and altitude Rendu This plastic anisotropy has also important consequences for polycrystalline ice (e.g. glacier ice) plasticity: it generates strong strain incompatibilities between neighboring grains which can be relaxed e.g. through dynamic recrystallization mechanisms Here we do not focus on these topics. Instead, we revisit some fundamental aspects of ice single crystal plasticity, with a brief incursion on polycrystals, in light of "recent" (the last 20 years) developments on the small scale (from the individual dislocation scale to the crystal/sample scale) dynamics of plastic deformation. We show that ice plastic "flow" actually occurs in a strongly spatially heterogeneous and intermittent way, through dislocation avalanches spanning a huge range of size. We relate this with the plastic anisotropy mentioned above that maximizes the role of long-range elastic interactions in collective dislocation dynamics, and discuss the link with the absence of significant isotropic hardening in ice or of development of an internal characteristic microstructural length scale. This "wild" dynamics, characterized by power law distributions of plastic fluctuations (with infinite variance) The fundamentals of ice plasticity have been extensively detailed elsewhere As already stressed above, plastic anisotropy is the most prominent characteristic of ice plasticity. This has been exemplified by the creep tests reported by Duval and others This slip anisotropy at the crystal/sample scale does not mean that non-basal dislocation motion is impossible On the other hand, they are generally associated with the climb Counter-intuitively, the mobility (dislocation velocity/resolved shear stress) of individual non-basal edge dislocations is almost one order of magnitude larger than the mobility of basal ones Lattice resistance in ice, , which is associated to O-O bonds is not yet known, but is likely very small, at least at temperatures relevant to lab experiments or terrestrial ice ( 50° ). Laboratory mechanical tests can only give an upper bound: torsion creep tests performed at -10°C on well-oriented ice single crystals revealed a significant viscoplastic deformation through basal glide for a resolved shear stress as low as 30 kPa In FCC metals, the multi-slip plasticity generates complex dislocation entanglements "stiffened" by short-range interactions between dislocations gliding on different planes. The resulting strain-hardening, which has been used for millennia to harden metals and alloys from forging, is isotropic, meaning that most of plastic strain is not recoverable upon unloading. Instead, strain-hardening in ice is essentially kinematic (or directional) leading to a stabilization or an increase of the strain-rate under constant stress. These recrystallization mechanisms are out of the scope of the present manuscript. This kinematic hardening is the signature of the predominance of long-range elastic interactions in the collective dislocation dynamics, and of the concomitant absence of a welldefined dislocation sub-structure with a characteristic scale. We will see below that more detailed analyses fully confirmed these points. In metallurgy, the introduction of impurities (solutes, precipitates,..) has been used for centuries to harden materials This situation, which is irrelevant for ice, is not considered here. As shown below, in FCC metals with immobile impurities, their pinning effect frustrates collective dislocation dynamics, hence reduces the intermittency of plastic deformation Ice is, once again, paradoxical in this respect. First, protonic disorder may actually favor dislocation mobility In conclusion, compared with FCC or BCC metals or alloys, ice plasticity appears as particularly exotic, characterized by a very strong plastic anisotropy, a very low lattice friction, kinematic hardening instead of isotropic, which likely signs the absence of development of a well-defined dislocation sub-structure and of an emergent internal scale (see more below), and disorder-softening instead of hardening. As discussed below, these differences with classical metallurgical materials are reflected in the nature of plastic "flow", and particularly its intermittency and spatial heterogeneity. Intermittency of plastic deformation Historically, the first evidence of jerky, intermittent plasticity was reported in 1932 by Orowan and Becker on Zinc single crystal rods Interestingly, this seminal work likely played an important role in the elaboration of the classical dislocation theory developed by Orowan few years later As any sudden local change of inelastic strain They attributed these bursts to dislocation "breakaways" that we can now identify as avalanches. This work suggested that (i) AE can indeed be an efficient monitoring tool of plastic intermittency and (ii) dislocation avalanches might not be restricted to hexagonal materials (note, however, that LiF and NaCl strongly differ from FCC metals in terms dislocation core structure, lattice friction, ect..). Other authors also reported some acoustic bursts during plastic deformation of FCC metals such as Copper Taken altogether, these seminal works suggested that plastic deformation can take place through dislocation avalanches, apparently in a rather systematic way in hexagonal materials where these coordinated motions may account for a large portion of total plasticity. On the other hand, in FCC metals, such plastic bursts are much more episodic and disappear during strain-hardening, while the global dynamics seems dominated by the cumulative effect of small uncorrelated motions. In these initial studies, however, a detailed characterization of plastic intermittency in terms of time correlations, distribution of avalanches sizes, or spatial localization, was not performed. After these seminal analyses, this topic was nearly abandoned for few decades. This can likely be due to the concomitant development of classical plasticity theory that more or less implicitly assumes, inspired by smooth stressstrain curves at the macro-scale, that such plastic fluctuations average out at some large enough time and spatial scales (hence defining a representative volume element for plasticity). By the end of the last century, new AE measurements in ice showed that such assumption is wrong, at least in this material, and revived this important subject The first evidences of AE generated by dislocation avalanches in ice single crystals were reported more than 20 years ago The waveform of a typical AE burst recorded during the plastic deformation of ice is shown on Fig. Considering the case of AE sensors responding to surface velocity, Rouby et al. , where is the Burgers vector. This quantity accounts for the area swept in a unit of time by the dislocations during the avalanche, i.e. ~ . Once normalized by the sample volume, this represents a plastic strain rate. To go further and estimate the incremental strain induced by the avalanche, an additional hypothesis on the evolution of during the avalanche is required. Richeton et al. However, in other systems exhibiting intermittent slip avalanches, such as sheared granular media When plastic deformation does not take place through intermittent, well-defined dislocation avalanches, but instead results from the cumulative effect of numerous uncorrelated and small dislocation motions, continuous AE is generated Figure , over about 7 orders of magnitude, without detectable upper cut-off, while the lower cut-off results from the experimental detection threshold. For uniaxial compression experiments, the exponent was found to be independent of the applied stress (Fig. or of the orientation of the c-axis vs the loading axis, with 1.40 0.03. The exponents were estimated from a robust maximum likelihood methodology -It implies that plastic "flow" in ice is scale invariant, with an absence of characteristic scale over at least 7 orders of magnitude for dissipated energy, or 3 1⁄2 orders of magnitude in slip "size". -As and are smaller than 2, both the mean and the standard deviation of and are theoretically undefined. In more practical terms, this means that most of the energy and strain are dissipated through few, large avalanches, while the remaining population of plastic fluctuations accounts for a negligible part of total deformation. -A combination of the two points mentioned above precludes the definition of a representative volume element (RVE) for ice single crystal plasticity. -These distributions are the signature of a dynamical system at (or near) a critical state. We will re-discuss below the possible nature of this criticality, which is still debated nowadays These dislocation avalanches do not occur randomly through time, instead are characterized by time-clustering, another clear signature of the intermittency of ice plasticity Hence, the avalanche rate can be written as: , where is a background rate accounting for uncorrelated events (a Poisson process), is a function describing the aftershock triggering rate, while summation is restricted to all events occurring at times . Note that the interpretation of the continuous AE mentioned above assumes the absence of any related triggering, i.e. / reduces to a background activity in this case. For crustal seismicity, it has long been recognized that the aftershock triggering rate decays as ~ where is generally close to 1 and is a (small) time constant; this is the socalled Omori's law However, in the creep experiments performed on cm-size ice single crystals (Fig. The power law distribution of avalanche energies as well as the aftershock triggering process described above are clear signatures of a collective dislocation dynamics governed by longranged elastic interactions between dislocations the closer in time two avalanches are, the larger the probability is that they will be closer in space. This is another signature of a triggering process resulting from internal stress redistributions following plastic events. As such stress redistributions decay with the distance from the mainshock, triggering is naturally associated with spatial clustering, while the space/time coupling results from a cascade process in which avalanches positively modulate the occurrence probability of the subsequent avalanches in their vicinity, which in turn modify the occurrence probability of the third generation of avalanches, and so on, at increasing distances (on average) from the avalanches of the first generation. Such "diffusion" of the activity (Fig. This fractal patterning reveals the absence of a spatial characteristic scale in the plastic deformation of ice single crystals, much like the power law distribution of energies (Eq. ( illustrates the absence of a specific avalanche "size". We show below that the presence of grain boundaries (GBs) partly modifies this assessment. These observations are fully consistent with the analysis, from synchrotron topography, of slip lines and dislocation arrangements in ice single crystals deformed under torsion The emergence of such scale-invariant patterns, which were also observed in Cd single crystal, a HCP metal Richeton et al. A well-known effect of temperature is on the velocity of an individual dislocation under a lowvelocity regime (~μm/s), which follows an Arrhenius scaling, ~ / , with 0.9 eV This observation is consistent with the phonon drag scenario. However, this drag coefficient does not have a significant effect on dislocation avalanches and plastic intermittency. Indeed, collective dislocation dynamics in ice is, as mentioned above, essentially ruled by longranged elastic interactions, which nature is not supposed to change with temperature. All the observations reported above were obtained for ice single crystals. The presence of grain boundaries (GBs) is expected to play a significant role on this collective dynamics. Indeed, GBs act as strong barriers to dislocation motion, as evidenced e.g. by dislocation pileups AE recording during compression creep of ice polycrystals with an isotropic texture and an average grain size 〈 〉 varying from 260 μm to 5 mm revealed that GBs indeed hinder the propagation of dislocation avalanches The connection between dislocation avalanches and kinematic hardening was also explored upon unloading polycrystalline samples The observations summarized above show that plastic deformation in ice occurs in a strongly intermittent way, through dislocation avalanches clustered in both time and space and power law distributed in size (incremental strain) and energy. The values of the corresponding exponents ( and <2) imply that most of plastic deformation takes place through few, very large avalanches that control the global dynamics. Following a terminology first introduced by B. Mandelbrot for financial fluctuations A comparison with other materials and crystalline structures is enlightening to unravel the origin of this wildness. Similar AE monitoring of plastic deformation was performed during monotonic tensile tests on HCP (Zn-0.08%Al and Cd) and FCC (Cu, Al and Cu-Al) metals and alloys This fully contrasts with the behavior of FCC materials. In this case, although the episodically recorded AE bursts are power distributed as well, the global activity is dominated by a continuous AE signal, signature of mild, uncorrelated fluctuations. Consequently, is in the range 0.1-0.5 for pure Copper, 0.01 to 0.1 for Cu-Al alloys (a first indication of the role of extrinsic disorder -solutes in this case -on wildness), and 0.01 to 0.02 for pure Al AE is an indirect probe for plastic fluctuations. As mentioned in section 3.1, the first evidences of dislocation avalanches were obtained directly from the stress-strain curves of thin rods At this stage, a question arises: Why do we not detect similar sudden strain steps during mechanical tests on ice crystals ? The answer is likely twofold. It might be first related to a too low sampling frequency and sensitivity of the strain sensor (~10 μm of resolution over a stroke of 5 mm for classical LVDT sensors, i.e. a ~10 -3 strain sensitivity). Sampled at 1 Hz, the sensor will probe the cumulated effect of hundreds of avalanches, which, for most of them, belong to the background activity , hence are not concerned by the space/time coupling of plastic activity mentioned in section 3.2. In addition, as suggested by the non-trivial scaling between the cut-off amplitude and the grain size in polycrystals (see section 3.2) and in agreement with the presence of strong slip localization In this case, finite size effects (the avalanche cannot extend more than the sample size ) imply that the maximum volume strained by an avalanche should scales as , hence the corresponding strain increment as The same reasoning implies that wild plastic fluctuations should become unescapable in very small structures (few μm and below). Such mechanical experiments were not (yet) performed on ice. However, with the recent development of nanotechnologies, the physics of plasticity at such small system sizes became a subject of growing interest over the last 15 years and the micropillar compression test a standard FCC metals , with 1.6, i.e. rather close to the exponents reported for AE amplitudes or energies in ice A recent study analyzed more systematically this size effect on wildness, for Al and Alalloys (i) The wildness decreases with increasing sample size, from 1 for very small systems (below 500 nm for pure Al) to 0 above few μm. Hence, these experiments allow to cross over the entire wild-to-mild transition. (ii) An increasing wildness is associated with an increasing slip anisotropy. In other words, in these FCC materials, plasticity switches from multi-slip to single slip upon decreasing the sample size. (iii) Consequently, Taylor (forest) hardening is suppressed at small scales (iv) The exponent is not universal, instead is tightly linked to the wildness through a relationship that itself appears material-independent: the smaller the wildness, the larger the exponent (Fig. (v) The introduction of an internal disorder in the crystalline structure through alloying (solutes or precipitates) counteracts the external size effect: It promotes a mild plasticity, slip isotropy, and forest hardening. From this comparison between different materials, at various system sizes, the wildness of ice plasticity, and of other materials for small enough external sizes, can now be unambiguously ascribed to slip anisotropy, which promotes the role of long-ranged elastic interactions in collective dislocation dynamics while suppressing isotropic hardening related to short-range interactions. In FCC materials, such slip anisotropy, hence wildness, is only encountered at μm-and sub μm-scales, when surface effects and dislocation starvation mechanisms The observations reported in section 3 on ice single crystals revealed a surprising similarity between the collective dislocation dynamics in this material, and brittle crustal deformation and earthquakes. Indeed, both systems share a power-law distribution of "seismic" energies and associated slips (the Gutenberg-Richter law in case of earthquakes Owing to the strong analogy between the two systems, a similar debate also happened in case of dislocation avalanches. It is worth recalling that the microscale physics of deformation is different in the two systems, as dislocation motion and plasticity is a friction-free process, i.e., unlike earthquake nucleation and propagation, is insensitive to the normal stress. This suggests that the exact nature of the local threshold dynamics is unimportant to define the collective behavior. Instead, the two systems share some ingredients essential for the emergence of avalanche dynamics and intermittency: -long-ranged elastic stress redistribution following a dislocation avalanche or an earthquake. Note that the associated elastic redistribution kernel, which is non-convex, is similar, as the fault slip associated with an earthquake can be modelled from the continuum theory of dislocations -presence of disorder -a slow driving condition with an external driving rate (applied strain-rate on experiments; tectonic loading for earthquakes) much smaller than the rate of avalanche spreading and of elastic stress redistribution. The AE data obtained on ice single crystals argued for a SOC-like interpretation of plastic deformation, at least in this material and maybe on a more general perspective However, it has been argued more recently that the dislocation avalanches recorded during the plastic deformation of metallic (FCC and BCC) micropillars might be associated instead with tuned-criticality, i.e. with true scale invariance only reached at the system-size plastic yield τ (the critical point). In this case, upper-truncated power law distributions of avalanche sizes would be observed for applied stresses below τ , this truncation signing a finite correlation length much smaller than the system size. This interpretation, however, seems irreconcilable with the absence of detectable upper cut-off in the distributions of AE burst energies in ice crystals, and with the independence of these distributions with the applied stress (Fig. This discussion illustrates the fact that, much like for earthquakes Beyond this debate, we have seen in section 3 that the intermittency and wildness of ice plasticity appears as an extreme case (see Fig. It was mentioned that multi-slip plasticity, allowing the emergence of dislocation substructures, i.e. of an intrinsic disorder, as well as large system sizes and extrinsic disorder, all favor mild fluctuations that are incompatible with a pure critical interpretation of plasticity. In other word, SOC-like criticality of plasticity might be actually restricted to ice, and maybe to other HCP materials. In this context, the relation between wildness and the power law exponent (Fig. , where is the system size and an internal length scale In this mean-field description of obstacles, represents the length scale at which the dislocation-dislocation elastic interaction stress (~ ) becomes equal to the dislocationobstacle interaction stress According to the similitude principle In this framework, the extreme wildness of ice plasticity can now be interpreted as follows. First, extrinsic disorder effects are negligible. In addition, lattice resistance is very small: taking the upper estimate of 10 -5 for / (see section 2) and 0.452 nm for basal dislocations It has been proposed, from a continuum model of plasticity In the framework discussed above, the effects of GBs were not considered. In other words, the internal scale was always considered to be smaller than 〈 〉. Indeed, dislocations do not overcome GBs as they do for Peierls barriers, forest dislocations, solutes or precipitates, and a mean-field description of these GBs effects on dislocation motion and dynamics appears problematic. However, it has been shown in section 3.2 that GBs do hinder the propagation of individual dislocation avalanches, whereas correlated plastic activity spreads over distances much larger than the grain size. Based on this transmission of plastic deformation (but not of dislocations) through GBs revealed on ice polycrystals , where is the plastic yield of single crystals and a constant in the range 0.05-0.5. This model is based on the idea that the macroyield corresponds to a stress level for which the incompatibility stresses between neighboring grains with different orientations can be relaxed through a system-wide transmission of strain bursts, letting strain to "percolate" through the material. As already mentioned, ~ is very small in ice. Although the grainsize dependence of in ice polycrystals from monotonic loading tests is still unexplored, Duval and co-workers 