We present a new first-principles linear-response theory of changes due to perturbations in the quasiparticle selfenergy operator within the GW method. This approach, named GW perturbation theory (GWPT), is applied to calculate the electron-phonon (e-ph) interactions with the full inclusion of the GW non-local, energy-dependent self-energy effects, going beyond density-functional perturbation theory. Avoiding limitations of the frozen-phonon technique, GWPT gives access to e-ph matrix elements at the GW level for all phonons and scattering processes, and the computational cost scales linearly with the number of phonon modes (wavevectors and branches) investigated. We demonstrate the capabilities of GWPT by studying the e-ph coupling and superconductivity in Ba0.6K0.4BiO3. We show that many-electron correlations significantly enhance the e-ph interactions for states near the Fermi surface, and explain the observed high superconductivity transition temperature of Ba0.6K0.4BiO3 as well as its doping dependence. First-principles calculation of electron-phonon (e-ph) coupling The e-ph coupling treated in DFPT is only approximate since the DFT orbital eigenvalues are not the true electron (or quasiparticle) energies. This is reflected in that, in general, the Kohn-Sham eigenvalues do not yield accurate band gaps and band widths nor information on lifetimes The GW approximation However, the frozen-phonon technique is limited to only investigate couplings to phonon wavevectors that are commensurate to a large supercell, which makes it prohibitive to achieve a fine sampling of the Brillouin zone (BZ). More importantly, frozen-phonon calculations can only provide some intra-band part of the e-ph matrix elements indirectly and an overall e-ph coupling strength by examining band energy shifts. The e-ph matrix elements between different bands and for wavevectors across the full BZ -the essential ingredient of microscopic e-ph formulations of many physical phenomena -are not available within frozen-phonon methods In this Letter, for the first time, we present a first-principles linear-response GW method to external perturbations, which we call GW perturbation theory (GWPT). In this scheme, the first-order change of the self-energy operator to a phonon perturbation Δ Σ is constructed from a linear-response calculation, which is performed within a single primitive unit cell for any phonon wavevector q and phonon branch . This method avoids the use of supercells, and the computational cost naturally scales linearly with the number of phonon modes needed. More importantly from a physics view point, it provides the e-ph matrix elements at the GW level for any pairs of electronic states directly and efficiently, making GWPT a desirable ab initio method to systematically study e-ph interactions including many-electron self-energy effects. We demonstrate the power of the GWPT method by studying the e-ph coupling and superconductivity in Ba0.6K0.4BiO3 Here the GWPT method is formulated for phonon perturbations, but it can straightforwardly be generalized to other perturbations such as electric field and strain. We present the theory for crystals with time-reversal symmetry (TRS), and spin indices are omitted for simplicity. The key quantity is the e-ph coupling matrix element ( , ). The eph matrix element at the GW level can be constructed in a similar way that the quasiparticle energy is constructed with the contribution from the GW self-energy replacing that from the exchange-correlation functional ( ) in DFT; that is, where is the e-ph matrix element at the DFT level where = , , labels the Cartesian directions, counts the atoms in the primitive unit cell, is the mass of the -th atom, , ( ) is the -component of the -th eigenvector of the dynamical matrix at q, is the phonon frequency, l labels the l-th unit cell in the material, and Rl is the corresponding lattice position vector. In Eq. (3), the partial derivative is taken with respect to the atom coordinate of the -th atom, along the direction, and in the l-th unit cell. DFPT calculates Δ by self-consistently solving the Sternheimer equation Therefore, the calculation of the e-ph matrix elements at either DFPT or GWPT level is indeed done in a primitive unit cell, and no supercells are needed. Now we construct the change in the self-energy operator. A change in Σ involves changes in G and W. Here, we use the constant-screening approximation where and are energy variables, and = 0 . To construct Δ , we need the first-order change in the wavefunction where and are the DFT eigenvalues. Using the knowledge that DFT eigenfunctions well approximate the quasiparticle wavefunctions of most materials where = 0 for < and = 0 for > at zero temperature, and is the Fermi energy. In Eq. ( In our implementation of GWPT, a plane-wave basis is used. The matrix element of Δ Σ now becomes, where and are reciprocal lattice vectors, and p are the band index and wavevector for the internal summation, and ( , ′) is the screened Coulomb interaction. In the construction of W, the full dielectric matrix within the random-phase approximation The above formalism of GWPT has been implemented in the BERKELEYGW code We have applied our GWPT method (within a one-shot calculation, i.e. G0W0PT) to study superconductivity in Ba0.6K0.4BiO3 in its cubic perovskite phase (Fig. We first perform standard DFT and DFPT calculations on Ba0.6K0.4BiO3 using the GGA functional We focus on the single band (labeled as n0 and highlighted in Fig. In the frozen-phonon calculation, the energy of the degenerate states at the BZ boundary (R' point in Fig. To study superconductivity in Ba0.6K0.4BiO3, we calculate the e-ph matrix elements that scatter quasiparticle states within the n0 band by performing both DFPT and GWPT calculations on an 8×8×8 k-grid (full grid) and q-grid (35 irreducible q-points) show strong variances in the distribution of the e-ph matrix elements and also in the enhancement factor of GWPT over DFPT, due to the wavefunction character changing near the Γ point of either the initial or final states. These results, for the first time, systematically reveal the complex nature of many-electron renormalization of the e-ph interactions, demonstrating the capability and power of GWPT. We evaluate the superconducting Tc of Ba0.6K0.4BiO3 using the McMillan-Allen-Dynes formula We further study the doping dependence of the superconductivity in Ba1-xKxBiO3 (superconductivity is observed experimentally for > 0.3) from first principles, calculated using a rigid-band approximation In summary, we present the theoretical formulation, practical implementation, and application to Ba1-xKxBiO3 of the newly developed GWPT method. GWPT is shown to be able to systematically and accurately investigate the rich e-ph physics at the GW level, beyond the accessibility of any other existing ab initio methods. The capability of GWPT demonstrates its great application potential to the study of the rich e-ph physics in a wide-range of materials, going beyond DFT. Experimental data are plotted as squares in a primitive unit cell takes ~ 10 4 seconds, and the frozen-phonon GW calculation performed in a 2×2×2 supercell takes ~ 10 6 seconds. The efficiency is differed by two orders of magnitude for this relatively small supercell. For a fine sampling of the q-grid, the frozen-phonon GW technique becomes prohibitive, whereas GWPT has the capability to access the e-ph physics systematically and efficiently. In the main text, we report the results of both DFPT and GWPT calculations on 8×8×8 k-and q-grids (phonon q-grid is symmetry reduced). We check the convergence of k-grid up to 16×16×16 with DFPT and list the results in Table We provide another verification example of diamond by comparing frozen-phonon results and perturbation theory calculations, as plotted in Fig. supercell. The state of interest has quadruple degeneracy at the supercell BZ boundary, and will split upon the atom displacement (see Fig. The phonon band structure directly obtained with DFPT calculations shows imaginary frequencies at R and M points, leading to a structural phase transition involving the oxygen octahedron tilting Our calculated phonon spectrum is in good agreement with neutron diffraction experiment We note that our calculated e-ph coupling constant = 0.47 with DFPT is higher than previous ab initio results = 0.33 In the calculation of superconductivity, the DFT band structure is used, as our calculated GW band structure remains quite similar near the Fermi level. The significant enhancement of e-ph coupling is dominantly due to the many-electron renormalization of the e-ph matrix elements. We show further results of the distribution of e-ph matrix elements in BZ, in Fig. In the study of the doping-dependent superconductivity in Ba1-xKxBiO3, we adopt the rigid-band approximation (band energy, phonon spectrum, and e-ph matrix elements are taken from ab initio calculations at x = 0.4), which is usually a good approximation if the doping range of study is not too large so that the system remains similar. By varying the Fermi level for different doping concentrations, we recalculate the Eliashberg function ( ), the e-ph coupling constant , and the superconducting (using * = 0.16). The experimental optimal doping (i.e. with the highest ) is near x = 0.4. Experimentally 