Mn 3 Sn is a non-collinear antiferromagnet which displays a large anomalous Hall effect at room temperature. It is believed that the principal contribution to its anomalous Hall conductivity comes from Berry curvature. Moreover, dc transport and photoemission experiments have confirmed that Mn 3 Sn may be an example of a time-reversal symmetry breaking Weyl semimetal. Due to a small, but finite moment in the room temperature inverse triangular spin structure, which allows control of the Hall current with external field, this material has garnered much interest for next generation memory devices and THz spintronics applications. In this work, we report a THz range study of oriented Mn 3 Sn thin films as a function of temperature. At low frequencies we found the optical conductivity can be well described by a single Drude oscillator. The plasma frequency is strongly suppressed in a temperature dependent fashion as one enters the 260 K helical phase. This may be associated with partial gapping of the Fermi surfaces that comes from breaking translational symmetry along the caxis. The scattering rate shows quadratic temperature dependence below 200 K, highlighting the possible important role of interactions in this compound. The anomalous Hall effect (AHE) conventionally occurs in ferromagnetic metals (FMs) and is usually interpreted as an effect beyond the ordinary Hall effect that arises from spontaneous magnetization 1 . It can arise based on three different mechanisms: side jump scattering, skew scattering, and intrinsic effects. The latter arises through Berry curvature. This Berry curvature is determined by the geometry of Bloch wavefunctions and acts in many ways as an effective magnetic field in momentum space. Recently, the possibility of an intrinsic AHE in systems without net magnetization has been explored, such as in spin liquid and antiferromagnetic systems First-principle band structure calculations of Mn 3 Sn showed multiple pairs of Weyl nodes and threedimensional linear dispersions in momentum space that have been confirmed by recent photoemission experiments In this work, we take advantage of recent technical advances in thin film preparation Polycrystalline Mn 3 Sn films were deposited to a thickness of 100 nm by DC magnetron sputtering at room temperature onto Si/SiO 2 substrates from a Mn 2.5 Sn target. The sputtering power and Ar gas pressure are 60 W and 0.3 Pa. The film is post-deposition annealed at 500 • C for 1 h. The annealing procedure after the deposition crystallizes the as-deposited amorphous film into a polycrystalline form of Mn 3 Sn. Further details of the deposition and sample treatment can be found in Complex values of the THz transmission of these films were measured in a home-built THz time-domain spec- troscopy (TDTS) spectrometer with a closed-cycle 7 T superconducting magnet. The complex conductivity can be extracted by using the appropriate expression in the thin film approximation: Fig. Figs. Here, ∞ represents a background polarizability that originates from absorptions above the measured spectral range including phonons and electronic interband transitions. s is an index that represents a possible sum over a number of the Drude oscillators. An example fit to the data at 5K is shown in Fig. The temperature dependent plasma frequency ω p /2π is displayed in Fig. Fig We have also performed extensive measurements in perpendicular magnetic field (Faraday geometry) at low temperature, but saw essentially no effect of field in the THz range. As shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have studied the THz-range optical response of Mn 3 Sn thin films. The system shows a good metallic state in the whole temperature range. Magnetoterahertz conductivities at 6 K do not exhibit field dependence and strongly indicate the quasiparticles have large effective mass and low electronic mobility, consistent with the fact that Mn 3 Sn is a correlated electron system. The suppression of the plasma frequency at low temperatures is consistent with the expected gapping of the Fermi surface in the spatially modulated helical phase.