The similarities to cuprates make iridates an interesting potential platform for investigating superconductivity. Equally attractive are their puzzling complex intrinsic interactions. Here, we report an ultrafast optical spectroscopy investigation of a coherent phonon mode in Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 , a bilayer Ruddlesden-Popper perovskite iridate. An anomaly in the A 1g optical phonon (ν = 4.4 THz) is unambiguously observed below the Néel temperature (T N ), which we attribute to pseudospin-lattice coupling (PLC). Significantly, we find that PLC is the dominant interaction at low temperature, and we directly measure the PLC coefficient to be λ = 150 ± 20 cm -1 , which is two orders of magnitude higher than that in manganites (< 2.4 cm -1 ) and comparable to that in CuO (50 cm -1 , the strongest PLC or spin-lattice coupling (SLC) previously known). Moreover, we find that the strong PLC induces an anisotropic negative thermal expansion. Our findings highlight the key role of PLC in iridates and uncovers another intriguing similarity to cuprates. Single-layer and bilayer Ruddlesden-Popper perovskite iridates (Srn+1IrnO3n+1, n = 1, 2 and ∞) are highly analogous to the superconducting cuprates As a typical 5d compound, Sr3Ir2O7 experiences strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC), which renders pseudospin J, instead of spin S or orbital angular momentum L, a good quantum number. The pseudospins (with J = 1/2) align along the c-axis into antiferromagnetic (AFM) long-range order, whereby the AFM to paramagnetic (PM) phase transition occurs at TN = 280 K Ultrafast optical spectroscopy is a powerful method to investigate the coherent phonons Here we report a thorough ultrafast optical spectroscopy investigation of the coherent phonon in Sr3Ir2O7. We coherently generate and detect the low lying A1 g phonon. We unambiguously observe coherent phonons above TN = TMIT and, more importantly, discover a phonon anomaly below TN = TMIT. We attribute this phonon anomaly to a coupling between the c-axis AFM pseudospin long-range order and the out-of-plane breathing A1 g phonon mode (i.e., PLC). Significantly, we obtain the PLC coefficient λ = 150 ± 20 cm -1 , which is greater than the highest values ever reported for PLC or SLC, and we identify PLC as a major intrinsic interaction in Sr3Ir2O7 at low temperatures. Moreover, we infer from the phonon anomaly that the interlayer spacing is expanded below the Néel temperature, which is verified by our temperature-dependent x-ray diffraction (XRD) experiment. Our unambiguous experimental evidences thus paint a clear picture of the PLC in Sr3Ir2O7. Our pump-probe experiment is implemented in a way similar to that in Ref. Ultrafast laser pulses of 800 nm central wavelength, 70 fs pulse duration, and 250 kHz repetition rate are used to generate and detect coherent phonons in Sr3Ir2O7. The 1.55 eV photons excite the transitions from the Jeff = 3/2 valence band to the Jeff = 1/2 conduction band Our temperature-dependent XRD experiment on Sr3Ir2O7 single crystal is carried out using a BRUKER Discover D8 diffractometer from 20 to 310 K, with the Cu Kα radiations (with wavelengths of Kα1 and Kα2 being 1.5406 Å and 1.5444 Å, respectively). At each temperature, the 2θ angle is varied and recorded from 10 to 60 degrees, with a step increment of 0.001 degree. The XRD patterns are indexed in the space group I4/mmm. From the recorded 2θ diffraction peaks, the lattice parameter is calculated using Bragg's law. We first grow a single crystal of Sr3Ir2O7 (see Appendix B) and then we use Raman scattering and single crystal XRD (see Appendix C) to characterize the sample. The Raman scattering is consistent with the reported Raman spectra of Sr3Ir2O7 By comparison with the standard XRD results, we assign the cleaved surface of our Sr3Ir2O7 sample to be the (0 0 1) plane (see Appendix C). The ultrafast dynamics result at 6 K is shown in Fig. By comparing with the Raman results (see Appendix C), we assign the coherent phonon to be the lower-frequency A1 g mode. In the FFT result, there is also a discernible peak at 5.5 THz (i.e., 183 cm -1 ), which corresponds to the higher frequency A1 g phonon. In the upper inset, the fitting curves of both phonon modes are plotted, respectively. In the following we only discuss the temperature dependence of the lower frequency A1 g phonon (red curve). It can be seen that the dynamics of this coherent phonon mode exhibits a cos(ωt) time dependence, with an initial phase of zero (see the upper inset of Fig. We further investigate the temperature dependence of the coherent phonon in the range of 6-320 K (Fig. where AΩ is the phonon amplitude, Ω is the phonon frequency, τΩ is the phonon lifetime, and φ is the initial phase. These coherent phonon parameters are fitted for different temperatures, and are plotted in Fig. First, the phonon amplitude AΩ exhibits an anomaly at and below TN, as shown in Fig. The abrupt enhancement upon the onset of the AFM ordering unambiguously demonstrates the coupling between this phonon mode and the pseudospin AFM order. A 5-fold enhancement in AΩ on entering the ordered pseudospin state (from the metallic PM state to the insulating AFM state) is identified (see Figs. The strong similarity in temperature dependence between the two quantities suggests that the coherent phonon is correlated to the collinear long-range AFM order below TN; as such, PLC must exist below TN, which directly leads to the observed phonon anomaly. We then quantitatively understand this PLC-induced phonon anomaly in amplitude. It is known that, for coherent phonons, the amplitude AΩ is linearly dependent on the Raman tensor α/Q where Z represents the spin-independent term, Λ represents the spin-dependent term,  is the correlation function between two nearest neighboring spins, and β is a constant. Microscopic analysis showed that the term containing Λ is mainly contributed by the d electron hopping between nearest neighboring magnetic ions during phonon Raman scattering Sr3Ir2O7, where Ji and Ji+1 are pseudospins of the nearest neighboring Ir 4+ ions. In the simple Heisenberg nearest neighbor approximation and the molecular field approximation, the pseudospin correlation is given by This correlation is a direct manifestation of the PLC. It can be seen that this relation is directly exhibited in the experimental results shown in Fig. Second, the phonon frequency also exhibits an anomaly below TN (Figs. ), where Ω0 and C are constants Quantitatively, the PLC leads to a frequency shift of where B is the Bohr magneton, μ is the reduced mass, Ω is the phonon frequency at 0 K (in Fig. is the phonon modulation of the super-exchange interaction Jc along the c-axis. The quantity ), by which we obtain the PLC coefficient λ = 150 ± 20 cm -1 (i.e., This λ value is significantly greater than those reported values of other materials (Table and the value of SLC coefficient λ for CuO is 50 cm -1 Third, we analyze the temperature dependence of the phonon lifetime, which also exhibits some anomalous features. In Fig. Mott insulator releases less itinerant thermal electrons. The effect of cooling is two-fold: it increases the phonon lifetime because less thermal carriers involve in the phonon-carrier scattering, and it increases the electronic resistivity because less thermal carriers involve in conducting currents. This explains the similarities between the curves in Fig. Finally, we consider the exact physical picture of the PLC observed in Fig. 2 AF M at low temperatures, we attribute this reduction of interlayer interactions to the PLC. Classically, the PLC acts like a "spring" with negative spring constant in addition to the regular lattice interaction. For regular lattice interactions (regular "springs"), cooling leads to a reduced interlayer spacing. Thus the contribution from a "negative spring" will lead to expanded interlayer spacing instead. In Fig. Furthermore, as seen from Fig. To further verify the above interpretations obtained from our ultrafast spectroscopy investigation, we carry out a temperature-dependent XRD experiment to directly measure the lattice constant c (hence the IrO6 interlayer spacing) of the Sr3Ir2O7 single crystal. We show the results in Fig. In analyzing the amplitude anomaly, it is worthy to note that resonant Raman scattering has also been proposed to explain the temperature-dependent Raman intensity. In a different material HgCr2Se4, the electronic structure varies with temperature and the spin-dependent Raman mechanism does not apply satisfactorily Furthermore, the overall similar temperature dependence between the phonon amplitude (Fig. Anyhow, quantitatively, here the major interaction at low temperatures is still the PLC. Interestingly, the strong PLC we find in Sr3Ir2O7 frequently echoes its counterpart (strong SLC) in high temperature superconducting cuprates Thus our investigation suggests a new way of inducing or tuning the various properties in strongly correlated iridates, including possible superconductivity. In summary, we report an unambiguous observation of the extremely strong PLC in a single crystal of Sr3Ir2O7 through an ultrafast laser spectroscopy investigation of the coherent phonon. Below TN, a PLC-induced phonon anomaly (in amplitude, frequency and lifetime) is directly observed, and negative thermal expansion is discovered for the first time, both of which are direct effects of the strong PLC. We obtain an exceptionally high PLC coefficient for Sr3Ir2O7, λ = 150 ± 20 cm -1 , which is the largest PLC or SLC coefficient value ever reported. We identify that PLC is a crucial interaction at low temperatures in Sr3Ir2O7. These results clearly reveal the central role of PLC in the iridates and mark another novel property shared between the iridates and cuprates. Our investigation provides a clear fundamental physical picture of the PLC in Sr3Ir2O7, and suggests a new method of tuning the magnetic, lattice and electronic properties in this strongly correlated system, including possible superconductivity. As introduced in the main text, pseudospins in Sr3Ir2O7 are anti-aligned along the c-axis. In Heisenberg's nearest-neighbor interaction picture, the Hamiltonian corresponding to the pseudospin interaction is where Jc is the superexchange coupling energy between two nearest Ir 4+ ions and Ji is the pseudospin of the ith Ir 4+ ion. Considering a pair of Ir 4+ ions, in the quantum harmonic oscillator picture, the Hamiltonian for the A1 g phonon without PLC can be written as where P is the momentum operator for the Ir 4+ ion,  is the reduced mass (one half of the mass of an iridium atom), k is the spring force constant between the two nearest anti-phase vibrating Ir 4+ ions and u is the deviation from the equilibrium distance between the two Ir 4+ ions. When additionally considering the PLC, the equivalent spring force constant can be written as k ́ and the Hamiltonian can be written as where N is the number of magnetic ion pairs in each A1 g phonon (here N = 1). The k ́ can be obtained by taking the second derivative of the potential term in Eq. ( The oscillation frequencies with and without PLC can be obtained by . Thus, Eq. ( ( ) Omitting the high order terms, the pseudospin-induced frequency anomaly '      can be explicitly written as In the molecular field approximation Substituting Eq. ( The PLC strength can be characterized by a constant λ defined as follows where  is the conventionally defined spin-phonon coupling coefficient. As such, We interpret the maximum value of 2 AF M from Ref. Furthermore, from Fig. For example, it is reported that 2 2 / 16 xz stret J u    mRy/Å 2 for LaMnO3 Notice that in our ultrafast generation and detection of the coherent phonon, the intensity of the low-energy A1 g mode (142 cm -1 ) is much higher than that of the high-energy A1 g mode (183 cm -1 ), as shown in the two insets of Fig. [7], and Fig. A 1g (147 cm -1 ) A 1g (183 cm -1 ) A 1g (183 cm -1 ) Frequency (cm -1 ) A 1g (147 cm CuO [28,30] LaMnO3 [27] PrMnO3 [29] NdMnO3 [29] MnF2 [31] -5.0 ± 0. 