Here, we describe a method for the enhanced self-assembly of triblock Janus colloids targeted to form a kagome lattice. Using computer simulations, we demonstrate that the formation of this elusive structure can be significantly improved by self-propelling or activating the colloids along the axis connecting their hydrophobic hemispheres. The process by which metastable aggregates are destabilized and transformed into the favored kagome lattice is quite general, and we argue this active approach provides a systematic pathway to improving the self-assembly of a large number of colloidal structures. The current rise in popularity of colloidal active matter is due in large part to the recent advances in colloidal synthesis. Through the pioneering work of synthetic chemists and material scientists, there now exists a large number of experimental realizations of synthetic microswimmers and active colloids. The key design principle for these small compact structures, which has been experimentally demonstrated in systems of gliding microfilaments, As our model system, we consider the heavily studied experimental system of triblock Janus colloids. The premise of our approach is built around finding alternative and more efficient selfassembly pathways by leveraging the unique driven nature of active colloids. By introducing activity as a new dimension in the self-assembly parameter space, we demonstrate how this new control variable makes it possible to bias the selection of a particular crystal structure against the formation of unwanted metastable states and greatly improves the overall yield and rate of self-assembly in the triblock system. Each triblock Janus colloid is modeled as a sphere of diameter σ and undergoes Brownian dynamics at a constant temperature T according to the coupled overdamped equations: where the translational diffusion of the colloid is given by the Stokes-Einstein relation D = k B T γ -1 , with γ being the translational friction due to the fluid. For spherical colloids in a low Reynolds number environment, it is reasonable to assume rotational diffusion is thermal in origin and given by D , where the rotational friction is given by γ R . In this study, we prefer not to specify a particular propulsion mechanism and instead generally assume that each triblock Janus colloid swims at a fixed speed U along a predefined orientation unit vector n n n(t). In this work, we also neglect all hydrodynamic interactions between colloids. Given the relatively small swim speeds involved in this study, it is reasonable to assume that long-range hydrodynamics interactions will be relatively weak and will only quantitatively change the self-assembly behavior of the triblock Janus system. The two hydrophobic patches that give the colloids their triblock nature are located at opposite poles of the colloid, with each hydrophobic patch accounting for ≈ 28% of the particle surface area. The polar equatorial region accounts for the remaining 44% of the surface area. A key requisite of this approach is that the swimming axis of the colloid is aligned with the center-line of the two hydrophobic hemispheres as shown in Figure • Experimentally, self-assembly is induced by the addition of salt, which screens long-ranged electrostatics and allows hydrophobic attractions to dominate. In simulations, this is manifested by a shortrange attraction between the hydropho-bic patches, which we often refer to as a "bond", and is characterized by a binding energy ε, which is cutoff at a separation distance of 1.5σ. • Due to the electrostatic screening, we assume that the equatorial polar regions can effectively be described by a short-ranged volume excluding potential, which is cutoff at 2 1/6 σ. • The angular potential between the colloids is rather flat for a range of angular displacements. The only nonthermal torques are those induced at the boundary between the polar and hydrophobic region of the colloids. This is consistent with experimental observations that show a large degree of rotational freedom when two particles are in contact with each other with their hydrophobic patches facing each other. In this work, all simulations contain N = 10, 000 triblock Janus colloid, which are strictly confined to self-propel in two dimensions. Both the motion and the orientation vectors of the colloids are confined to evolve in the xy-plane. This mimics the reference experimental system where self-assembly is templated to occur on a surface after sedimentation. The length and energy scales were chosen to be σ and k B T , respectively, while τ = σ 2 D -1 is the unit of time. All simulations were run for 10 4 τ with a time step of ∆t = 10 -5 τ . All results are reported in reduced Lennard-Jones units. As a useful reference, an active colloid in our simulations with swim speed U = 1 in reduced Lennard-Jones units corresponds to a swim speed of ≈ 1 μm/sec for an active colloid with a diameter of ≈ 1 μm. Three different volume fractions were considered: φ = 0.2, φ = 0.4, and φ = 0.6. For each volume fraction, a range of temperatures T and self-propelling speeds U were considered such that this study spans the parameter space where formation of the kagome lattice is possible. Both the size of the hydrophobic patches and the magnitude of the binding energy (ε = 15k B T ) were tuned to maximize the self-assembly of the kagome lattice in the equilibrium system U = 0 at a temperature of T = 1 and volume fraction φ = 0.6. All simulations were carried out using a modified version of the HOOMD-Blue simulation package, Figure At the opposite end of the spectrum, if the bulk volume fraction is too high (φ 0.6), the self-assembly dynamics becomes sluggish, and the system is prone to become trapped in a metastable disordered state (data not shown). There exists a window in volume fraction where self-assembly of the kagome lattice is favored, and we empirically find that φ = 0.6 is an optimal volume fraction to maximize the rate of self-assembly for the equilibrium system. At this particular volume fraction, the colloids almost immediately find the proper coordination and orientation to form the kagome lattice. Self-assembly at this volume fraction also leads to highly polycrystalline structures, as formation of the kagome lattice occurs nearly simultaneously throughout the sample (see Figure Interestingly, the percent yield of the kagome lattice increases significantly once a small amount of activity is introduced. The selfpropulsion of the triblock colloids generates a unique nonequilibrium environment that constantly allows for rearrangements of any mechanically unstable structure and guides the formation of the thermodynamically and mechanically stable kagome lattice (see Movie S2). For the two smaller volume fractions φ = 0.2 and φ = 0.4, the rate of self-assembly is dramatically faster than the equilibrium system. As expected, the improvement in self-assembly is less dramatic for the highly optimized equilibrium system at φ = 0.6. It is also important to note from Figure Figure For the best performing region of the active triblock system, we observe the kagome lattice form out of local high density fluctuations that develop from frequent collisions among the selfpropelled linear precursors. These large fluctuations in density are especially important early on in the self-assembly process. For many selfassembly processes, the growth of a particular target structure requires the formation of a critical nucleus of a characteristic size. By controlling the level of activity in the system, it is possible to modulate the magnitude and lifetime of density fluctuations. The fact that activity alone can generate giant fluctuations in density has important implications for colloidal self-assembly and is a key ingredient in developing our approach to active self-assembly. In addition, self-propulsion will in general improve the kinetics of self-assembly, as the dynamics becomes inherently faster. The rate at which an unbounded colloid can explore the system is now set by the swim speed U , and is no longer solely regulated by the temperature T . The enhanced diffusivity scales as D ∼ U 2 /D r in the dilute limit. Interestingly, we observe extended regions of coexistence between kagome and hexagonal crystals with the latter crystal structure becoming more stable at large activities. This is consistent with the notion that an increase in activity corresponds to an increase in swim pressure, Unexpectedly, there are two different regimes where hexagonal order naturally develops in the active system, and although the corresponding structures both exhibit translational hexagonal symmetry, they differ significantly in the orientation of the triblock colloids within the lattice. The two different flavors of hexagonal order in the active system are shown in Movies S3 and S4. We should stress that the formation of a stable hexagonal lattice in both the active and equilibrium system requires a global realignment of the orientations of the colloids within the lattice. As shown in Figure where n n n i is the orientation of the propelling vector of the ith colloid and M i is its corresponding number of neighbors within a cutoff distance r c = 3σ. Figure If each colloid has its axis of propulsion oriented in the same direction as its neighbors, then Ω = 1 and if the colloidal propelling axes are randomly oriented Ω = 0. At a volume fraction φ = 0.4, the equilibrium triblock system does not exhibit hexagonal order for any temperature T and there is no global alignment as shown in Figure Lastly, we should note that in this high temperature and highly active regime, orientational alignment does not develop from within the core of an already assembled crystal structure, but rather develops early on in the assembly process as the crystal nucleates from the fluid. An initially disordered small crystallite templates its own growth fueled by the addition of colloids or short chains from the bulk. Given the active nature of the colloids, free-swimming colloids joining the crystallite will be more likely to have their propelling axis directed inward and toward the center of the cluster they join. As the crystallite grows it preferentially forms layers of colloids oriented predominately in the same direction. Since the sum of all active forces acting on these crystals is typically not equal to zero, the developing crystals are typically quite active in their own right, and they tend to rotate and move across the system with a speed that is proportional to the imbalance of active forces and torques within the crystal. It is the merging of these highly oriented crystalline domains that gives rise to the stable hexagonal crystals that result in the final configurations (See Figure In this paper, we have shown how even a small amount of activity can have a profound impact on the self-assembly pathway of triblock Janus colloids intended to spontaneously organize into a macroscopic kagome lattice. We find significant yields of kagome assembly can be obtained under system conditions where no assembly is possible in the corresponding equilibrium system. Activity is able to sufficiently smooth the underlying energy landscape such that the kinetically favored intermediates can quickly transform into the thermodynamically favored product. The ability of active particles to efficiently break apart branching and competing metastable structures, while generating high density fluctuations favoring the growth of isotropic structures such as the kagome and the hexagonal crystals, is the key element responsible for the enhanced self-assembly observed in this system. Although we study this problem through the lens of a single model system, we believe that the general approach and methodology discussed here can be successfully applied to other patchy colloidal systems. For instance, we have performed several simulations with colloids carrying four orthogonal attractive patches tailored to form a colloidal square lattice, 