Recent reports of current-induced switching of ferrimagnetic oxides coupled to a heavy metal layer have opened realistic prospects for implementing magnetic insulators into electrically addressable spintronic devices. However, key aspects such as the configuration and dynamics of magnetic domain walls driven by electrical currents in insulating oxides remain unexplored. Here, we investigate the internal structure of the domain walls in Tm 3 Fe 5 O 12 (TmIG) and TmIG/Pt bilayers and demonstrate their efficient manipulation by spin-orbit torques with velocities of up to 400 m s -1 and minimal current threshold for domain wall flow of 5 x 10 6 A cm -2 . Domain wall racetracks embedded in TmIG are defined by the deposition of Pt current lines, which allow us to control the domain propagation and magnetization switching in selected regions of an extended magnetic layer. Scanning nitrogen-vacancy magnetometry reveals that the domain walls of thin TmIG films are Néel walls with left-handed chirality, with the domain wall magnetization rotating towards an intermediate Néel-Bloch configuration upon deposition of Pt. These results indicate the presence of a sizable interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in TmIG, which leads to novel possibilities to control the formation of chiral spin textures in magnetic insulators. Ultimately, domain wall racetracks provide an efficient scheme to pattern the magnetic landscape of TmIG in a fast and reversible way. Spintronics relies on the use of current-induced torques for manipulating the magnetization of thin films and nanodevices Magnetic insulators offer exciting perspectives for spintronic and magnonic applications beyond conventional metallic systems TmIG(8 nm)/Pt(5 nm) bilayers were grown on SGGG (111)-oriented substrates by a combination of pulsed laser deposition for epitaxial growth of the garnet and in-situ dc sputtering for Pt. The numbers between parentheses indicate the thickness of each layer. Pt current lines were patterned in the shape of Hall bars by optical lithography and selective etching of the metal, leaving the TmIG film un-etched (see Methods). Figure The magnetic state of the TmIG film underneath the Pt current line, +m (up) or -m (down), can be read electrically by measuring the transverse Hall resistance R xy , as shown in Fig. The switching polarity is determined by the damping-like component of the SOT (2-4), which stabilizes +m for J x parallel to H x and -m for J x antiparallel to H x in TmIG/Pt. Notably, we found that full switching can be achieved with pulses of 1 ms at current densities below 10 7 A cm -2 for an in-plane field as small as |H x |=20 Oe, which confirms the high quality of our devices (see also Supplementary A distinctive feature of our experiments is that TmIG covers the entire substrate, but switching occurs only in the region defined by the Pt current line. This is clearly seen in Fig. As SOT-induced switching is strongly dependent on the DW structure where ψ defines the angle of the in-plane magnetization direction with respect to the X-axis, ∆ DW is the DW width, and M S the saturation magnetization. Figures Figures Measurements of the DW velocity v DW are reported in Fig. Our measurements reveal robust DW velocities of up to ~200 m s -1 for domain expansion (Fig. reaches values in excess of 3 × 10 -10 m 3 A -1 s -1 for J x = 5 × 10 7 A cm -2 , which is comparable to that observed in compensated metallic ferrimagnets The linear increase of v DW with J x for expanding and contracting walls (Fig. In agreement with the presence of DMI inferred from the DW magnetization profile, we observe a slightly larger v DW when the DW moves against the direction of the current (red symbols in Fig. Our results demonstrate fast current-driven DW motion in a magnetic insulator and provide first insight into the internal DW structure of thin garnet layers. The chiral Néel structure of the DWs in TmIG reveals that oxide interfaces support a finite DMI even in the absence of heavy metal layers, which makes it possible, in principle, to stabilize nontrivial topological configurations in insulating magnetic thin films, such as spin spirals and skyrmions. The low current threshold for DW flow and the large DW mobility, combined with the possibility of defining DW racetracks embedded in a continuous magnetic medium, make TmIG extremely attractive for spintronic applications. Local control of the magnetization is unique to magnetic insulators, which opens the possibility of printing arbitrary circuit paths enabling, for instance, the implementation and in situ reconfiguration of synthetic magnetic structures with tailored magnonic bands Films growth and devices fabrication. The TmIG thin films were grown by pulsed laser deposition on (111)-oriented Gd 3 Sc 2 Ga 3 O 12 substrates (lattice constant a = 12.56 Å) to achieve high tensile strain (~2%), which promotes perpendicular magnetic anisotropy or less when doubling the pulse length, which we attribute to Joule heating-indicating that the DW motion coincides with the pulse duration (see Fig. Scanning NV magnetometry. Spatially resolved scans of the magnetic stray field produced by a DW in TmIG (see Fig. The NSDM employed a monolithic diamond probe tip with a single NV center implanted at the apex (QZabre LLC, www.qzabre.com). The NV center spin resonance was monitored by optically-detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) spectroscopy (36)(46) using a nearby microwave antenna (~2.9 GHz) for spin excitation and fluorescence microscopy (532 nm excitation, 630-800 nm detection) for spin state readout. To convert the spin resonance frequencies to units of magnetic field, we fitted the ODMR spectrum to a double Lorentzian and extracted the frequency difference Δf between the resonance peaks. The detected field B NV is then given by |B NV | = π Δf , where γ = 2π ⋅ 28.0 GHz/T is the electron gyromagnetic ratio. To re-establish the relative sign of B NV , we inverted (B NV → -B NV ) the image on one side of the DW (Fig. because the NV center is sensitive only to fields that are parallel to its symmetry axis e → NV . Here, B → is the vector field at the position of the NV center, and θ NV and φ NV are the polar and azimuth angles of e → NV in the laboratory frame (see Fig. We investigated the magnetization, spin structure and width of the DW by analyzing the local field image B NV (X, Y) shown in Fig. By assuming that the magnetization is predominantly out-of-plane, we further reconstructed a magnetization map M z from the magnetic field map B NV by using where W is a low-pass filter (cutoff λ = d) that suppressed high spatial frequencies in the image The resultant magnetization map is plotted in Fig. where θ and φ denote the polar and azimuthal angle of the normalized magnetization vector m = M/M s (x, y, z) collinear to the applied field H (see Fig. (H x + H DMI ), whereis the gyromagnetic ratio, ħ the reduced Planck constant, μ 0 the vacuum permeability, θ SH the effective spin Hall angle of Pt, and H DMI