The present paper extends the thermodynamic dislocation theory initiated by The novel approach initiated by Langer et al. The LBL-theory and the above extensions can be used to describe the deformations of crystals whose dislocations are neutral in that their resultant Burgers vector vanishes. Ashby The above TDT and its extensions have been proposed for small deformations. However, most of the experimental results were performed at finite plastic deformations. For logical consistency and comparison with experiments, the finite deformation TDT has to be developed. The aim of this paper is to provide the TDT for finite and non-uniform plastic deformations. By including its two missing quantities, configurational entropy (or its dual, configurational temperature) and density of redundant dislocations, as state variables in the constitutive equations, we obtain the synthesis of CDT and LBL-theory, which is a truly dynamic theory that applies to any non-uniform finite plastic deformations. We call it finite deformation thermodynamic dislocation theory. The latter is reduced to the previously proposed version of TDT if the total and plastic deformations are small. It is also consistent with the second law of thermodynamics. As an illustrative example, the problem of finite strain constrained shear of single crystal deforming in single slip is considered within the proposed theory. It will be shown that, for the specimens of macroscopic sizes, this problem can approximately be solved if the excess dislocations are neglected. The simulated stress-strain curves show temperature, velocity and orientation sensitivity. The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 the finite deformation kinematics of TDT is laid down. Section 3 proposes the thermodynamic framework for this nonlinear TDT. In Section 4 the problem of finite strain constrained shear is analyzed. Section 5 presents the numerical solution of this problem and discusses the stress-strain curves and their sensitivity on temperature, strain rate, and orientation of slip system. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper. For simplicity, we restrict ourselves to the plane strain deformations of a single crystal slab of thickness L having only one active slip system. We choose a fixed rectangular cartesian coordinate system associated with this slab such that the displacements u 1 and u 2 depend only on x 1 and x 2 , but not on x 3 , while the displacement u 3 = 0. The position vector of the same material point (x 1 , x 2 , x 3 ) in the deformed state is Thus, the deformation gradient is given by where the comma in indices denotes partial differentiation. Kinematical quantities characterizing the observable deformation of this single crystal are the displacement field u(x α , t) and the plastic deformation field F p (x α , t) that is in general incompatible. For single crystals having one active slip system, the plastic deformation is given by with β(x α , t) being the plastic slip, where the pair of constant and mutually orthogonal unit vectors s = (s 1 , s 2 , 0) and m = (m 1 , m 2 , 0) indicates the slip direction and the normal to the slip planes. The edge dislocations causing this plastic slip have dislocation lines parallel to the x 3 -axis and the Burgers vector parallel to s. Thus, there are altogether three degrees of freedom at each point of this generalized continuum. Later on, two additional internal variables will be introduced. In this paper, Greek indices run from 1 to 2, while Latin indices from 1 to 3. Summation over repeated indices within their range is understood. We see immediately from (2) that det F p = 1, so the plastic deformation is volume preserving. We assume that the deformation gradient F is decomposed into elastic and plastic part according to Thus, the elastic deformation field equals The relationship between the three deformation fields is illustrated schematically in Fig. With these deformation fields various measures of strain can be introduced. The relevant measures that will be used in TDT are the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor and the similar elastic deformation tensor Note that both tensors are defined on the reference configuration It turns out that, under the plane strain deformation, the density of excess dislocations can be related to the plastic slip β by the kinematic equation This is based on the fact that the incompatibility tensor, introduced by Nye Since |dB| = b|N + -N -|, the scalar density of excess dislocations is given by (4). This density can be indirectly measured by the high resolution electron backscatter diffraction technique (EBSD) In contrast to the excess dislocations, the other family of dislocations, called by Cottrell To set up phenomenological models of crystals with continuously distributed dislocations using the methods of non-equilibrium thermodynamics of driven system let us begin with the free energy density. As a function of the state, the free energy density may depend only on the state variables. Following Kröner The first term in The last term has been introduced by Langer We propose the following stored energy density of neo-Hookean compressible material with I 1 = tr C e , J = det F e = det F, and with λ and μ being the Lame constants (cf. where ε e = 1 2 (u∇ + ∇u -βs ⊗ m -βm ⊗ s) is the small elastic strain tensor and ω e = 1 2 (u∇ -∇u -βs ⊗ m + βm ⊗ s) the small elastic rotation tensor. Expanding function f (J) = 1 2 λ(1 -J) 2 -μ ln J into the Taylor series about J = 1 and keeping in Eq. ( Furthermore, we employ the following formula for the energy of excess dislocations ψ m (ρ g ) This logarithmic energy term stems from two facts: (i) energy of excess dislocations for small dislocation densities must be γ D ρ g like that of redundant dislocations, and (ii) there exists a saturate state of maximum disorder and infinite configurational temperature characterized by the admissibly closest distance between excess dislocations, a. The logarithmic term With this free energy density we can now write down the energy functional of the dislocated crystal. Let the cross section of the undeformed single crystal occupy the region A of the (x 1 , x 2 )-plane. The boundary of this region, ∂A, is assumed to be the closure of union of two non-intersecting curves, ∂ k and ∂ s . Let the displacement vector u ( x, t) be a given smooth function of coordinates (clamped boundary), and, consequently, the plastic slip β(x, t) vanishes The remaining part ∂ s of the boundary is assumed to be traction-free. If no body force acts on this crystal, then its energy functional per unit depth is defined as with da = dx 1 dx 2 denoting the area element. Under the increasing load the resolved shear stress also increases, and when it reaches the Taylor stress, dislocations dipoles dissolve and begin to move until they are trapped again by dislocations of opposite sign. During this motion dislocations always experience the resistance causing the energy dissipation. The increase of dislocation density as well as the increase of configurational temperature also lead to the energy dissipation. Neglecting the dissipation due to internal viscosity associated with the strain rate, we propose the dissipation potential in the form where τ Y is the flow stress during the plastic yielding, d ρ and d χ are still unknown functions, to be determined later. The first term in (8) is the plastic power which is assumed to be homogeneous function of first order with respect to the plastic slip rate Since the dislocation mediated plastic flow is the irreversible process, we derive the governing equations from the following variational principle: the true displacement field ǔ(x, t), the true plastic slips β(x, t), the true density of redundant dislocations ρr (x, t), and the true configurational temperature χ(x, t) obey the variational equation for all variations of admissible fields u(x, t), β(x, t), ρ r (x, t), and χ(x, t) satisfying the constraints Varying the energy functional with respect to u we obtain the quasi-static equations of equilibrium of macro-forces which are subjected to the boundary conditions Taking the variation of I with respect to three other quantities β, ρ r , and χ and requiring that Eq. ( with e D = γ D L. Here, is the resolved shear stress (Schmid stress), while is the back stress. The first equation of ( Le if we choose where t 0 is the characteristic microscopic time scale. In these equations the steady-state configurational temperature is denote by χ 0 , while the steadystate dislocation density equals Finally, ν(θ, ρ, q 0 ) is defined as follows Note that, for ρ changing between 0 and ρ ss < 1/a 2 , both numerators on the right-hand sides of ( Based on the Orowan's equation β = bρv and the assumption that dislocations spend most of time in the pinned state, the plastic slip rate must be determined by the kinetics of thermally activated dislocation depinning where In Eq. ( Eqs. ( with 0 being the initial mass density. For uniform deformations the theory is considerably simplified. Indeed, since ρ g = 0, the back stress τ B vanishes, and Eq. ( 4. Finite strain constrained shear As an application of the proposed theory let us consider the single crystal layer having a rectangular cross-section of width w and height h, 0 ≤ x ≤ w, 0 ≤ y ≤ h and undergoing a finite plane strain constrained shear deformation (see Fig. where u 1 (y, t) and u 2 (y, t) are the longitudinal and transverse displacements, respectively, with γ(t) being the overall shear regarded as a control parameter. We assume the shear rate γ = q 0 /t 0 to be constant. If γ is small, the layer deforms elastically. However, when γ becomes sufficiently large, dislocations will be depinned initiating the plastic flow. We admit only one active slip system, with the slip directions inclined at an angle φ to the x 1axis and the edge dislocations whose lines are parallel to the x 3 -axis. Under these conditions the deformation can be assumed uniform for the specimens of macroscopic sizes. Strictly speaking, the conditions (18) do not allow dislocations to reach the upper and lower boundaries, so these boundaries act as obstacles. This leads to an accumulation of excess dislocations and to nonuniformity of plastic deformation near these boundaries. For macroscopic specimens, however, the percentage of excess dislocations is negligibly low and the assumption of uniformity of plastic deformation is a good approximation everywhere except for the very thin layers near the upper and lower boundaries. We aim at determining the displacements, the dislocation densities, the configuration temperature and the stress-strain curve as a function of γ within the finite deformation thermodynamic dislocation theory summarized in The active slip system inclined at the angle φ to the x 1 -axis has the vectors s = (cos φ, sin φ, 0) and m = (-sin φ, cos φ, 0), therefore the plastic deformation and its inverse are Because the system is undergoing steady-state plane constrained shear with the constant shear rate γ = q 0 /t 0 , we can replace the time t by the total amount of shear γ so that t 0 d/dt → q 0 d/dγ . The equations of motion for this system become With C from In terms of the introduced function Eq. ( It is convenient to rewrite Eqs. Then we present Eq. ( We set μT = (b/a)μ T = μr and assume that r is independent of temperature and strain rate. Then fP (τ, ρ) = exp -1 θ e -τ /(μr √ ρ) . We define q0 = (a/b)q 0 so that q/(q 0 ) = q/q 0 . Function ν becomes ν(θ, ρ, q0 ) ≡ ln 1 θ -ln ln . The dimensionless steady-state quantities are ρss ( χ) = e -1/ χ, χ0 = χ 0 /e D . Using q instead of q as the normalized plastic strain rate means that we are effectively rescaling t 0 by a factor b/a. Since t -1 0 is a microscopic attempt frequency, of the order 10 12 s -1 , we take (a/b)t 0 = 10 -12 s. In terms of the introduced quantities the governing equations read The corresponding equations of the small strain theory are In order to simulate the theoretical stress-strain curves, we need values for five system-specific parameters and two initial conditions from each sample. The five basic parameters are the following: the activation temperature T P , the stress ratio r, the steady-state scaled effective temperature χ0 , and the two dimensionless conversion factors K χ and K ρ . We also need initial values of the scaled dislocation density ρi and the effective disorder temperature χi ; all of which are determined by the sample preparation. The basic parameters for copper are chosen as follows We choose also the initial conditions τ (0) = 0, ρ(0) = 10 -6 , χ(0) = 0.18, β(0) = 0. , and at three shear rates 0.1/s (red), 10/s (blue), and 1000/s (green): (i) finite strain (bold line), (ii) small strain theory (dashed line). We take the shear modulus for copper to be μ = 50000 MPa. The plots of the resolved shear stress τ (γ) as function of γ for copper found by the numerical integration of ( Although the resolved shear stress decreases with the increasing slip angle (for φ < 45 • ), the true shear stress σ 12 increases with the increasing slip angle. To see this, let us first compute the true Cauchy stress σ = J -1 F e • μ(I -C e-1 ) • F eT = μ(F e • F eT -I). With Since σ 11 = μβ sin 2φ, σ 11 = -μβ sin 2φ, according to the small strain theory, it is easy to check that the resolved shear stress τ = s i σ ij m j = μ(γ cos 2φ -β) as expected. Fig. In this paper, we have developed the extension of the LBL-theory to nonuniform finite plastic deformations for single crystals deforming in single slip. For single crystals deforming in multiple slips, the set of state variables must be enlarged to include multiple densities of dislocation populations, each describing different types of dislocations with different orientations, and we will need separate equations of motion for each of these populations. But even in this case, we can assume that the dislocation populations will retain their identity. Consequently, the generalization to a multi-slip version of the present theory for single crystals should not pose fundamentally new problems. The stress-strain curves of finite strain constrained shear deformation show sensitivity to temperature, strain rate and orientation of the slip system. However, this case study serves only as an illustration of the theory. To compare with real experiments, tension/compression and torsion tests should be considered instead. This and another problem of finite deformation with excess dislocations exhibiting kinematic work hardening and Bauschinger and size effects will be discussed in our forthcoming papers.