The underdoped phase diagram of the iron-based superconductors exemplifies the complexity common to many correlated materials. Indeed, multiple ordered states that break different symmetries but display comparable transition temperatures are present. Here, we argue that such a complexity can be understood within a simple unifying framework. This framework, built to respect the symmetries of the non-symmorphic space group of the FeAs/Se layer, consists of primary magnetically-ordered states and their vestigial phases that intertwine spin and orbital degrees of freedom. All vestigial phases have Ising-like and zero wave-vector order parameters, described in terms of composite spin order and exotic orbital-order patterns such as spin-orbital loop-currents, staggered atomic spin-orbit coupling, and emergent Rashba-and Dresselhaus-type spin-orbit interactions. Moreover, they host unusual phenomena, such as the electro-nematic effect, by which electric fields acts as transverse fields to the nematic order parameter, and the ferro-Néel effect, by which a uniform magnetic field induces Néel order. We discuss the experimental implications of our findings to iron-based superconductors and possible extensions to other correlated compounds with similar space groups. The complexity of the phase diagrams of correlated systems often challenges the notion of a unifying, simple framework to describe these fascinating systems. One example is that of the underdoped holedoped cuprates: besides the mysterious pseudogap phenomenon, they display a plethora of ordered phases -incommensurate magnetism, charge order, nematicity, time-reversal symmetry-breaking order, and inversion symmetry-breaking order (for a recent review, see Ref. The phase diagram of underdoped iron-based superconductors seems relatively simpler compared to their copper-based counterparts Analogously to the historical evolution of the "typical" phase diagram of the cuprates, more detailed experiments in the iron-based materials have recently unveiled a much more intricate underdoped phase diagram. In particular, besides stripe magnetism and nematicity, other types of magnetic order were observed to proliferate as optimal doping is approached Formally, M a is the staggered Fe magnetization with mo-arXiv:1902.10831v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 22 Jul 2019 mentum Q a . One can then consider the "mother" order parameter as a hypothetical six-dimensional super-vector T . The symmetries of the square lattice only allow certain combinations of the six components of M to condense, namely, one single-Q state (the stripe magnetic order) and two double-Q states (called spinvortex crystal The single-Q phase breaks tetragonal symmetry and is therefore associated with a vestigial nematic phase. An important question is what types of vestigial orders can be associated with the double-Q magnetic phases. This question was partially addressed in Ref. In this paper, we use group theory to determine the orbital ordering configurations of these vestigial phases, revealing a rich landscape of intertwined spin-orbital coupled phases. More than just an interesting extension of previous results, our work provides a powerful new framework to describe and predict possible ordered phases of underdoped iron-based superconductors, as well as their responses to external electromagnetic and strain fields. The key point is that the description of the magnetic degrees of freedom in terms of the order parameters M 1 and M 2 is inevitably incompatible with a description of the orbital degrees of freedom, due to the crystal symmetry of the FeAs (or FeSe) layer. More specifically, while the magnetic properties alone can be reasonably described in terms of a simplified unit cell containing only one Fe atom, the five 3d Fe-orbitals cannot. The resolution to this conundrum is to note that the presence of a sizable spin-orbit coupling, as observed experimentally in most iron-based superconductors In particular, while M a lives in the artificial one-Fe square lattice unit cell (a = 1, 2), η α lives in the actual crystallographic unit cell of a single layer (α = 1, 2, 3), containing two Fe atoms and two As/Se atoms. Because both wave-vectors Q 1 = (π, 0) and Q 2 = (0, π) of the 1-Fe Brillouin zone map onto the same wave-vector Q M = (π, π) of the 2-Fe Brillouin zone, all η α have the same wave-vector, as seen in Fig. 1. The well-studied Q = 0 nematic phase, whose Ising order parameter transforms as the B 2g irreducible representation of the tetragonal group. This is the vestigial phase of the stripe magnetic state. The corresponding orbital order configuration is a mixture of onsite and bond d xz /d yz ferro-orbital order, as well as d xy bond order. Structurally, this order couples to an acoustic phonon mode, and is thus accompanied by an orthorhombic lattice distortion. Its conjugate field is shear strain along the Fe-Fe bonds. 2. A Q = 0 ordered phase whose Ising order parameter transforms as the B 2u irreducible representation of the tetragonal group. This is the vestigial phase of the charge-spin density-wave state. The corresponding orbital order configuration is a combination of intra-unit-cell staggered charge order on the d xy orbitals and a intra-unit-cell "staggered spin-orbit coupling" ordering involving the d xz /d yz orbitals. This ordered state does not couple to any new atomic displacements, but it does remove the spin-degeneracy of the bands, giving rise to spontaneously generated Dresselhaus-type and Rashbatype spin-orbit terms. For simplicity, we refer to this phase as the charge-ordered state. Its conjugate field is a combination of an electric field perpendicular to the FeAs-layer and shear strain along the Fe-As bonds. 3. A Q = 0 ordered phase whose Ising order parameter transforms as the A 2u irreducible representation of the tetragonal group. This is the vestigial phase of the spin-vortex crystal state. The corresponding orbital order configuration is a mixture of staggered spin-current patterns involving the d xy orbitals and a mirror-symmetry breaking ordering involving the d xz /d yz orbitals. This type of order couples to an optical phonon mode, whose softening however does not lead to any new atomic displacements. Similarly to the B 2u Ising order, it also removes the spin-degeneracy of the bands, triggering the appearance of Dresselhaus-type and Rashbatype spin-orbit terms. For simplicity, we refer to this phase as the spin-current state. Its conjugate field is an electric field perpendicular to the FeAslayer. A summary of the framework derived here, including the primary magnetic states and their vestigial phases is shown in Fig. The same formalism can be used to investigate how the vestigial phases respond to external fields, such as a magnetic field H. In the nematic phase, the field simply induces a finite magnetization, as expected for a standard paramagnet. However, in the charge-ordered and spin-current states, the field H also induces a finite Néel magnetization N, despite the absence of any long-range magnetic order. In the charge-ordered state, N H, resulting in a ferrimagnetic spin configuration, whereas in the spin-current state we find that an in-plane magnetic field induces a canted spin configuration for H x or H ŷ, and a ferrimagnetic configuration if H is applied along the diagonal direction of the 1-Fe unit cell. This effect, which we dub ferro-Néel effect, shows the nontrivial character of these vestigial paramagnetic phases, and can be used to identify these exotic spin-orbit coupled vestigial states. This paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II we discuss how vestigial phases arise in the iron-based systems. We argue that the fundamental degrees of freedom are given by Eq. ( Recent experiments unveiled an unexpected complexity of the phase diagram of underdoped iron-based superconductors, which rivals that of underdoped cuprates. Our goal is to formulate a unifying framework in which the observed magnetic and non-magnetic orders arise from the same basic interactions, thus providing an organizing principle to describe and predict the behavior of underdoped iron-based superconductors without resorting to fine-tuned multi-critical points. The main idea is that all these phases can be described as condensations of simple or composite combinations of the components of the six-dimensional super-vector: Here, M a,μ are the components of the staggered magnetizatons M 1 and M 2 given in Eq. In the absence of a lattice, the elements of M would transform as an irreducible representation (irrep) of the SO(6) group. There is a huge degeneracy of magnetic ground states that give the same amplitude of the supervector M. The vast majority of these states are not realized in the iron-based superconductors. This reflects the important fact that this enlarged SO(6) symmetry is merely a theoretical construct, as the existence of the lattice immediately constrains the possible combinations of the elements of M to those that obey the crystal lattice symmetries. We stress that the magnetic order parameters are not SO T and identifying the appropriate order parameters as the three-dimensional vectors M 1 and M 2 , instead of M. The resulting free energy, which can be constructed by imposing that its elements transform trivially under the group symmetry operations, becomes: Clearly, while the first two terms only depend on the amplitude of the super-vector M, the last two terms explicitly break SO( Although the magnetic properties of these systems are decently described within the approximation of a single-Fe square lattice, the symmetries of the actual FeAs/Se layer are different than those of the simple square lattice. Most notably, there is a glide plane symmetry originating from the puckering of the As/Se atoms above and below the Fe plane. The immediate consequence of including the As/Se atoms is that the unit cell doubles and rotates by 45 • (see Fig. In this case, the six elements of M cannot be organized in the two three-dimensional vectors M 1 and M 2 . Due to the doubling and 45 • rotation of the Fe-square unit cell, the two wave-vectors Q 1 = (π, 0) and Q 2 = (0, π) are folded onto the same wave-vector Q M = (π, π) (see Fig. The field theory for the magnetic degrees of freedom should thus be expressed in terms of the two-component vectors η α , rather than the three-component vectors M a . Imposing that the free-energy expansion transforms trivially under the operations of the space group P 4/nmm, we find: (5) Here, α, β = 1, 2, 3 and τ j are Pauli matrices that live in the two-dimensional "internal" space of η α . Symmetry constrains a number of the coefficients, e.g. u 13 + g 13 = -w 13 and u 23 + g 23 = -w 23 . Note that the quadratic term was previously obtained in Refs. 41 and 63. Moreover, the w αβ -coefficients play no role at the magnetic transition The six different ground states of Eq. ( The vestigial orders in terms of the M a order parameters were previously discussed elsewhere by one of us A vestigial order parameter is a composite order parameter that can order even in the absence of the primary order, and that breaks a subset of the symmetries broken by the primary order parameter (for a review, see Ref. 7). Vestigial order can only appear if the primary order parameter transforms as a multi-dimensional irrep, i.e. if the group is non-Abelian. In our case, we thus search for bilinear combinations φ j α of the primary order parameters η α that do not transform trivially under the operations of the space group P 4/nmm: Here, μ, ν = 1, 2 denote the two components of the vector η α and Λ j μν is a 2 × 2 matrix. Since the three η α belong to different irreps, and long-range magnetic order develops only within a single irrep channel, we consider only the composite order parameters associated with each irrep separately. This is in agreement with previous RG calculations of Eq. ( The 2 × 2 matrices Λ j μν can be generally expressed in terms of Pauli matrices τ . Their explicit expressions are obtained by the decomposition of the products of irreps E M i The fact that both inversion-even (g) and inversion-odd (u) one-dimensional irreps appear is because the two components of the two-dimensional irreps transform oppositely under the glide-plane symmetry. Note that, because 2Q M = (2π, 2π), the irreps on the right-hand side are those of the P 4/nmm space group at the Γ ≡ (0, 0) point of the crystallographic Brillouin zone, which is equivalent to the familiar point group D 4h . Among those, it is not possible to form non-zero bilinears involving η α that transform as B 1u and A 1u . Consequently, for each α, there are only two possible composite order parameters that transform non-trivially under D 4h (i.e. that do not transform as A 1g ), namely: In terms of the original order parameters M a , we have: All these composite order parameters have zero wavevector, and thus correspond to intra-unit cell order. In particular, φ z 1 , φ z 2 , and φ z 3 transform as the B 2g irrep of D 4h ; φ x 1 and φ x 2 transform as A 2u ; and φ x 3 transform as B 2u . Because order parameters that break the same symmetry must necessarily couple bilinearly in the free energy expansion, they must either be all zero or all non-zero at the same time. Therefore, we identify three distinct vestigial phases, represented by the order parameters: All of them are Ising-like, zero wave-vector order parameters; the subscript just indicates how they transform under the D 4h group. In the next section, we will see that they correspond to nematic order, spincurrent order, and checkerboard charge order, respectively. Interestingly, the existence of three inter-related spin-driven Ising-nematic order parameters, φ z 1 , φ z 2 , and φ z 2 have been recently reported in an NMR study of a detwinned 122 iron pnictide Having established the vestigial order parameters, we now discuss the actual vestigial phases. Formally, a vestigial phase is that in which the symmetry-breaking composite order parameter is non-zero, but the primary order parameter vanishes: Clearly, if η α = 0, it follows necessarily that at least one of the composite orders is non-zero, η α τ (x,z) η α = 0. The non-trivial aspect of the condition above arises from the fact that the composite order can be finite even if the primary order is not. Note also that η α τ y η α is identically zero, as τ y is antisymmetric, and that the nonsymmetry breaking composite combination η α τ 0 η α is always non-zero, as it transforms as the trivial A 1g irrep of D 4h . Physically, the latter corresponds simply to magnetic amplitude fluctuations. To determine whether and when condition Our analysis so far has focused exclusively on the spin degrees of freedom. However, orbital degrees of freedom are essential to describe the properties of the vestigial phases, particularly since it is the very existence of a spin-orbit coupling that changes the form of the magnetic free-energy from Eq. (4) to Eq. ( To proceed, we must first define what we mean by orbital degrees of freedom, since the five 3d Fe orbitals are generally hybridized throughout the Brillouin zone, and are thus not generically good quantum numbers. However, if we focus on the low-energy states near the Fermi level, we can restrict our analysis to the orbitals that give the dominant spectral weight, namely, the d xz , d yz , and d xy orbitals. Moreover, because the Fermi pockets are typically small, we can focus on the states close to the high-symmetry points of the crystallographic Brillouin zone, i.e. the Γ = (0, 0) and M = (π, π) points. Fortunately, at these high-symmetry points, we can define pure orbital states. Thus, we can label the Bloch states near the Fermi level by their orbital content, following the procedure outlined in Ref. in terms of the xz and yz orbital operators. Here, s denotes the spin quantum number. We use K/X to denote a momentum in the crystallographic Brillouin zone/unit cell, while k/x corresponds to the 1-Fe Brillouin zone/unit cell (see Fig. While the two elements of Ψ M+,σ transform as the "upper" elements of the E M 1 and E M 3 irreducible representations, the two elements of Ψ M-,σ transform as the "lower" elements of E M 1 and E M 3 We start with the case of the Φ B2g vestigial order, which is the vestigial phase associated with the E M1 , E M2 , and E M3 single-Q stripe magnetic phase, as discussed in Sec. II. There are three different types of orbital order parameters that appear concomitantly with the condensation of Φ B2g (see Ref. ∆ Note that we have omitted the momentum summations for convenience. The first two terms can be expressed as combinations of onsite ferro-orbital order and bondorbital order involving the d xz and d yz orbitals, whereas the third term corresponds to bond orbital order involving the d xy orbital. The breaking of tetragonal symmetry warrants identifying this vestigial phase as a nematic phase. We emphasize that this orbital pattern is rather different than a uniform occupation of the d xz and d yz orbitals, as it has previously been pointed out theoretically in The real-space orbital order patterns are illustrated in Figs. Let us now consider the vestigial phase with Φ A2u order parameter, which is associated with the E M1 , E M2 double-Q spin-vortex crystal phase discussed in Sec. II. There are two momentum-independent fermionic bilin- (2) The first term corresponds to an intra-unit cell staggered deformation of the bonds connecting next-nearestneighbor Fe atoms, and as such renders the positions of the As/Se atoms above and below the Fe plane inequivalent ) Recall that k x and k y refer to momenta in the 1-Fe Brillouin zone and σ x and σ y refer to spins along the Fe-Fe bonds. All four allowed linear-in-momentum terms are shown explicitly in Appendix B. In Figs. Finally, we analyze the orbital order patterns associated with the vestigial order with Φ B2u order parameter, which is related to the E M3 double-Q chargespin density-wave phase. There are two momentum-independent fermionic bilinears transforming as B 2u : (2) The first term corresponds to an occupation imbalance of the d xy orbital on neighboring sites, as illustrated in Fig. Appendix B shows additional spin-dependent terms are discussed. As with the case of A 2u vestigial order, electronic states near the Γ point are affected by terms linear in momentum. As explained above, these terms resemble the Rashba-and Dresselhaus-type spin-orbit couplings commonly found in systems that break inversion symmetry. In our case however, the multi-orbital structure allows for multiple inequivalent terms: (5) All the induced spin-orbit terms are listed in Appendix B. The reconstruction of the electronic dispersion in the vestigial phase that displays B 2u order is shown in Figs. The symmetry classification above reveals the existence of three different types of vestigial phases associated with the magnetic ground states of the iron pnictides, which trigger unique orbital order patterns. All these vestigial order parameters are Ising-like (i.e. scalar) that have zero in-plane wave-vector. As such, they transform as different irreducible representations of the P 4/nmm group at the Γ point, which coincide with the irreps of the D 4h space group. In particular, we found a vestigial nematic B 2g phase, a vestigial spin-current A 2u phase, and a vestigial charge-ordered B 2u phase. In this section, we discuss different experimental manifestations of these vestigial orders based on their coupling to nonelectronic degrees of freedom, such as the lattice, as well as to external electromagnetic fields. A. Coupling to the lattice In the long wavelength limit, the elastic degrees of freedom are described in terms of derivatives of the displacement vector U. For a tetragonal lattice, there are six independent strain modes. Two of them transform as A 1g and do not change the symmetry of the lattice (e.g. volume collapse); two of them involve out-of-plane shear distortions and transform as E g ; and another two involve only in-plane lattice distortions and transform as B 1g and B 2g . These last two correspond to the strain fields respectively. Note that U(X) is defined in the crystallographic unit cell. A simple symmetry analysis reveals that the only vestigial order parameter that couples linearly to a symmetrybreaking strain mode is the nematic one, Φ B2g , which couples to the shear mode ε B2g . Such a linear coupling drives a softening of the sound velocity of the acoustic phonon mode that propagates along the Besides the elastic lattice modes, associated with acoustic phonons, the system also has optical phonon modes. Among those, there is an A 2u zone-center optical phonon, with an energy of about Ω A2u ≈ 40 meV, corresponding to an in-phase displacement Z of the Fe and As/Se atoms along the out-of-plane axis We finish this section by noting that the vestigial order parameter Φ B2u does not couple linearly to either acoustic or optical phonon modes. This implies that the onset of charge-ordered vestigial phase is not accompanied by any changes in the atomic positions of the crystal structure. The analysis above reveals that the shear strain ε B2g acts as a conjugate field to the vestigial nematic order parameter Φ B2g . Thus, controlled application of uniaxial strain, for instance via piezoelectric devices, offers a unique route to probe nematicity. This has been routinely employed to study nematicity in the iron pnictides and other systems that display nematic order. An interesting question is whether there are experimentally accessible conjugate fields to the other vestigial order parameters obtained here, Φ A2u and Φ B2u . Interestingly, an electric field applied along the z axis, E z , also transforms as A 2u , and thus behaves as a conjugate field to the spin-current order parameter Φ A2u . Such a field can be experimentally applied in a controlled way via electrostatic gating of thin films. It can also appear in a less controlled way due to the existence of a substrate, as is the case in FeSe grown on SrTiO 3 It is also interesting to note that the order parameters Φ A2u and Φ B2g are not completely unrelated, as they live in the same two-dimensional subspace spanned by the two-component magnetic order parameter η 1 (or η 2 ). This is a direct consequence of the common vestigial nature of both orders, and manifested clearly in Eq. ( As for the vestigial order parameter Φ B2u , we did not identify a simple experimentally accessible quantity that could act as its conjugate field. It is possible, however, to combine two different quantities whose product transforms as B 2u . This is achieved for instance by combining a biaxial strain ε B1g and a perpendicular electric field E z . Since B 1g ⊗ A 2u = B 2u , there is a trilinear coupling between Φ B2u , ε B1g , and E z . Of course, the disadvantage of this trilinear coupling is that E z also induces Φ A2u . The magnetically ordered states discussed in our work, described in terms of the order parameters η α , are associated with the ordering vectors (π, 0) and (0, π) of the Feonly Brillouin zone. Another type of magnetic order that has been observed in certain hole-doped iron pnictides is the well-known Néel order, described by an order parameter N, and associated with the ordering vector (π, π) of the Fe-only Brillouin zone This simple observation motivates us to investigate the coupling between the Néel order parameter N and the vestigial order parameters Φ. To ensure time-reversal invariance, since N is odd under time-reversal whereas Φ is even, this coupling can only take place in the presence of an external magnetic field H. Note that H is a pseudo-vector whose out-of-plane component transforms as A 2g and whose in-plane components transform as E g The situation is different for the vestigial order parameter Φ B2u . The free energy in such a case allows for a trilinear coupling of the form: where λ B2u is a coupling constant. The physical implication of this term is clear: in the vestigial charge-orderd phase, where Φ B2u = 0, application of a uniform magnetic field induces Néel order polarized parallel to the field direction. Because H inevitably induces ferromagnetic order, the resulting magnetic configuration is ferrimagnetic, as illustrated in Fig. A trilinear coupling is also allowed in the case of the vestigial order parameter Φ A2u , although its form is different than that of Eq. ( where λ A2u denotes a coupling constant. Here, the subscripts x, y refer to the 1-Fe unit cell, i.e. they are parallel to the Fe-Fe nearest-neighbor directions. In the spincurrent phase, where Φ A2u = 0, the polarization of the Néel order induced by the external field depends crucially on its direction. An out-of-plane field, for instance, does not induce any Néel order, as illustrated in Fig. where the ± sign depends on the sign of the coupling constant λ A2u . Clearly, for θ H = ± π 4 , corresponding to a field applied along the (anti)diagonal, there is no canting and the induced order is ferrimagnetic, similarly to the case with Φ B2u order. We dub the rather unusual effect described by Eqs. ( The situation changes qualitatively in the case of the 122 compounds (e.g. BaFe 2 As 2 ), where the layers are stacked in a staggered pattern. In this case, the appropriate space group is not the non-symmorphic P 4/nmm group but instead the symmorphic I4/mmm. While a full group-theoretical analysis is beyond the scope of this work, we can still determine the main qualitative changes in our results in this case. This can be accomplished by starting from the artificial 1-Fe Brillouin zone and noting that the main difference between the compounds with P 4/nmm and I4/mmm space groups is on the zcomponent of the momentum vector P fold responsible for folding the larger 1-Fe Brillouin zone onto the crystallographic 2-Fe Brillouin zone Because the vestigial nematic order parameter Φ B2g has ordering vector q = (0, 0, 0) in the 1-Fe Brillouin zone, it remains a zero wave-vector order in the 2-Fe Brillouin zone for both types of systems. Thus, in regards to the nematic phase, the results are the same for both P 4/nmm and I4/mmm compounds. On the other hand, the 1-Fe Brillouin zone ordering vector of the two other vestigial order parameters Φ A2u and Φ B2u is q = (π, π, 0). This means that, in the 2-Fe (crystallographic) Brillouin zone, the ordering vector is Q = (0, 0, 0) for the P 4/nmm compounds, but Q = (0, 0, π) for the I4/mmm compounds. Consequently, these vestigial orders break translational symmetry by doubling the periodicity along the z direction. While this property provides another experimentally accessible way of detecting these vestigial orders (e.g. via X-ray scattering), it also implies that E z is not a conjugate field for Φ A2u and that A 2u spin-current order is not accompanied by a soft zone-center phonon. The results for the coupling to the Néel order parameter of Sec. IV C remain the same, since the ordering vector of latter in the 1-Fe Brillouin zone is (π, π, 0). We finish this section by emphasizing that the premise of our framework is that the dominant magnetic fluctuations are peaked at (π, 0, π) and (0, π, π) in the 1-Fe Brillouin zone, i.e. they are stripe-like magnetic fluctuations. Although this is the situation in the majority of iron-based materials, this is not the case for all of them. The prime example is the 11 compound FeTe, which displays double-stripe magnetic order, with ordering vector π 2 , π 2 , π in the 1-Fe Brillouin zone In this paper we presented a simple, yet powerful framework that provides a unifying description of the complexity of the underdoped phase diagram of the iron pnictides. Such a framework consists both of primary phases that display long-range magnetic order and of their vestigial phases that intertwine spin and orbital degrees of freedom. A plethora of electronic orders that break different symmetries of the FeAs/Se layer while displaying comparable transition temperatures emerge within this framework, from stripe magnetic order and nematicity to C 4 magnetism, charge order, and loop spincurrent order. Formally, all these states arise from the condensation of the symmetry-allowed simple and composite order parameters formed by the six components of the super-vector M in Eq. ( Whereas previous works focusing on the idealized Feonly square lattice have identified some of these phases, all electronic orders discussed here respect the symmetries of the crystallographic non-symmorphic space group that describes the FeAs/Se layer. These symmetries qualitatively change the nature of the vestigial phases, and the orbital-order patterns that accompany the composite spin orders. Besides the widely investigated Isingnematic order parameter Φ B2g , which transforms as the B 2g irrep of the tetragonal group, two additional Isinglike, zero wave-vector composite order parameters are found, transforming as the A 2u and B 2u irreps (denoted by Φ A2u and Φ B2u ). While Φ B2g is associated with a combination of onsiteand bond-orbital orders involving the d xz , d yz , d xy orbitals, Φ A2u is accompanied by spin-current order involving the d xy orbitals and staggered d xz /d yz orbital hybridization. Similarly, Φ B2u is accompanied by checkerboard charge-order related to the d xy orbitals and staggered d xz /d yz spin-orbit coupling. Moreover, the onset of Φ A2u and Φ B2u also triggers different types of Rashbalike and Dresselhaus-like spin-orbit couplings involving the d xz /d yz orbitals. Importantly, these spin-orbit coupling terms are a consequence of a spontaneous symmetry breaking driven by magnetic fluctuations, rather than an explicit broken symmetry due to e.g. a substrate or an applied electric field. These rather unusual orbital patterns lead to a variety of interesting effects unveiled in our work: the lifting of the spin-degeneracy of the electronic band structure in the vestigial A 2u and B 2u phases; the electro-nematic effect, by which an electric field applied perpendicular to the FeAs/Se layer acts effectively as a transverse field to the nematic order parameter; and the ferro-Néel effect, describing the fact that Néel order is induced by a uniform magnetic field in the vestigial A 2u and B 2u phases, resulting in ferrimagnetic and canted antiferromagnetic spin configurations. The most promising iron-based compounds where these unusual A 2u and B 2u vestigial phases may be realized are those for which the primary C 4 magnetic phases have been observed. Interestingly, not only doping, but also pressure, have been shown to be capable of tuning the magnetic ground state from stripe to C 4 More broadly, the formalism discussed here could also be relevant to other correlated systems that have the same space group as the iron pnictides and display magnetic or nematic orders. One interesting case is that of URu 2 Si 2 , which has the same I4/mmm space group as the 122 pnictides. Nematic order has been suggested below the hidden-order temperature by certain experiments, which may be an instability on its own right or a B 2g vestigial phase A2u . We now turn to the bilinears involving states at the hole pockets, which have the form Ψ † Γ Λ Ψ Γ . As before, we write the vertex as Λ = Λ(s) ⊗ Λ(o) ⊗ Λ(k) . The doublet Ψ Γ , corresponding to d xz and d yz orbitals, transforms as the E g irrep of the P 4/nmm group at Γ. Thus, the momentum-independent bilinears constructed from such fermions will transform as one of the gerade irreps: To construct fermionic bilinears transforming as ungerade irreps it is necessary to consider vertices Λ(s) and Λ(k) that are odd under inversion. Since spin-vertices are even under inversion, the vertices that are odd under inversion must be Λ(k) , which must be odd in momentum. Hence, to preserve time-reversal symmetry, the spin vertices Λ(s) therefore cannot be the identity. We thus construct the allowed vertices by combining (k x , k y ), which transforms as E u , and (σ x , σ y ), which transforms as E g : Combining Eqs. (B4) and (B5) gives: The numerical prefactors denote how many copies of the respective irreps can be constructed. The 4 different A 2u terms result from whereas the 4 different B 2u terms are: In the expressions above, the gerade irreps originate from the bilinear Ψ † Γ Ψ Γ , Eq. (B4), whereas the ungerade irreps come Λ = Λ(s) ⊗ Λ(k) , Eq. (B5). Writing down these combinations explicitly, we have Γ , Ψ M± are defined in the crystallographic Brillouin zone, the orbital operators d xz , d yz , d xy are defined in the 1-Fe Brillouin zone. ss [B 2u ] ∼ k x σ x ss -k y σ y ss . (