We investigate the jamming transition in a quasi-2D granular material composed of regular pentagons or disks subjected to quasistatic uniaxial compression. We report six major findings based on experiments with monodisperse photoelastic particles with static friction coefficient μ ≈ 1. (1) For both pentagons and disks, the onset of rigidity occurs when the average coordination number of non-rattlers, Z nr , reaches 3, and the dependence of Z nr on the packing fraction φ changes again when Z nr reaches 4. ( (5) The jammed pentagons have similar translational order for particle centers but slightly less orientational order for contacting pairs compared to jammed disks. (6) For jammed The jamming transition for a granular material separates fluidlike states with zero yield stress from solid-like states that can support finite stress. The past two decades have seen a significant effort directed toward understanding the jamming transition in model granular systems consisting of spherical particles The pentagon is the regular polygon with smallest number of sides that cannot fill space, so it is often used as a model system for non-spherical particles with a non-smooth boundary We perform experiments on two types of systems. The first consists of about 800 identical regular pentagons and the second of about 900 identical disks. The side length of the pentagons is 9.40 mm while the radius of the disks is 6.35 mm. The inter-particle friction coefficients for pentagons and disks are μ p ≈ 1.23 (face to face) and μ d ≈ 1.07 respectively. Both particle types are prisms of height 6.35 mm. The particles rest on a Plexiglas plate, and the particle-plate static friction coefficient is μ ≈ 0.36 for disks and μ ≈ 0.59 for pentagons. The particles are homemade, using the same method as in The experimental set-up is similar to the one used in In this work, we determine the pressure in the system by measuring G 2 ≡ |∇I| 2 both disks and pentagons under uniaxial compression We also consider the deviations of particle displacements from their expected motions if the compression were to induce only affine distortions of the packing. We measure δ x rms (φ ) ≡ [dx(φ ) 2 ] 1/2 , where dx(φ ) is the x-component (transverse to the compression direction) of the displacement of a given particle during the compression step (φ , φ + δ φ ). The bar indicates an average over all particles. The jamming transition happens when a granular system first supports non-zero stress as the compression proceeds. Fig. Figures We determine the jamming packing fraction by measuring φ at the transition signaled by the change in behavior of the mean contact number of non-rattlers Z nr , where "nonrattlers" are defined here as all particles that have detectable contacts with at least two neighboring particles. The dependence of Z nr on φφ c is plotted in Figs. The existence of φ c1 and φ c2 has been observed in the uniaxial compression of bidisperse disks A striking observation from Figs. 2(c) and 2(f) is that both pentagons and disks show Z nr (φ c1 ) ≈ 3 = d + 1 and Z nr (φ c2 ) ≈ 4 = 2d, where d = 2 is the dimension of the packing. For disks, these two values correspond to saturated bounds on the numbers of constraints required to avoid floppy modes and assure geometric consistency, respectively. For pentagons, however, the situation is more complicated, and it appears that the bounds are not saturated, as suggested by the following arguments. Assume that the forces at each contact do not lie precisely at the Coulomb threshold (i.e., that an infinitesimal increase of the tangential component of contact force will not cause sliding). For frictional disks, Z nr ≥ d + 1 is the condition for the granular system to have no floppy mode The total number of DOFs is 3N, and to eliminate all floppy modes, N c must be greater than or equal to this. Thus the isostatic condition becomes Z nr ≥ 6/(n + 2). At φ c1 , we find the averaged n = 0.31 ± 0.02, where the errorbar is the standard deviation. Therefore the isostatic value of Z nr becomes 6/(n + 2) ≈ 2.6, which is significantly smaller than our observed value near 3. We propose three possible reasons for this mismatch: (1) some contacts are at the Coulomb threshold, as observed in numerical simulations for disks The change in behavior at φ c2 is expected to be associated with the purely geometric constraint that disallows packings with overlapping particles. For rigid disks, the nonoverlapping condition requires Z nr ≤ 2d The collapse of data in Fig. To further characterize the jammed packings, we collect data on spatial correlations of particle positions, bond orientations and the local environments of individual particles at the packing fraction φ c2 . We found that any packing fraction above φ c1 yields similar results. Figure In Fig. where θ k j is the angle of the vector joining the centers of particles j and k with respect to an arbitrary reference direction, ∑ z k j means the sum over all particles j that are in contact with particle k, N is the total number of particles, ∑ bond means the sum over all k j pairs that are in contact and N b is the number of such bonds. We find for pentagons Q l 6,p = 0.64 ± 0.02 and Q g 6,p = 0.11 ± 0.07, and for disks Q l 6,d = 0.72 ± 0.03 and Q g 6,d = 0.24 ± 0.09. The large values of Q l indicate that the centers of nearest neighbors of a particle tend to form hexagons. However, those hexagons tend not to be aligned with each other over larger distances (see Fig. , where β k is the angle between the vector pointing from the center to one of the vertex of kth pentagon and the vertical direction. We note both Q g 5,p and S 5 are close to zero, showing that there is no global pentagonal order for both bond and particle orientations. To study the statistics of local environments we measure the distribution of Voronoi cell area s for both shapes. For a disk, the cell is defined as the associated Voronoi cell obtained from the set of points marking the centers of the disks. For the pentagon packing, we generalize the concept of Voronoi tesselation using the the definition detailed in where the three fitting parameters are s0 = -1.94 ± 0.01, k = 4.18 ± 0.08 and θ = 0.442 ± 0.005. The same kind of distribution has been reported in other stable granular systems with different φ , including 3D monodisperse spheres The rotational degree of freedom for pentagons gives rise to geometric features in pentagon packings that have no analogue in disk packings. For example, a description of the contact between two particles requires specification of an angle α defined as the smaller angle between the pentagon edges (see the insert in Fig. We studied the jamming transition induced by quasi-static uniaxial compression of monodisperse granular systems consisting of regular pentagons or disks with static friction coefficient μ ≈ 1. We focused on two types of measurements: the evolution of state variables through the jamming process and the geometric structure of the jammed packings. The differences between the two particle shapes provide a means of identifying the properties of frictional granular materials that may be generic, along with those that are special to disks. The quasi-static evolution of pressure, contact numbers, and non-affine displacement per step during uniaxial compression are qualitatively the same for pentagons and disks, despite the fact that the mean packing fractions φ c1 , above which the system jams, and φ c2 , above which the particles hardly ever rearrange, are 1% smaller for pentagons. We note two important findings: (i) We found Z nr (φ c1 ) ≈ 3 and Z nr (φ c2 ) ≈ 4 for both pentagons and disks. For disks, those two values are the lower (isostatic) and upper (non-overlapping) bounds of Z nr for jammed packings. For pentagons, however, the values of Z nr do not match predicted bounds based on a simple constraint counting argument. (ii) We found that all Z nr data collapse naturally when plotted against f nr for different initial configurations without any rescaling and the collapsed curves for both shapes are similar, consistent with the observation in The geometric structures of the jammed packings of pentagons and disks were compared in detail, leading to three major observations: (i) The pair correlation functions for both shapes show the same characteristic decay length for the peak heights, indicating similar degrees of translational order. (ii) The 6-fold bond orientational order is smaller for jammed pentagons both locally and globally, consistent with recent numerical observations The jammed pentagon packings have structural features with no analogue in disk packings, including the distributions of fv contact angles, PDF(α), and of the sizes of the ff clusters, PDF(L). PDF(α) is constant and PDF(L) shows a power-law distribution. The wide distribution PDF(α) reflects a complicated local packing structure, which tends to reduce the bond orientational order for pentagons as compared to disks. The rapid decay of PDF(L) indicates that ff clusters are usually very small and do not percolate, consistent with recent numerical simulations The pentagonal particles used for this work have features, such as vertex-to-face or face-to-face contacts and complex geometrical packing constraints, that may be expected to occur in packings of real sands or rocks. The similarity of the results to those for frictional disks suggests that lessons learned from the simpler model systems are indeed useful conceptual guides to the analysis of real systems of grains with aspect ratios near unity. This work is dedicated to Bob Behringer, whom we are deeply indebted to and will forever miss. Though the paper was written after his passing, his role in supporting and mentoring this research justifies including him as a coauthor. Discussions with Yuchen Zhao, Émilien Azéma, Dong Wang, Ryan Kozlowski and Aghil Abed Zadeh are highly appreciated. 