Direct laser writing of surface waveguides with ultrashort pulses is a crucial achievement towards all-laser manufacturing of photonic integrated circuits sensitive to their environment. In this Letter, few-cycle laser pulses (with a sub-10 fs duration) are used to produce subsurface waveguides in a non-doped, non-coated fused silica substrate. The fabrication technique relies on laser-induced microdensification below the threshold for nanopore formation. The optical losses of the fabricated waveguides are governed by the optical properties of the superstrate. We have measured losses ranging from less than 0.1 dB/mm (air superstrate) up to 2.8 dB/mm when immersion oil is applied on top of the waveguide. Among the several fabrication techniques that may be used to produce waveguides in glass substrates The experimental setup is depicted in Fig. In Fig. In order to examine the ability of the microstructures to guide light at optical frequencies, the fundamental mode of a CW He-Ne beam (λ = 633 nm) was focused onto the entrance facet of the laser-induced microstructures with a microscope objective (numerical aperture 0.42). A second microscope objective (Olympus MPlan, 100x, numerical aperture 0.9) used in combination with a tube lens (focal length of 200 mm) formed a 111-fold magnified image of the end facet on a camera sensor. Figure The influence of the input polarization was examined by placing the waveguide between a polarizer and an analyzer. The transmission of the waveguide was measured as a function of the relative angle between the polarizer and the analyzer [see Fig. A first order exponential fit of the experimental data indicates that the superstrate-induced leakage is as strong as 2.83 +0.48 -0.66 dB mm -1 . The uncertainties were obtained from fits of the lower and upper bounds of the experimental values. In the so-called ray-optic approach of guided mode theory The large attenuation coefficient deduced from the numerical fit indicates that the optical structures are sensitive to the refractive index of their environment and can thus be employed as refractive index sensors, with significant potential for lab-on-chip applications. These waveguides may for instance constitute the sensitive part of optical biosensors microsystems that are used for label-free bio-sensing In this Letter we have presented a method to inscribe waveguides directly on the surface of a pure fused silica substrate. For the results presented here, few-cycle pulses from a high repetition rate non-collinear optical parametric amplifier have been utilized. The extent to which longer pulses can be utilized will be the subject of future investigations. We note that stretching the pulse by linear dispersion is not a viable option. The highly structured ultra broadband spectrum quickly leads to a multi-pulse structure in the time domain, which could potentially change the dynamics of the ionization process. We also note that new trends in non-linear pulse compression have the potential to bring few-cycle pulse capabilities to lasers typically used in laser material processing The results presented in this Letter represent the first demonstration of waveguides that are directly photoinduced on the surface of fused silica without the need for pre-(e.g. deposition of a photosentive material or applicaton of a cover slip) or post-processing of the target substrate. The optical structures produced correspond to type 1 modifications, support waveguiding at optical frequencies, possesses polarization-maintaining properties and exhibit a core refractive index change of ∆n ≈ +0.006 on average. AFM measurements and Micro-Raman investigations indicate that laser-induced microcompaction is at the origin of the observed refractive index change. The waveguides are sensitive to their environment, extending the capability of the direct laser write method to the rapid prototyping of compact optical non-Hermitian microsystems taking advantage of all the well-known benefits (small size and weight, low power consumption, improved reliability and vibration sensitivity 