CdTe is one of the leading materials for low cost, high efficiency thin-film solar cells, because it has a high absorption coefficient and a nearly ideal band gap of 1.48 eV for solar cell according to the Shockley-Queisser limit. However, its solar to electricity power conversion efficiency (PCE) is hindered by the relatively low open circuit voltage (VOC) due to intrinsic defect related issues. Here, we propose the strategy of improving CdTe solar cell performance by reducing the "ideal" band gap of CdTe to gain more short-circuit current from long-wavelength absorption without sacrificing much VOC. Alloying CdTe with CdSe seems to be the most appropriate approach to reduce the band gap because of the large optical bowing and relatively small lattice mismatch in this system, even though CdSe has larger band gap than CdTe. Using the first principle hybrid functional calculation, we find that the minimum band gap of the CdTe1-xSex alloy can be reduced from 1.48 eV at x=0 to 1.39 eV at x=0.32. We also show that the formation of the alloy can improve the defect property, for example, ptype doping of CdTe by CuCd can be greatly enhanced by the alloying effects. CdTe is one of the leading material for low-cost, high-efficient, thin film solar cells due to its good optoelectronic property and the easy way to fabricate The current PCE in the world-record solar cell is mainly limited by the small opencircuit voltage (VOC), which is about 0.85 V compared to its band gap of 1.48 V at room temperature, as well as the relatively low short-circuit current (JSC), which reaches about 28 mA/cm 2 compared to JSC = 30 mA/cm 2 under the Shockley-Queisser limit For example, if the band gap is reduced from 1.48 eV to 1.35 eV, the ideal JSC is increased from 30 mA/cm 2 to ~36 mA/cm 2 . Because VOC of the current champion CdTe solar cell is still much lower than the band gap Band gap tuning through alloying is widely used in semiconductors. Alloying CdTe at cation site could hardly achieve the reduction of the band gap, because the band gap always becomes wider when Cd is substituted by isovalent Zn In this work, using the first principle hybrid-functional calculations, we find that the minimum of the band gap of the CdSexTe1-x alloy can approach 1.39 eV at about x= 0.32. Our investigation of the doping property of the alloy reveals that the formation of the impurity CuCd exhibits dramatic bowing effect on the impurity formation energy, which can be utilized to improve the PCE. The obtained band structure and the defect properties of the CdSexTe1-x alloy suggest that CdSexTe1-x alloy should be a better solar cell absorber than CdTe for the thin film solar cell application. The first principle calculation in this work is performed by the VASP code PAW psuedopotentials with an energy cutoff of 350 eV were employed. PBEsol functional To calculate the band structures and the band offsets, we have employed the hybrid functional The CdSexTe1-x alloy is assumed to be random and is mimicked by the special quasirandom structures (SQS) As described above, we have calculated the respective volume and mixing enthalpy ΔHmix of the random CdSexTe1-x alloys with Se composition x=0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75 and 1 as shown in Figure Considering the limit condition for the effective formation energy, the Eq. ( On the other hand, at low temperature limit (T → 0), only the site with the lowest formation energy at charge q (s ) is occupied under equilibrium condition, so the effective formation energy ΔHeff (α, q, x, 0) is just equal to ΔHf (α, q, s0 q , x). The effective transition energy level εeff (α, 0/q, x, 0), therefore, is the energy difference between ΔHf (α, 0, s0 0 , x) and ΔHf (α, q, s0 q , x). Note that the s0 0 and s0 q may not be at the same site. .625 alloy at the low temperature limit, the high temperature limit and a finite temperature T=600K. The calculated effective formation energies for the defect CuCd at neutral and -1 states in CdSexTe1-x alloys (x=0, 0.25, 0.375, 0.5, 0.75 and 1) at the low temperature limit, the high temperature limit and a finite temperature T=600K are shown in Figure As expected, the effective transition energy level increases as Se concentration increases in the alloy. It is interesting to see in Figure The formation energy of the CuCd 0 defect in the CdSe0.375Te0.625 alloy range from In summary, using first-principles calculations, we show that alloying CdTe with CdSe to form CdSexTe1-x alloys could be an effective approach to increase the PCE of the CdTe based thin film solar cells. The CdSexTe1-x alloy has two merits compared to CdTe: (1) reduced band gap (estimated to be 1.39 eV at x=0.32) to improve longwavelength light harvest, thus improving JSC without significant effect on achievable Voc; (2) lower formation energy of the shallow defect CuCd to improve the p-type conductivity. Experimental tests of our predictions are called for.