We show that the fundamental gaps of quantum dots can be accurately estimated at the computational effort of a standard ground-state calculation supplemented with a non self-consistent step of negligible cost, all performed within density-functional theory at the level of the local-density approximation. In single-electron transport through a semiconductor quantum dot 1 (QD), an electron can pass from one reservoir (the source) to another (the drain) when a voltage is applied. In this process, an electron is first added to and then removed from the dot. Assuming a weakcoupling of the dots to the reservoirs, the addition of an electron requires to overcome the so-called charging energy. Coulomb blockade oscillations arise in the conductance from the sequence of charging and discharging the QD. , where E N is the ground state energy of the QD with N electrons. Thus, the fundamental gap is defined as This quantity is useful in the evaluation of the electronic properties of a QD, especially in the context of applying them in a circuit or in lattices such as QD cellular automata. In Kohn-Sham (KS) density-functional theory (DFT) where ε H,N is the energy of the highest (H) occupied KS level for the system with N electrons -hence the subscript N ; the corresponding orbital may be referred to as the highest occupied "molecular" orbital (HOMO). Note that, throughout this work, we are primarily concerned with non-degenerate levels. By mixing states with different integer electron numbers and, thus, switching from DFT to Ensemble-DFT (EDFT), one finds that the fundamental gap can be expressed in terms of two contributions where is the energy gap between the last occupied and the first unoccupied KS levels. In ε L,N , L refers to the lowest unoccupied "molecular" orbital (LUMO) and N to the fact that this is an eigenvalue of the KS system with N electrons; and is an exchange-correlation (xc) contribution that can be obtained from the xc-potential v XC (r) for ensemble particle densities. Thus, ∆ XC,N is due to the discontinuities of v XC (r) that can occur at integer electron numbers Finally, let us note that Eq. ( Thus, it should be apparent that ∆ XC,N yields in general a non-vanishing contribution. Artificially confined many-electron systems, such as QDs, can exhibit ∆ XC,N of sizable magnitude It is well-known that the issue of getting vanishing ∆ XC,N -when local-density approximation (LDA) or generalized-gradient approximation (GGA) is directly evaluated on the ensemble densities as in Eq. ( For finite systems, it has been shown that the LDA and GGA forms may become useful if they are properly upgraded to EDFT A reason of inaccuracy ascribed to procedures based on LDA and GGA when computing fundamental gaps of atoms, molecules, and their arrays through Eq. ( For the calculation of the fundamental gaps, meta-GGAs (MGGAs) are promising alternatives but still with mixed results Reaching a satisfactory accuracy in the calculation of fundamental gaps usually requires orbital-dependent functionals, e.g., in the form of hybrids. In this case, the generalized rather than the regular KS approach is adopted as a convenient computational procedure, and a part of ∆ XC,N is absorbed in the corresponding generalized KS gap In this work, we show that accurate estimations of the fundamental gap for QDs can be obtained by means of a computationally straightforward procedure, which requires a single set of self-consistent calculations supplied with a non self-consistent calculation of negligible computational burden -all at the LDA level. Our attention was drawn to such a procedure by earlier works Here, our focus is on two-dimensional QDs -for which, we will also analyze the case of x-only approximations extensively. This paper is organized as follows. Theoretical preliminaries illustrating the approach and the necessary com-putational steps are given in Sec. II. Results of the applications are reported in Sec. III. The paper is summarized with an outlook in Sec. IV. In the following, as in the typical calculations reported in the literature for QDs, we work within a spinunrestricted formulation. Furthermore, we focus on electrons which are effectively confined to two-spatial dimensions, which is the case of main interest when considering semiconductor QDs. where d 2 r is the infinitesimal volume in two dimensions, r = (x, y) is the position vector and x and y are the coordinates, n denotes the pair (n ↑ , n ↓ ), n = n ↑ + n ↓ is the total particle density. T KS [n] is the kinetic energy of the Kohn-Sham systems, which is defined as here the Lapalcian takes into account only twodimensional partial derivatives, namely ∇ 2 = ∂ 2 x +∂ 2 y . N σ is the number of electrons with spin σ, and N = N ↑ +N ↓ . E H [n] is the (Hartree) electrostatic interaction energy defined as Finally, EXC[n] is the exchange-correlation energy functional that in practice needs to be approximated. The KS single-particle orbitals are solutions of the equations 45 The KS potential may be decomposed as where and The exact spin-densities can be calculated from the exact KS orbitals, in principle, by summing n jσ (r) = |φ jσ (r)| 2 over the occupied single-particle states, n σ (r) = Nσ j=1 n jσ (r). As mentioned in the introduction, the KS scheme provides us with all the ingredients to compute the fundamental gap either via differences of total energies [as in Eq. ( Ensemble-SDFT allows us to consider a fractional number of electrons, which are realized by mixing pure states with different integer numbers of electrons. The ensemble xc-potential can jump by a well-defined (spindependent) constant, whenever the number of electrons passes through an integer value. This leads to an appealing way to compute the fundamental gap 6 [see Eq. ( To conclude our analysis, however, we do not go into the details of ensemble-SDFT. It is sufficient to recall that through Eq. ( where and For later convenience, we emphasize that the above quantities are well defined also for jσ = Lσ. Writing Eq. ( So far, exchange and correlation were included and treated exactly. Next, we neglect the correlation and restrict ourselves to the exact-exchange-only approximation (EXX). Thus First we notice that E X depends on n implicitly, i.e., through the KS orbitals φ jσ (r) ≡ φ jσ [n](r). Thus, in the case of Eq. ( The EXX potential in the KLI approximation is given by where is the Slater (SL) potential and can be regarded as a correction to the Slater potential. As long as the particle density and the spinpolarization are preserved, the KS potential can be shifted, for each spin channel, by an arbitrary constant and thus the term with j = N σ in Eq. ( Next, we seek to further minimize our numerical efforts. As shown in Appendix A, elementary but tedious algebraic steps allow us to define an approximation to ∆ X,N in terms of the difference of single-particle energies, as follows In Eq. ( The importance of Eq. ( where LDA, for brevity, stands for local-spin-density approximation, and the notation emphasizes that eigenvalues are determined within x-only LDA calculations. Eq. ( It is tempting to extend Eq. ( This equation expressed through the xc-potential [see Eq. (A4)] has been previously suggested in Ref. 43 and -with improved models for the xc-potential In Ref. 43 it is shown that ε Hσ,N+1 can be connected to ε Hσ,N+1 in a perturbative fashion -but we will not explore such corrections in this work. In Refs. 43 and 44 neither electrons in artificial confinements nor the x-only limit were scrutinized. We carry out these analyses on QDs in the next section. In this section, we show that the fundamental gaps of QDs computed up to exchange-only effects by using Eq. ( We model electrons in a semiconductor QD with a two-dimensional harmonic external potential in effective atomic units where ω determines the strength of the confinement, and α defines the elliptical deformation. The harmonic confinement is the standard approximation for electrons in semiconductor QDs. We carry out all our calculations with the OCTOPUS code We select a grid spacing of g = 0.1/ √ ω eff. a.u. The simulation box containing the real-space domain is circular with a radius of R = K/ √ ω, where K = 5.0 eff. a.u. is used for N = 2, 4, 5 and K = {6.0, 6.5, 7.0, 7.5, 8.0, 8.5} eff. a.u. is used for N = {6, 12, 20, 30, 42, 56}, respectively. The self-consistent criteria for the solution of the KS equation is = dr n old (r) -n new (r) /N < 10 -6 . We verified numerically that these parameters are sufficient to get fundamental gaps converged within the fourth significant digit. In Fig. EXX-KLI results for the fundamental gaps computed according to GE,N [Eq. ( Fundamental gaps G∆,N obtained with the exchange-only KLI and LDA approximations, respectively, for elliptic quantum dots [Eq. (25) with α = 1.05] with N = 12 electrons and varying confinement strength ω. The contributions of the Kohn-Sham gap [Eq. ( the values for the gaps given by the aforementioned expressions are relatively close to each other in all cases. We stress that no deviations would be observed if the exact xc-energy functional could be used. These results support in particular the usefulness of Eq. ( Next we compare our EXX-KLI results based on Eq. ( The LDA errors in the fundamental gap are mostly due to the derivative discontinuity. This can be seen in the KS gaps (open boxes in Figs. Finally, we consider the full gaps when including correlations. We consider parabolic QDs by setting α = 1 in Eq. ( We stress that our procedure exploits Eq. ( In this work, we have given evidence that the fundamental gaps of artificially confined systems such as semiconductor quantum dots can be accurately estimated by means of a simple procedure within a minimal computational effort: a regular Kohn-Sham calculation plus a straightforward non-self-consistent (one-shot) evaluation -all carried within the local-density approximation. Specifically, we have considered the case of quantum dots defined by parabolic and elliptical confinements. It would be interesting to explore whether our conclusions can apply also to a larger variety of artificially confined nanoscale systems. Corrections in the form of the gradients of the particle-density may help to preserve accuracy without substantially increasing the numerical effort. But functional forms that explicitly depend only on the particle density and, possibly, gradients thereof, can still fail in the case of periodic systems 1283 (2002).