Using elastic neutron scattering on single crystals of MoTe2 and Mo1-xWxTe2 (x < ∼ 0.01), the temperature dependence of the recently discovered T * d phase, present between the low temperature orthorhombic T d phase and high temperature monoclinic 1T phase, is explored. The T * d phase appears only on warming from T d and is observed in the hysteresis region prior to the 1T transition. This phase consists of four layers in its unit cell, and is constructed by an "AABB" sequence of layer stacking operations rather than the "AB" and "AA" sequences of the 1T and T d phases, respectively. Though the T * d phase emerges without disorder on warming from T d , on cooling from 1T diffuse scattering is observed that suggests a frustrated tendency toward the "AABB" stacking. Many layered materials have structure-property relationships that depend on their layer stacking. For example, the transition metal dichalcogenide MoTe 2 is reported to be a type-II Weyl semimetal in its orthorhombic T d phase (with the non-centrosymmetric P nm2 1 space group) The T d and 1T phases can be constructed from a stacking pattern of "A" and "B" operations, as shown in Fig. We performed elastic neutron scattering as a function of temperature to study the mechanism of the structural phase transition between the 1T and T d phases in MoTe 2 . On warming, the recently discovered T * d phase 1T and (20 3) D2 1T Bragg peaks are observed near L = 2.3 and L = 2.7, respectively; D1 and D2 denote each of the two 1T twins. (Since MT1 could not be warmed fully into 1T in Fig. To verify the predicted AABB stacking structure of T * d , we carried out single-crystal neutron diffraction measurements on the MT1 crystal on CORELLI, and the data are shown in Figures Stringent constraints on possible T * d structures follow from the lack of change in (00L) and (01L) peak intensities between the T d phase at 240 K and the T * d phase at 300 K (as seen from the near-unity intensity ratios in Fig. For a closer look at how the transition proceeds, in Fig. In contrast, on warming the intensities of the T d peaks in Fig. To investigate the boundary between the T d and T * d regions, in Fig. A similar pattern can be seen in the resistance data of Fig. We next discuss how these structural transitions proceed and the kinds of interlayer interactions that may be responsible, beginning from the observation that the onset to T d occurs at a similar temperature whether cooling from the ordered T * d phase, or from the frustrated T * d region accessed on cooling from 1T . Since the onset temperature to T d does not appear to vary substantially with overall stacking disorder, we suggest that short-range rather than long-range interlayer interactions determine the onset temperatures (into 1T or T * d as well as T d ). (Though we use the term "interlayer interactions", we emphasize that these are effective interactions. Whether an interlayer boundary shifts from A→B depends on the free energy, which depends on the surrounding environment, which is specified by the A/B stacking sequence. "Interlayer interactions" represent the dependence of an interlayer boundary's contribution to the free energy on the surrounding stacking, and can be indirect, involving changes to band structure, phonon dispersion, etc.) In contrast, long-range interlayer interactions may govern the gradual decrease in diffuse scattering and increase in Bragg peak intensities on warming into 1T or cooling into T d . What kind of stacking faults causing this diffuse scattering persist on cooling into T d , even when short-range interlayer interactions favor an ordered phase? At twin boundaries, shifts of A→B or B→A (e.g., AAAABBB...→AAABBBB...) would not change the short-range environment, and could only be induced by changes in long-range interlayer interactions. The decrease in diffuse scattering in T d on cooling can be explained by the annihilation of these twin boundaries, either by joining in pairs or by exiting a crystal surface. The lack of change on subsequent warming can be explained by the relaxation of conditions that, on cooling, had driven twin boundaries to annihilate. Previous studies on MoTe 2 should be re-examined in light of the existence of the T * d phase. First, the hysteresis loop in resistivity (first reported in Ref. 