Arrays of Vortex Transitional (VT) memory cells with functional density up to 1 Mbit/cm 2 have been designed, fabricated, and successfully demonstrated. This progress is due to recent advances in design optimization and in superconductor electronics fabrication achieved at MIT Lincoln Laboratory. As a starting point, we developed a demo array of VT cells for the 100-μA/μm 2 MIT LL fabrication process SFQ5ee with 8 niobium layers. The studied two-junction memory cell with a twojunction nondestructive readout occupied 168 μm 2 , resulting in an over 0.5 Mbit/cm 2 functional density. Then, we reduced the cell area down to 99 μm 2 (corresponding to over 0.9 Mbit/cm 2 functional density) by utilizing self-shunted Josephson Junctions (JJs) with critical current density, Jc of 600 μA/μm 2 and eliminating shunt resistors. The fabricated high-Jc memory cells were fully operational and possessed wide Read/Write current margins, quite close to the theoretically predicted values. We discuss approaches to further increasing the integration scale of superconductor memory and logic circuits: a) miniaturization of superconducting transformers by using soft magnetic materials; b) reduction of JJ area by using planar high-Jc junctions similar to variable thickness bridges. ECADES ago, development of superconducting latching logic circuits was considered as a more challenging task than development of Josephson junction memories utilizing the natural ability of superconductors to store data as persistent currents The reported performance of superconductor RAM also matched the expectations set by the speed of light. For instance, This research is based upon work supported by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity, via Air Force Contract FA872105C0002. (Corresponding author: Vasili Semenov.) V. K. Semenov and Yu. A. Polyakov are with the Department of Physics and Astronomy, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794-3800, USA (email: Vasili.Semenov@StonyBrook.edu). a 380-ps RAM access time reported in The latter figure appears to be in a shocking mismatch with extremely high clock frequencies, tens of GHz, reported for complex RSFQ digital circuits, and reaching up to 750 GHz for the simplest ones In addition to the VT-based RAMs, it is appropriate to mention some other, less successful, solutions The first In order to develop large-scale integration of superconductive RAMs, we started with the original VT memory cell and performed its miniaturization and optimization using the modern design tools for the now-available advanced fabrication technologies. These results are presented in Sec. II. In the following sections III and IV, we discuss approaches to further miniaturization of superconductor memory cells in order to achieve very large scale integration (VLSI) of superconductor memory required, e.g., for applications of superconducting processors in high performance computing. We mainly address reduction of the area occupied by superconducting flux transformers and potential use of the planar junction technology for VLSI. The circuit diagram of a generic VT memory cell is shown in Fig. The microphotograph of the fabricated VT1 memory cell is shown in Fig. Design parameters of the VT1 memory cell are given in Table I. In order to reduce the size of two transformers used in the VT cells, we implemented them as coupled (overlapping) microstrips on two adjacent wiring layers. The mutual coupling between the microstrip lines was increased by making perforations (openings) in the ground plane under a large part of their length; see Sec. III. The resultant values of the most important mutual inductances, Mij between pairs of inductors Li and Lj, (Li, Lj) are given in Table The cells in each column of the array are connected galvanically by a bit selection line marked IY in Fig. The IX and IY current patterns required to perform Write and Read operations on a selected VT cell were generated and measured by an automated, multichannel data acquisition setup, Octopus VT2 implementation is based on self-shunted JJs with 600 μA/μm 2 critical current density Fig. To demonstrate low interference between the cells, we ran a more comprehensive, although time consuming, checkerboard test, which is used in semiconductor memory testing to detect bridging faults. The test consists of: a) writing a checkerboard pattern of "1"s and "0"s in the whole array; b) reading the content of all cells; c) writing a complementary checkerboard pattern consisting of "0"s and "1"s; d) reading the content of all cells. This test failed when applied to the whole array. However, it passed through when two particular cells were excluded from the test. The extracted cumulative margins for the checkerboard test are shown in Fig. The achieved functional density of our JJ RAM is about one million cells per cm 2 , and the circuit density is about 4 million JJs per cm 2 . We believe that this functional density exceeds the density of any state-of-the-art superconducting circuits reported up to date. However, the achieved density is still a few orders of magnitude below the density of SRAM and DRAM in CMOS. In the following sections, we discuss our proposals for a) doubling the functional density by incremental improvements of the existing fabrication technology; and b) more radical but still feasible technology developments required for dramatic improvements in functional density of superconductor electronics. Fig. About 25% of the Josephson junction-based memory cell area is occupied by two flux transformers; see Table Since two inductors in the same plane occupy at least twice as much area as vertically stacked inductors, we used vertically stacked microstrip inductors formed by layers M5 and M6 above M4 ground plane in our memory design. For the layer stack description, Nb and interlayer dielectric thicknesses, and other parameters, see The mutual inductance between the stacked M5 and M6 microstrip inductors is shown in Fig. If we want to keep IX and IY currents below 1 mA, the mutual inductance of the transformers should be about 2 pH. According to Fig. It may appear that some reduction in the area of the transformers could be achieved by meandering the inductors. However, this is not possible because meander's turns need to be spaced by some nonzero amount, s. Therefore, the area occupied by a meander [lw + ls(n-1) -sw(n-1) -s 2 (n-1) 2 /n] is always larger than the area lw of a straight-line inductor with the same inductance, where l is the straight-line inductor length and n is the number of turns in the meander. In order to increase the mutual coupling, both flux transformers in the VT cells were implemented as stacked superconductor strips crossing ground plane perforations (holes), as shown schematically in Fig. Similarly, the mutual inductance between two microstrip inductors over the perforation is defined mostly by dimensions of the perforation rather than by the shapes of the inductors, while the coupling coefficient k remains relatively low. Hence, the available design techniques do not allow for a significant downscaling of transformer dimensions. The use of soft magnetic materials is a well-known remedy for a drastic reduction of transformer dimensions in electronics. However, it is also known that magnetic impurities can spoil or even destroy superconductivity. This is why magnetic materials have been avoided in superconductor electronics. Fortunately the prejudice against magnetic materials has been reduced due to very promising investigations of Josephson junctions with barriers made of magnetic metals; see We suggest to use thin-film soft magnetic materials to reduce transformer dimensions, as illustrated in Fig. To operate at very high frequencies expected from superconductor electronics, magnetic films in the suggested transformers need to be nonconductive and possess a low imaginary part μ" of complex magnetic permeability μ = μ'+iμ" in order to have low RF losses in the transformer. At the same time, the real part μ' should be sufficiently high at the frequencies of operation in order to provide for a desired reduction in the transformer size. Preferably, it should also weekly depend on frequency. There are many advanced materials, e.g., conventional ferrites, spinels, hexaferrites, etc., capable of working at up to ~ 100 GHz; see We should note that other areas of superconductor electronics, namely various ac-biased logic circuits, would significantly benefit from the development of compact transformers. For instance, all Reciprocal Quantum Logic (RQL) [4], Quantum Flux Parametron (QFP) The smallest Josephson junctions used in our VT2 cell are about 400 nm in diameter, and all four JJs occupy less than 4% of the memory cell area. Therefore, further miniaturization of the JJs does not seem to provide significant benefits to the memory density. However, the presently utilized Josephson tunnel junctions have two significant drawbacks which may complicate miniaturization of other components and integration with magnetic dielectrics. First of all, AlOx tunnel barriers used degrade above ~ 200 o C. This makes it difficult to apply modern miniaturization technologies to superconductor electronics. For instance, the widely used in CMOS industry damascene processing requires filling of high aspect ratio vias and narrow trenches by chemical vapor deposition of superconducting materials, which usually requires processing temperatures above Fig. Basically, all theories tell that the bridge length, d should be smaller than the coherence length in the bridge material, ξ in order to minimize the dependence of the bridge critical current Ic on d, which in this regime changes as 1/d; and the shorter the bridge the better. The material-depend coherent length in thin films is typically ~ 50 nm. This sets the scale of the required bridge length. Patterning at these dimensions is quite comfortable for the modern tools used in CMOS industry. However, if the required spread (one standard deviation, σ) of Ic is, say, 2%, the 1σ spread in d should be less than 1 nm, which is beyond the current capabilities even of the most expensive CMOS technologies. The other unpleasant limitation is related to the required range of bridge resistances, Rn which should be from ~ 2 Ω to ~ 8 Ω. It comes from the desired IcRn product of ~ 0.8 mV and the typical range of Ic used in digital circuits, from ~ 0.1 mA to ~ 0.4 mA. This range of Ic could only be covered by changing the bridge width, w since the bridge length d is fixed. For the bridge material with sheet resistance, Rs of 10 Ω per square, the required width is from ~ 40 nm to ~ 250 nm. If the width is defined with the same 1σ spread as the one required for d, the resultant spread in Ic would be √2σ ~ 2.8%. These well-known estimates were given again to emphasize that implementation of the bridge-type planar technologies for superconducting VLSI circuits would require fabrication technologies as sophisticated and expensive as used in the very advanced CMOS nodes. About 35 years ago bridges and other weak links lost their competition with sandwich-like tunnel structures mainly because of the above requirements. It would be interesting to see if advantages of the planar devices for VLSI could be realized when a 50-nm patterning scale becomes standard in superconductor electronics. We note, however, that such dimensions are quite usual at a low scale of integration where such techniques as e-beam lithography and focused ion beam etching are practical, and junction parameter spreads are not important. For instance, very small Josephson junctions are mandatory components of nano-SQUIDs; see, for example, V. DISCUSSION One of the goals of this presentation was to demonstrate advantages of the recently developed fabrication technologies The other goal was to assess if superconductor electronics can reach integration scales and functionalities comparable to the modern CMOS circuits, a question posed in By investigating the compact memory cells, we confirmed that miniaturization by linewidth reduction is the best natural remedy against parasitic flux trapping. Not only because Abrikosov vortices cannot be trapped in narrow superconducting traces, but also because effects of a magnetic flux trapped in any of the flux-trapping moats (seen as long dark horizontal rectangles in Fig. It was commonly accepted that the spacing between superconductor wires should be kept sufficiently wide to avoid their parasitic coupling. Indeed, two stripline or microstrip inductors located in the same plane couple mainly through fringing fields between them, and the k nearly exponentially decreases with increasing the spacing between the inductor edges, a so-called edge coupling; see Fig. Of course, numerous, but relatively low, parasitic couplings should be taken into account. The used tandem of InductEx and PSCAN2 perfectly executed this task. The miniaturization procedure was quite labor intensive in comparison with the past practice. This is because the stretching or narrowing of one wire affects values of all other self-and mutual inductances, i.e., the effective inductances are mutually dependent. Therefore, a known recommendation, e.g., in PSCAN2, to adjust just one inductance during circuit optimization cannot be implemented. Instead, it was necessary to run numerous optimization cycles and make a tradeoff between PSCAN2 recommendations and the real set of inductive parameters extracted by InductEx after each optimization cycle. We hope that the proposed transformer miniaturization could be realized if technology integrating soft magnetic dielectrics with high permeability and superconductor electronics will be developed. Miniaturization of Josephson junctions is a challenging task and without the guaranteed success. Many bridge techniques have been tested with disappointing results for large-scale applications. However, bridge junctions firmly keep niche positions due to a set of unique advantages. First of all, the discussed earlier small dimensions. Secondly, being planar devices, they are better suited for vertical integrations with several stacked Josephson junction layers. Bridges could be useful even if they are formed as a narrowing in a superconductor film. For example, superconductive constrictions are used as heaters locally destroying superconductivity of thin films Our interest in Josephson junction memories was inspired in part by a recent burst of interest to programmable magnetic πjunctions and their use in "magnetic" junction memories; see, for example, MJRAM Hence, even if the magnetic JJ and its wiring does not occupy any space, the maximum expected reduction in area of the MJRAM cell with respect to the VT cell is only 30%. We believe that this would not be sufficient to justify implementation of MJRAMs, given all the technological complexities with fabrication of highly uniform programmable MJJs and high magnetic fields required for their initialization and control. Note also that these fields could be incompatible with superconductor logic circuits because of high sensitivity of the latter to magnetic field capable to induce undesirable Abrikosov or Josephson vortices. Nevertheless, we recognize that initial demonstrations may not necessarily illustrate all advantages of a new technology. We did not attempt to implement existing or develop new drivers and decoders for JJ RAM because of a small scale of our effort. We are counting on the known solutions such as presented in Finally, let us note that memory cells could be also made of logic cells and, whereas transformers are highly desirable, they are not mandatory components of JJ-based memory. The key function of the transformers is to "calculate" AND functions of half-selection input data. For instance, in the VT cell, the input data are presented by DC currents IX and IY. In general, these data could arrive within a large, say, 200 ps time interval, which is too long for the RSFQ-like logic circuitry. However, S. Rylov in We have demonstrated JJ-based memory cells and RAM arrays with record functional density of about 1 Mbit/cm 2 and record density of Josephson junctions of 4×10 6 JJ/cm 2 . We searched for new solutions to end the existing skepticism about very large scale integration of superconductor RAMs and other digital circuits. We illustrated that advancing patterning technique to 50 nm along with thin-film transformers using soft magnetic dielectrics would be sufficient to increase the functional density of RAM to 10 Mbit or even to 20 Mbit per square centimeter. Compact transformers with soft magnetic materials operating up to tens of GHz would also be highly beneficial to superconductor logic circuits such, e.g., QFP, AQFP, RQL, and others, which need transformers in their multi-phase ac-biasing networks, in signal invertors, and in logic gates.