Recently, the maximum a posteriori (MAP) probability rule has been proposed as an objective and quantitative method to detect atom columns and even single atoms from high-resolution high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) images. The method combines statistical parameter estimation and model-order selection using a Bayesian framework and has been shown to be especially useful for the analysis of the structure of beam-sensitive nanomaterials. In order to avoid beam damage, images of such materials are usually acquired using a limited incoming electron dose resulting in a low contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR) which makes visual inspection unreliable. This creates a need for an objective and quantitative approach. The present paper describes the methodology of the MAP probability rule, gives its step-by-step derivation and discusses its algorithmic implementation for atom column detection. In addition, simulation results are presented showing that the performance of the MAP probability rule to detect the correct number of atomic columns from HAADF STEM images is superior to that of other model-order selection criteria, including the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC). Moreover, the MAP probability rule is used as a tool to evaluate the relation between STEM image quality measures and atom detectability resulting in the introduction of the so-called integrated CNR (ICNR) as a new image quality measure that better correlates with atom detectability than conventional measures such as signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and CNR. The physical properties of nanomaterials are strongly related to their exact structural and chemical composition. Small changes in the local atomic structure may induce significant changes in their properties Even from a single projection image, 3D atomic models can be obtained In statistical parameter estimation theory, STEM images are considered as data planes from which unknown structure parameters are estimated. For this, a parametric model is needed describing the expectations of the experimental measurements. Quantitative structure information is obtained by fitting the model to the experimental images using a criterion of goodness of fit. For atomic resolution STEM images, the projected atomic columns can be described as Gaussian functions superimposed on a constant background To overcome this problem, an alternative, quantitative method has been proposed in a recent study to determine the number of atomic columns for which there is most evidence in the image data The remainder of this article will be organised as follows. In section 2, the methodology of the MAP probability rule to determine the most probable number of atomic columns from HAADF STEM images is described in detail. This is followed in section 3 by an explanation of how the MAP probability rule can be used to evaluate the connection between measures of image quality and atom detectability. In section 4, the relation of the MAP probability rule to model selection is investigated. Finally, in section 5, conclusions are drawn. Quantitative measurements of the unknown structure parameters, such as atomic column positions and their widths, peak intensities and background, are not directly provided by highresolution STEM images, but can be obtained from these images using statistical parameter estimation theory where ζ is a constant background, ρ n , η n , β x n and β y n are the width, the height and x-and y-coordinates of the nth atomic column described by a Gaussian peak, respectively, and N is the total number of atomic columns. The unknown parameters of the expectation model are represented by the parameter vector: containing M = 4N+1 parameters. In order to extract reliable structure information of nanomaterials from HAADF STEM images using a model such as in Eq. ( The term p(w|N) reflects the evidence that the image data w is generated by N atomic columns. The probability p(N) expresses prior knowledge of the number of atomic columns N in the image, which has been chosen to be a uniform distribution, reflecting no a priori preference for any number of columns. The denominator is a normalization constant, which is independent of the number of columns N, and therefore cancels out when comparing posterior probabilities as a function of N. As such, Eq. (3) reduces to p(N|w) ∝ p(w|N). By making use of so-called marginalisation where the marginalised variables are the parameters θ of the expectation model. The first term in the integral, p(w|θ,N), is the likelihood function which describes the probability of the observed image pixel values w for particular values of the parameters θ of a model with N atomic columns. Therefore, it is an explicit function of the parameters θ. In essence, the likelihood function is a measure of the goodness of fit of the model with the experimental measurements or image pixel values. The other term in the integral, p(θ|N), is the prior density of the parameters θ for a model with N columns. In practice, evaluation of the MAP probability rule can be reduced to calculating the marginal likelihood p(w|N) described by Eq. ( An expression for the likelihood function p(w|θ,N) can be derived by taking into account knowledge about the statistical properties of the errors in the experimental measurements. Since a STEM image of K×L pixels is formed by counting electrons scattered to the detector, the pixel values are inevitably subject to Poisson noise where For simplicity, it can be assumed that σ kl ≈ [w kl ] 1/2 , so that σ kl is independent of the parameters θ. The likelihood function then becomes where is a weighted sum-of-squared-residuals misfit between the data and the parametric model. Different prior density functions p(θ|N) can be constructed reflecting different types of prior knowledge. In this paper, p(θ|N) is expressed as a product of uniform distributions over a predefined range for each parameter θ m : ) where the subscripts max and min refer to a predefined maximum and minimum value, respectively. The choice for this form of prior simplifies the subsequent algebra significantly. More importantly, by using this uniform prior combined with a conservative choice of the predefined parameter ranges, the amount of prior knowledge that is introduced can be kept minimal, thus avoiding biased results due to the incorporation of possibly invalid prior knowledge. Moreover, this form of prior can also be used in a flexible way since the predefined parameter ranges can easily be adapted depending on the available prior knowledge. Finally, it can be shown that by substituting Eq. ( ) in which χ 2 min = χ 2 ( θ), with θ the parameter vector that maximizes the likelihood function described by Eq. ( where the unknown parameter vector can be written as containing M = 3N+2 parameters. For such a model, the posterior probability becomes As another example, for an expectation model given by where the columns are assumed to be Gaussian shaped with equal widths and equal heights, with unknown parameter vector containing M = 2N+3 parameters, the posterior probability becomes Also for models where other shapes of atomic columns are assumed, such as Lorentzian shapes or a mixture of Lorentzian and Gaussian shapes As stated above, the MAP probability rule selects the most probable number of atomic columns by comparing posterior probabilities as a function of N, i.e. for different numbers of Gaussian peaks in the model describing the atomic columns in the image, starting from an initial model containing N 0 peaks up to and including a model containing a value of N max peaks. The parameters θ of the initial model are optimized by minimizing the weighted sum-of-squared-residuals misfit χ 2 (θ), given by Eq. ( To optimize the parameters associated with the other peaks, the estimated parameter values of the previous optimization, in this case of a model with N 0 peaks, are used as starting values. Next, another peak is added, in the same way as described above, in order to obtain the optimal parameter values of a model containing N 0 +2 peaks. This procedure continues until the parameters of a model with N max peaks are optimized. In order to determine the most probable number of atomic columns present in a STEM image, the posterior probability of N = N 0 ,...,N max columns is computed relatively to the posterior probability of N max columns as follows where the denominator is a normalization constant so that the maximum value of p rel (N|w) corresponds to one. The most probable number of atomic columns is then given by the value N that maximizes Eq. Besides detecting atomic columns from HAADF STEM images, the MAP probability rule also offers a way to evaluate the relation between image quality measures and atom detectability. A common HAADF STEM image quality measure is the SNR. In general, one expects that the detectability of the atomic columns in the image will increase with increasing SNR. Note that, as local fluctuations of the background or differences in column thickness or composition can occur, each column can possess a different SNR value. The SNR of a column located at pixel (k,l) can be defined as where λ kl and σ kl denote the expected value of the observed image pixel value w kl at position (x k ,y l ) and its standard deviation, respectively. As w kl is Poisson distributed, σ kl = [λ kl ] 1/2 . When the background in the image can be considered to be constant, Eq. ( where η and ζ denote the height of the atomic column and the background of the image, respectively, for a parametric model based on a superposition of Gaussian peaks, such as in Eqs. ( Note that the definition of CNR in Eq. ( In this section, the MAP probability rule has been used as a tool to compare SNR and CNR in relation with atom detectability. First, SNR is investigated. For this, a set of simulated HAADF STEM images of 12.5 Å by 12.5 Å with a pixel size of 0.25 Å has been simulated of an individual Au atom using MULTEM to which an arbitrary constant background has been added accounting for the contribution of electrons scattered by an amorphous substrate. The remaining simulation parameters are listed in Table As followed from the previous section, CNR is a more intuitive image quality measure than SNR when it comes to detecting atoms from HAADF STEM images. In this section, the relation between the CNR measure and atom detectability is investigated for variations of atom type, incoming electron dose and image pixel size. First, the detection rate of the MAP probability rule for different types of individual atoms as a function of CNR is shown in Fig. where ρ denotes the estimated width of the atomic column. In this work, ICNR values are calculated by expressing ρ in units of pixels. In order to estimate the integrated background under the column, the area under the column has been considered to be a circle with a radius of 3ρ, since 99.46 % of the volume under the Gaussian peak describing the column is contained within this distance. It should be noted that Eq. ( In this section, it is explained how the MAP probability rule is related to the concept of model selection, where one aims to select the best model from a set of candidate models given experimental data. For this, the working principle of model selection is described in detail. Hereby, different model-order selection criteria are introduced in order to compare their performances to detect the correct number of atomic columns from HAADF STEM images to that of the MAP probability rule. The heart of model selection consists of selecting one model from a set of competing models that represents most closely the underlying process that generated the experimental data. For this purpose, a criterion measuring how well the model fits the data is required. Such a criterion of goodness of fit quantifies the descriptive adequacy of a model, which is possible by, for example, a maximum likelihood evaluation. However, a modelselection criterion based solely on goodness of fit automatically selects the model which fits best to the data. This is undesired, since model fit can be easily improved by increased model complexity, referring to the flexibility of a model to fit the observed data. In this way, a model might be selected without necessarily bearing any interpretable relationship with the underlying data-generating process. For this reason, typical model selection methods take into account both the goodness of fit and the complexity of the models under investigation There are at least three important factors that contribute to the complexity of a model Typically, model-selection criteria are written as twice the negative log likelihood, accounting for the goodness of fit, plus a penalty term that accounts for model complexity Different criteria have been proposed in the literature and describe the complexity of the model in a different way, often taking only one dimension of model complexity into account, i.e. the number of parameters with M the number of parameters in the model. A very similar criterion is the Generalized Information Criterion (GIC) where the contribution of the penalty term can be modified by the parameter d: A clear guideline on how to choose the value of d is lacking. Different choices of d = 3 with W the sample size (i.e. the number of datapoints). For a STEM image, W is equal to K×L pixels. As opposed to the AIC and GIC, the penalty term is dependent on the sample size. When W > 8, the BIC accounts more for the complexity of the model than the AIC. An alternative criterion is the Hannan-Quinn Information Criterion (HQC) Thus, a model selection method performs a tradeoff between high goodness of fit and low model complexity. In essence, the MAP probability rule is also a model selection method where the posterior probability of the presence of N atomic columns in the STEM image can be written in general terms as p(N|w) ∝ goodness of fit model complexity when the approximations of the analytical expression of p(N|w) are valid. A more detailed explanation of Eq. ( where the term cst refers to a constant coming from the proportionality of Eq. ( where use is made of the fact that det(cA) = c M det(A) for a scalar c and M×M matrix A. As such, Eq. ( Interestingly, the first two terms of Eq. ( In this section, the performance of the MAP probability rule in detecting atoms from STEM images is compared to the AIC, GIC, BIC and HQC, which were introduced in the previous section. For this, a set of 1000 images of Au atoms has been simulated by MULTEM with dimensions of 12.5 Å by 12.5 Å and a pixel size of 0.25 Å. The remaining simulation parameters are listed in Table As mentioned earlier, Eq. ( implying that the MAP probability rule is asymptotically equivalent with the BIC in Eq. ( As the prior density p(θ|N) is part of how the MAP probability rule determines model complexity, as shown in Eq. ( In the present paper, the methodology of the recently proposed MAP probability rule to detect single atoms from highresolution HAADF STEM images Moreover, it has been shown that the MAP probability rule can be effectively used as a tool to evaluate the relation between STEM image quality measures and atom detectability. This has resulted into the introduction of the ICNR as a new image quality measure that better correlates with atom detectability than conventional measures such as SNR and CNR. Atomic columns resulting from images with ICNR values of less than around 5.0 become challenging to accurately detect as typically the detection rate of 100 % drops rapidly starting from this value. In addition, the relation of the MAP probability rule with model selection has been thoroughly investigated. It has been explained that model-selection criteria are based on a tradeoff between high goodness of fit and low model complexity. Interestingly, the complexity term of the MAP probability rule depends on three dimensions of model complexity, namely the number of parameters, functional form and extension of the parameter space, as opposed to other model-selection criteria, which has been shown to allow for more accurate atom detection from STEM images. Furthermore, the MAP probability rule allows for a clear and flexible incorporation of prior knowledge, which is often not the case for other model-selection methods. Microscope parameter values for simulation of a STEM image of graphene using MULTEM. Microscope parameter values for simulation of a set of HAADF STEM images of 12.5 Å by 12.5 Å using MULTEM.