One endeavour of modern physical chemistry is to use bottom-up approaches to design materials and drugs with desired properties. Here we introduce an atomistic structure learning algorithm (ASLA) that utilizes a convolutional neural network to build 2D compounds and layered structures atom by atom. The algorithm takes no prior data or knowledge on atomic interactions but inquires a first-principles quantum mechanical program for physical properties. Using reinforcement learning, the algorithm accumulates knowledge of chemical compound space for a given number and type of atoms and stores this in the neural network, ultimately learning the blueprint for the optimal structural arrangement of the atoms for a given target property. ASLA is demonstrated to work on diverse problems, including grain boundaries in graphene sheets, organic compound formation and a surface oxide structure. This approach to structure prediction is a first step toward direct manipulation of atoms with artificially intelligent first principles computer codes. The discovery of new materials for energy capture and energy storage and the design of new drugs with targeted pharmacological properties stand out as the ultimate goals of contemporary chemistry research and materials science In active learning, the computational search is selfdirected. It thereby becomes independent on both the availability of large datasets as in big data approaches The strength of reinforcement learning was recently demonstrated by Google DeepMind in a domain accessible to the general public In the present work, we aim at bringing the image recognition approach into the domain of quantum chemical guided materials search. I.e. we formulate a protocol for deep reinforcement learning in which a convolutional neural network (CNN) starts with zero knowledge and builds up its knowledge of optimal organisation of matter via self-guided recurring inquiries for its produced candidate structures. By optimal organisation of matter, we consider in this first application primarily the thermodynamical stability of a configuration as revealed by a quantum mechanical simulation. The network is fed a real-space image-like representation of the chemical structures and is trained by "playing" against itself, striving to beat the properties of its ever best candidate. As a result, the blueprint for favourable atomic arrangements is directly searched for and learned by the network. This deviates from existing approaches that based on intricate descriptors of the atomic environments Training data example Calculating training batch rewards s Replay buffer P (i-1) P (i-1) P (i-1) P (i-1) P (i-1) Building Phase The three phases of structure search in ASLA. In each step t of the building phase for episode i, the atomistic structure s (i) t is input to the CNN that outputs Q-values (blue raster plot) estimating the expected reward for the final structure, s t , are taken according to an ε-greedy policy thereby building the final structure. In the evaluation phase, a structure property, P (i) , is calculated. All episode steps are stored in the replay buffer from which a training batch is extracted. Properties contained in the batch are then converted to rewards which represent Qtarget-values that the CNN is trained toward predicting. The goal of an ASLA structure search is to generate structures of a given stoichiometry which optimise a target structural property, P. This is done by repeatedly generating candidate structures, evaluating a reward according to P, and learning from these experiences, or episodes, how to generate the globally optimal structure. The three phases of an ASLA structure search, building, evaluation and training, are depicted in Fig. In the building phase, atoms are placed one at a time on a real space grid to form a structure candidate. N atoms are placed in a sequence of actions a t ∈ {a 1 , a 2 , ..., a N }. At each step of the candidate generation ASLA attempts to predict the expected reward of the final structure given the incomplete current structure. This information is stored in a CNN, which takes as input the incomplete, current configuration s t , encoded in a simple one-hot tensor, and outputs the expected reward (Q-value) for each available action (see Extended Data Fig. In the training phase, the CNN parameters are updated via backpropagation, which lowers the root mean square error between predicted Q-values and Q targetvalues calculated according to: where r ∈ [-1, 1] is the reward of completing episode i with property P (i) , where 1 is considered the better reward (reflecting e.g. the lowest potential energy). Thus, the Q-value of action a (i) t of step t is converged toward the reward following the properties of the final configuration s final , an approach also taken in Monte Carlo reinforcement learning A training batch of N batch state-action-property tuples, (s t , P (i) ), is selected from the most recent episode, the best episode, and via experience replay As a first demonstration, an instance of ASLA (an agent) learns how to build a sheet of pristine graphene. One carbon atom is present in an initial template structure, s 1 , and N = 23 carbon atoms are placed by the agent on a grid with periodic boundary conditions. Figure The evolution over the episodes of the overall ringshaped patterns in the Q-values for t = 1 show how the agent becomes aware of the correct interatomic distances. The barely discernible six-fold rotational symmetric modulation of the Q-values that develop within the rings ends up being responsible for the agent choosing bond directions that are compatible with accommodating graphene within the given periodic boundary conditions. Interestingly, the agent may discover the optimal structure through different paths due to the random initialization and the stochastic elements of the search. In Fig. Moving on to a more complex problem, we consider a graphene grain boundary which has been studied by Zhang et al. The number of required episodes can be lowered significantly with the use of transfer learning. Transfer learning is a widely used approach in many domains where knowledge is acquired for one problem and applied to another The ability of ASLA to build multicomponent structures is easily accommodated by adding to the CNN input a dimension representing the atomic type. The CNN will then correspondingly output a map of Q-values for each atomic type. When building a structure, a greedy action now becomes that of choosing the next atom placement according to the highest Q-value across all atomic types. Figure Figure The production of the epoxy species intensifies as evidenced by Fig. Switching to a rewarding motif consisting of a carbon atom binding to one oxygen and two carbon atoms we find the results of Fig. The ability of ASLA to direct its search in response to variations in the reward function represents a simple illustration of how automated structure search may lead to design of molecules with certain properties. The present approach may be used in search for larger organic compounds with some given backbone building blocks or some assemblies of functional groups. It might also be directly applicable when searching for organo-metalic compounds where the malleable bonds mean that the desired motif may only be specified loosely as done here. However, for searches that target e.g. ionization potentials, HOMO-LUMO gaps, deprotonation energies, and other global properties of molecules, we envisage that more elaborate strategies for directing the searches must be implemented in order to truly conduct molecular design. As a final, non-trivial example, the structure of oxidized silver, known to be an efficient catalyst for e.g. epoxidation reactions In the present work, we have demonstrated how deep reinforcement learning can be used in conjunction with first principles computational methods to automate the prediction of 2D molecular and inorganic compounds of optimal stability. The work is readily generalized into handling 3D atomistic structures by turning to 3D convolution kernels and adding one more spatial dimension to the input grid and to the output Q-value tensor. This will increase the computation load of each Q-value prediction linearly in the number of grid points added in the 3rd dimension, which is manageable. It will, however, also open for more complex problems to be addressed which will require more episodes to converge. As more complex 2D or even 3D problems are tackled with the method, we foresee the need for introducing further means of directing the global optimisation. The reinforcement protocol will be slow in detecting structures that require several favourable ε-moves to form and will suffer from conservatism, exploring mainly close to previously built structures. Here, adding e.g. a beam search strategy, Monte Carlo tree search and possibly combining the method with a property predictor network allowing for the screening of several orders of magnitude more structures than those handled with the first principles method may be viable strategies. Finally, we note that agents trained to act on a variable number of atoms are desirable as they will be more versatile and capable of solving more diverse problems. Such agents may be obtained by introducing chemical potentials of atomic species. Notwithstanding such possible extensions, we consider the present work to represent a first peek into a rich research direction that will eventually bring about first principles computer codes for intelligent, bottom-up design and direct manipulation of atoms in chemical physics and materials science. Neural network architecture. In all presented applications, a plain CNN with three hidden layers of each ten filters implemented with Tensorflow The input is a one-hot encoded grid (1 at atom positions, 0 elsewhere), and the correct number of output Q-values (one per input grid point) is retained by adding padding to the input, with appropriate size and boundary conditions. Other layer types, such as a fully connected layer, would disrupt the spatial coherence between input and output and are thus not used. The filter dimensions depend on a user-chosen physical radius and the grid spacing. E.g. a filter of width 3 Å on a grid with spacing 0.2 Å has 15 × 15 weights per convolution kernel. Search policy. An action is chosen with a modified ε-greedy sampling of the Q-values (see Extended Data Fig. The reward function scales all batch property values linearly to the interval [-1, 1], where 1 is considered the better reward. If the property values span a large interval, all values below a fixed property value is set to -1 in order to maintain high resolution of rewards close to 1. This is done for the graphene systems and the C 3 H 4 O 2 compounds, where the lower limit of -1 is fixed at an energy which is ∆E higher (less stable) than that of the energy corresponding to a reward of 1. Spillover is incorporated into the backpropagation cost function by also minimizing the difference between Q target and predicted Q-values of grid points within some radius r spillover of the grid point corresponding to the action a t . In all of the present work, r spillover = 0.3 Å. The complete cost function is thus where m is the augmented batch size, and η j is a weight factor determining the amount of spillover for a grid point j within the radius r spillover . Thus, the predicted Qvalues of adjacent grid points, Q spillover j , are also converged toward the Q target value, but at a different rate determined by the factor η j (η j = 0.1 in the present work). CNN parameters are optimised with the ADAM gradient descent optimiser. Rotational equivariance is learned from augmenting the batch by rotating produced configurations (see Extended Data Fig. ã(i) t , P (i) ), where ã(i) t deviates from the actually tested action, a t , by ± one pixel in the x-and y-directions. Layer-wise relevance propagation. Layer-wise relevance propagation seeks to decompose the CNN output, i.e. the Q-value, and distribute it onto the CNN input in a manner that assigns a higher share, or relevance, to more influential input pixels (Fig. Here, x i is the activation of node i connected to node j by the weight w ij , while τ is a small number to avoid numerical instability when the denominator becomes small. Equation 3 distributes relevance of neuron j to neuron i in the preceding layer according to the contribution to the pre-activation of neuron j from neuron i weighted by the total pre-activation of neuron j. Equation 3 implies that bias weights are not used whenever relevance values need to be calculated (i.e. in the graphene grain boundary and edge systems). Exploration via punishment. The agent might settle in a local optimum, where a highly improbable series of ε-moves are needed in order to continue exploring for other optima. To nudge the agent onwards we introduce a punishment which is activated when the agent builds the same structure repeatedly, indicating that it is stuck (similar to count-based exploration strategies in reinforcement learning where m runs over structures, s final , to be punished (repeated structures), and where A and σ are constants. The distance |s final | is evaluated using a bagof-bonds representation where f artificially strengthens the potential energy for structures fulfilling some criterion g according to: For instance, g may be the criterion that some oxygen atom in the structure is connected to two carbon atoms no matter the angle (two atoms are considered connected if they are within the sum of the covalent radii + 0.2 Å). In the present work, λ = 0.2 is used. DFT calculations. All calculations are carried out with the grid-based projector augmented-wave (GPAW Hardware. All calculations were done on a Linux cluster with nodes having up to 36 CPU cores. Neural network and DFT calculations were parallelized over the same set of cores on one node. The CPU times given for the transfer learning problem presented in Fig. Hyperparameters. For all relevant hyperparameters, see Extended Data Table Extended Data Figure The input can readily be expanded in the third dimension to accommodate systems of several atomic species. Extended Data Figure Action space 1ε ν Extended Data Figure Extended Data Figure 