In this work, we develop the gradient metasurface is constructed of a locally anisotropic resonant structure, comprising a steel cylinder with an elliptical rubber coating embedded in epoxy. The deflective angles of rubber ellipses in the locally anisotropic resonant unit provide a method of controlling the reflected phase. Phase shifts of the reflected wave can cover the 2π range. With an appropriate design of the phase profiles along the acoustic metasurface, we can achieve anomalous reflection and Bessel beam. The locally anisotropic resonant units have significant potential for engineering and manipulating acoustic wavefronts. Metamaterials are a class of subwavelength artificial composite structures with exotic properties that cannot be found in natural materials. However, these metamaterials have large thickness to lead to the bulky size and they go against miniaturization and integration of acoustic devices. A new type of metamaterials -metasurfaces -has emerged. Not only do acoustic metasurfaces exhibit the excellent ability of governing the acoustic wave, but also they provide a new method to accomplish the integration of acoustic devices. Inspired by optical wave manipulation, metasurfaces can be useful for manipulating acoustic wavefronts. The general Snell's law The acoustic metasurface is based on arrays of subwavelength units, including (but not limited to) Helmholtz resonators Similar the monopolar resonant mechanism of Helmholtz resonators, the locally anisotropic resonant units also have outstanding resonant performance. The three-component composites have a matrix of silicone-coated metallic spheres embedded in epoxy and were first proposed by Liu et al. In this work, we propose a resonant-based acoustic metasurface. Each of its anisotropic resonant units contains a steel cylinder with an elliptical rubber coating embedded in epoxy. It is an interesting phenomenon that the rubber ellipses in the locally anisotropic resonant unit provide another adjustable phase for the metasurface. The commercial software "COMSOL Multiphysics" (based on the Finite Element Method) was employed to numerically calculate. The dipolar resonant mechanism can be used to create adjustable phase shifts. Only one mode can be excited in the work frequency. These acoustic metasurfaces constructed by anisotropic resonant units with the deflective elliptic inclusion have an extraordinary reflected phase modulation and can be used to arbitrarily manipulate low-frequency acoustic waves in a water matrix. The anisotropic resonant units with the deflective elliptic inclusion contain the three accessible materials, which demonstrate remarkable phase change and novel acoustic property. Anomalous reflection and Bessel beam are exhibited by imposing suitable phase delay profiles of the metasufaces. The designed metasurfaces extend new degrees of freedom and paves the way for thin planar reflective structures for acoustic wave front manipulation. Fig. We designed and optimized 16 types of anisotropic resonant units with trihedral rigidness, to produce phase delay profiles with a relatively high resolution. The units have a square cross section of length w. The semimajor and semi-minor axes of the rubber ellipses are fixed as 0.3w and 0.25w, respectively. The reflected phase can cover 2π phase span along with the gradually deflective angles of the rubber ellipses. In the planar acoustic metasurfaces, for simplicity, the radii of the steel cylinders are tailored to yield the desired phase shifts. The phase of the reflected waves as a function of deflective angles of the rubber ellipses is plotted in Fig. Where θ r , θ i are the reflected and incident angles, respectively; φ(x) , dx are the phase discontinuities and the distant between the crossing points along the x direction, respectively; k 0 = 2π λ ⁄ is the wave vector in water. Equation (1) shows the direction of reflected wave can be controlled freely through a suitable gradient phase profile. Fig. The numerical simulation of acoustic metasurfaces based on the deflective elliptic inclusion units is introduced. When an acoustic wave from the bottom is normally incident toward the designed metasurfaces, the reflected pressure fields show that the acoustic wave is oblique. The angle of reflected wave is calculated as 33.4° utilizing the general Snell's law. From the reflected pressure distribution, it is noted that the simulated results agree well with the theoretical ones. And the locally anisotropic resonant units with the deflective elliptic inclusion are also capable of controlling reflected acoustic waves arbitrarily and open up a new avenue for acoustic wave front engineering and manipulations. In the following, we show the different wave manipulation effect based on the different combinations of fundamental units. A planar acoustic axcion is exhibited. In order to the design the planar acoustic axcion, the reflected angle of sound wave is set as 10. When an acoustic wave from the bottom is normally incident, the reflected phase gradient of the metasurface along any x position should satisfy the next equation: Applying the aforementioned condition, when the focal length is set as 3λ, the structure of threecomponent composites along any x position is certain. Fig. To better exhibit the performance of the acoustic lens, the transverse cross-section pressure intensity distribution at y=20.5 m is plotted in Fig. In this work, we present an acoustic metasurface based on anisotropic resonant units with deflective angles of the rubber ellipses, which have sufficient degrees of freedom for wavefront modulation. By selecting an appropriate gradient phase profile, the acoustic metasurface can realize anomalous reflection. It illustrates the remarkable ability of controlling the acoustic wave. The acoustic metasurfaces built from our anisotropic resonant units are a new approach for engineering and manipulating wavefronts.