Atomically thin graphite, known as graphene, has been a marvel in material science because of its exceptional properties, novel physics and promising applications. Atomically thin diamond, called diamane, has also attracted considerable scientific interest due to its potential physical and mechanical properties. However, until now there has been no reports of successful synthesis of a free-standing pristine diamane film. Here, we report the synthesis and electronic structure characterization of diamane. Electrical measurements, x-ray diffraction and theoretical simulations reveal that trilayer and thicker graphene transform to hexagonal diamane (h-diamane) when compressed to above 20 GPa, which can be preserved down to few GPa. Raman studies indicate that the sample quenched from high pressure and high temperature also has a h-diamane structure, i.e., hdiamane is recovered back to ambient conditions. Optical absorption and band structure calculations reveal an indirect energy gap of 2.8±0.3 eV in the diamane film. Compared to gapless graphene, diamane with sizable bandgap may open up new applications of carbon semiconductors. Although diamond and graphite are both allotropes of carbon, their very different structures and bonding lead to dramatically different physical, chemical and mechanical properties. Diamond is the hardest bulk material, the best thermal conductor, is chemically inert and optically transparent compared to graphite which is soft, opaque semimetal. Atomically thin graphite, i.e., graphene, has been found to have many exceptional physical properties, such as high carrier mobility 1 , half-integer quantum Hall effect Previous theoretical and experimental studies suggest that atomically thin diamond films do not exist in free or pristine state due to the lack of thermally stable two-dimensional structure but are achievable if the surfaces are thermodynamically equilibrated with specific chemical groups such as hydroxyl or hydrogen Diamane has several polytypes due to different stacking sequence of carbon layers. For simplicity, we compactly classified h-diamane with the number of carbon layers 10 , i.e., 3, 4, 6-layer (3L, 4L, 6L) h-diamane are transformed from trilayer, tetralayer and hexalayer graphene, respectively. We demonstrate that (n ≥3)-layer h-diamane are successfully synthesized by compression of trilayer and thicker graphene, which could be preserved to few GPa under decompression. In additional our finding reveal that hdiamane synthesized at high pressure and high temperature could be recovered back to ambient conditions. Electrical measurements are a sensitive probe to study the pressure-induced graphite to diamond transition since the sp 2 -sp 3 rehybridization between carbon atoms is accompanied by the opening of an energy gap and a dramatic increase in resistance High-pressure resistance measurements were conducted on graphene ranging in layer thickness from multilayer (graphite, 1 μm in thickness) to bilayer at room temperature. All the samples except bilayer show obvious transition with dramatical increases of resistance (Fig. Specifically, the sheet resistance of multilayer graphene varies smoothly until the onset of the transition just above 15.1 GPa (inset of Fig. The temperature dependence of sheet resistance of few-layer graphene samples confirm the layer dependence of diamondization transition (Extended Data Fig. To track the diamondization process directly, we conducted high-pressure x-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements on mixed few-layer graphene powders (3-8 layers for single flake, Extended Data Fig. We performed extensive structure searches through the CALYPSO methodology to rationalize the pressure-induced structure evolution of few-layer graphene. In our simulations, 3L h-diamane in (-2110) orientation with a sizable energy gap, as shown in Fig. Previous experimental studies indicated that h-diamond could be synthesized at high pressure and high temperature and preserved to ambient conditions The inner carbons are sp 3 -bonded in h-diamane while parts of the surface carbons are sp 2 -bonded. Their electronic structure should deviate substantially from those of graphene and diamond. For examining the electronic structure, infrared absorption measurements (the photon energy range of 0.2~1.0 eV) were conducted on graphene samples with thickness ranging from multilayer to trilayer under compression. The absorbance of all the graphene samples, A = -log T drop suddenly above the onset pressure and approach to zero with further compression (Extended Data Fig. To further track the opening of the bandgap, we measured the Vis-UV (1.4~4.9 eV) absorption spectra of trilayer and thicker graphene under compression. For all the graphene samples, pronounced and asymmetric peaks at a photon energy of 4.6 eV are observed in the absorption spectra at low pressures (Fig. Above the graphene to h-diamane transition pressure, such as multilayer above 16.2 GPa, hexalayer above 20.6 GPa and trilayer above 28.3 GPa, a sharp drop of absorbance is observed at the radiation photon energy of 2.0 eV (Fig. The opening of bandgap is also in agreement with the optical microscopy observations that trilayer and thicker graphene becomes increasingly transparent above the transition pressure (Extended Data Fig. Weak absorption edges are observed at 2.8±0.3 eV in the absorption spectra of (n ≥3)-layer diamane. It is hard to identify the direct or indirect bandgap because of the weak absorption edges. Alternatively, we adopted the band structure calculations to identify the direct/indirect gap. The calculations indicate that h-diamane transformed from few-layer graphene has an indirect energy gap of 3.0±0.2 eV, with the valance band maximum and conduction band minimum located at Γ and S high symmetry points (Extended Data Fig. The experimental results suggest that a large pressure range is needed to make few-layer graphene transformed to h-diamane completely, i.e., the ratio of graphene/hdiamane is pressure dependent. Such phase mixture can be indicated from the nonuniform transparency of the compressed multilayer graphene. The transparent area expands gradually with pressure above the onset pressure. The continuous increase of resistance and decrease of absorbance with pressure, rather than sharp transitions at the onset pressure, can also be the consequence of the gradual transition from graphene to h-diamane transition. In conclusion, free-standing pristine (n≥3)-layer h-diamane has been synthesized by compressing mechanically exfoliated trilayer and thicker graphene (up to 1 μm in thickness) at ambient temperature and once synthesized can be preserved down to few GPa. The transition pressure is significantly dependent on the layer number, i.e., the transition occurs at a higher pressure in thinner sample. H-diamane synthesized at high pressure and high temperature conditions, such as 25.0 GPa and 1700 K for mixed 3-8 layers graphene powders, could be recovered back to ambient pressure. An energy gap of 2.8±0.3 eV is observed in (n≥3)-layer h-diamane. Band structure calculations reveal the indirect gap with the valence band maximum and conduction band minimum located at Γ and S high symmetry points, respectively. The electronic bandgap usually determines the electrical and optical properties of a semiconductor, and further governs the operation of semiconductor devices such as field-effect transistors, lasers, etc. Hdiamane semiconductor, in contrast to the gapless graphene, would enable potential applications of carbon-based electronic devices. After graphene, carbon nanotubes, fullerenes and other carbon allotropies, the realization of a free-standing pristine diamane would be another exciting achievement in material science, which may trigger many novel applications of carbon, such as its potential application in quantum computation. Sample preparation and electrical measurements in diamond anvil cells. Fewlayer graphene flakes were mechanically exfoliated from bulk graphite on Si/SiO2 surface. Optical microscopy, Raman spectroscopy and atomic force microscopy were utilized to identify the layer number of graphene samples. Few-layer graphene was then transferred onto diamond surface using a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamping technique Each Ti/Au film electrode was extended beyond the indentation area of gasket through hand-wiring platinum foil (~2 μm in thickness) electrodes to keep the stability of electrodes under pressure. The insulation of probing electrodes from the metallic rhenium gasket were done through a mixture of cubic boron nitride and epoxy precompressed into the indentation area of gasket. Daphne 7373 or argon pressure media were used to simulate a quasi-static pressure environment on samples. Lowtemperature electrical measurements were conducted in PPMS with temperature range of 2-300 K. Raman characterization. Raman spectra were collected with Renishaw InVia spectrometer. The identification of layer was done using a 532 nm laser as the incident structure search. After that, lattice optimizations were done on the obtained favorable structures with argon atoms surrounded to mimic hydrostatic condition. Band structure calculations were performed with the VASP codes using both the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof and heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof hybrid functional 