Electrical transport properties near an electronic Ising-nematic quantum critical point in two dimensions are of both theoretical and experimental interest. In this work, we derive a kinetic equation valid in a broad regime near the quantum critical point using the memory matrix approach. The formalism is applied to study the effect of the critical fluctuations on the dc resistivity through different scattering mechanisms, including umklapp, impurity scattering, and electron-hole scattering in a compensated metal. We show that electrical transport in the quantum critical regime exhibits a rich behavior that depends sensitively on the scattering mechanism and the band structure. In the case of a single large Fermi surface, the resistivity due to umklapp scattering crosses over from ρ ∼ T 2 at low temperature to sublinear at high temperature. The crossover temperature scales as q 3 0 , where q0 is the minimal wavevector for umklapp scattering. Impurity scattering leads to ρ -ρ0 ∼ T α (ρ0 being the residual resistivity), where α is either larger than 2 if there is only a single Fermi sheet present, or 4/3 in the case of multiple Fermi sheets. Finally, in a perfectly compensated metal with an equal density of electrons and holes, the low temperature behavior depends strongly on the structure of "cold spots" on the Fermi surface, where the coupling between the quasiparticles and order parameter fluctuations vanishes by symmetry. In particular, for a system where cold spots are present on some (but not all) Fermi sheets, ρ ∼ T 5/3 . At higher temperatures there is a broad crossover regime where ρ either saturates or ρ ∼ T , depending on microscopic details. We discuss these results in the context of recent quantum Monte Carlo simulations of a metallic Ising nematic critical point, and experiments in certain iron-based superconductors. Many strongly correlated materials, such as high temperature superconductors, exhibit electrical transport properties that are markedly different from those expected in a Fermi liquid. Most famously, in many systems, the electrical resistivity is a linear function of temperature. Interestingly, it is often in this regime where the highest superconducting transition temperature is observed. Understanding the role of strong electronic correlations in such systems is of utmost importance. A natural way to explain these properties is to consider a metallic system tuned near a quantum critical point (QCP), i.e., a "quantum critical metal". This is further motivated by the observation that superconductivity is typically found near another electronically ordered phase Of particular interest is the electrical transport properties near an Ising-nematic QCP in two spatial dimensions On the theoretical front, several works have studied trasport near a nematic QCP The situation is complicated by the fact that despite arXiv:1902.04590v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 12 Feb 2019 the substantial progress made In this work, we develop a memory matrix approach for transport in the intermediate coherent electron regime. Transport in this regime can be described by a kinetic equation, where the effects of the quantum critical fluctuations are incorporated in the collision integral. At low temperatures (in the absence of a superconducting phase), the electrons become incoherent, and our approach breaks down; however, in the absence of a magnetic field, in this regime the system generically becomes a high T c superconductor mediated by the nematic fluctuations. Our theory is expected to hold down to temperatures of the order of T c . We apply our technique to study situations where different scattering mechanisms dominate the transport behavior, including umklapp scattering, impurity scattering, and momentum-conserving electron-hole scattering in a compensated metal. We find that depending on the relaxation mechanism, the electrical resistivity exhibits rich features, including several regimes beyond the ones discussed in Refs. 1. In a clean system with a large, generic Fermi surface, umklapp scattering has a low-momentum threshold q 0 determined by the smallest distance between Fermi surfaces in different Brillouin zones. At low temperatures, T T 0 ∼ q 3 0 , the typical momentum of the quantum critical fluctuations is smaller than q 0 . As a result, ρ(T ) ∼ T 2 , as in a Fermi liquid, despite the proximity to the QCP 2. In the presence of weak impurity scattering in a single electronic band and in the absence of umklapp scattering, the critical nematic fluctuations decouple from the transport properties to lowest order in temperature. This is since for a single convex Fermi surface, electron-electron scattering near the Fermi surface conserves the odd moments of the quasiparticle distribution function 3. For a clean compensated metal with an equal density of electrons and holes, the low-tempearture properties are strongly sensitive to the presence of "cold spots" on the Fermi sheets. At these points, the lowest-order coupling between the quasiparticles and the nematic fluctuations vanishes by symmetry. For instance, in the case of a B 1g nematic order parameter (of x 2y 2 symmetry), the cold spots occur at the intersection between the diagonals k x = ±k y and the Fermi surfaces. We show that the non-equilibrium distribution function displays a strongly non-harmonic form, changing abruptly at the cold spots. In the case where all the Fermi surfaces have cold spots, ρ ∼ T 2 ; if only some of the Fermi surfaces have cold spots and others do not The outline of the paper is given as follows. In Section II, we introduce a model Hamiltonian that realizes a metallic Ising-nematic QCP, and argue that there is a parametrically broad temperature regime where electrical transport can be described by kinetic theory. In Section III, we derive a memory matrix formalism for calculating the linearized collision integral, and discuss various conservation laws. In Section IV, we study the temperature dependence of dc electrical resistivity near the QCP originating from various current-relaxation mechanisms, including impurity scattering, umklapp scattering, and momentum conserving electron-hole scattering in a compensated metal. We conclude in Section V. We consider a simple model on a two-dimensional square lattice that realizes a metallic Ising-nematic QCP. The Hamiltonian is given by where Here, c αk annihilates an electron of flavor α = 1, . . . , N with momentum k. ε k is the electron's energy dispersion, and μ is the chemical potential. Physically, N = 2 (for the two spin flavors), but we will keep N general -for some purposes it will be useful to consider the limit of large N . The nematic form factor f k,k+q satisfies f k,k+q = -f R π/2 k,R π/2 (k+q) , where R π/2 is a rotation by π/2 around the axis perpendicular to the plane. The interaction is written as U q = λ 2 D 0,q /N , where λ is the coupling constant (the normalization by N enables us to define the large-N limit), and we choose D 0,q = 1/[r 0 + 2(2cos q xcos q y )] (the lattice constant is set to unity) where L 0 is a free fermion Lagrangian corresponding to the first term in Eq. ( 1. The nematic fluctuations become overdamped as a result of their coupling to electrons near the Fermi surface. To leading order in λ, φ acquires a selfenergy of the form: Π(q, iν n ) ∝ f 2 q,q γ|νn| |q| , where ν n = 2πT n is the bosonic Matsubara frequency and γ ∝ λ 2 ε -2 F is the Landau-damping coefficient (ε F is the Fermi energy). This leads to a quantum critical scaling with a dynamical critical exponent z = 3. 2. The feedback of the Landau-damped critical fluctuations on the electrons near the Fermi surface leads, to one-loop order, to an electronic selfenergy , where ω n = 2πT n + 1 2 is the fermionic Matsubara frequency. Below an energy scale Ω NFL ∝ λ 4 ε -1 F N -3 , the self-energy becomes dominant over the bare iω n term in the electron propagator, and the electrons become strongly incoherent. This regime is currently not well understood theoretically. Within a large-N expansion, terms which are naively of arbitrarily high order in 1/N turn out to be equally important as the leading ones in this regime. Superconducting fluctuations are also expected to become strong at the same energy scale, implying a nematic-mediated superconducting transition temperature T c ∼ Ω NFL . A dome-shaped superconducting phase with a maximum T c near the nematic QCP was indeed found in quantum Monte Carlo simulations These considerations suggest that in the weak coupling limit λ 2 ε F or in the large-N limit, there is a broad regime of temperatures Ω NFL T ε F above the QCP where the system can be described in terms of Landaudamped nematic fluctuations coupled to coherent electrons. Evidence for the existence of such a regime, even at moderate values of the coupling constant, has been found in numerical simulations In the previous section, we argued that above an energy scale Ω NFL , the normal state transport is governed by a kinetic (Boltzmann) equation. Deriving the kinetic equation requires special care: while the Lagrangian in Eq. ( In this section, we derive the kinetic equation based on the memory matrix method. This method has been applied widely for studying transport phenomena; see, e.g., Refs. The dc resistivity can be calculated by taking the zero-frequency limit of the real part of optical conductivity, i.e., ρ -1 = lim Ω→0 Reσ(Ω). Within linear response, the optical conductivity is given by the retarded current-current correlation function: , where J is the electrical current operator corresponding to Eq. ( where χ Jx,αk ≡ ́β 0 dτ J x (τ )n αk (0) and χ αk,βk ≡ The dynamical properties are encoded in the structure [M (Ω) -iΩχ] -1 , where M αk,βk (Ω) is the "memory matrix". To leading order in 1/N , the memory matrix is given by: where ṅαk ≡ i[H, n αk ], and the correlation function G R ṅαk ṅβk (Ω) is computed to order 1/N 0 . To perform the computations, it is convenient to write the equivalent Hamiltonian to Eq. ( A diagrammatic representation of this operator is shown in Figure Below we first construct the memory matrix in the absence of any current-relaxing mechanisms, and study its structure and conservation laws. Next we will study how the memory matrix and the transport properties are affected by different scattering mechanisms. Ω NFL , we compute M αk,βk in a 1/N expansion. Depending on the placement of the two momentum states k and k , there are two classes of Feynman diagrams that contribute to leading order, as illustrated in Figure whereas the fermion propagators G 0 (k, iω n ) = 1/(iω nε k ) are the bare ones. At low frequencies, we write D -1 (q, iν n ) = r q + γ q |ν n |, where r q includes the renormalization effects from Π(q, iν n = 0), and to be: There are three RPA diagrams as shown in the above figure. Mathematically, they can be shown to be: The memory matrix M kk ′ (iΩ n ) can be calculated from the retarded response function (in Matsubara frequencies analytically continue to time-ordered one) to be: The red colored labels correspond to external momenta k and k . For convenience we omitted the flavor index on the fermionic Green's functions, and the summation over internal frequencies is implicit. A detailed derivation of the expressions corresponding to these Feynamn diagrams is presented in Appendix A 2. For class I [Fig. where R k,k+q,νn is the polarization bubble summed over the internal fermionic Matsubara frequencies: Here, n F (ε) is the Fermi function. Similarly, the expression for class II diagrams is For simplicity, we have omitted the static part G R ṅαk ṅβk (0) in the expressions. However, they are always subtracted in later calculations. The memory matrix are expressed in Matsubara frequencies. To obtain real-time dynamics, we perform an analytic continuation iΩ n → Ω + iδ. At high frequencies, these terms in the memory matrix reproduce the standard Feynman diagrams describing contributions to optical conductivity, namely Maki-Thompson (MT), Density of States (DOS) and Aslamazov-Larkin (AL) diagrams. This is shown in Appendix G. In particular, MT and DOS diagrams combine to give class I diagram, corresponding to the δ k -k,q and δ kk terms respectively. AL is equivalent to class II diagrams. In the dc limit, our memory matrix approach is equivalent to the quantum Boltzmann equation discussed in the Kadanoff-Baym-Keldysh framework αk kM αk,βk = 0. Momentum conservation crucially relies on the fact that the nematic fluctuations gain their dynamics only as a result of their coupling to the electrons. As a result, they do not act as a "sink" for the total electronic momentum. It is worth noting that momentum is conserved only when the two classes of diagrams are combined, but not for each class separately. At low temperatures compared to the Fermi energy ε F , the dominant scattering processes occur in the vicinity of the Fermi surface. For two given momentum states on the Fermi surface k and k , there are three types of processes described by class I and class II diagrams, as depicted in Figure Since the dominant contribution to the memory matrix comes from the vicinity of the Fermi surface, we can approximate R defined in Eq. This approximation is justified in Appendix C. After per- forming summation over the bosonic Matsubara frequencies, we can simplify the memory matrix to be: αk,βk = - where we have defined The imaginary part of the nematic propagator is ImD q,ω = γ q ω/(r 2 q + γ 2 q ω 2 ), and n B (ω) is the Bose-Einstein distribution function. In the case of a single convex Fermi sheet with no umklapp scattering, there are additional conservation laws that emerge at low temperature. In particular, all the odd-parity deformations of the Fermi surface are quasiconserved, in the sense that the lifetimes of these modes are parametrically larger than those of the even-parity modes We now turn to discuss how the quantum critical fluctuations manifest themselves in the temperature dependence of the dc resistivity, ρ(T ), through different current relaxation mechanisms. In a metal with a generic electron density, the electrical current cannot relax completely (and hence ρ = 0) unless momentum conservation is violated. Having a non-zero resistivity therefore relies crucially on the momentum relaxation mechanism, either through impurity or umklapp scattering. In the special case of a compensated metal with an equal density of electrons and holes, the resistivity is finite even if the total momentum is conserved. We note that in our calculation, the temperature dependence comes from the scattering rates, encoded in the memory matrix. The thermodynamic susceptibilities, χ Jx,αk and χ αk,βk , defined in Eq. ( We will present our results for ρ(T ) in dimensionless units. The temperature is rescaled by the energy scale set by the Landau damping term: Ω L ≡ ε 2 F λ -2 . As we discuss in Appendix A 2, the natural scale for the resistivity in our problem is Note that in the large-N or weak coupling limits, where our approach is valid, ρ L is always much smaller than the quantum of resistance /e 2 . We consider quenched disorder, modeled by a random potential: αr , where V imp (r) has the following properties: V imp (r) = 0 and V imp (r)V imp (r ) = g 2 imp δ (rr ), where • • • denotes disorder averaging. The time-derivative of the electron occupation number is given by ( ṅαk As a result, for weak disorder strength, the leading correction to the memory matrix is given by where the correlator of the disorder potential is static and momentum-independent, i.e., D imp q,νn = g 2 imp δ νn,0 . To leading order in impurity strength, we neglect the crossterms involving both impurity and quantum critical scattering One can verify that momentum is no longer conserved under impurity scattering, by observing that This expression does not vanish for a general value of k , due to the asymmetry of momentum states k ± q. We first show that when there is only a single convex electron Fermi surface, quantum critical scattering does not contribute to the dc resistivity within our lowestorder approximation in T /ε F . In this case, ρ ≈ ρ 0 ∝ g 2 ν F coming from impurity scattering, where ν F is the density of states at the Fermi level. To see this, we work in the basis of Fermi surface harmonics, e inθ k , where θ k is the angle between a point k on the Fermi surface and the x axis. Since our problem is inversion-symmetric on average, M imp αn,βm is non zero only if m and n have the same parity. Electron-electron scattering on a single, convex Fermi surface conserves all the odd-parity modes Next, we study the case of multiple Fermi sheets. Different sheets generically have different energy dispersions and are separated in momentum space. The smallmomentum nematic fluctuations induces intra-sheet scattering, while impurity scattering can be either intra-or inter-sheet. We write the electrical current operator as J = ik v i,k c † i,k c ik , where i is the sheet index. Due to differences in the Fermi velocities in each Fermi sheet, the current is not conserved by nematic scattering (unlike total momentum). As a result, the resistivity acquires a temperature-dependent correction ∼ T α , whose The dashed line marks the value 4/3. The dispersion used for one-band case is ε k = -2t (cos kx + cos ky)-4t cos kx cos kyμ , with t = 1, t = -0.3 and μ = -1. In the multi-sheet case, we used three circularly-shaped Fermi pockets of equal size, with two electron-like and one hole-like dispersions. Impurity scattering strength is taken to be gimp = 0.02εF . The nematic-electronic coupling strength is λ 2 ≈ 0.83εF . The Fermi energy is defined as εF = vF kF FS. exponent is determined by the decay of odd-parity modes on the Fermi surface. Scaling arguments suggest that nematic contrinbution to the current decay rate scales as q2 τ -1 sp , where q ∼ T 1/3 is the typical momentum transfer following quantum critical scaling, and τ -1 sp ∼ T 2/3 is the single-electron decay rate. As a result, for a multiband system subject to impurity scattering, we expect that ρρ 0 ∝ T 4/3 . In Figure In the presence of an underlying lattice, the electronic momentum is only conserved up to a reciprocal lattice vector G. In an umklapp scattering process, two of the initial states and one of the final states are on the Fermi q 0 FIG. 4. Two-particle collision involving a Umklapp process. One of the final states is a different Brillouin zone. Therefore, the total momentum changes by the crystal momentum G. q0 is the minimal momentum transfer in an umklapp scattering event. surface in the first Brillouin zone, while the other final state is in a neighboring Brollouin zone. An umklapp scattering process on the Fermi surface involves a minimum momentum transfer q 0 that depends on the geometry of the Fermi surface, as illustrated in Figure We study ρ(T ) for a model with a generic, large Fermi surface, similar to the one shown in Fig. Although for r = r c and T > T 0 , there is a temperature window where ρ(T ) appears to be approximately linear (Fig. The mechanisms for current dissipation discussed so far rely on breaking the conservation of total electron momentum, either by impurity or by umklapp scattering. It is well-known that in a compensated metal with equal number of electron and hole-like charge carriers, electron-electron interactions alone can lead to a finite electrical resistivity, even in the absence of momentum relaxation Several of the iron-based superconductors known for exhibiting non-Fermi liquid transport, such as FeSe 1-x S x In this Section, we study the temperature dependence of dc resistivity for a compensated metal near a nematic quantum critical point. Motivated by the case of the iron-based superconductors, we focus on the case where the electron and hole pockets are much smaller than the Brillouin zone size, such that umklapp scattering is negligible. Since the nematic critical fluctuations are centered at small momenta, we assume that they cannot scatter electrons from one pocket to the other. The Hamiltonian is given by where i = 1, . . . , n is the pocket index, and the pocket dispersions ε ik are assumed to be such that the total area enclosed by the electron-like pockets is equal to that of the hole-like pockets. f i,k,k+q is the Ising-nematic form factor of the ith pocket, centered at wavevector Q i . Importantly, depending on the position of the Fermi pocket in the Brillouin zone, the form factor may or may not contain "cold spots" -points on the Fermi pocket where the form factor vanishes. For example, a pocket centered at the Γ point [Q i = (0, 0)] has cold spots where the diagonals k x = ±k y intersect the Fermi surface. In contrast, a pocket at the X or Y points [Q i = (π, 0) or (0, π), respectively] does not have any symmetry-imposed cold spots. The band structures of most of the iron-based superconductors contain pockets centered at both the Γ, X, and Y points (in the one Fe per unit cell scheme). As we shall see below, the presence of cold spots on the Fermi pockets, and whether they occur on all or only some of the pockets, changes qualitatively transport behavior at low temperature. We study ρ(T ) in four different scenarios: in a clean system where (1) all the pockets have cold spots, (2) the hole pockets have cold spots but the electron pockets do not, (3) no pockets have cold spots, and (4) a disordered system where all the pockets have cold spots. For simplic- FIG. ity, we considered a model with two circular pockets with identical radii, one electron-like and one hole-like. We do not expect the results to change qualitatively for pockets of a general shape, as long as the system is perfectly compensated (see Appendix I). The results are summarized in Fig. To understand the origin of the strong sensitivity of the low-temperature transport behavior to the presence of cold spots, we examine the non-equibrium distribution function in the presence of a current. It is convenient to parametrize the distribution function δn ik in terms of another function Φ ik such that where i is the band index, k is a point on the Fermi surface and E = E x x is the electric field applied along the x axis. Φ ik can be computed from the memory matrix according to: Φ ik = M -1 ik,jk χ jk ,Jx . More details on relation between our memory matrix approach and the non-equilibrium distribution function are given in Appendix F. Fig. in the presence of a current in the x direction, for the same model as in Fig. shows the clean case without hot spots. In this case, Φ 1θ k = -Φ 2θ k = cos θ k . However, when cold spots are present on at least one Fermi pocket, the distribution function on both pockets changes dramatically, as seen in Fig. The shape of the non-equilibrium distribution function in the presence of cold spots can be understood qualitatively as follows: at low temperatures, the characteristic momentum transfer q due to quantum critical scattering, q ∼ k F (T /Ω L ) 1/3 , is small. The scattering rate from a point k near one of the cold spots to a nearby point k + q is suppressed by the nematic form factor. Therefore, the cold spots effectively cut the Fermi surface into four nearly-disconnected patches. The equilibration within each patch is much faster than the equilibration between patches (see Fig. Electron scattering on the Fermi surface due to small wavevector nematic fluctuations. The intersection between the Fermi surface and the dashed lines are where the nematic form factor vanishes -the nematic "cold spots". Small wavevector scattering across the cold spots are strongly suppressed by the nematic form factor. Having analyzed the asymptotic low-temperature behavior of the resistivity due to different scattering mechanisms, we turn to discuss the crossover behavior at higher temperatures. In particular, depending on microscopic parameters, there may be a regime where the temperature is comparable to or larger than the energy scale set by the Landau damping, Ω L , but still much smaller than the Fermi energy. Since Ω L = ε 2 F /λ 2 , this regime is accessible within our model at strong coupling (or, equivalently, if the Fermi energy is small). Formally, the calculation in this regime can still be controlled in the large N limit, as long as T Ω NFL . As we shall now show, the resistivity is determined by quasi-elastic scattering of electrons off thermally excited nematic fluctuations. Depending on the evolution of the correlation length with temperature, this may lead to either ρ ∼ T or ρ ∼ const. in the crossover regime. We begin by examining the temperature dependence of the scattering cross-section between electrons and nematic fluctuations, V q (T ) [see Eqs. F (x) has the following asymptotic properties: for x 1, F (x) ≈ πx 2 /3, whereas for x 1, F (x) ≈ 4x. We can now estimate the resistivity in the regime T Ω L ∼ ω q∼k F , that corresponds to x 1 in Eq. Placing both k and k + q on the Fermi surface (recall that we are still considering T ε F ) constrains the allowed wave-vector q to a one-dimensional manifold. The first q 2 term in the integrand is the wellknown transport factor that suppresses the contribution of small angle scattering. This factor arises from the term 2 that appears when inserting Eq. ( where we have expressed r q (T ) = ξ -2 (T ) + q 2 . If ξ ≈ ξ 0 is only weakly dependent on temperature, or if ξ -1 k F , then ρ(T ) ∼ T . In contrast, if ξ -1 (T ) k F , then the behavior of ρ(T ) is determined by the temperature dependence of ξ(T ). For ξ -2 ∼ T (as was observed in the QMC simulations of Ref. In summary, we have developed a memory matrix approach to derive a kinetic equation applicable in a broad temperature regime near an Ising-nematic QCP. The formalism is applied to study the behavior of the dc resistivity in the vicinity of the QCP. The resistivity exhibits a rich behavior that depends on the dominant mechanism for current dissipation and on the structure of the Fermi surface. We find several regimes where the resistivity is strongly affected by nematic critical fluctuations, despite their long-wavelength nature. As long as the Fermi surface is not very small compared to the size of the Brillouin zone, there is a broad temperature range where the resistivity is strongly enhanced near the QCP due to umklapp scattering; in this regime, the umklapp processes also modify the spectrum of the critical nematic fluctuations, and z = 3 dynamical scaling does not hold. At asymptotically low temperatures, however, z = 3 scaling is recovered, and ρ ∼ T 2 . In multi-band systems in the presence of impurities, ρρ 0 ∝ T 4/3 down to the lowest temperatures, as anticipated from z = 3 dynamical scaling. In a compensated metal with an equal density of electrons and holes, the quantum critical fluctuations can affect the resistivity even in the absence of impurities and at arbitrarily low temperatures. In this case we find that the dc resistivity is strongly affected by the presence of "cold spots" on the Fermi sheets, due to the symmetry of the nematic order parameter. In the clean limit, ρ ∼ T α , where α = 2, 5/3, or 4/3, depending on whether there are cold spots on all the Fermi sheets, on some of the sheets, or on none, respectively. It is important to note that we have assumed a purely electronic mechanism for the Ising-nematic QCP, and have neglected the effect of coupling to the lattice. This effect is known to change the properties of the QCP, quenching most of the long-wavelength nematic fluctuations and making the transition more mean-field like Our analysis can be extended straightforwardly to other metallic QCPs in d = 2 dimensions that do not involve breaking of translational symmetry, such as ferromagnetic transitions. In the latter case, there are generically no cold spots on the Fermi surface. The diversity of possible behaviors found in our study suggest that experiments in critical metals should be interpreted with great care. Nevertheless, it would be interesting to consider our results in the context of ongoing experiments We closely follow the discussion of the memory matrix approach in Ref. Here, χ AB is a theormodynamic susceptibility relating the operators A and B. The Liouville "super operator" is defined as L = -[H, •]. The operators satisfy the Heiseberg equation of motion: Ȧ = i[H, A] = -iLA. We are interested in calculating a retarded correlation function of two operators, characterizing the response of the system. This can be done through the relation where C AB (t) ≡ (A(t)|B). Fourier transforming both sides, we obtain where C AB (z) ≡ ́∞ 0 e izt C AB (t), z is a complex number in the upper half plane, and similarly for GR AB (z) = ́∞ 0 e izt G R AB (t). For example, the frequency-dependent conductivity can be written as The key step in the memory matrix technique is to identify a set of slow (or nearly-conserved) operators, and project the dynamics onto these operators. We denote the set of slow operators by |A α ). We assumne that the current is a linear combination of |A α )'s. Then, to compute C JxJx (z), it is sufficient to compute matrix elements of the resolvent (or Green's function) Ĝ(z) = i z-L in the subspace of |A α ). To do this, we define the projection operator onto the slow subspace, and Q = 1 -P is a projection onto the complementary subspace. The equation for the Green's function G is From this we obtain the two equations z P -P L P P Ĝ P - z Q -QL Q Q Ĝ P -QL P P Ĝ P = 0. (A8) Solving for P Ĝ P , we arrive at The matrix elements of Ĝ between two operators in the slow subspace can then be written as where we have defined the matrices So far, the manipulations have all been exact -we have not used the fact that the operators |A α ) are "slow". The slowness of the operators A α is typically employed when computing M αβ (z). We imagine that the Hamiltonian depends on a parameter g, such that to zeroth order in g, L(g = 0)A α = 0. Then, to leading order in g, we can drop the factors of Q in the evaluation of the denominator in Eq. (A12), and the memory matrix becomes an ordinary dynamical correlation function with H(g = 0). In our quantum critical system, we choose the set of operators to be the occupations of particles per flavor in momentum space, {n αk }. In order to evaluate the memory matrix, Eq. (A12), we note that in the N → ∞ limit, the operators {n αk } become conserved quantities. This is since We use a normalized set of operators, | n αk ) = (n αk |n αk ) -1/2 |n αk ). In the presence of time reversal and inversion symmetries, ( n αk |L| n α k ) = 0. Consider the matrix element of L between | n αk ) and the normalized operator ( We can easily check that ( This implies that, to leading order in 1/N , the memory matrix can be written as where the correlation function is evaluated in the N → ∞ limit. In this limit, L does not connect the slow operators n αk to other operators, and the projector Q in the denominator of Eq. (A12) is automatically accounted for. To compute the memory matrix, we use Eq. (A3). The retarded response function can be computed from imaginarytime-ordered correlation function via analytic continuuation. In Matsubara frequency: Here ṅαk ≡ -[H, n αk ] denotes imaginary-time derivative. Let us first observe the general structure of the response function by treating λ as a small perturbation. To order O(λ 2 ): After Fourier transformation: where we have defined To the next order O(λ 4 ), to see that Here for convenience we have omitted the summation over repeated indices. The connected random phase diagram has the structure shown in Fig. After Fourier transformation: and Within random phase approximation corresponding to leading order in 1/N , we use the dressed nematic propagator to be D -1 = D -1 0 -Π, but keep the fermion Green's function and the coupling vertex unrenormalized. We obtain the following expression for the memory matrix within the random phase approximation: Here for simplicity of writing we have omitted the Ω n = 0 term inside the brackets. However, in following calculations the static contribution is always subtracted. We refer to the two contributions to the memory matrix in Eq. (A23) as class-I and class-II diagrams, respectively. Naively, the class II diagrams are O(N -2 ) while the class I diagram is O(N -1 ), both contributions need to be kept when studying transport properties. This is because in class I, the flavor indices α, α are constrained to be the same, while in class II they are not. In the {n αk } basis, the optical conductivity is expressed as: where χ Jx,αk ≡ ́β 0 dτ J x (τ )n αk (0) and χ αk,βk ≡ ́β 0 dτ [ n αk (τ )n βk (0)n αk n βk ] are thermodynamic susceptibilities. A straightforward analysis from Eq. (A24) shows that σ(Ω) ∼ O N 2 , where one factor of N comes from the number of conducting channels, and the other factor comes from the fact that the eigenvalues of the memory matrix relevant to transport scale as O N -1 . As a result, the dc resistivity is ρ ∼ O N -2 in the large N limit, where our computation is formally justified. Similarly the class II diagram contribution is: By change of variables k → kζ q, and ζ → -ζ , we get where is the polarization bubble. Making use of Dyson's equation D -1 = D -1 0 -Π, we obtain: Summing up the two classes of diagrams: The first term is the static contribution G αk,α k (Ω n = 0) , and should be subtracted at the end of the computation. If the dynamics of nematic fluctuations is generated by coupling to the electrons, as discussed previously, then D 0 is frequency independent. In that case, the second term vanishes as well, and momentum is conserved. Whether nematic fluctuations can act as a "momentum sink" is fundamentally dependent on whether their propagator has its own independent dynamics. Appendix C: Low temperature and dc limit We derive the expressions of the memory matrix in the dc limit and for temperature T much smaller than the Fermi energy ε F . It is convenient to invoke spectral representation for the nematic propagator. Define D -1 q,νn ≡ r q + γ q |ν n |, we have where the spectral function is ImD q,ω = γ q ω r 2 q + γ 2 q ω 2 . For a given momentum transfer, the spectral function is peaked at . This can be interpreted as the dispersion relation of Landau-damped nematic fluctuations. At small wave-vectors, ω q ε F . First, consider the class I diagram. The sum over bosonic Matsubara frequency ν n can be explicitly performed using spectral representation, giving rise to: where n F,k is short for the Fermi-Dirac distribution function n F (ε k ), and n B (ω) is the Bose-Einstein distribution function. Following an analytic continuation iΩ n → Ω + iδ, we obtain: Making use of 1 ω-iδ = P 1 ω + iπδ (ω), and taking the dc limit Ω → 0, we observe that the principle part on the second line cancels the static part, and only the imaginary part contributes to the real frequency memory matrix. We obtain: This is equivalent to the linearized collision integral studied in many previous works, e.g. Ref. where we have used n F,k+qn F,k ≈ -ωδ (ε k ), and defined We see that the dominant processes contributing to class I diagram comes from the Fermi surface. Next we derive the expression for class II diagrams in the dc limit. There are two terms shown in Eq. (A23), corresponding to Figs. Here we defined two analytic functions f and g. Both f and g are analytic everywhere except on the real axis. Hence, we can use a spectral representation for both functions, to obtain: Carrying out the Matsubara sum: Following an analytic continuation, iΩ n → Ω + iδ, and taking the zero-frequency limit, we obtain: The imaginary part of the f and g functions are, respectively: and Here we have used a short-hand notation: Following a similar analysis, the second term in the bracket in the expression for M (2) [Eq. (A23)] can also be carried out, except in this case, Combining the two contributions, we get the following expression for class II diagram in dc limit: where and We see again that the frequency integration is constrained to be at small frequencies ω < min (T, ω q ). Approximating -πζ (n F,k+ζqn F,k ) ≈ πωδ (ε k ) and -πζ (n F,k +ζ qn F,k ) ≈ πωδ (ε k ), we see that: Since the frequency is small compared to the Fermi energy, we can further approximate the two δ-function constraints as δ (ε k+ζq ) δ (ε k +ζ q ), placing all four momentum states on the Fermi surface. We then make use of the identity: where V q (T ) is defined in Eq. ( Here we have made use of the invariance under (ζ, ζ ) → (-ζ, -ζ ) to eliminate ζ in the expression. In this section we show that in a two-dimensional system with a single, convex Fermi surface and with no umklapp scattering, there are additional approximately conserved modes that emerge at low temperatures and frequencies due to projection of scattering processes onto the Fermi surface. We start from Eqs. ( αk,α k as follows: The two class II terms are related to each other via The Landau damping parameter γ q appearing in M (2,±) αk,α k is self-consistently calculated from the electron polarization bubble: Note that γ q ∼ O N 0 , since nematic boson can decay into all flavors of electrons. We define memory matrix in the harmonic basis: where h nk = exp (inθ k ), and h n,-k = (-1) n h nk . By introducing a short-hand notation d nkk ≡ h nkh nk , Class I contribution becomes: Here we made use of symmetry under k ↔ -k to derive the above expression. Similarly, class II contributions can be shown to be of the form For a convex Fermi surface and a given momentum transfer q, to place all four momentum states {k, k + q, k , k -q} on the Fermi surface implies that k = -k or k = k + q. As a result, the bracket on the second line can be simplied to be γ q 2πλ 2 d * nkk (h mk+q + h m,-k ) . By change of variables: k + q → k , we can combine the two class of diagrams to arrive at the final expression for memory matrix in the harmonics basis: Eq. (D7) shows a dichotomy between even/odd parity modes. The second term in the bracket vanishes for even parity modes, and as a result, these modes are fast-relaxing from critical nematic fluctuations. In contrast, the relaxation of odd-parity modes is strongly renormalized by scattering processes described by class II diagrams. For a given pair of odd values of {n, m}, M αn,α m has a simple N × N matrix structure in the flavor basis, given by 1 -1 N along the diagonal and -1 N otherwise: N ×N There is one zero mode associated with this matrix structure, with an eigenvector given by 1 This corresponds to a conservation of the generalized current J n ≡ αk h nk c † αk c αk , whenever n is odd. Note that the total electron momentum P can be represented as a linear combination of J n , and therefore is also conserved. We point out that except for momentum, all other odd-parity currents are only quasi-conserved. Scattering processes away from the Fermi surface will lift these zero modes to a decay rate which is O T 2 /ε 2 F smaller than the relaxation of even-parity modes The generalization of the memory matrix to multiple electron bands is straightforward. For simplicity we omit the flavor index, and consider the case N = 1. The generalization to the case of a general N is straightforward. In addition, we assume that the critical nematic fluctuations can only scatter electrons within each band, since the fluctuations carry a small momentum. The Lagrangian is taken to be: where Here i = 1 . . . N band is the band label, and ε ik is the dispersion for the i-th electron band. The other terms in The derivation of the memory matrix parallels that of the multi-flavor, single-band scenario, with the only difference coming from different dispersions and form factors for different electron bands. There are two class of Feynman diagrams for the memory matrix, and at low temperatures and in the dc limit, the expressions for the two class of diagrams are: The Landau damping coefficient describes a sum of scattering processes on each electron band: Similar to the discussion in Sec. IV, we can rewrite the memory matrix in the harmonics basis. Class I diagram can be shown to be: where we have defined a short-hand notation: d in,kk = h inkh ink . Similarly, class II diagrams are expressed as: The term on the second line evaluates to: where γ jq is the Landau damping due to j-th band, such that γ q = j γ jq . In Eq. (E7), the p j 's are solutions of the two equations ε jpj = 0, ε jpj -q = 0. Since the momentum is two-dimensional, there is a discrete set of such solutions. For a convex, inversion symmetric Fermi surface of the jth band, there are two solutions: p j and -(p jq). We perform change of variables k = k + q, and the terms corresponding to the two classes to obtain the final expression: It is easy to see how this reduces to the one band expression in Eq. (D7). In that case, the solutions to the equations ε p = ε p-q = 0 are p = -k or k . One for the second term in Eq. (E8), we get: which is the same expression compared to Eq. (D7) in the case N = 1. Here we make explicit connection between our memory matrix approach with the familiar Boltzmann equation, and identify the non-equilibrium distribution function in the presence of an applied electric field within the memory function approach. We begin with writing down the Boltzmann equation for the quasiparticle distribution function {n αk (t)}: In the absence of an electric field, the steady state is given by the equilibrium Fermi-Dirac distribution n F,αk . When a small electric field E = E x x is applied, the distribution function deviates away from n F,αk , with the dominant response occuring near the Fermi surface. We write n αk = n F,αk + (∂ ε n F,αk ) Φαk , and the linearized Boltzman equation for the non-equilibrium distribuion {Φ αk (t)} has the form Fourier transformation gives: where where Φ = Φ/E x . In matrix form, we get Comparison between Eq. (F6) and Eq. ( In the main text, we address the functional form of Φ due to critical nematic fluctuations and how they lead to a temperature dependent resistivity very different than previously calculated. To leading order in 1/N , there are three types of diagrams that contribute to σ(Ω), depicted in Figure The DOS diagrams contribute two terms (a,b), related to each other by a change of iΩ n → -iΩ n . They can be expressed as: Here G k,ωn is short hand notation for the non-interacting fermionic Green's function The term on the second line does not contribute to σ (Ω), since following analytic continuation, it is the real part the retarded response function. Focusing on the first term, by a suitable change of variables, the dependence on the external frequency can be shifted entirely into the nematic propagator: Here, as before R (k, k + q, iν n ) ≡ -T ωn G k+q,ωn+νn G k,ωn . The MT term (c) can be expressed as: Following similar procedure as above, the MT contribution can be reduced to: Eqs. (G4) and (G6) share a similar structure. The combination gives: The AL contribution (d,e) can be expressed as: 11. Sketch of a two-electron scattering process for compensated metal. Blue Fermi pockets are electron-like and red Fermi pocket is hole-like. The purple (green) arrows label the Fermi velocities in the initial (final) states. Such a process flips the direction of electrical current from upward to downward. Here the terms on the second and third lines represent the fermionic triangle. Similarly, it can be reduced to: We note, however, that σ(iΩ n ) computed to lowest order in perturbation theory is equivalent to our memory matrix approach only at the high frequency limit. This is seen by expanding Eq. (A24) to leading order in the memory matrix: Repeated indices are summed over. In the second step we made use of J = k v k c † k c k , and χ kk = δ kk (-∂ ε k n F ). In the dc limit, σ (Ω → 0) ∝ M -1 , which cannot be obtained perturbatively without resumming an infinite set of diagrams. In a general band structure, the momentum and the current operators are not identical, and therefore electronelectron collisions can change the total current even if they conserve momentum. However, since the total electrical current has a finite overlap with the total momentum, meaning that the thermodynamic susceptibility χ JP = 0, the dc resistivity is still zero as long as momentum is conserved, because then the current cannot relax to zero. It is well-known, however, that this is not the case for a totally compensated metal, where the densities of electron and hole-like charge carriers are equal. This is because in a compensated metal, χ JP = 0. Below, we derive this result for completeness, first for non-interacting electrons and then a general interacting model. , As a result, in a compensated metal, the dc resistivity is non-zero even if momentum is perfectly conserved. We consider a system with i = 1, . . . , l Fermi sheets. The current operator is given by J = -e ik v ik c † ik c ik , where v ik = ∇ k ε ik , and ε ik is the dispersion relation of the ith sheet, while the momentum operator is given by P = ik kc † ik c ik . In the free electron limit, the thermodynamic susceptibility: χ JP = ́β 0 dτ J (τ ) • P(0) is given by: Summing over Matsubara frequency gives ∂n F (ε ik ) ∂ε ik . At temperatures much smaller than the Fermi energy of any of the Fermi sheets, we may approximate ∂n F (ε ik ) ∂ε ik ≈ -δ(ε k ). Then we have Here, L 2 is the total area of the system. Note that ̧F S dkk • vik is the area of the ith sheet in momentum space, with a positive sign if v ik is pointing outward (electron-like), and a negative sign if v ik is pointing inward (hole-like). Thus, by Eq. (H2), χ JP is proportional to the total area of all the Fermi pockets, each weighted with a sign that corresponds to the type of carriers. In a compensated metal, this is zero by definition, and hence χ JP = 0. We now derive this result in the presence of arbitrary interactions. We consider a general first-quantized Hamiltonian of the form H = j ε j (-i∇ j + q j A) + V ({r j }) (H3) where ε j (k) is the dispersion relation of the jth particle, and V ({r j }) is an arbitrary interaction potential, assumed to be translationally invariant. Here, we have allowed for different types of carriers with different charges q j . We would like to compute the overlap between the momentum and current operators: where A is spatially uniform. Since momentum is conserved, we can replace P(τ ) = P(0) = P. We write χ JP as where in the last line, we have performed a gauge transformation that shifts -i∇ j → -i∇ jq j A, and hence removes the A dependence from H where, as before, we treat Φ as a vector in momentum, Fermi sheet, and flavor space. The computation of the resistivity can be treated as a minimization problem: Φ that satisfies Eq. (F6) also minimizes the functional on the right hand side of Eq. (I1) where i, j are band labels, and we have replaced h ink with Φ iθ k , and replaced d in,kk with Φ ik -Φ ik . By symmetry, Φ ik = -Φ i,-k . For concreteness, it is useful to consider a simple model with two circular Fermi pockets with opposite Fermi velocities; we will comment about the generalization to more generic situations below. In the two-pocket model, since the Fermi velocities of the two pockets are opposite, Φ 1k = -Φ 2k . Carrying out the summation over band as well as performing momentum integration along the direction perpendicular to the Fermi surface, we get: Here, as before, V q (T ) = F (T /ω q )/γ q , where ω q = r q /γ q , |kk | = 2k F sin | θ-θ 2 |, and 1+u 2 sinh -2 u 2x . The asymptotic behavior of F (x) is: for x 1, F (x) ∝ x 2 ; whereas for x 1, F (x) ∝ x. Equation (I3) forms the basis for carrying out scaling analysis. We analyze cases where either there are no cold spots on either pocket, a case with cold spots on both pockets, and a case where one pocket has cold spots and the other does not. In this case, we assume for simplicity that f 1 = f 2 = 1. Since our the problem is rotationally invariant, the angular distribution function for an electric field in the x direction is Φ θ = cos θ The dominant contribution to resistivity is due to small angle scattering. We define relative angle α ≡ |θθ |, and the integrand of Eq. (I3) for α 1: Here θ 0 ∼ 1 is an upper cutoff. We defined θ T ≡ T /Ω L to be a dimensionless temperature. The integral is convergent both for α → 0 and α → ∞, due to the asymptotic behavior of the scaling function F discussed above. Therefore, we can rescale α ≡ α/θ As shown in Figs. Here v ik is the Fermi velocity of the ith band, and θ is the angle of k with respect to the x direction. dk i, = k iF (θ)dθ. The off-diagonal elements (θ = θ ) of the memory matrix are constructed from Eqs. (E3) by solving for the condition that all participating momentum states are on the Fermi surface. For class I diagram, the following expression is used: where on the right hand side both k and k are taken to be on the Fermi surface. Class II diagrams are constructed using: Here all four momentum states k, k , k + q c and k ± q c are on the Fermi surface. Note that the head-on collisions (namely when k = -k) need to be treated differently, as in this case, there is a one-dimensional manifold of q c satisfying the momentum-energy conservation constraints. Specifically, we incoporate these processes using the following expression: In numerical calculations, we discretize the angle along the Fermi surface. The number of points is usually taken to be 500. However, to extract proper scaling behavior at the lowest temperatures, we checked the convergence of the results for up to 2000 points. In Figure In the absence of impurity or umklapp, there is a large number of zero modes, corresponding to the conservation of total electron number as well as the conservation of all odd-parity modes. This is expected since we are projecting scattering processes onto the Fermi surface. When either impurity or umklapp scattering is added, all odd-parity modes (including momentum) are lifted from zero, and only total number is conserved. However, the way these zero modes get lifted is different depending on the mechanism. In the case of impurity scattering, all odd-parity modes gain a finite decay rate ∼ g 2 imp ν F . However when umklapp scattering is dominant, the odd-parity modes are smoothly lifted from 0, and form a continuous spectrum.