The dynamics of magnetic moments in iron-chromium alloys with different levels of Cr clustering show unusual features resulting from the fact that even in a perfect body-centred cubic structure, magnetic moments experience geometric magnetic frustration resembling that of a spin glass. Due to the long range exchange coupling and configuration randomness, magnetic moments of Cr solutes remain non-collinear at all temperatures. To characterise magnetic properties of Fe-Cr alloys, we explore the temperature dependence of magnetisation, susceptibility, Curie temperature and spinspin correlations with spatial resolution. The static and dynamic magnetic properties are correlated with the microstructure of Fe-Cr, where magnetisation and susceptibility are determined by the size of Cr precipitates at nominal Cr concentrations. The Curie temperature is always maximised when the solute concentration of Cr in the α phase is close to 5 to 6 at.%, and the susceptibility of Fe atoms is always enhanced at the boundary between a precipitate and solid solution. Interaction between Cr and Fe stimulates magnetic disorder, lowering the effective Curie temperature. Dynamic simulation of evolution of magnetic correlations shows that the spin-spin relaxation time in Fe-Cr alloys is in the 20 to 40 ps range. Iron and chromium are the main components of steels. They are both magnetic transition metals. Fe-Cr alloys adopt various structural and magnetic phases depending on the chemical composition and temperature. Theoretical understanding of the correlation between magnetic properties and microstructure provides valuable insight for tuning and characterising the mechanical properties of Fe-Cr alloys and steels. Understanding the coupled mechanical and magnetic properties that evolve as the underlying microstructure changes is particularly significant for steels development, including reduced activation ferritic martensitic (RAFM) steels for advanced fission and fusion reactors Magnetic ordering strongly affects structural and mechanical properties of Fe-Cr alloys. For example, the total free energy resulting from both magnon and phonon excitations stabilises the ferromagnetic (FM) bodycentred cubic (BCC) phase of Fe in comparison with the hexagonal close-packed phase structure stabilised by the s and d orbital occupation alone Magnetic phases of Fe-Cr alloys are fairly complex. The magnetic ground state of pure BCC Cr is an incommensurate spin density wave (SDW) with the Néel temperature T exp N ≈ 310K Fe-Cr alloys generally adopt a BCC structure across the whole chemical composition range, except at low Cr concentration and at high temperature, where they exhibit an FCC γ-loop in the phase diagram The 475 • C embrittlement in steels In general, precipitation during thermal ageing occurs across a time scale exceeding 10 4 hours The kinetics of Cr clustering in Fe-Cr alloys has been studied extensively through experimental In this paper we quantitatively explore the relationship of magnetic properties of Fe-Cr alloys with the underlying atomic ordering. We show that the Curie temperature is not only dependent upon the nominal concentration of solute atoms but also on the degree of Cr clustering. Furthermore, using correlation functions we show that the local Curie and Néel temperatures change in the vicinity of the cluster interfaces. We shall understand these phenomena from the scientific perspective, showing that some of the peculiar magnetic properties stem from geometric magnetic frustration. The randomness of exchange coupling between magnetic moments in Fe-Cr alloys essentially form spin glasses. Knowing the relationship between magnetic properties and precipitation in a quantitative manner may help in the development of a non-invasive engineering technique to estimate the level of Cr precipitation by probing local magnetic properties. Our paper is structured as follows. In Section II, the method of Langevin spin dynamics, the Hamiltonian and the quantitative properties of interest are introduced. In Section III A, magnetisation of solid solutions of Fe-Cr alloys are investigated, which are compared to alloys consisting of ideal and impure Cr clusters in Sections III B and III D, respectively. We examine the change of Curie temperature T C as a function of the size and chemical composition of clusters. The dynamics of magnetisation characterised using correlation functions of the idealised clusters is examined in Section III C and for (001) Fe/Cr interfaces in Section III E. Our results are summarised in Section IV. Spin Dynamics (SD) is an indispensable tool for studying magnetic excitations. Originating from the Landau-Lifshitz and Gilbert equations The temperature of a dynamic spin system can be controlled by Langevin thermostat where the H i = -∂H/∂S i is the effective field for spin i, γ s is a damping parameter and ξ i is δ-correlated random noise, which satisfies ξ i (t) = 0 and ξ iα (t)ξ jβ (t ) = μ s δ ij δ αβ δ(t -t ). Greek alphabet subscripts represent the Cartesian coordinates. According to the fluctuation-dissipation theorem (FDT) We perform SD simulations using our code SPILADY We adopt a Heisenberg-Landau type magnetic cluster expansion (MCE) Hamiltonian developed for Fe 1-x Cr x alloys, which has been used in various Monte Carlo (MC) simulations where and The magnetic energy of an alloy configuration depends on atomic site occupational variables σ i and the noncollinear magnetic moments of each atom M i . The discrete occupational site variable σ i takes a value of σ i = +1 if the i th atomic site is occupied by an Fe atom, or σ i = -1 if it is an Cr atom. Since the magnetic interactions depend on the atomic configuration, both the magnetic order and magnitudes (2) ij and B (2) ij are functions of atomic species in the 1 st and 2 nd coordination shells. The numerical values of the parameters for the Fe 1-x Cr x Hamiltonian in Eq. 2 to 4 are given in Table Magnetocrystalline anisotropic energy is not included in the MCE Hamiltonian, but can in principle be incorporated phenomenologically We verified our implementation by performing time averaged benchmarking comparisons for pure Fe, Fe-Cr alloys and (001) Fe/Cr superlattices. They show perfect agreement with MC calculations performed by Lavrentiev et al. A fundamental difference between Langevin SD (Eq. 1) and MC methods is the process of attaining equilibrium. Whilst both approaches should give the same thermodynamically averaged quantities in the limit of time going to infinity, dynamics simulations show if a system can really achieve equilibrium within realistic timescales. MC methods, on the other hand, do not contain an objective concept of time. It provides no information on the dynamics or time relaxation of events. The current model is also applicable to the study of spin glasses. Fe-Cr adopts a spin glass magnetic state at high Cr concentrations An important macroscopic order parameter is the time averaged magnetic moment. The contribution by species η = Fe or Cr is calculated using the magnetic moments in thermal equilibrium at a particular temperature T over the trajectory in a time period of τ , assuming ergodicity: The summation spans all atoms N η of the species. The averaged system magnetic moment is the contribution from all element types. Magnetisation is the magnitude of the averaged magnetic moment i.e. Mη = | M η |. The susceptibility of an observable with respect to its conjugate field can be calculated from the fluctuations of the observable within a canonical ensemble. This facilitates the calculation of the magnetic susceptibility χ through the spin dynamics calculations: where μ 0 is the vacuum permeability and M is the averaged magnetic moment within a defined volume. One can estimate the fundamental timescales of magnetic excitations using the correlation of fluctuating magnetic moments. The correlation of a magnetic moment at site i over a time interval of τ from a starting time t can be calculated using a time-displaced spin-spin autocorrelation function. where e i = M i /M i is the unit vector of magnetic moment. The autocorrelation function is calculated on-thefly where atom j is in the 1 st nearest neighbour shell of atom i. At cryogenic temperatures, a FM monodomain would yield c 1 = 1 whereas a layered AFM domain such as in L1 0 phase FeNi would return c 1 = -1. In the following, when we consider a spherical precipitate, we measure the averaged correlation functions of magnetic moments displaced from a chosen origin r 0 , i.e. the geometric centre of a cluster. We call c 0 (|r -r 0 |) the radially resolved time-displaced spin-spin autocorrelation functions (RRACF), and c 1 (|r-r 0 |) the 1 st nearest neighbour radially resolved time-displaced spin-spin correlation functions (1nRRCF). Our investigation starts from disordered solid solutions of Fe 1-x Cr x , where 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.25. We study the change of Curie temeprature T C through the change of magnetic susceptibility χ as functions of Cr concentration and temperature. SD simulations were performed using a cubic simulation cell with periodic boundary conditions containing 31250 atoms. Collinear ordering of magnetic moments along [001] was chosen for the initial configuration. We define the magnetisation axis parallel to the z direction. Statistics were collected over a 5ps production run following a 1ps thermal equilibration period. Each configuration was generated by random substitution of Cr atoms into the BCC Fe matrix to satisfy the concentration requirements. As we use a relatively large simulation cell, we assume sufficient statistical sampling of local structure. To check this assumption, for x = 15 and 25 at.%, we simulated three random configurations and found comparable results for each case. The magnetisation of the disordered solid solutions are shown in Fig. We determine T C through the turning point in the bulk susceptibility (∂ 2 T χ = 0) as shown in Fig. T C increases for small Cr concentrations up to 5 at.%Cr. Further increases in the Cr concentration decrease the T C . This is in agreement with experimental observations that T C is maximised for a Cr concentration around 6 at.% A concentration of x = 6.25 at.% Cr is an idealised case. It allows for the highest concentration of Cr which support perfect AFM ordering of all Cr magnetic moments with respect to their neighbouring Fe atoms. This is achieved when the Cr atoms take the corner sites of a repeating unit constructed of 2 × 2 × 2 unit cells. This is reflected with a pseudo-gap minimum in the spin-resolved density of states Irradiation alters the microstructure of steels, which influences their mechanical properties Atom probe experiments show precipitates form during ageing and irradiation. They starts forming as elongated coagulated clusters and becomes roughly spherical over time The system size corresponds to an α precipitate number density of 2.7×10 23 m -3 which is comparable to the lower limits observed experimentally in neutron irradiated Fe-Cr steels The averaged magnetisation for Cr concentrations of 9% and 25%, with different precipitate sizes and at different temperatures, are shown in Fig. In general, the disordered solid solutions have the smallest magnetisation. Both the Fe and Cr moments prefer being antiparallel to neighbouring Cr moments. With disordered configurations (when x > 0.06) this can rarely be satisfied. In order to minimize the energy, Cr moments try to be as antiparallel as they can with respect to their neighbours, so they tilt. This results in geometric magnetic frustration and non-collinearity of the Cr magnetic moments (see supporting Figure In Fig. An alternative representation is the magnetic moment space as shown in Fig. Non-collinear arrangements of Cr and Fe moments across the interface of the precipitate are similar to observations of (011) Fe-Cr interfaces Knowledge that we just obtained can be applied to realistic materials such as EUROFER-97. This is the European reference steel for the first wall of a DEMO fusion reactor which has a Cr concentration of 9 at.%. As we can ascertain from Fig. The first wall operating temperature of a fusion reactor is expected to be in the range of 350 • C to 550 • C 63 (i.e. 623 to 823K). We calculated the magnetisation for different Cr concentrations at 600K and 800K. Details can be found in the Supplementary Material. The difference between the magnetisation of the solid solution and com- plete phase separation at 9 at.%Cr is 10.4% at 600K and 10.3% at 800K. Our analysis shows that there are measurable changes to the macroscopic magnetic properties, which arise due to Cr clustering. In Fig. As a metric to quantify the conditions which maximise the Curie temperature, we consider the effective concentration x . This is defined as the concentration of the Cr remaining the α phase (see supplementary material for further details). Indeed for each concentration, we identify that T C is maximised when enough Cr conglomerates to produce an effective concentration of approximately 6 at.%Cr. The effective concentration x in the systems with nominal concentrations x of 5, 12 and 18 at.%Cr are shown explicitly in Figure The increase of T C when x ≈ 6 at.%Cr is not coincidental. It can be attributed to the same mechanism that drives T C in solid solutions to be maximised at x = 6.25 at.% Cr 17 . When more Cr atoms are in the precipitate, the relative concentration of Cr within the α phase decreases. This increases the average number of Fe nearest neighbours and decreases the number of nearest and next-nearest neighbouring Cr atoms. This reduces the geometric magnetic frustration of the Cr magnetic moments in the α phase. They can then align antiferromagnetically with the adjacent Fe atoms which is energetically favourable. This in turn strengthens the magnetic moment of the Fe atoms which can remain correlated to higher temperatures. Our simulations show the alloy acts as a composite system. The α phase, with an effective concentration of x , behaves as a disordered solid solution Fe 1-x Cr x . Cr within the α precipitate are bulk-like with an antiferromagnetic ordering below the Néel temperature. In the succeeding sections we consider the dynamics at the cluster interface and how Fe substitutions within the α change the magnetic properties. For larger cluster sizes, we can study the magnetic properties with spatial resolution. We demonstrate this by examining a spherical Cr cluster, of radius 4 nm with no impurities, situated within pure Fe. We used a simulation cell containing 250,000 atoms, that is 50 × 50 × 50 unit cells. This corresponds to a number density of 3.2×10 23 m -3 which can be observed experimentally, such as experiments on neutron irradiated Fe-12Cr at 320 • C by Reese et al. In Fig. We repeated the calculation three times with slightly different initial magnitudes of the magnetic moments such that different phase space trajectories were explored. We did this in order to confirm the oscillations are physical, and not caused by noise or poor convergence. It also improves our statistical sampling. The average is plotted as the solid line for each temperature with the shaded region limiting the maximum and minimum values of the repeated runs. We confirm the oscillations at 32 Å < |r -r 0 | < 40 Å are physical by noting only small variances between the peaks of all the calculations. Furthermore, the peaks occur at fixed distances across different temperatures. To visualise the local magnetic configurations, the time averaged magnetic moments within a representative con-ventional unit cell centred at each radius is shown in Fig. The susceptibility within a cluster is particularly high when the temperature is below the Néel temperature T N ≈ 350K. This is due to the magnetic frustration of the Cr near the interface. A peak in susceptibility is observed within the Fe matrix even at a temperatures much lower than T C . From Eq. 6, it is apparent that the Fe moments near the interface fluctuate more readily than in the bulk Fe. We can deduce that the disorder of the configuration at the Fe-Cr interface leads to a reduction of T C locally. This is evidenced further in the analysis of correlation functions below. We note that the magnetisation level in the centre of a pure Cr cluster is not unique. This indicates there is metastability enabling the magnetic moments to order according to initial conditions akin to a spin glass. The system also meets the criteria of frustration due to the local configuration dependence of the exchange parameters. Since Fe-Cr is known to become a spin glass for 81-84%Cr An advantage of SD compared to MC is its capability of simulating the dynamic time resolved magnetic properties. In Fig. The profile of the correlation functions c 0 and c 1 consist of a decaying envelope function indicative of the characteristic relaxation or dephasing time, where its asymptotic value represents the strength of correlation. The oscillations in the RRACF are due to the precession of magnetic moments At T = 100K the RRACF is positive for all radii. In the α phase away from the cluster, the RRACF remains close to unity indicating the magnetic moments are strongly correlated over time. The Fe moments on the interface (40.1 Å) have a lower RRACF due to the magnetic frustration reducing the correlation. This coincides with the sharp increase in magnetic susceptibility along the interfacial Fe layers. Near the centre of the precipitate (13.1 Å), the Cr magnetic moments have bulk-like ordering and are strongly correlated. Near the interface the magnetisation within the cluster fluctuates. As one can see in Fig. The 1nRRCF provides a measure of correlation between a magnetic moment at |r -r 0 | with its nearest neighbours. At 100K, it shows that the Fe moments in the α phase remain extremely collinear with their neighbours since c 1 ≈ 1. Collinearity is decreased slightly for the Fe magnetic moments near the Cr cluster (40.1 Å). Cr magnetic order is bulk-like near the centre of the precipitate at 13.1 Å where c 1 ≈ -1. Towards the Fe interface the Cr moments become less correlated with their nearest neighbours over time as indicated by the increased value of the 1nRRCF. This indicates the Cr moments are deviating from AFM ordering. Indeed this assessment agrees with Fig. At 500K, Cr moments in the centre of the precipitate (13.1 Å and 35.1 Å) become uncorrelated, which is consistent with T N ≈ 350K. These moments dephase within 20-30ps. Moments at 37.0 Å from the precipitate centre are still weakly correlated with their neighbouring atoms, and the 1nRRCF becomes positive. This implies the local T N is enhanced for Cr near the interface in contrast to the reduction in T C for interfacial Fe. At 800K, Fe magnetic moments remain strongly correlated as shown in RRACF and 1nRRCF albeit collinearity has decreased due to thermal fluctuations. Fe moments near the α interface at 40.1 Å remain less correlated than those in the Fe matrix and take a longer time to dephase. These interfacial Fe moments have a higher oscillation frequency indicating that their effective fields are stronger because of the strong J F e-Cr 1nn interaction. The larger fluctuations give rise to the enhanced susceptibility (Eq. 6). This provides further evidence that the effective T C is reduced around the cluster. Consequently the interface acts as a nucleation site for the ferromagnetic to paramagnetic phase transition. At 1200K, all magnetic moments become incoherent, as shown by both the RRACF and the 1nRRCF dropping to zero (Figure In previous sections, we considered idealised spherical α clusters. In reality, a Cr cluster is rich in Cr but impure Spherical α clusters with Cr concentration x c and radius 40 Å are created in a pure Fe matrix. Three configurations are generated for concentrations of x c = 0.8, 0.6, 0.4, 0.2 in a supercell with 250,000 atoms. Since irradiated steels have been experimentally observed to have α clusters with concentrations between 50 and 95% we report the x c = 0.8 and 0.6 cases in Fig. At low temperatures (T < T C ), the magnetisation in the Fe matrix recovers the bulk values typically within 10 Å from the α interface. When the temperature increases, the recovery length increases for all x c . At 1100K, the recovery length is 20-30 Å for all x c , even where there is no Cr in the Fe matrix. This indicates the interactions and associated reduced ferromagnetic ordering proximate to the interface have long range effects, which reduces their correlated reinforcement. For higher concentrations of Fe within the α , the total magnetisation within the cluster steadily increases. A discontinuous change in the radially averaged magnetisation is observed across the interface. The total magnetisation is enhanced within 10 Å of the precipitate interface. The enhanced magnetic susceptibility of the Fe atoms near the interface discussed in the previous section is also observed for the non-ideal clusters (see arrow in Fig. Within the cluster, the susceptibility is reduced near the interface. This corresponds to an increased effective T N originating from the interfacial Cr moments coupling to Fe moments. To visualise the magnetic ordering in the system and the change with temperature, the magnetic moment space for each precipitate concentration is shown in Fig. For x c = 0.8, 0.6 and 0.4, the Fe moments dispersed within the α precipitate experience significant frustration. This non-collinearity is shown in the magnetic moment space by the egg-shaped / ovoid distribution. The Fe moments maintain weak ordering with a net magnetisation and with maxima along the major axis of the ovoid. The Cr moments are similarly distributed albeit with a weak total magnetic moment orientated opposite to that of Fe moments. Surprisingly at 500K, the collinearity increases. The thermal agitation enables Fe moments perpendicular to the magnetisation axis to reorient. We note that experiments have confirmed spin glass state 81-84 at.% Cr at low temperatures In summary, the idealised pure Cr precipitates have an ordered non-collinear AFM structure which becomes more disordered with Fe substitutions. Despite the reduction of magnetic ordering, the overall properties remain similar. The effective T C of Fe surrounding the α cluster is reduced whereas T N of interfacial Cr atoms is increased. This results in a spatial dependence of timeresolved properties such as the susceptibility which was used to identify interfacial Fe to be more susceptible than Fe in the α phase. For large clusters, we may approximate the interface by ideal flat interfaces with different orientations. Indeed, it has been shown that when non-collinear magnetic configurations are permitted, the formation energies of (001), (011) and (111) Fe/Cr interfaces predicted using density functional theory are nearly degenerate Spin dynamics calculations are performed on a cell containing 32000 atoms, where 20 × 20 × 20 Cr unit cells stacked upon 20×20×20 Fe unit cells. Periodic boundary conditions are enforced. Essentially, we create an Fe/Cr superlattice with two interfaces in the principle cell. The time averaged magnetic properties of such a confirguration has been studied using MC MCE simulations in Ref. 54. In the Supplementary Material we provide the averaged magnetisation of the superlattice system and the layer resolved magnetic moments which we compare to these earlier calculations by Lavrentiev et al. The magnetisation almost equals to the scaled value for bulk Fe implying the Fe magnetic moments in the Fe layers remain bulk like at low and intermediate temperatures. It is similar to the case of large clusters with high Cr concentration. At higher temperatures the magnetisation of the interfacial system reduces faster than the bulk Fe (Supplementary Fig. The bulk magnetisation recovery length from the interface increases with temperature. There is excellent agreement between our SD calculations with the MC simulations for these time averaged properties. Using SD, we can also study the continuous evolution of magnetic moments as a function of time. We analyse the time correlation between spins by considering correlation functions across a simple (001) interface. These results are compared to the dynamics observed for more complex interfaces of clusters. This allows us to conclude whether the behaviour identified in Section III C is general or is a consequence of the topology of a cluster. In Fig. In Fig. Additional evidence can be observed from the time correlation functions (Eq. 7 and 8) which are now defined to be resolved per (001) layer in Figure The interfacial Cr layers Cr(1), remain strongly correlated in comparison to the other Cr layers. A minimum is observed in the susceptibility at the interface for all temperatures correspondingly. At 800K, almost twice T N , c 1 (z, τ ) identifies the moments in Cr(1) are still correlated to the moments of the nearest neighbouring atoms. This behaviour of the susceptibility and correlation is observed for both the (001) interface and the high index interfaces of spherical α clusters. This shows simple (001) interface are good approximations to more complex interfaces. Spin dynamics simulations were performed to investigate the magnetic properties in Fe 1-x Cr x alloys. Different Cr concentrations and degrees of Cr clustering were considered. We adopted a magnetic cluster expansion Hamiltonian that considers both longitudinal and transverse fluctuations of magnetic moments within the framework of Langevin spin dynamics. We observed a strong dependence between the magnetic properties of the FeCr alloys with the local microstructure. Using the SPILADY code When we observed the change in the Curie temperature for nominal concentrations of Cr with precipitates of varying size, we found a dependence upon the effective concentration. The effective concentration is the Cr concentration outside the α cluster. The transition temperature was found to be highest for configurations with an effective α concentration of 5-6 at.%. For a particular case of Fe-9Cr alloys, which has the same Cr concentration as EUROFER-97, the magnetisation can vary by 10% over the operational temperature ranges of the first wall of fusion power plant, for example from 600K to 800K. The change of magnetisation is due to the varying level of Cr precipitation. This potentially has significant impact on the integrity of the mechanical properties of steels, which is coupled to its magnetic properties. Cr located at the α-α interface were observed to have moments that remained strongly correlated over time and with respect to the neighbouring moments. The Cr moments were aligned anti-parallel to the moments of adjacent Fe atoms. This reduced their susceptibility relative to Cr in the core of the cluster. For pure Cr precipitates, the moments were identified to rotate from being anti-parallel with Fe at the interface, to being perpendicular in the centre. The Cr moments were in an antiferromagnetic configuration with respect to their nearest neighbours. Cr moments near the interface, where the non-collinear configuration was observed, were determined to be the least correlated and therefore frustrated. For impure clusters of experimentally consistent Fe concentrations (50-95%Cr), the ordered antiferromagnetism in the centre of the cluster was destroyed. Instead, disordered non-collinear configurations were ob-served at all temperatures. A net magnetisation was still supported. When temperature was increased, the Fe moments close to the interfaces became more disordered than in the bulk. The Cr cluster interface acts as a nucleation site with a reduced effective Curie temperature. Conversely, the Cr moments on the interface remain statistically correlated at temperatures far exceeding the Néel point. We may understand the underlying physics through an investigation into dynamic properties which can be calculated from spin dynamics calculations in contrast to the Monte Carlo method. We studied the spin-spin autocorrelation and 1 st nearest neighbour correlation functions in Cr clusters and (001) Fe-Cr superlattices. Contrary to expectation, the high index of the cluster interface did not significantly change the observed correlation of Fe and Cr across the interface with respect to the simple (001) case. Fe magnetic moments near the interface fluctuate more readily than in the bulk of the α. This resulted in enhanced susceptibility of the Fe in the interfacial layers. The dynamic properties observed for the impure clusters remained consistent with the pure clusters and (001) interface. The effect of external magnetic field, which was not considered here, may indeed worth attention from the technological perspective. In the design of ITER In summary, using spin dynamics we have investigated the magnetisation, the susceptibility and the Curie temperature of Fe 1-x Cr x alloys with different Cr concentration and different degrees of Cr precipitation. This enhances our knowledge of how magnetic properties of steels change upon ageing and under irradiation damage. This may help to find a non-invasive way of determining the level of Cr precipitation through the observation of magnetic properties of alloys.