Experiments on planar Josephson-junction architectures have recently been shown to provide an alternative way of creating topological superconductors hosting accessible Majorana modes. These zero-energy modes can be found at the ends of a one-dimensional channel in the junction of a twodimensional electron gas (2DEG) proximitized by two spatially separated superconductors. The channel, which is below the break between the superconductors, is not in direct contact with the superconducting leads, so that proximity coupling is expected to be weaker and less well controlled than in the simple nanowire configuration widely discussed in the literature. This provides a strong incentive for this paper which investigates the nature of proximitization in these Josephson junction architectures. At a microscopic level we demonstrate how and when it can lead to topological phases. We do so by going beyond simple tunneling models through solving self-consistently the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations of a heterostructure multicomponent system involving two spatially separated s-wave superconductors in contact with a normal Rashba spin-orbit-coupled 2DEG. Importantly, within our self-consistent theory we present ways of maximizing the proximity-induced superconducting gap by studying the effect of the Rashba spin-orbit coupling, chemical potential mismatch between the superconductor and 2DEG, and sample geometry on the gap. Finally, we note (as in experiment) a Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov phase is also found to appear in the 2DEG channel, albeit under circumstances which are not ideal for the topological superconducting phase. There has been much excitement in the literature over the possibility of observing one-dimensional (1D) topological superconductivity which involves a single 1D wire Indeed, the planar junctions have a notable strength relative to the nanowires. The phase difference between the two superconductors provides an alternative knob (beyond the Zeeman field) to tune the system into the topological phase This leads to the central goal of this paper which is to quantify this somewhat indirect form of proximitization and to optimize its effectiveness. We focus on a well-studied substrate: the 2DEG which has moderately strong Rashba spin-orbit coupling (SOC). Our calculations go beyond the simple tunneling models While not essential to the topological superconductiv- By tuning the strength of either the applied in-plane magnetic field B or the phase difference φ between the two superconductors, the system can be tuned into the topological superconducting phase which hosts Majorana zero modes (γ) at the end of the junction. (b) Schematic diagram of a nanowire proximitized by a superconductor. The system becomes a topological superconductor, which hosts Majorana zero modes (γ) at the end of the nanowire, when the strength of the magnetic field B is above a certain critical value. ity, a relevant complement to these studies relates to a very elusive state of matter, the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) The two generic types of proximitized 1D topological superconductors are illustrated in Fig. One should appreciate that to design topological superconductors without proximitization, say by doping a topological insulator It is useful to quantitatively characterize the Josephson-junction-based topological superconductors we consider here in terms of the size of the energy gap, E gap , associated with the proximitized 2DEG. The quantity E gap depends on the junction geometry and materials parameters. It varies with the junction thickness, the strip width, the SOC and chemical potential difference between the host superconductors and the 2DEG. Equally important is its dependence on the external parameters which control topological phases: the Josephson-junction phase difference φ and the Zeeman field E Z . This field enters in two different ways; it affects the gap opening and closing processes associated with topological phase transitions in a Josephson junction. It also affects the coupling at each separate interface between the host superconductor and the 2DEG substrate. Increasing E Z in the 2DEG inhibits proximitization. It is convenient, then, to isolate these processes by writing This states that the energy gap in the presence of Zeeman and superconducting phase difference, E gap , depends directly on a proximity-induced gap ∆ prox , (which is deduced in the absence of any Zeeman field, E Z or phase bias φ), times a multiplicative function, f (E Z , φ), which represents (dominantly) the topological characteristics of the junction. In the topological region, the parameter E gap is, thus, a crucial parameter, as its inverse characterizes the Majorana localization length. The smaller this length, the more localized are the Majorana modes. The localization of the Majoranas is, then, optimized when the proximity gap ∆ prox is maximal. Understanding this is one of the central contributions of our paper. We now present a brief outline. Section II of the paper discusses the theoretical model, i.e., the Hamiltonian of the planar Josephson junction. In Sec. III, we give a discussion of the self-consistent BdG approach used to solve for the energy dispersion and proximity-induced gap. In Sec. IV we study a simple tunneling model of the superconducting proximity effect in which the junction is converted to a lower dimension by integrating out the host superconductors. Section V focuses on numerical results from our full-proximity model for the proximity gap ∆ prox where ∆ prox is the spectral gap calculated for junctions in the absence of Zeeman field and superconducting phase difference. Here we separately discuss the role of SOC, chemical potential mismatch, and 2DEG thickness on ∆ prox . The symmetry class of the planar Josephson junction is addressed in Sec. VI. In Sec. VII we present the topological phase diagram as a function of in-plane Zeeman field and superconducting phase bias for different chemical potential mismatch. We further show the evolution of the energy spectrum across the topological phase transition. Section VIII presents a brief discussion of how FFLO superconducting phase is established, in the presence of an in-plane Zeeman field along the junction. More details of this elusive FFLO phase are presented in Appendix A. Finally, we summarize our conclusions in Sec. IX. We consider a Josephson junction made from a Rashba spin-orbit-coupled 2DEG in contact with two spatially separated superconductors and subjected to an in-plane magnetic field along the junction as shown in Fig. We begin by writing down the "normal" component (in the absence of superconducting pairing) of the Hamiltonian as where ψ σ (ψ † σ ) is the annihilation (creation) operator of an electron with spin σ =↑, ↓. In Eq. ( where μ S and μ 2DEG are the chemical potentials of the superconductor and 2DEG, respectively. Throughout this paper, we work in units where = 1, μ 2DEG = 1, and 2m * = 1 which gives the Fermi momentum of the 2DEG, k F = 1. The widths of the superconductors and the junction (along the y direction) are denoted by W SC and W , respectively [see Fig. The Zeeman energy E Z (r) = g(r)μ B B/2 is due to the applied in-plane magnetic field B along the junction (x direction) with g being the Lande g factor and μ B being the Bohr magneton. Except when indicated otherwise, the Zeeman energy E Z (r) is assumed to be zero in the host superconductor and insulator but taken to be constant throughout the 2DEG (E Z,L = E Z,J = E Z , where E Z,L is the Zeeman energy of the 2DEG directly below the superconducting leads and E Z,J is the Zeeman energy of the 2DEG in the junction). We justify this assumption by noting that the Lande g factor for the superconductor ( g ∼ 2 for Al) is much smaller than the Lande g factor for the semiconductor ( g ∼ 15 for InAs) An important parameter which appears throughout this paper is α which characterizes the strength of the SOC in the 2DEG. The SOC strength is zero in the superconductors and insulator but finite in the 2DEG, i.e., This is a realistic representation We assume that the system is translationally invariant along the x direction and finite in both y and z directions. Because the system is translationally invariant along the x direction, we can write the Hamiltonian in the Nambu basis Ψ kx (y, z) = ψ kx↑ (y, z), ψ kx↓ (y, z), ψ † kx↓ (y, z), -ψ † kx↑ (y, z) where the BdG Hamiltonian is given by Here the Pauli matrices σ and τ act in the spin and particle-hole subspace, respectively, with τ ± = (τ x ± iτ y )/2. The superconducting pairing potential, ∆(y, z), arises microscopically from the attractive interactions which are only present in the host superconductors: where g(y, z) is the coupling function within the parent superconductors: for W/2 < y < W SC + W/2 and D 2DEG < z < D 2DEG + D SC , 0 otherwise. (9) Here, g 0 is the attractive coupling constant, and φ is the phase difference between the two superconductors. Applying a Bogoliubov transformation, with T being the temperature. The Debye frequency ω D provides an energy cutoff in Eq. We obtain the pair amplitude F (y, z) [Eq. where the wave function is given by with the boundary condition Φ nkx (y, z) = 0 at |y| > W SC + W/2, z < 0 and z > D 2DEG + D SC and subject to the self-consistency equation [Eqs. ( For definiteness, we set the smallest length scale to be of the order of 1/k F where k F = √ μ 2DEG is the Fermi momentum of the 2DEG. General matrix elements are similarly expanded in terms of the same Fourier series. For example, we define the matrix elements of an operator O to be In this way all terms in the BdG Hamiltonian can be expanded in this basis set. What we have accomplished in this procedure is to successfully transform a set of differential equations into an algebraic matrix eigenvalue problem. Having recast the Hamiltonian in the basis given in Eq. ( The above more powerful procedure has not been widely applied; rather the literature focus has been on an approximate treatment of proximitization. The approximate approach builds on earlier work by McMillan Here, H S,N is the Hamiltonian of the superconductor (S) and 2DEG (N ), respectively, and the tunneling Hamiltonian is given by where c S/N,k,σ is the annihilation operator in the S or N side of the interface for an electron with momentum k and spin σ = ↑ / ↓ . This tunnel Hamiltonian H T conserves momentum k parallel to the N S interface but changes the transverse momentum k ⊥ perpendicular to the interface. In this approach one derives the proximity-induced superconductivity by integrating out the superconducting term in Eq. ( Assuming the density of states to be weakly dependent on energy, the surface self-energy can be calculated to be where the density of states ν(ε F N ) is evaluated at the Fermi energy of the 2DEG and ζ N is the proximityinduced shift in the chemical potential of the 2DEG. We can now incorporate this self-energy into the strongcoupling form Here, is the reduced quasiparticle weight due to the virtual propagation of electrons in the superconductor with Γ N = |t| 2 ν(ε F,N ) being the effective coupling between the 2DEG and superconductor. This quasiparticle weight can be viewed as the fraction of time that a propagating electron spends on the superconducting side of the N S interface. The proximity-induced superconducting pairing potential in the 2DEG is then given by Having solved for ∆ N , we now solve for the renormalized superconducting pairing potential in the superconductor. Similar to Eq. ( Substituting this into the strong-coupling form of Green's function of the superconductor, we have where Thus, the renormalized superconducting pairing potential in the superconductor is given by where ∆ 0 is the gap of an isolated superconductor. Note that the subscripts N, S in the above equations refer to the quantities in the 2DEG (N ) and superconductor (S), respectively. The coupled gap equations [Eqs. A. Relation to the standard effective model In the literature, it is rather common to ignore the corrections in the host superconductor and assume ∆ S = ∆ 0 but we will see in the full proximitization theory that this is not generally a good assumption. Also important is that in the more general situation, all pair amplitude parameters vary continuously across the system. With this simplification, the above analysis is the basis for the so-called "effective model" which is described as having integrated out the host superconductor. In the effective model, the Hamiltonian of the 2DEG is given by where ∆ is the proximity-induced pairing potential in the 2DEG which is obtained after integrating out the superconductors. This is given by where ∆ prox is chosen phenomenologically. We turn now to numerical results for ∆ prox obtained from our full proximitization studies. Although we begin with the limit of zero magnetic field, it is useful to understand how the magnetic field affects the separate proximitization processes at each of the two interfaces between the 2DEG and the host superconductor. To do this we compare two kinds of Josephson-junction configuration: The first junction has the Zeeman field confined to the channel in the 2DEG between the two superconductors [Figs. In the remainder of this section, we will address how to optimize the proximity gap ∆ prox at E Z = φ = 0. By dropping the Zeeman field and junction phase bias, we are establishing how to select materials as well as geometric parameters. Since SOC plays an important role, it should be noted that there is no consensus in the literature about how SOC interacts with proximitization. It has been argued that larger SOC is beneficial This mismatch is illustrated in Fig. FIG. We summarize this by noting that the dependence of the proximitized gap on the SOC strength is weaker for the case where the superconductor chemical potential is larger than the 2DEG chemical potential. This is because a superconductor with a larger chemical potential has more occupied subbands. As a result, for an incident electron coming from the 2DEG with transverse momentum normal to the N S interface, there is an electron from one of the subbands in the superconductor with momentum which is close to matching the incident momentum of the electron from the 2DEG. Note that a mismatch in the Fermi velocity of the electron in the superconductor and 2DEG increases the amplitude of the normal reflections while decreasing that of Andreev reflections. Since the superconductivity in the 2DEG is proximity induced via Andreev reflection processes at the interface These physical effects are illustrated more directly in Fig. But this raises another important issue. While a substantial mismatch in chemical potentials helps to negate the SOC effects on the proximitization, there is a negative side to making the chemical potential mismatch (δμ = μ Sμ 2DEG ) too large. To make this clear, we can compare Figs. 4(a) and 4(d) which represent an extreme example of zero SOC in the 2DEG. Here one can see that the larger the chemical potential difference, the smaller the effective pairing gap. This is because the chemical potential mismatch increases the Fermi velocity mismatch between the 2DEG and the superconductors resulting in a decrease in the NS interface transparency. [80] We will refer back to these competing effects involving δμ and the SOC strength, α, in a summary figure (Fig. Figure Figure Figure It is useful to look at the underlying symmetries which dictate the nature of the topological phases. The above BdG Hamiltonian [Eq. P = σ y τ y K where K is the complex conjugation. For zero Zeeman field E Z = 0 and a superconducting phase bias φ = 0 or φ = π, the Hamiltonian belongs to the symmetry class DIII in the tenfold classification The T and M y symmetries are broken when an inplane Zeeman field is applied along the junction (x direction) or for a phase bias other than φ = 0 or φ = π. The Hamiltonian, however, remains invariant under an antiunitary "effective" time-reversal operator T which is the product of the T and M y operators, i.e., T = M y T = iK × (y → -y) where T 2 = 1. Thus the system has the BDI symmetry The symmetry class BDI is characterized by a Z topological invariant Q Z where |Q Z | denotes the number of Majorana zero modes at each end of the junctions. On the other hand, the symmetry class D is characterized by a Z 2 topological invariant Q Z2 which denotes the parity of the Q Z invariant. We obtain the phase diagram of the system by calculating the topological invariant following Ref. To do so, we first diagonalize the chiral operator C with 1 and -1 in the upper-left and lower-right block, respectively. Since {C, H} = 0, in this basis where the C is block diagonal, the BdG Hamiltonian H kx is off diagonal, i.e., We can calculate the Z topological invariant (Q Z ) from the winding of the phase θ(k x ) of the determinant of the off-diagonal part A(k x ) where e iθ(kx) = detA(k x )/|detA(k x )|. The Z topological invariant is given by and the Z 2 topological invariant (the parity of Q Z ) is given by It is shown in Ref. Figure We understand this stripelike phase diagram as deriving from an increasing mismatch between the chemical potential of the superconductor and the 2DEG. This, in turn, should be viewed as leading to an increase in the strength of the normal reflections in the 2DEG. Due to the proximity to the superconductor, the chemical potential of the 2DEG directly in contact with the superconductor will be renormalized by that of the superconductor. As a result, there is a difference between the effective chemical potential of the 2DEG directly below the superconductor with the effective chemical potential of the 2DEG in the junction. This effectively creates a potential barrier for the electrons which in turn increases the strength of normal reflections. We conclude this section by noting that under ideal circumstances (i.e., for transparent junctions with small δμ), the critical Zeeman field needed to tune the system to topological phases can be greatly reduced for a phase bias φ = π. One can infer from Fig. The topological phase transition of class D is associated with a gap closing at k x = 0 Figure We summarize this section by noting that despite the more indirect form of proximitization associated with this Josephson-junction architecture, as compared with the nanowires of Fig. An exotic superconducting state, characterized by nonzero center-of-mass momentum of Cooper pairs and spatially varying order parameter, may occur for certain materials in the presence of both in-plane magnetic field and superconductivity. Interestingly, the planar junctions discussed here are associated with this exotic form of superconductivity, referred to as the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinikov (FFLO) phase The upper panel of Fig. In Appendix A we show that the FFLO state is also present for the case of 1D Rashba SOC. There we also illustrate how the same behavior can be found in the effective models where the superconducting hosts have been "integrated out". In general, the amplitude of the FFLO oscillation decreases with increasing temperature The presence of nonmagnetic disorder will decrease the amplitude and period of the FFLO oscillations. This is because the associated scattering involves an averaging of the effective magnitude of the magnetic field over all directions (from a minimum value of 0 to a maximum value of E Z ), yielding a shorter oscillation period While heterostructures that involve proximitization appear to be important for achieving topological superconductivity, the major components required to achieve this phase are in many ways inimical to the proximitization process. These involve Zeeman fields, spinorbit coupling which can lead to band-structure mismatches and substantial chemical potential discontinuities between the parent superconductors and the proximitized (often semiconducting) medium. Nevertheless, experiments Because we have focused on the proximitization process itself, in this paper we were able to consider how to maximize the proximity gap ∆ prox both by varying geometry as well as materials parameters. This particular parameter ∆ prox is understood to be computed in the absence of Zeeman field or phase difference. It nevertheless sets the scale for the energy gap in the topological phase, E gap , and thereby for the stability of Majorana zero modes. Figure Finally, by plotting the pair amplitude itself, we have provided in this paper very direct evidence for the elusive FFLO phase. It is not necessarily to be associated with topological physics, but it has some of the same requirements. We show how the presence of Zeeman fields together with SOC and (remote) proximity effect stabilize this state which exists entirely inside the 2DEG channel, much as in recent experiments which breaks the rotational symmetry. In the limit where E Z αk F μ, the two Fermi surfaces are shifted in the direction perpendicular to the Zeeman field direction (along k y ) by q = 2E Z /v F as shown in Fig. In the main text we have shown how the FFLO phase appears in a proximitized junction in the presence of an in-plane Zeeman field and a conventional (2D) Rashba SOC. In this appendix we show that our findings are quite robust, appearing also for a 1D Rashba SOC as well as in the effective model. We self-consistently solve the BdG equations to obtain the pair amplitude [as given by Eq. ( .2 shows the pair amplitude F (y, z) for a 2DEG with a 1D Rashba spin-orbit-coupling α∂ y σ x . The pair amplitudes are calculated for different SOC strengths. As for the case of 2D Rashba spin-orbit-coupled electron gas, here we also find an oscillation of the pair amplitude within the junction channel and with the oscillation length scale given by λ = E Z /(2v F ) which increases with increasing Zeeman field E Z and decreases with increasing α (as v F increases with increasing α). This is indicative of the FFLO phases formed in the presence of an applied in-plane magnetic field along the junction. We note that the Hamiltonian of a 2DEG with a 1D Rashba SOC can be mapped by a gauge transformation into the Hamiltonian of a conical Holmium magnet (Ref. 