Much attention has been given recently to flexible and wearable integrated-electronic devices, with a strong emphasis on real-time sensing, computing and communication technologies. Thin ferroelectric films exhibit switchable polarization and strong electromechanical coupling, and hence are in widespread use in such technologies, albeit not when flexed. Effects of extrinsic strain on thin ferroelectric films are still unclear, mainly due to the lack of suitable experimental systems that allow cross structural-functional characterization with insitu straining. Moreover, although the effects of intrinsic strain on ferroelectric films, e.g. due to film-substrate lattice mismatch, have been investigated extensively, it is unclear how these effects are influenced by external strain. Here, we developed a method to strain thin films homogenously in-situ, allowing functional and structural characterization while retaining the sample under constant straining conditions in AFM and XRD. Using this method, we strained the seminal ferroelectric, PbZr 0.2 Ti 0.8 O 3 that was grown on a flexible mica substrate, to reduce substrate clamping effects and increase the tetragonality. Consequently, we increased the domain stability, decreased the coercive field value and reduced imprint effects. This method allows also direct characterization of the relationship between the lattice parameters and nanoscale properties of other flexible materials. The growing interest in flexible and foldable electronics raises the need for functional materials with suitable characteristics, mainly in the form of thin films. Ferroelectrics are functional materials that exhibit reversible spontaneous polarization, while they are a sub-group of piezoelectrics and hence demonstrate strong electro-mechanical coupling. Ferroelectrics are thus used in a broad range of applications that may benefit from mechanical flexibility, including sensors and medical monitoring devices as well as mobile-phone antennae and non-volatile memory devices. However, characterizing functional properties of thin ferroelectric films at the device-relevant length scale while flexing the material is a great challenge. Effects of mechanical strain on the piezoresponse and polarization hysteresis loops of thin ferroelectric films were observed first macroscopically (e.g. with optical interference methods), demonstrating clockwise or counterclockwise rotation of the hysteresis loop under tensile and compressive strain respectively. Among the flexing methods, four-point stressing produces the most homogeneous strain distribution over a long range, enabling characterization of the functional properties independent of the position of the PFM probe as well as under the larger-scale XRD beam. The applied stress (σ) and hence the induced strain (ε) along a beam according to the torque behavior is described as follows is the torque that is applied to the load span L 1 (i.e. the distance between the two inner supports of the four stressing points), F is the force, δ and b are respectively the thickness and width of the bent sample and I = bδ In addition to extrinsic strain, thin ferroelectric films experience intrinsic strain that must be considered as well. Thin films of perovskite ferroelectrics exhibit typically inferior functional characteristics with respect to their bulk form because they are inherently strained by the substrate. Significant effort has been put in understanding and controlling the effect of substratefilm lattice mismatch during the film growth on key properties, such as piezoresponse, polarization retention, polarization imprint and coercivity, with an emphasize on the commonly used perovskite ferroelectric, PZT. Nevertheless, to-date, experimental realization of the simultaneous extrinsic (flexing) and intrinsic (substrate clamping) effects of strain for the sake of understanding the effects of strain and structure on ferroelectric functionality in a given material is still lacking. Here, we developed a method for straining a flexible ferroelectric film homogeneously with a four-point bending stage and characterizing both its structural and functional properties in-situ. We used this method to tune the substrate-film lattice mismatch while straining the material in the XRD. We then transferred the sample while maintaining the same strain conditions to perform PFM imaging and spectroscopic characterization. We demonstrated that by compensating the substrate clamping with external strain the ferroelectric functional properties are enhanced. The samples investigated in this work are 30-nm thick PbZr 0.2 Ti 0.8 O 3 (PZT) films grown on a flexible freshly cleaved mica muscovite substrate (30-m thick) by pulsed laser deposition (PLD). A comparison between the functional properties of the unstrained and strained PZT thin films was done by means of PFM imaging and PFM spectroscopy (Asylum Research, MFP Infinity). The procedure we used to corroborate the structural and functional properties of the same individual samples in unstrained and strained states while applying in-situ external stress was as follows. First, we determined domain stability, coercive field and remanent piezoresponse by PFM imaging and local hysteresis measurements of unstrained samples. Secondly, we used the RSM to measure the lattice parameters of both the PZT and SRO films, allowing us to extract the PZT-SRO lattice mismatch ( a l -a s a s ) as well as the PZT tetragonality ( c l a l ), where a s is the SRO lattice parameter and a l , and c l are the short-and long-axis PZT lattice parameters. Thirdly, using the bending stage, we varied the PZT-SRO lattice mismatch by tuning the strain in the sample while performing XRD profiling. Finally, once we minimized the lattice mismatch, we transferred the sample to the PFM and characterized the strained samples by both imaging and hysteresis measurements. This iterative process was performed when tuning a given sample controllably in-situ. The out-of-plane θ -2θ scans were measured (see Figure allowing us to extract both the film-substrate lattice mismatch and the PZT tetragonality (for extracting the SRO lattice parameters, we replaced in this expression both a l and c l with a s ). We then strained the sample in-situ with the four-point bending stage and extracted the corresponding change in lattice parameters by mapping the RSM signal around two different orientations. Figure Table To determine the effects of strain on ferroelectricity we tested both the domain stability as well as the spectroscopic switching parameters. First, we imaged engineered domains (areas scanned with positive and negative voltages that exceed the coercive value) of the unstrained and of the strained sample. The imaging was done by means of amplitude and phase PFM signals of the vertical (out-of-plane) and lateral (in-plane) piezoresponse (typically, proprtional to the polarization) mapping as seen in Figure Next, to complete the examination of the effects of strain on the functional properties of the ferroelectric material, we measured the switching parameters of the hysteresis loop in the PZT film. Local hysteresis loop measurements were done in a set of 8×7 points spread in a 25×25 m 2 area. At each point, four consecutive switching cycles were performed. For examining the effect of strain on the hysteresis loops, the entire experiment was done both for the unstrained and strained sample with the same experimental conditions (same cantilever, voltage-sweeping conditions etc.) with only a few hours gap between the measurements of the unstrained and strained sample. Figure For the sake of completeness, the average of the first switching cycle for all the 8×7 points of the unstrained and strained cases are given for both the butterfly (PFM amplitude signal, Figure Functional properties of PZT films as a functional of their tetragonality: comparison with literature. Our results show a clear relationship between the structure and functionality of ferroelectrics by means of direct observations. Reducing the film-substrate lattice mismatch between the PZT film and the SRO sample is accompanied by significant increase in stabilization of switched ferroelectric domains (retention). Reduction of this lattice matching is also accompanied by reduction of the asymmetry of the ferroelectric hysteresis loop (imprint and surface charging). Straining the sample led also to another change in the structural propertiesincrease in the PZT tetragonality, which in turn was accompanied by an increase of the remanent piezoresponse as well as the area integrated within the hysteresis loop. We suggest that these observations are in agreement with the existing literature related to the effects of either lattice matching engineering (by means of varying the substrates) [ 