Superconductors with topological surface or edge states have been intensively explored for the prospect of realizing Majorana bound states, which obey non-Abelian statistics and are crucial for topological quantum computation. The traditional routes for making topological insulator/superconductor and semiconductor/superconductor heterostructures suffer fabrication difficulties and can only work at low temperature. Here, we use angleresolved photoemission spectroscopy to directly observe the evolution of a topological transition of band structure nearby the Fermi level in two-dimensional high-Tc superconductor FeTe1-xSex/SrTiO3(001) monolayers, fully consistent with our theoretical calculations. Furthermore, evidence of edge states is revealed by scanning tunneling spectroscopy with assistance of theoretical calculations. Our study provides a simple and tunable platform for realizing and manipulating Majorana states at high temperature. Topological superconductors, which can host Majorana bound states on their surface or edge, have drawn enormous attention in condensed matter physics Monolayer FeSe grown on SrTiO3(001) (STO) holds the highest Tc (above 65 K In this paper, we perform systematic ARPES measurements with photon energy and polarization dependence on FeTe1-xSex/STO monolayers with different Se content (x) which are grown by in situ molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). In addition to the observation of two bands intersecting, the spectral weight and effective mass of bands change dramatically around x = 0.21, further supporting a transition of topological band inversion nearby the Fermi level (EF). Furthermore, evidence of edge states of monolayer FeTe/STO around 50 meV below EF is observed by STM/STS measurements. Their topological origin can be interpreted by our LDA calculations and band structure results. The crystal structure of monolayer FeTe1-xSex/STO is presented in Fig. FeTe1-xSex for in situ ARPES measurements are grown on 0.7wt% Nb-doped STO substrates after degassing for 10 hours at 600 °C and then annealing for 1.5 hours at 950 °C in an ultrahigh vacuum MBE chamber. Substrates are kept at 310 °C for monolayer FeSe and 275 °C for monolayer FeTe1-xSex during the film growth. Fe (99.98%), Se (99.999%) and Te (99.99%) are co-evaporated from Knudsen cells. The flux ratio of Fe to Se/Te is 1:10 which are measured by a quart crystal balance. The growth rate is determined by Fe flux and equaled to 0.7 UC/min. The Se content (x) is controlled by the ratio of Te to Se flux speed during growth. After growth, the monolayer FeSe films are annealed at 370 °C and monolayer FeTe1-xSex at 260 °C for 20 hours. During the growth process, the sample quality is monitored using reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED), as shown in Fig. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations employ the projector augmented wave (PAW) method encoded in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) The unit cell of monolayer FeTe1-xSex/STO is tetragonal and contains two iron atoms. The in-plane lattice constant a is fixed at 3.905 Å by the STO substrate. The main effect of the isovalent substitution of Te by Se is increasing the height of Se/Te surface H, which is labelled in Fig. Simultaneously, the  band top changes from dxz to pz/dxy and this induces a parity change from even to odd with respect to the xz plane, which is a direct evidence for the band inversion that can be verified by ARPES experiments. In ARPES measurements, orbital and parity characters of bands can be determined by changing the photon energy and the polarization according to the matrix element effect We can also trace the evolution of the  band. In contrast to the  band, no obvious change occurs for the  band, except for a band shift to a lower binding energy. To see it more clearly, we show the MDCs plot of the  and  bands in Figs. Our ARPES and LDA calculation results provide direct evidence of topological transition in high-Tc FeTe1-xSex/STO monolayers. The consistency of STM/STS experiments and ARPES/LDA results further supports it. The topological transition can be tuned by Te doping. Moreover, the position of topological bands can be tuned by abundant methods, including post anneal treatment FeTe1-xSex/STO monolayers are the two-dimensional counterpart of FeTe0.5Se0.5 single crystal but with much higher Tc. Majorana bound states have been observed on the surface of the latter † Correspondence authors: mhq@iphy.ac.cn; yjsun@iphy.ac.cn; dingh@iphy.ac.cn