We designed and fabricated a new type of superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) susceptometers for magnetic imaging of quantum materials. The 2-junction SQUID sensors employ 3D Nb nano-bridges fabricated using electron beam lithography. The two counter-wound balanced pickup loops of the SQUID enable gradiometric measurement and they are surrounded by a one-turn field coil for susceptibility measurements. The smallest pickup loop of the SQUIDs were 1 μm in diameter and the flux noise was around 1 μФ0/√Hz at 100 Hz. We demonstrate scanning magnetometry, susceptometry and current magnetometry on some test samples using these nano-SQUIDs. The superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs) Here, we report the design, fabrication and characterization of nano-SQUIDs based on 3D nano-bridge junctions The two junctions of our nano-SQUIDs were made of 3D Nb nano-bridges (Fig. As expected for a SQUID, the voltage across our devices were modulated by the flux through the SQUID loop (Fig. We integrate our nano-SQUIDs into a closed-cycle He-4 cryostat for scanning SQUID microscopy. We hand-polish nano-SQUIDs and glue it to a cantilever that acts a capacitive sensor for height. The capacitance is approximately 1pF when the cantilever is relaxed and changes when the SQUID touches the sample. We use a balanced capacitance bridge The SQUID is shunted by a small resistance and its current is inductively coupled to a SQUID array amplifier. The output of the array amplifier goes into room temperature feedback electronics which controls the current of modulation coils for a FFL detection of the flux signal. The susceptometry is performed by passing a low frequency current (IF) through the field coil and by demodulating the susceptibility (dF/dIF) out of the flux signal. The current magnetometry can be carried out by passing an AC current (IAC) through the sample and by demodulating the current flux signal (FI'/IAC) from the flux signal similarly. We tested the performance of our scanning SQUID microscope for magnetometry, susceptometry and current magnetometry imaging. For magnetometry, we used a Nb film cooled under zero applied magnetic field (Fig. In conclusion, we have designed and fabricated a type of nano-SQUID susceptometers based on Nb 3D-nanobridge junctions. Our fabrication process was simpler than that of the nano-SQUIDs based on tri-layer junctions; whereas the flux noise was on the same level. Our field measurement suggests that these SQUID could potentially function as magnetometers under 5 KGs of perpendicular magnetic field. We used these nano-SQUIDs for scanning SQUID microscopy and demonstrated their capabilities for magnetometry, susceptometry and current magnetometry imaging, which are important for determining the electro-magnetic properties of quantum materials. By combining deep-etching with EBL defined pickup coils, we might be able to fabricate nano-SQUIDs with better than 1 μm spatial resolution. Our fabrication process can be readily transferred to niobium nitride 