In the past years classical wave-systems have constituted an excellent platform for emulating complex quantum phenomena. This approach has been especially fruitful in demonstrating topological phenomena in photonics and acoustics: from chiral edge states of Chern insulators and helical edge states of topological insulators to higher-dimensional topological states of quasiperiodic systems and systems with synthetic dimensions. Recently, a new class of topological states localized in more than one dimension of a D-dimensional system, referred to as higher-order topological (HOT) states, has been reported, offering an even more versatile platform to confine and control classical radiation and mechanical motion. However, because experimental research of HOT states has so far been limited to two-dimensional (2D) systems, third and higherorder states have evaded experimental observation. Studying higher-dimensional classical systems therefore opens an opportunity to emulate higher-order topological insulators and explore HOT states beyond second order. In this letter, we design and experimentally study a 3D acoustic metamaterial supporting third-order (0D) topological corner states along with second-order (1D) edge states within the same topological bandgap, thus establishing a full hierarchy of HOT states in three dimensions. The metamaterial is implemented over a versatile additive manufacturing platform, which enables rapid prototyping of metaatoms and metamolecules, which can be snapped together to form 3D metamaterials with complex geometries. The assembled 3D topological metamaterial represents the acoustic analogue of a pyrochlore lattice made of interconnected molecules, and is shown to exhibit topological bulk polarization, leading to the emergence of HOT states localized in all three or in two dimensions. Topological acoustics and mechanics have been explored as a powerful platform for the implementation of a plethora of topological phenomena A three-dimensional acoustic metamaterial emulator of the pyrochlore lattice First, we theoretically explore the band structure of the unit cell, as shown in Fig. where N 1,2 is the total number of points in the discretized momentum space. Due to the spatial symmetries of the pyrochlore crystal, the bulk polarizations with cyclically permutated indexes are equivalent to each other, and therefore the system is characterized by nontrivial bulk polarization in all three dimensions. As shown in Fig We numerically calculated the energy spectrum of the metamaterial sample in Fig. In addition to corner states localized in three dimensions, the nonzero value of bulk topological polarization gives rise to the formation of another class of HOT states -2nd order edge states confined to the edges of the fabricated finite metacrystal. These modes are shown in Fig. Advanced manufacturing techniques based on 3D printing meta-molecules and their snapassembly to form complex acoustic metamaterials provides exciting opportunities in acoustics. Here, this platform has been applied to fabricate a 3D topological metamaterial forming the acoustic analogue of pyrochlore crystal, and supporting a regime with nontrivial topological bulk polarization. We demonstrated for the first time that such topological polarization leads to the emergence of a hierarchy of higher-order topological states, 3 nd order states confined to corners, 2 nd order states localized at the edges of the 3D metacrystal. The respective modes show strong and topologically robust confinement to the respective edges and corners, making them ideal candidates for applications in which precise control of energy localization is critical. In this respect, topological metamaterials not only hold the promise for desirable field concentration, but also add the unique feature of robustness, which ensures the spectral position of the HOT states to be stable, as long as the generalized chiral symmetry of the manufactured structure is ensured by its design and fabrication. The use of additional synthetic degrees of freedom, engineered by the complex geometries of the 3D multimodal metamolecules, may further facilitate control of topological acoustic modes, opening even more interesting applications, with sound-waves filtered, steered, and routed based on their internal synthetic polarization. 1. Structure design, 3D printing, and generic measurements -The unit cell designs of the topological expanded lattice are shown in Fig. The unit cells and boundary cells were fabricated using the B9Creator v1.2 3D printer. All cells were made with acrylic-based light-activated resin, a type of plastic that hardens when exposed to UV light. Each cell was printed with a sufficient thickness to ensure a hard wall boundary condition and narrow probe channels were intentionally introduced on top and bottom of each cylinders to excite and measure local pressure amplitude at each site. The diameter of each port is 2.50 mm with a height of 2.20 mm. When not in use, the probe channels were sealed with plumber's putty. Each unit cell and boundary cell were printed one at a time and the models were designed specifically to interlock tightly with each other. The expanded structure shown in Fig. 2. Numerical method -Finite element solver COMSOL Multiphysics 5.2a with the Acoustic module was used to perform full-wave simulation. In the acoustic propagation wave equation, the speed of sound was set as 343.2 m/s and density of air as 1.225 kg/m^3. Other dimensional parameters of the structure are the same as the fabricated parameters. TBM is used to fit the band diagrams of the dimerized and un-dimerized structures with the first principles COMSOL solution. For the un-dimerized band structure with X-W line degeneracy, the on-site frequency is fitted as ω0 = 8584 Hz and κ = γ = 12.8 Hz. For the dimerized band structure with X-W line broken degeneracy, ω0 = 8470 Hz and κ = 12.8 Hz, γ = 115 Hz (κ and γ are flipped for the shrunken case). These numbers were used to extract the bulk polarization of the expanded and shrunken cases. The speaker was placed at the bottom port and the microphone at the top port of the same site. The frequency generator was used to run a sweep from 7600 Hz to 8800 Hz in 20 Hz intervals with a dwell time of 0.5 seconds while the FFT spectrum analyzer obtained the amplitude responses φ(ω) at each frequency. Field distributions φj(ω) are obtained by repeating this process for each site j. Once each amplitude response was obtained for each of the 80 individual sites, we separate the response of the bulk, surface, edge, and corner sites depending on which mode dominates at that site, put it another word, we use the filter functions to obtain the spectra for different type of modes. We obtained the average power spectrum P a (ω) = ∑ |Φ j (ω)| j 2 /N for each region where N is the number of resonators within that region and then normalized the spectra with P n (ω) = P a (ω)/ ∑ P a (ω) . For the field profiles excited by a single frequency, the speaker was fixed at the port of the site of interest and the microphone was placed over each site of the lattice to measure the magnitude response at the desired frequency (shown in Fig. 