Both electronic Raman scattering (ERS) and angle-resolved photoemission spectra (ARPES) revealed two energy scales for the gap in different momentum spaces in the cuprates. However, the interpretations were different, and the gap values were also different in two experiments. In order to clarify the origin of these discrepancies, we directly compared ERS and ARPES by calculating ERS from the experimental data of ARPES through the Kubo formula. The calculated ERS spectra were in good agreement with the experimental results except for the B 1g peak energies. The doping-dependent B 2g peak energy was well reproduced from a doping-independent d-wave gap deduced from ARPES, by assuming a particular spectral weight distribution along the Fermi surface. The B 1g peak energies could not be reproduced by the ARPES data. The difference between B 1g ERS and antinodal ARPES became larger with underdoping, which implies that the effect of the pseudogap is different in these two techniques. A superconducting energy gap is a crucially important parameter for a superconductor. For high-temperature superconducting cuprates, many experimental techniques have been devoted to studying the gap energy and structure. Since a d-wave symmetry of the gap has been revealed On the other hand, in ERS measurements, the spectrum with B 1g polarization shows a pair-breaking excitation around the antinodal region, while the spectrum with B 2g polarization indicates a gap in the nodal region. The unusual behavior of ERS is that the B 1g pair-breaking peak energy increases monotonically with underdoping, while the B 2g peak energy traces the doping dependence of T c . The questions can be summarized as follows. (i) Can the doping dependence of the B 2g Raman spectra be explained by the ARPES data that show a doping-independent d-wave gap slope along the Fermi surface? (ii) What is the B 1g Raman gap or ARPES gap in the antinodal region, and what is the origin of its unusual doping dependence? (iii) Is the B 1g Raman gap really smaller than the ARPES antinodal gap? If so, what is the reason? The purpose of this study is to answer these questions and to draw a unified electronic picture that reconciles the ERS and ARPES observations. So far, there have been some reports on the calculation of ERS spectra from ARPES data. The kinetic theory calculation successfully proved that a d-wave pairing symmetry can explain the ERS of the cuprates. 12) However, the calculated spectra are too simple to compare with experimental data. Even though a scattering rate is introduced to explain a real broad peak, the theory can neither explain the B 1g peak energy in the underdoped regime nor the doping dependence of the B 2g peak energy. In order to explain the different behaviors of B 1g and B 2g spectra, a parameter called the quasiparticle spectral weight was added to the kinetic theory. Bi2212 single crystals were grown by a floating zone method. The carrier doping level was controlled by post-annealing under various conditions. We prepared samples at three doping levels: underdoped (T c = 75 K), nearly optimally doped (T c = 92 K), and overdoped (T c = 85 K). Hereafter, we call them UD75K, OP92K, and OD85K, respectively. ARPES and ERS measurements were carried out in the superconducting state at 10 K. The ARPES for the samples OP92K and UD75K were measured at Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource beamline 5-4 using 22.7 eV photons with an energy resolution of 5 meV and an angular resolution of 0.1. The polarization was along the Cu-O direction. The ARPES data of these samples were reported in Refs.7 and 14. The ARPES of sample OD85K was measured at the Institute for Solid State Physics, Tokyo University, using helium lamp light with a photon energy of 21.2 eV without polarization. The energy resolution was 10 meV, and the angular resolution was 0.1. The energy dispersion curve (EDC) spectra were divided by the Fermi-Dirac function convoluted by the energy resolution to wipe out the thermal effect. Figure ERS measurements were performed in B 1g and B 2g geometries on the samples from the same batch with a triple-grating Jobin-Yvon T64000 spectrometer and an Ar-Kr laser line (514.5 nm). The laser power was kept at ~ 5 mW to avoid overheating. The B 1g geometry is obtained when crossed polarizations for incident and scattered light are rotated 45 from the Cu-O bond directions, while B 2g polarizations are along them. In these geometries, it is possible to probe the antinodal and nodal regions corresponding to the principal axes and the diagonal of the BZ, respectively. All Raman spectra were corrected by the instrumental spectral response and the Bose factor. ARPES intensity I k, is a function of matrix elements M k , Fermi Dirac function f  , and a spectral function A k, : , . If the matrix elements do not have a strong momentum dependence, the spectral function A k, can be obtained directly from the ARPES spectra. On the other hand, electronic Raman response " in the superconducting state can be described by Green's functions using the Kubo susceptibility where  is the Raman shift, and  k and  k are the bare and renormalized Raman vertices, respectively,  k is the superconducting gap,  k is the bare band energy, V is the volume, and f  is the Fermi function. Since Green's functions are related to the spectral functions through the following relation the electronic Raman responses can be calculated from the ARPES spectra. Here, we normalized the ARPES spectra for different momentum cuts by the maximum values of the energy dispersion curves at the Fermi vector. In this study, we used the same Raman vertex for both the bare and renormalized vertices. A tight binding model is often used for the band structure in cuprates, which allows us to obtain the Raman vertices The parameters t, t', and  were obtained by fitting the ARPES data with the tight binding band. For sample OP92K, t = 0.238 eV, t' = 0.392t, and  = -0.320 eV. These parameters are consistent with those of previous reports. In these calculations, the density of states over the entire BZ were taken into account, and the unoccupied states in the superconducting state were obtained by symmetrizing the ARPES EDCs against the Fermi level. A symmetric behavior of the density of state between the occupied and unoccupied state is supported by the tunneling spectra of Bi2212 when both states are probed. For sample OD85K, we had to take into account the bilayer splitting into a bonding band (BB) and antibonding band (AB). In this study, EDC spectra were fitted by three Gaussian functions corresponding to a BB-peak, an AB-peak, and an incoherent part, as shown in Fig. The B 1g and B 2g Raman spectra calculated from the ARPES data are presented in Fig. When the carrier doping is reduced, the B 1g peak energy shifts to higher energy in both the experimental and calculated spectra. It should be noted that the B 1g peak energy is always lower in the experiment than in the calculation from ARPES, and this difference becomes larger with underdoping. For the B 2g spectra, the difference between the experimental and calculated spectra is remarkable in the low-energy region, and it becomes larger with underdoping. Next, to further improve our calculation, we considered the effect of matrix element M k , which was assumed to be constant in the calculations so far. In reality, M k is not uniform in BZ but changes with k depending on polarization and measurement geometry. This modifies the ARPES spectral intensity I k, . This means that the real intensity distribution of A k, along the Fermi surface cannot be easily deduced from the ARPES intensity I k, . Since it is difficult to determine M k experimentally, we assume here a simple linear peak-intensity profile of A k, along the Fermi surface. In fact, a linear behavior of the intensity profile was found in the ARPES data of (La,Sr) 2 CuO 4 , For sample OD85K, a good fit is obtained with profile N10-AN10 that has a constant intensity along the Fermi surface. For sample OP92K, the profile N10-AN5 gives the best fit. The reduction of intensity in the antinodal region pushes up the low-energy part in the B 2g spectrum. For sample UD75K, we need a more radical reduction in the antinodal region to obtain a good agreement between the calculated and experimental spectra. When the profile changes from N10-AN10 to N10-AN1, we find a tendency that the spectral weight in the low-energy region of both B 1g and B 2g is increased and the B 2g peak shifts to lower energy. We also examined a special profile in which the intensity changes more radically, as indicated in Fig. Summarizing the calculation of the Raman spectra with the assumed intensity profiles of A k, , we find that different doping levels have different intensity profiles: a special profile for the underdoped UD75K, N10-AN5 for the optimally doped OP92K, and N10-AN10 for the overdoped OD85K. It is difficult to obtain this doping dependence of the spectral weight distribution from ARPES measurements because the matrix elements change the intensity profiles of the spectral functions. In this sense, the present trial functions remove the matrix element effects. (See the Appendix.) The result shows that A k, confined in the nodal region distributes to the antinodal region as the doping level increases. This behavior is consistent with a recent report that the superconducting spectral weight is suppressed by the competing pseudogap in the antinodal region. Note that in the special profile of sample UD75K, the portion of the Fermi surface that has a strong intensity is up to 0.4 on the horizontal axis in Fig. From Fig. The peak energies of the calculated Raman spectra are plotted in Fig. One can also notice that the calculated B 1g peak energy is closer to the ARPES antinodal gap rather than the experimental B 1g energy. The difference from the experimental Raman data increases with underdoping. The fact that the B 1g peak energy calculated from the ARPES data reproduces the ARPES antinodal gap energy indicates that our calculation method is appropriate. As demonstrated previously, the intensity profile of A k, cannot cause a shift in the B 1g position. Therefore, this difference between the experimental Raman B 1g and the ARPES antinodal gap energies must be intrinsic. Since the difference increases with underdoping, this difference is possibly caused by the pseudogap. In Fig. In this study, two k-selective measurements (ARPES and ERS) were performed for the same Bi2212 single crystals with different doping levels at 10 K, well below T c . The B 1g and B 2g Raman spectra were calculated from the ARPES data over the entire Brillouin zone by using the Kubo formula and assuming the k-dependence of the peak-intensity profile of the spectral function A k, . The calculated Raman spectra well reproduced the experimental data except for the B 1g peak energies. This indicates that we successfully established an analytical method by which to compare ARPES and Raman data. From the present results, we reached the following conclusions. First, Raman and ARPES can be understood with the same gap profile. Namely, the nodal slope of the gap profiles is doping independent, as reported by ARPES. The apparent doping dependence of the B 2g peak energy is caused by the change in spectral weight of A k, along the Fermi surface. Second, the antinodal gap of ARPES is a superconducting gap that is strongly affected by the pseudogap, whereas the Raman B 1g gap is moderately affected. This probe-dependent effect of the pseudogap is the main source for the difference between the Raman B 1g gap and the ARPES antinodal gap energies. Third, while the spectral weight of A k, is confined to the nodal region in the underdoped sample, the antinodal region gains spectral weight with doping and contributes to superconductivity. Although this is similar to the "Fermi arc" picture reported previously, 