We demonstrate a simple single grating beam modulation technique, which enables the use of a highly intense neutron beam for phase imaging and thus spatially resolved structural correlation measurements in full analogy to quantum interference based methods. In contrast to interferometric approaches our method is intrinsically achromatic and provides unprecedented flexibility in the choice of experimental parameters. Utilizing merely a macroscopic absorption mask unparalleled length scales become accessible. The results presented, including application to a variety of materials, establish a paradigm shift in phase imaging. State of the art imaging with visible light as well as with electrons comprises numerous contrast mechanisms, including phase and dark-field contrast schemes Neutron interferometry has created significant impact in neutron imaging in particular when Talbot Lau grating interferometers enabled unprecedented high efficiency phase contrast imaging with neutrons early in the millennium Today grating interferometers for imaging are available at many leading instruments at neutron sources around the world Here we introduce a paradigm shift demonstrating that the interferometric nature of the applied techniques is not relevant but only the spatial modulation of the beam, no matter how it is achieved. In contrast to previous works underlining the virtues of quantum particlewave interferometry we chose the most basic approach to create spatial beam modulation on a suitable length scale to retrievably encode small angle beam deviations superimposed to real space images The set-up is established by merely adding an attenuation grating in a conventional pinhole collimated imaging instrument (Fig. The sensitivity of a modulated beam measurement technique depends on the modulation period p and the sample to detector distance L s (Fig. respectively. At this angle, or scattering vector, intensity is shifted from the maxima exactly into the intensity depleted minima -the dark-field -of the modulation pattern. This in turn for the probed length scale equals For the intrinsically achromatic technique the wavelength l is a free parameter (Fig. The measurements were performed with a 10 mm pinhole, common for conventional high resolution imaging measurements and leading to a collimation ratio L/D of about 700. The chosen L/D and grating to detector distance l of 0.26 m enabled a visibility of 18% (Fig. Fig. and sample q (eq. 3), the line profile contains a theoretical calculation for the steel cylinder (black curve)(eq. 4); (c) the dark-field image (DFI) reflects the relative visibility loss through scattering from the sample V/V 0 =BA 0 /(B 0 A) (eq. 3); A macroscopic beam modulation superimposed to an image enables different routes of measurement and analyses strategies for the contrast modalities where i,j are the pixel indices, C is the phase of the open beam modulation and X is the grating scan parameter. For an individual measurement of a set of samples the images corresponding to the three parameters: transmission image (TI), differential phase image (DPI) and dark-field image (DFI) are depicted in Fig. where ∂Q/∂x is the gradient of the neutron wave-front perpendicular to the modulation. The phase can be retrieved straightforwardly from corresponding integration Systematic quantitative reference measurements have been performed on a second set of samples. The study focusses on quantitative dark-field imaging indicating samples with symbols and colors used in the corresponding plots. Note, that where the error bars are not visible they are lying within the size of the used symbols. Both powders were measured contained in quartz glass cuvettes with sample thicknesses of 5 mm for both Sipernat-310 and -350 and additionally a 2mm thick sample of Sipernat-350. Distance scans were performed at wavelengths of 3.5 Å and 5.6 Å from L s 20 to 250 mm and 120 to 250 mm, respectively (compare Fig. where V 0 is the visibility without sample, S is the total small angle scattering cross section and G(x) is the projected real space correlation function of the microscopic sample structures The data is further reduced pixel-wise by computing the logarithm and dividing by the sample thickness t and the wavelength square. The total scattering probability St depends on l 2 , which needs to be normalized in order to combine scans at different wavelengths and to achieve results independent of the utilized beam. Subsequently the data is modelled with specific projected real space correlation functions G(x) representative of the microscopic structure investigated. A fitting procedure finally enables to retrieve the respective structural parameters. According to Ref. where K 1 is the modified Bessel function of second kind and first order and a represents the characteristic structure size in the two-phase medium. The model and parameters found through small angle scattering measurements in Ref. This model describes a simplified limited fractal taking into account an exponential cut-off Additional data on well characterized samples returned the porosity on the probed length scale of a ferrite magnet produced through sintering as well as the poly-disperse structure size distribution in a ferrofluid (Fig. We conclude, that our most simple approach of a single attenuation grating with submillimeter period that requires no specific and sensitive alignment, does overcome stability requirements, design and fabrication issues related to fine structures as well as other limitations of interferometers. In particular the intrinsically achromatic nature of our technique enables straightforwardly multi-wavelength and polychromatic studies without the corresponding drawbacks of interferometry. In contrast, it provides the capability for efficient, simple, flexible and quantitative multi-modal imaging and especially phase imaging in the form of differential phase and dark-field contrast. In addition, the method holds the potential to straightforwardly cover an unprecedented correlation length range. The capability to extend the range reported for Talbot Lau interferometers 