 Au evaporated on Bi2Se3 at RT forms islands according to the Volmer-Weber growth mode  upon annealing to 100° C the Au deposits are not stable and assemble into larger and thicker islands  the Topological surface state (TSS) of Bi2Se3 is weakly affected by the presence of Au  at the Au/Bi2Se3 interface there is a weak chemical instability that results in Bi diffusion toward the surface of Au islands and in a chemical interaction between Au and atomic Se limited at the interfacial region  for the investigated range of Au coverages, the Au/Bi2Se3 heterostructure is inert towards CO and CO2 exposure at low pressure (10 -8 mbar) regime We report a combined microscopy and spectroscopy study of Au deposited on the Bi2Se3(0001) single crystal surface. At room temperature Au forms islands, according to the Volmer-Weber growth mode. Upon annealing to 100° C the Au deposits are not stable and assemble into larger and thicker islands. The topological surface state of Bi2Se3 is weakly affected by the presence of Au. Contrary to other metals, such as Ag or Cr, a strong chemical instability at the Au/Bi2Se3 interface is ruled out. Core level analysis highlights Bi diffusion toward the surface of Au islands, in agreement with previous findings, while chemical interaction between Au and atomic Se is limited at the interfacial region. For the investigated range of Au coverages, the Au/Bi2Se3 heterostructure is inert towards CO and CO2 exposure at low pressure (10 -8 mbar) regime. Binary bismuth chalcogenides Bi2Se3 and Bi2Te3 have been extensively studied as reference topological insulators (TIs). These materials are bulk insulators with topological surface states (TSS) crossing the Fermi level In fact, depending on the near surface localization and distribution of the metal atoms on top of the TI, the electronic, magnetic, chemical and transport characteristics of the entire heterostructure can dramatically change. A theoretical model of charge transport by the TI surface states predicts that the TSS survive, provided that bonding at the metal/TI interface is weak while Pd and Pt should exert a stronger interaction with the TI surface resulting in delocalization of the TSS and poor spin-momentum locking. In another study, a theory predicts that Ag and Au thin layers on Bi2Se3 have large Rashba splitting and high spin polarization of the Ag quantum wells, which give a great potential for development of spintronic devices Despite the fundamental importance of the metal/TI interfaces and a number of theoretical studies predicting exotic phenomena, the experimental knowledge about metals on TI surfaces is surprisingly limited, especially concerning morphology and growth mode. The experimental studies reported in the literature are focused on the interactions of ultra-low coverages (almost isolated atoms) of metal atoms deposited on the TIs In this context, it is especially important to extend the studies above the diluted coverage regime and to understand what is the growth morphology of the metal on the TI surface, to what extent the metal overlayer interacts with the TI substrate, how the TSS change with the presence of the metal overlayer and what is the reactivity of the system at the different stages of the overlayer growth. Here we present a comprehensive surface sensitive characterization of Au on Bi2Se3. Bi2Se3 is considered a prototypical TI material because it has a relatively large band gap (~0.3 eV) that helps maintaining an insulating bulk and a relatively simple surface structure (one Dirac cone at the gamma point). Au was chosen because it is a very common contact metal for electronic devices and was also considered as possible co-catalyst in metal/TI based catalytic systems. In this study we have addressed the questions of the growth mode, the chemical properties at the interface and the variation of the TSS at different coverage regimes from very diluted concentrations up to tens of angstroms. Moreover, the stability and evolution of Au upon thermal treatment, have been addressed. Finally, to obtain firm experimental evidences for the chemical properties theoretically predicted for the small clusters and thin Au layer on Bi2Se3 Bi2Se3 single crystals were grown following the procedure described in Ref. The XPS spectra were fitted with spin-orbit doublets obtained by convolution of the Doniach-Sunjic function with the Gaussian function sited on a Shirley-type background using KolXPD software Images were processed using the software Gwyddion Morphology and surface density of the gold clusters were characterized ex-situ after STM or photoemission experiment by a Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM, JEOL JSM 7100f) with an accelerating voltage of 20 kV. The density and the fraction of covered surface were determined by a statistical analysis of the SEM images using the image processing software ImageJ The growth mode of Au on Bi2Se3 has been characterized by means of STM (Fig. Interestingly, no smaller clusters or isolated Au atoms (either as single adatoms or organized film) are observed, which indicate that Au atoms can diffuse over the surface at RT, finding a stable configuration only when they form clusters above a given threshold size, which is approximately 2 nm. The SEM, LEED, ARPES and XPS analyses were performed in parallel on the same set of samples in order to correlate morphology, chemistry, band structure and structural properties. From the analysis of the SEM images, at low coverage (2 Å, Fig. At the all stages of the growth, the LEED pattern shows a hexagonal symmetry (Fig. The electronic structure of Au on Bi2Se3 has been studied by measuring ARPES spectra along the Γ ̅ -K ̅ direction in an energy region close to the Fermi level. On the data of the bare Bi2Se3 surface (Fig. For the Au coverage above 5 Å, the Bi 5d and Se 3d spectra are fitted with two doublets (Bi 1 , Bi 2 , Se 1 and Se 2 ). The spectral weight of Bi 2 with respect to Bi1 increases with the Au coverage, while that of Se 2 remains almost unchanged with respect to Se 1 . Bi 2 is at 0.75 eV lower BE with respect to Bi 1 and Se 2 is at 0.3 eV higher BE than Se 1 . The appearance of Bi 2 and Se 2 components were observed also after depositing above 10 Å of Au in one single step. This proves that the observed chemically shifted Bi 2 and Se 2 components are not due to surface contamination or degradation occurring with time. To assign the Bi 2 and Se 2 components the following has to be considered. Under these experimental conditions, 95% of photoemission signal originates from the outermost ~ 24 Å of the surface In previous literature, new component in the spectra of Bi 5d core level has been detected when Cr Fe Recently, Walsh et al. The same authors Hence, the results indicate the occurrence of chemical interaction between Au and Bi2Se3 surface. According to microscopy measures reported in Ref. Bi changes its chemical state bonding to Au and becomes metallic, while Se remains localized at the interface with a chemical state compatible with that of atoms of Se in contact with Au(111). Thermal stability of the Au islands on Bi2Se3 was also investigated. Firstly, 1 Å of Au was deposited on Bi2Se3 at RT and subsequently annealed at 100 oC. For all the obtained Au/Bi2Se3 films (from 2 Å to 110 Å), the reactivity has been studied by dosing 10 L of CO and CO2 at pressure of 5×10 -8 mbar at RT (1 L =1.3×10 -9 bars) and by measuring the XPS spectra. No signature of carbon on the surface upon dosing have been observed. The TSS and the Bi, Se and Au core levels did not change indicating the absence of the chemical reactivity of Au under these experimental conditions. Here we remark the fact that the theoretical prediction about the chemical reactivity of Au on Bi2Se3 was done for Au clusters of seven atoms Gold, deposited at RT on Bi2Se3 in a coverage range from <2 Å up to 110 Å, forms threedimensional islands following Volmer-Weber growth mode, similarly to other systems where a substrate-overlayer interaction is weak. At more than 100 Å a network of 3D coalesced islands is observed. Our systematic investigation showed that upon the Au deposition, TSSs are stable and clearly visible with ARPES at least up to 45 Å coverage. For Au coverage above 5 Å, shifted components of Bi 5d and Se 3d core level peaks were detected in analogy to other metal/Bi2Se3 interfaces. The obtained spectroscopic results have been discussed in combination with the microscopy data. While a strong chemical instability of the metal/Bi2Se3 interface (such as for Fe, Cr, or Ag) is excluded in present case, the XPS results obtained with a surface sensitivity of about 24 Å, clearly demonstrate that a chemical interaction is present at the very interface, resulting in additional spectral components both for Se and Bi. Possible implications of this result should be evaluated especially when the system Au/Bi2Se3 is used to exploit phenomena that require chemical stability at the interface between two materials. The Au islands are not stable upon annealing, and the effect is visible already at 100 oC. With annealing, the coalescence of Au islands is observed, resulting in larger and less dense islands. For the entire investigated range of the gold coverage, no chemical reactivity towards CO and CO2 has been detected. The knowledge gained about the growth mode and morphology of Au on Bi2Se3 is of great importance for the design of TI based devices with optimal metal contacts, for interpretation of the observed properties (e.g. understanding of chemical shifts), but also for the appropriate modelling in theoretical investigations of metal/TI systems.