Nanoscale engineering and novel materials have created interesting effects in thermal transport. Thermal conductivity can now be different due to physical and heating sizes. Also, highly anisotropic thermal conductivity can result from unique material composition and geometries. Various experimental methods have been developed to measure these thermal conductivity variations. All of them require varying the physical size of the sample, the heating size or relative positions between heating and detection. Here, we numerically propose a time-domain optical method that uses spatial temporal temperature data to resolve anisotropic and size-dependent thermal conductivity. Our method is hassle-free as it does not vary any experimental parameters and is easily compatible with various methods of measuring temperature in the time domain. This technique can high throughput screening of thermal properties for nanoengineered and novel materials in thermal transport. Also, this technique can be used to identify novel effects in thermal transport within a single experiment. A good knowledge of the material's thermal conductivity is essential to managing heat flow in all thermal design and analysis. In most materials, their thermal conductivity is isotropic or direction independent. Recently, novel materials such as layered van der Waals solids Another interesting effect that is typically observed is size-dependent thermal conductivity. This happen when the experimentally measured thermal conductivity is lower than the bulk value. Experiments variations of sample size Here, we propose an experimental method that uses spatial temporal temperature data to retrieve multiple thermal transport parameters in a single experiment. First, we demonstrate numerically that multiple thermal conductivity values in a multilayers system can be retrieved once sufficient points have been sampled. Second, we show that size-dependent thermal conductivity variations for an anisotropic material can be accurately recovered. Last but not least, we discuss the compatibility of our method to current measurement techniques and conclude possibility of extending our work to other thermal effects of interest. Here, we assume a gaussian shaped transient heat flux on the sample surface at t = 0 as shown in Fig. where k r and k z are the radial and cross-plane thermal conductivities, respectively. ρ is the density of the material and c p is the specific heat. We can be Hankel and then Fourier transformed to yield where q 2 (κ, ω) = krκ 2 +ρciω kz . κ and ω are the Hankel spatial wavevector and Fourier transformed frequency respectively. The radial definition in Eq. 1 can be solved for geometries containing more than one layer where ∆T b and ∆T t are the back and top temperatures in the transformed space and f b and f t are the back and top heat flux. The components are A = cosh(qd), B = -sinh(qd)/(k z q), C = -k z q sinh(qd), D = A for a single layer case ANISOTROPIC THERMAL TRANSPORT such as MoS2 are known to have similar anisotropic thermal conductivities If we take a Fourier and Hankel transform using Eq. 1 of the temperature data ∆T (r, t) in Fig. of the results will depend on the number of points available for (κ, ω). We would like to highlight that the system of equations is highly non-linear for the multilayered version of Eq. 2. The values of the system of equations are complex and differs by orders of magnitudes as shown in Fig. In Table As shown As little as N ω = 25 points is sufficient to reconstruct all values accurately. The next example involves the use of the same method but assume a size-dependent thermal conductivity. This means that k r,z is a function of the transformed space parameters (κ, ω). Here, we choose graphite as a test case. This is because graphite is highly anisotropic, making the thermal transport of great interest. Furthermore, graphite has a in plane phonon mean-free-path (MFP) on that range of micrometers at room temperature while a small phonon MFP of hundred nanometers in cross plane (or the c-axis). Recent effort to resolve caxis MFP requires careful measurement of exfoliated samples of different thicknesses Figure obtain stable solutions for k r,z (κ, ω). Here, we choose N k = 50 and N ω = 500 in order to show a smooth size-dependent spectrum for k r,z (κ, ω). the potential of this method to accurately retrieve size-dependent thermal conductivity for various materials. One proposed experimental method to realize our scheme used to retrieve spatial temporal temperature data which can be captured by regular CCD cameras. Our method can be adapted to any optical transient methods such as time-domain thermoreflectance Nevertheless, no heating size or sample size is required to be changed. If materials have in-plane anisotropy such as black phosphorous, regular spatial decomposition in Cartesian coordinates can be performed to obtain ∆T in the transformed coordinates. More complicated optical excitation patterns such as transient grating can also be used and transformed according to the symmetry of the system. Essentially, our method opens up the concept of data multiplexing into thermal transport measurements. Now, instead of sending and retrieving one frequency at a time, we can retrieve information encoded over various frequencies by sampling and decode all at once. Last but not least, our method offers a snapshot technique to gather size-dependent thermal conductivity information with the least experimental effort possible. Using methods in Machine Learning, we can potentially reduce the amount of spatial temporal data required to obtain thermal transport parameters 