The discovery of graphene triggered a rapid rise of unexplored two-dimensional materials and heterostructures having optoelectronic and photonics properties that can be tailored on the nanoscale. Among these materials, black phosphorus (BP) has attracted a remarkable interest thanks to many favorable properties, such as high carrier mobility, in-plane anisotropy, the possibility to alter its transport via electrical gating and direct band-gap, that can be tuned by thickness from 0.3 eV (bulk crystalline) to 1.7 eV (single atomic layer). When integrated in a microscopic field effect transistor (FET), a few-layer BP flake can detect Terahertz (THz) frequency radiation. Remarkably, the in-plane crystalline anisotropy can be exploited to tailor the mechanisms that dominate the photoresponse; a BP-based field effect transistor can be engineered to act as a plasma-wave rectifier, a thermoelectric sensor or a thermal bolometer. Here we present a review on recent research on BP detectors operating from 0.26 THz to 3.4 THz with particular emphasis on the underlying physical mechanisms and the future challenges that are yet to be addressed for making BP the active core of stable and reliable optical and electronic technologies. Being compatible with many substrates, they can be easily integrated in an array configuration, and, exceptionally, can allow to engineer the physical mechanisms governing light detection from scratch [13], reaching high electrical bandwidths and low noise. Here we review the detection performances of BP-based nano-devices at THz frequencies. The rising interest in Terahertz (THz) radiation (loosely defined as the 0.1-10 THz frequency range, 30 -3000 μm wavelength range) has been triggered in the last decade by a wealth of applications in security, biomedical imaging, gas sensing, non-destructive testing and materials analysis, non-contact imaging of coatings and composites, non-invasive medical diagnosis of tumors and dental diseases In this context, several room-temperature (RT), on-chip integrated, detection technologies, suitable for real-time frame acquisition and based on distinctive physical mechanisms have been recently proposed and implemented Two-dimensional (2D) layered materials, such as graphene The development of mechanical exfoliation techniques prompted extensive research on layered 2D materials, aiming to the study of their unique physical properties and widening their scope of application At the same time, the field of 2D layered crystals has recently been populated with other materials, having complementary features with respect to graphene. For example, TMDs (MoS 2 , MoSe 2 , WS 2 , WSe 2 , etc.) show a direct, finite band gap (0.4 -2.3 eV) which endows them with a very high carrier density tuneability (on/off current ratios in a transistor up to 10 10 ), but limits the carrier mobility to relatively low values, typically less than 250 cm 2 V -1 s -1 In this context, black phosphorus (BP), the most stable allotrope of the element phosphorus, appears as a natural trade-off between graphene and TMDs. Indeed, with its thickness dependent energy gap, spanning from 0.3 eV in the bulk case, to 1.7 eV of the monolayer case (phosphorene) Differently from graphene, the atomic planes of BP, bound together by van der Waals forces, do not present an atomically flat structure The anisotropic band dispersion also affects the effective masses of free carriers in BP: the effective mass along the armchair direction is about an order of magnitude smaller than that along the zigzag direction A suitable method to determine the crystalline quality and in-plane orientation of an exfoliated few-layer BP flake (Figure Owing to this unique set of physical properties, black phosphorus promises new functionalities over a variety of device architectures, like sources, modulators, passive components and photodetectors. For example, owing to its ultrafast nonlinear optical response, it has been proposed as a saturable absorber in the telecom band (1400 nm -1600 nm) for the realization of passively mode-locked lasers Recently, Huber et al. Moreover, thanks to the inherent in-plane anisotropy, BP has been exploited to devise highspeed photodetectors with polarization sensitivity in the visible and near-infrared range The basic principle of photodetection is the conversion of absorbed photons into an electrical signal. Unlike the case of visible light or near-infrared radiation, the energy carried by a THz photon (hν = 4 meV for ν = 1THz) is not large enough to excite an optical transition across the energy gap of BP, i.e. does not create extra free carriers. For this reason, the generation of an electrical signal induced by the incoming radiation must rely either on electronic or thermal effects. The integration of a BP flake within a FET can trigger both dynamics when light is impinging on it. Under this configuration, three main effects can indeed take place in the device: the over-damped or resonant plasma-wave, the thermoelectric and the bolometric effects The activation of the plasma-wave mechanism in a FET detector can be interpreted as deriving from the non-linear dependence of the FET channel current on the gate voltage (V G ) near the pinch-off point. These devices have the advantage that the responsivity can be maximized with V G , while measuring the output at the drain with no source-drain bias applied, thus dramatically reducing the noise caused by a dc current. This physical effect, predicted by Dyakonov and Shur In order to funnel the free space THz radiation in the deeply sub-wavelength active element, a proper light harvesting scheme is needed. The typical approach is the exploitation of planar dipole antennas whose arms are connected to the S and top-gate electrodes (Figure where U a is the amplitude of the ac radiation field, R L is the finite impedance of the measurement setup including the readout circuitry, and η is a proportionality factor that takes into account the coupling efficiency of the THz antenna. The asymmetric antenna design generates a field enhancement between the G and S contacts of the FET. With reference to Figure Where k B is the Boltzmann constant, e is the (positive) elementary charge, σ(E) is the conductivity as a function of energy and the derivative is evaluated at the Fermi energy E F . At room temperature S B values as large as 335 μV/K have been found in few-layer BP flakes On the other hand, in order to activate selectively the bolometric effect, a symmetric antenna structure is needed. In fact, this mechanism arises as a consequence of the uniform heating of the FET channel when the antenna funnels the impinging THz beam. This can be achieved in a totally symmetric device architecture, like the one shown in Figure The activation of these three detection effects in BP-based FETs has been recently engineered and demonstrated in the sub-THz frequency range (265 GHz -640 GHz) Three different combinations of antenna design and crystal orientation with respect to the channel direction were tested. Sample A (Figure Experiments were carried out at room temperature with a ~ 300 GHz, linearly polarized, radiation produced by a tunable electronic source. The THz beam, modulated by a mechanical chopper, was focused on the detector by a set of off-axis parabolic mirrors, reaching a spot diameter of 4 mm in the focal point. The photoresponse was measured in photovoltage mode Where the factor π/√2 is a normalization coefficient that takes into account the rms value of the fundamental sine wave Fourier component of the square wave produced by the chopper, G n is the gain of the preamplifier, P tot is the average electromagnetic power, S t is the beam spot area and S λ is the diffraction limited area (S λ = λ 2 /4). Figure On the other hand, as depicted in Fig. When a symmetric THz antenna is employed (sample C) the bolometric effect is expected to occur. The responsivity curve of sample C is shown in Fig. Amongst the three reported devices, a maximum responsivity value R ν = 7.8 V/W has been obtained for sample C, corresponding to a noise equivalent power (NEP, defined as the ratio between R ν and the noise spectral density) of 7 nW/√Hz THz detectors realized with hBN/BP/hBN stacks have also a higher thermal stability with respect to oxide-encapsulated devices. The reported stability, allowed performing low temperature experiments which revealed and a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 2x10 4 at 4 K Many interesting applications in the THz frequency range require the use of compact, coherent, broadly tunable, monolithic micro-sources, having high spectral purity. Quantum cascade lasers (QCLs) are certainly the most appropriate in this respect: they operate in the 1.2-5.4 THz frequency range, with peak output powers that can reach watt-level, continuous-wave operation and ultra-narrow linewidth, which make them versatile for applications in high-resolution spectroscopy, gas sensing, and heterodyne detection FETs can provide efficient THz rectification far beyond their transit-time limited cut-off frequency: Si MOSFETs operating up to 4.3 THz Following this approach, the operation range of a BP-FET can be shifted to higher frequencies by reducing the antenna dimensions, while maintaining the same impedance (~ 70 Ω for a bow-tie). To match the wavelength generated by a 3.4 THz QCL, a BP-FET equipped with a 32μm long split-bow-tie antenna was fabricated (Fig. The light beam emitted by the QCL was focused on the detector using a pair of 5 cm focal length Picarin lenses, obtaining a Gaussian shape with ~ 200 μm diameter (Fig. The predicted plasma-wave response for this sample, calculated from the static dc conductivity as Δu p /(ηU a 2 ) (see eq.1), is depicted in Fig. V, whereas for V G < 0.3 V the response is predicted to drop rapidly. The qualitative agreement between the two graphs of Fig. Figure The recent progress in the development of photodetectors Of particular interest for photonics is the exploration of plasmon polaritons -hybrid light matter modes involving the collective oscillation of mobile charges. In graphene, plasmon polaritons have been exploited to confine and manipulate infrared radiation to length scales of tens of nanometres. The imaging of long-range propagating phonon-plasmon-polaritons and their ultrafast optical switching has been also demonstrated in black phosphorous via near-field optical microscopy experiments (Figure On the growth side, the recent progress on BP production by mineralizer-assisted gas-phase transformation method provides an efficient alternative to standard high-pressure synthesis or chemical vapor transport for the growth of large-size, high-quality crystals, also allowing the possibility to add dopants during the growth process Furthermore, the optimization of carrier density via chemical doping during growth is of fundamental importance to improve the performances of BP-based devices; for example, selenium doping has been demonstrated to be beneficial for increasing the responsivity of photodetectors operating in the visible range by more than one order of magnitude Black phosphorus earned an extraordinary potential among the family of 2D semiconductor materials when recent results unveiled its high carrier mobility, high optical and UV absorption, and other attractive properties, which are of particular interest for optoelectronic and photonic applications. The development of photodetectors from the ultra-violet to the near-infrared frequency regions has attracted increasing attention owing to the opportunity of band structure engineering via thickness control and to the peculiar absorption properties stemming from the in-plane crystalline anisotropy of BP. In this brief review, we have provided a summary of recent achievements in the development of BP-based photo-detectors operating in one of the most technologically appealing region of the electromagnetic spectrum: the far infrared. We discussed detection performances in the 0.3-3.4 THz frequency range, unveiling room-temperature responsivity higher than 4V/W and noise equivalent power lower than 10 nW/Hz 1⁄2 , making this technology highly competitive for practical process and quality control apprlications. We also discussed the influence of the strong inplane anisotropy of the material for tailoring the detection dynamics, offering an interesting route for engineering device properties "from scratch". Together with the demonstrated plasmonic response of BP heterostrctures, the present review provides a starting point for future studies and design of BP-based THz photonic, plasmonic and nano-electronic systems.