Our general interest is in self-consistent-field (scf) theories of disordered fermions. They generate physically relevant sub-ensembles ("scf-ensembles") within a given Altland-Zirnbauer class. We are motivated to investigate such ensembles (i) by the possibility to discover new fixed points due to (long-range) interactions; (ii) by analytical scf-theories that rely on partial self-consistency approximations awaiting a numerical validation; (iii) by the overall importance of scf-theories for the understanding of complex interaction-mediated phenomena in terms of effective single-particle pictures. In this paper we present an efficient, parallelized implementation solving scf-problems with spatially local fields by applying a kernel-polynomial approach. Our first application is the Boguliubov-deGennes (BdG) theory of the attractive-U Hubbard model in the presence of on-site disorder; the sc-fields are the particle density n(r) and the gap function ∆(r). For this case, we reach system sizes unprecedented in earlier work. They allow us to study phenomena emerging at scales substantially larger than the lattice constant, such as the interplay of multifractality and interactions, or the formation of superconducting islands. For example, we observe that the coherence length exhibits a non-monotonic behavior with increasing disorder strength already at moderate U . With respect to methodology our results are important because we establish that partial self-consistency ("energyonly") schemes as typically employed in analytical approaches tend to miss qualitative physics such as island formation. The symmetry classification of disordered metals as it has been devised by Altland and Zirnbauer is nowadays considered to be complete. Based on an (incomplete) analogy to the conventional Landau-Ginzburg-Wilson theories of classical phase transitions, there was a wide-spread misunderstanding with many researchers at the late 1980ies and early 1990ies that a classification based on symmetry (and topology) alone would (more or less) determine the phase-diagrams and the associated critical points as well. In other words, the symmetry-classification was largely identified with a classification of universality classes, i.e. of all nonequivalent quantum field theories (low-energy actionfunctionals) that describe a disordered electron system. Therefore, it came as a surprise for the larger part of the community when models of disordered fermions had been found that formally belong to the same symmetry class but nevertheless exhibit different phase diagrams. It is perhaps fair to say that despite of the progress in the symmetry classification, we are still far from a systematic understanding of all universality classes and phase-diagrams that systems of disordered fermions could exhibit. One could rephrase by saying that the generic ensembles of random Hamiltonians covered in the ten-fold way possess physically relevant sub-ensembles that exhibit their own phase-diagrams and critical fixed-points. The power-law random-banded matrices (PRBM) constitute a well studied example. The appearance of criticality in the PRBM-ensemble is a synthetic property; it is imposed by putting longrange (power-law) correlations into the hopping amplitudes of a tight-binding Hamiltonian. It therefore is interesting to explore properties of other ensembles that also exhibit long-range correlations in the Hamiltonian matrix elements, but of a kind that is self-generated and in this sense "emergent". Plausible candidates for such Hamiltonians are effective single-particle systems that appear in self-consistent-field (scf-) theories of interacting fermions. A prototypical example could be the Hartree-Hamiltonian of a disordered wire or film; it carries a long-range correlated on-site potential due to a weakly screened Coulomb-interaction. Quite generally, we have in mind fermionic Hamiltonians (1) the matrix h xy [n, ∆] is a functional of the density matrix n and the pairing fields ∆. The self-consistency condition inherent to generic mean-field theories requires that the arXiv:1903.10395v2 [cond-mat.dis-nn] 26 Sep 2019 fields n and ∆ are expectation values of operators n, ∆ to be calculated employing -amongst other ingredients, such as density matrices or exchange-correlation kernels -also Ĥsc . Thus, scf-conditions are implied, that h, ∆ and n obey. A microscopic randomness will enter Ĥsc , e.g., via h incorporating random on-site energies or hopping amplitudes. The set of random Hamiltonians introduced thereby follows the conventional symmetry classification. However, only the subset of all members of a given symmetry class that happens to comply with Eq. ( We believe that scf-ensembles, their physical and mathematical properties constitute a fundamental research topic that may not yet have received the amount of attention it deserves. Our belief bases on two observations: (i) The elements of scf-ensembles certainly tend to exhibit non-trivial correlations in their matrix elements h xy and ∆ xy . If correlations happen to be strong enough, e.g. sufficiently long ranged, then new phases with novel critical behavior can be expected to emerge. (ii) Mean-field theories are important because they provide a tractable reference point for a perturbative analysis of interaction effects. Thus, they are a generic encounter in all theories of disordered fermions that try to incorporate interactions. To reveal, in particular, the impact of quantum fluctuations a thorough understanding of the mean-field reference point would certainly seem helpful. We give examples for occurrences of scf-ensembles: Hartree theory (H): The obvious example to define ensembles of self-consistent Hamiltonians would be the Hartree-theory. In this case ∆=0 and the field n in Eqs. ( Hartree-Fock theory (HF): ∆=0; n resembles the density matrix n(r, r ) and h the Fock-operator. Our short list is far from exhaustive and further examples could be given. For instance, we recall that many spin-systems have faithful representations in terms of fermionic network-models that also could be dressed with self-consistency requirements, like self-consistent fluxes. Remarks: (i) The investigation of scf-ensembles is a very challenging endeavor. The difficulty is that each disorder configuration requires to find its own self-consistent fields h and ∆. The solution of the scf-cycle is very difficult to do with analytical techniques. But also numerically it is demanding already at moderate system sizes of a few thousand sites. Consequently, the number of studies including full self-consistency appears to be limited. In Tab. I we list contributions most relevant to us. (ii) A more general perspective can be developed that operates with self-consistency constraints on the Green's function G(E) rather than on the elements of the Hamiltonian. The generalization becomes non-trivial when the self-energy Σ(E) picks up an energy dependence. As a prototypical example we mention the GW-theory. It constitutes an electronic-structure method that builds upon the Hedin-equations approximating them by ignoring vertex corrections. signed by Altland and Zirnbauer (AZ). To see this, we recall that AZ distinguish ten classes according to presence or absence of discrete symmetries. In contrast, the scf-requirement as formulated in (2) invokes parameterbound kernels. Hence, a priori the number of scfensembles is not limited and an impression might arise according to which the scf-ensembles carry a degree of arbitrariness and therefore are less fundamental. To address this reservation against the basic concept, we recall that there is a very special set of scf-theories which is standing out; these scf-theories share with the parent field theory they derive from the basic symmetries and in this sense are conserving. The numerical challenge that the scf-ensembles pose as compared to simulations of noninteracting fermions is that for each sample the scf-equation Eq.( Thus motivated, we here present an implementation of the scf-problem that allows to achieve relevant system sizes at an affordable numerical cost. The interplay of disorder induced quantum-interference and mean-field interactions can be studied on length scales that exceed the lattice constant by two orders of magnitude. The computationally demanding step limiting the code-performance is the calculation of the scf-fields, n, ∆ and h, that need to be evaluated in every iteration cycle of the self-consistency process. In the case of Hartree-Fock-theory, for instance, this implies the reconstruction of the density-matrix from a given Fock-operator. In straight-forward implementations the Hamiltonian is diagonalized in each iteration cycle to feed eigenvalues and eigenvectors into the rhs of (2); the cost is O(N 3 bf ) operations, where N bf is the dimension of the single-particle Hilbert space. contains the Fermi-Dirac function, f (μ-ĤH ), of a matrix valued argument that conventionally is evaluated in the basis of eigenstates of ĤH . What many suggestions for O(N x bf )-solvers, x < 3, of the self-consistency problem have in common is that they employ an alternative approach for trace-computation that avoids a diagonalization of ĤH and therefore can be more efficient, in principle, than O(N 3 bf ). One of the well established options is the kernel-polynomial method (KPM). where Ĥs denotes an appropriately scaled Hamiltonian ĤH and |b is a suitable basis in which Ĥs is sparse. (N C : order of the Chebyshev expansion; a r : known expansion coefficients; N bf : number of basis functions). As is seen from ( We have implemented a matrix-free KPM-solver of the self-consistency problem (1), ( The KPM-aspect of our implementation is similar to other variants described in earlier work. They have been proven useful in applications of the BdG-equation for nanostructures with one or very few impurities, but have not been applied to disordered samples. Implementation differences are in details: Covaci et al. Motivated by experiments on the superconductorinsulator transition, e.g. Ref. Baturina et al. Motivated by this observation, we investigate as a first application of our technology the BdG-problem of disordered superconductors focussing on s-wave pairing in thin films at T =0. The full parameter plane of disorder, W , and interaction, U , is considered in which we study the distribution function and autocorrelations of the local gap function, ∆(r), as our main observable. Our computational machinery allows us to cover the full parameter space from the extreme regimes, which have been addressed computationally before, to the analytically tractable weak coupling limit. In this effort we observe the formation of islands in large regions of the parameter space, for the first time on mesoscopic scales considerably exceeding the lattice constant. Regimes are included with parameters relatively close to the one where strong inhomogeneity has been observed experimentally. Our observation might indicate that islands play a crucial role for the stability of the superconducting phase in actual experiments. Namely, islands imply localized Cooper pairs and therefore a diminishing of the phasestiffness. In other words, islands go together with enhanced phase-fluctuations that destabilise long-range superconducting order. This connection between islandformation and stability has been emphasized before. Finally, like earlier authors We consider the attractive-U Hubbard model 46 on the square lattice in two-dimensions within the mean-field (BdG-type) approximation: ĉ † i,↑ , U > 0 and random potential V i ∈ [-W, W ] drawn from a box distribution. We employ periodic boundary conditions and work at T =0; the chemical potential μ is adjusted to fix the the filling factor to n = The particle and hole wave functions u n (r i ) and v n (r i ) are determined solving the BdG equation where the physical sector corresponds to n > 0 and ∆u n (r i ) = ∆(r i )u n (r i ); (10) the sum over δ is over the lattice sites neighboring r i . The scf-conditions for the density n(r) and the gap-function ∆(r) read We assume self-consistency to be attained, if the relative change per iteration cycle in ∆(r i ) is at each site r i smaller than α. Typical values we take are α = 0.1%, 0.5%, 1%, 3%. Note that the average change α avg per iteration cycle is much smaller than α, e.g., for a typical sample at moderate disorder W = 2 we have α avg = 0.014%, 0.025%, 0.05%, 0.1% To speed up a single self-consistency iteration we optimize the Chebyshev expansion. Its performance critical part constitutes of the recursive action of the Hamiltonian on a basis vector, Eq. ( The idea is the following: Conventional sparse matrix packages keep all non-zero elements, i.e. value and index, in memory. Matrix-free implementations become efficient if many of the non-zero elements have identical values storing only the different values that occur. With matrix-free implementations the graph of the Hamiltonian has to be hard-coded in the matrix-vector product routine. For our Hamiltonian the amount of memory load operations of matrix data is reduced by a factor of 6 reflecting the number of non-zero elements per row of ĤBdG . In addition, the integer indices corresponding to the matrix graph do not have to be loaded. Altogether, this leads to a reduction of data to be loaded by a factor of 9. We improve the code performance by reducing the number of iterations needed until the convergence of the scf-cycle. The main idea applies, e.g., when scanning the parameter space at fixed U for increasing disorder Then, Ψ 1 will be used to initialize the scf-cycle for the second sample. As almost all runtime is spent on the recursive matrix vector products, the code lends itself very well to being split in an efficient low-level (i.e. C) kernel embedded in a high-level (i.e. python) code that implements the rest of the self-consistency cycle in a convenient way with negligible loss of performance. The kernel has been optimized for both threading and vectorization. In Fig. An additional level of parallelism is obtained by running the expansion of different basis vectors independently on different nodes. The average over the disorder ensemble is performed via farming. This inter-node parallelization scales almost perfectly. As a first application of our technology, we investigate statistical properties of ∆(r) and of the local density of states (LDoS), ρ(r, E), throughout the U -W -plane. To give a first impression we display in Fig. Also displayed in Fig. LDoS. We begin the statistical analysis with the spatial fluctuations of the LDoS, ρ(E, r). Fig. With increasing energy the distribution shifts to smaller values, which is merely reflecting the decrease of the DoS ρ(E), also seen in Fig. The LDoS-distribution has been investigated analytically at temperatures above the critical temperature T c . For increasing disorder and weak U more and more sites develop a pairing well below the clean limit, ∆(r) ∆ BCS , consistent with observations made in Ref. We consider the disorder averaged spatial autocorrelator Φ lg (q) = |∆(q)| 2 of the pairing function ∆(r) in Fourier space. At weaker disorder the correlation function displays a peak at (π/a, π/a), Fig. Notwithstanding anisotropy at q≈a -1 , in the limit of small wavenumbers q a -1 the correlator Φ lg (q) is isotropic and with good accuracy we have where Φ lg (0) := Φ lg (q → 0), given for different W in Fig. To attain ξ we have used a linear fit of Φ lg (0)/Φ lg (q 2 ) in the isotropic regime. As with the range of this regime also the number of data points increases considerably with W , 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1. 25 . ξ U (W ) exhibits a local non-monotonicity on its way from the clean to the dirty limit; the non-monotonic decay is readily seen also from the original data Fig. We return to a central theme of our interest, which is the impact of self-consistency on the calculation of physical observables. The full BdG-problem is specified by the set of equations ( Various possibilities for such simplifications are conceivable. The scheme we here describe is inspired by analytical calculations performed by Feigelman et al. We here derive equations for partial self-consistency starting from the mean-field Hamiltonian Eq. ( The corresponding eigenvalues of ψ l are denoted ξ l and will be measured with respect to the Fermi-energy E F . Expressing ĤBdG in d, d † we obtain ĤBdG = - where an abbreviation has been introduced. The main approximate step in partial self-consistency is to neglect all terms with more than two indices together with the Hartree term. The simplified meanfield Hamiltonian then reads d † l,↓ + h.c., (18) with an s-wave pairing strength The Hamiltonian (18) is structurally equivalent to the BCS Hamiltonian in the sense that the kinetic term and ∆ l are diagonal in the same (real-space) basis; Cooper pairs form within a Kramer's doublet. The corresponding BCS gap-equation reads Converting back to real-space we have The advantage of the partial ("energy-only") scf-scheme is that the pairing-amplitude can be calculated solely from the eigenstates and eigenvalues of the noninteracting reference Hamiltonian Ĥ0 . This comes at the expense of ignoring changes in the wavefunctions related to pairing and the inhomogeneous Hartree shift. full self-consistency. Center column: energy-only self-consistency with inhomogeneous Hartree shift. Calculation is done with the single-particle ("screened") potential as it results from the full scf-calculation, left. Right column: energy-only scheme. The energy-only data has been calculated employing full diagonalization (Parameters: U =1.5; N C =1024, α = 0.5%) Fig. In order to highlight the effect of screening, we have displayed in Fig. In analogy to the 2D case, we compare the results of full and energy-only self-consistency schemes for the local pairing amplitude ∆(r) in 3D. In the non-interacting 3D Anderson problem there is a phase transition at a critical disorder strength W c , where all states become localized. For a disorder strength below W c there exists an energy E c , the mobility edge, which separates a fully localized band from a band of extended states. We note that as the Anderson Hamiltonian is symmetric around E = 0 this is also true for the mobility edge. We refer to B. Bulka Our interest is in the importance of self-consistency in the presence of attractive on-site interactions close to the mobility edge in the insulating band. For comparibility with authors that have considered an energy-only approach in this context before of the random onsite energies V i in Eq. 9. Fig. Fig. The most striking and perhaps unexpected feature, however, is a qualitative difference. In the full scfcalculation, Φ lg (q) follows Eq. ( We have implemented an efficient solver of selfconsistent field (scf-) Hamiltonians that is based on the kernel-polynomial method. An application to disordered s-wave superconducting films has been presented that employs the Bogulubov-deGennes approximation. The statistical properties of the local density of states and of the local gap function ∆(r) have been studied. In this context our computational machinery proves useful since system sizes can be accessed significantly exceeding the ones that have been achieved in the earlier work. We thus can study the crossover in disorder strength W and interaction strength U from the strongly coupled into the perturbative regime, where analytical methods apply and can provide conceptual insights. Along this way three key observations have been made. (i) Superconducting islands form in large regions of the U -W phase space and thus appear to be a typical encounter already at intermediate interaction and disorder strength. (ii) Presumably related to island formation, the (mean-field) correlation length exhibits a nonmonotonous variation when sweeping from very weak to strong disorder. (iii) Island formation is a hallmark of wavefunction-renormalization in the sense that islands do not form with partial ("energy-only") self-consistency. To investigate into possible consequences of this observation for analytical treatments of the superconductorinsulator transition we leave as a topic for future research. As a concluding remark we note that the BdG-Anderson problem and the associated ensemble of selfconsistent random Hamiltonians is a particular representative of a very large class of random matrices that satisfy a self-consistency constraint ("scf-ensembles"). Presumably, because of the considerable challenges that such ensembles imply for analytical and computational treatments very little is known about them. We take the observations that have been reported for the BdGensembles, in this work as well as by the earlier authors, as a strong indication that much is there to be discovered. In Fig. 