Strong vibrational coupling has been realized in a variety of mechanical systems from cavity optomechanics to electromechanics. The observation of quantum effects in mechanical systems requires high quality factor resonators that can be cooled to their ground state. The temperatures needed to achieve this are T hf k ⁄ , where f is the vibrational frequency, h and k are Planck's and Boltzmann's constants, respectively. Experimentally cooling such low-frequency mechanical resonators to their quantum ground state is an enormous challenge, requiring cryogenic temperatures and cooling via radiation pressure. However, nanomaterials support vibrations at ultra-high frequencies (>50 GHz) and, thus, may enable the observation of the quantum regime for mechanical oscillators at moderate temperatures. A benchmark for evaluating whether a mechanical system can be cooled to its ground state is the frequency quality factor product f Q. This product should be greater than k T/h, that is, the mechanical quality factor Q must be larger than the number of thermal phonons at the ambient temperature ( Q k T /fh). Constructing high frequency/high quality factor plasmonic nanoresonators will be attractive for cavity optomechanics and electromechanics applications, Strong coupling between the vibrational modes of two nanoplates was observed with a coupling rate g 7.5 1.2 GHz and the value of g/ω 0.14 was obtained indicating the coupling strength is comparable to the natural frequency of the mechanical resonator. The observation of strong vibrational coupling between two plasmonic nanoresonators has not been previously reported, and is an important step for achieving quantum control of the mechanical modes of nanostructures. Au nanoplates were chemically synthesized based on previous studies, see Methods for details. Note that the in-plane shape had no influence on the thickness-dependent mechanical vibrations and damping for the large aspect ratio nanoplates in this work. The crystallographic structure of the Au nanoplates was characterized and gave a hexagonal symmetry diffraction pattern demonstrating single crystal nanoplates where the surfaces are {111} planes, as shown in Figure where the first term accounts for the background signal due to cooling of the nanoplate from electron-phonon (k el) and phonon-phonon (k ph) interactions, and the second term accounts for various vibrations with n 1,2, ⋯ representing the number of modes. Specifically, Figure where υ is the longitudinal sound velocity in the medium, n is the refractive index of the medium, φ is the angle of incidence of the probe beam, and λ is the wavelengths of the probe beam. Using a refractive index n 1.46 of glass and Brillouin oscillation frequency f 32.44 GHz at 530 nm, we calculated a longitudinal speed of sound υ 5900 m/s and acoustic wavelength λ 180 nm for normal incidence, which is consistent with previous measurements. (see Figure Previously, trenches were used to isolate metal nanostructures from the substrate to improve the vibrational quality factors. where ω is the angular vibrational frequency, ρ is the density, and E is Young's modulus along the direction of wave motion. For a nanoplate with a thickness h and free surfaces ( 0 at z 0 and z h), the fundamental vibrational frequency is ω . We estimate a thickness of h 20 nm for a vibrational frequency f 60.76 GHz using a value of E 115 GPa for the chemically synthesized Au nanoplates with {111} surface planes. The calculated vibrational spectra are shown in Figure Importantly, the spectra are dramatically shifted when coupling is introduced into the simulations. The measurements in Figure A statistical analysis of the experimental data is presented in Figure 1.2 GHz was obtained from the experimental measurements. A plot of f and f versus ∆ is presented in Figure The vibrational quality factors for the coupled vibrational mode are shown in Figure The average value is Q 95 30. The increased attenuation for the coupled system is probably because the overlapped nanoplates introduce additional relaxation channels compared to the isolated nanoplates. Besides the mechanical coupling for the overlapped Au nanoplates, there is a vibrational mode f 19.38 GHz in Figure The vibrational amplitude increases with increasing the pump power, however, the FFT spectra have identical vibrational frequencies. Note that the vibrational coupling is highly sensitive to the environment. Mechanical coupling between Au nanoplates was not observed when the nanoplates were immersed in water, as shown in Figure GHz for water yields a longitudinal speed of sound of υ 1470 m/s assuming n 1.33, which is consistent with our previous measurements. Creating high quality factor mechanical resonators in the ultra-high frequency range (GHz-THz) is interesting for many applications, ranging from mass sensing to quantum mechanics. Environmental damping is very dependent on the energy transfer efficiency between the localized acoustic vibration modes and sound waves in the surrounding medium. Replacing the glass substrate with 20 nm Lacey carbon films greatly improved the vibrational quality factors by blocking energy transfer to propagating longitudinal acoustic waves. Previously, suspending metal nanowires over trenches was used to improve the quality factors of plasmonic resonators. The improvement in the quality factors and signal-to-noise ratio is beneficial for realizing strong coupling in plasmonic resonators. Specifically, we were able to observe coupling between overlapped Au nanoplates (average vibrational frequency ω 55 10 GHz) with a coupling rate of g 7.5 1.2 GHz. Three important parameters can be used to evaluate whether the system is in the strong coupling regime. The large f Q product for the metallic nanoresonators also mean that this system is attractive for ground state cooling from room temperature. Furthermore, all optical excitation and detection of mechanical vibrations could provide a way to dynamically manipulate phonon motion. We have demonstrated strong vibrational coupling in plasmonic resonators. Engineering the phonon dissipation pathways by blocking the out-propagating acoustic waves improved the vibration quality factor an order of magnitude to Q 200 in Au nanoplates. We experimentally realized the highest frequency quality factor product f Q 1 10 Hz to date for plasmonic nanoresonators. The high quality factors for these nanoresonators allowed us to observe strong vibrational coupling between different nanoplates. Analysis of the data using a coupled harmonic oscillator model gave an average coupling rate g 7.5 1.2 GHz and cooperativity C 225 for the system. The metallic nanoresonators described in this study provide a platform for observation and control of quantum phonon dynamics. Materials: HAuCl4•3H2O, 1-pentanol and PVP (Mn = 40000) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (USA). Ethanol (AR, ≥ 99.7%) was purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China). Ultrapure water (18.2 MΩ•cm) was used throughout the experiments. Glass coverslips (catalog no. CG15KH) were purchased from Thorlabs China. Lacey carbon film with average pore size of ~5 m and thickness of ~20 nm coated copper grids (catalog no. BZ110125b) were purchased from Electron Microscopy Supplies China. The synthesis procedure was modified from previous studies. The solution was then heated to 120 °C and kept for 1h under continuous stirring and another 3 h without stirring disturbance to facilitate the growth of Au nanoplates. The solution was brought to room temperature and the product was collected and washed with ethanol at least three times by centrifugation and ultrasonication to remove PVP surfactant. The Au nanoplates were ready for experimental measurements. Femtosecond time-resolved pump-probe spectroscopy: Acoustic vibrations of the Au nanoplates were excited with femtosecond pulse lasers at 800 nm and detected at 530 nm. The experimental setup has been detailed elsewhere. 