We have developed a new method for fabrication of ultra-low noise silver-silver chloride (Ag-AgCl) reference electrode with dramatically high stability, useful in biomedical precise measurements. Low noise level and high stability are the most important features when evaluating reference electrode for example when used as a half-cell at electrochemical cells. The noise was measured for bare Ag-AgCl electrode pairs in a saline electrolyte without any junction. The noise spectral density for such measurements increases at low frequencies due to flicker (1/f) noise. Thermal noise from the real part of the electrode impedance is always lower than 1/f noise and is shown as offset voltage in noise spectrum. Electrode noise is highly correlated to its offset voltage. Moreover, the variance of the potential difference in our measurements is correlated to the noise level of electrodes. In this paper, offset voltage spectrum and the variance of data while doing measurements are proposed for identification of noise in our electrodes. The results presented suggest a new process for fabrication of electrode pairs with differential noise potential of 16 nanovolt root mean square at frequency of 1 Hz. In an electrochemical system, reference electrodes are essential components since they can provide stable and constant potential during the measurement One method to measure the noise power spectrum density of the electrode pairs is to place them in saline electrolyte and measure the potential difference between them in an electromagnetically shielded environment It is shown that the microstructure of the Ag-AgCl has a large influence on its repeatability and performance Some recent studies have focused on the fabrication of thermal electrolytic (ThE) Ag-AgCl reference electrodes In this research we developed a new technique to increase the effective surface of ThE reference electrodes by using a light Rhodium (Rh) coated silver tube as the inner skeleton instead of Pt wire for supporting the Ag-AgCl layers. Rh is also a noble metal which has a similar electrochemical reaction mechanism as Pt wire. Since we deposit a very thin layer of Rh on the outer surface of Ag tube, this method is Design and Fabrication of an Ultra-low Noise Ag-AgCl Electrode B. Rostami, S.I. Mirzaei, A. Zamani, A. Simchi, M. Fardmanesh more cost effective than using Pt wire as used in the conventional ThE methods. In the following sections, two different methods for fabrication of Ag-AgCl reference electrodes are proposed and their microstructure and noise level are compared to each other. The first method is the simplest way to fabricate an Ag-AgCl reference electrode by only doing the anodization step on a silver rod (Basic standard method) and the second one is the ThE method by replacing Pt wire by a light Rhodium (Rh) coated silver tube (New ThE method). In the basic standard fabrication method, a proportion of Ag rod was converted to AgCl by electrolysis technique which could be driven by applying a fixed current or a fixed potential. In this research, we have used constant current for converting 15 percent of the mass of identical Ag rods (99.99%, rectangular cross section 1mm x 0.5mm) to AgCl in a chloride solution. The block diagram of basic standard fabrication process is shown in Fig. Prior to electrode preparation, to remove surface contaminants of the silver rods, they were immersed in HNO3 solution (0.1 M, 37%, for 5 minutes) and rinsed thoroughly with DI water. Afterwards, they were immersed in NH4OH solution (37%, for 5 minutes) to remove oxide surface contaminants and again rinsed thoroughly with DI water. Aqueous solutions of KCl (0.5 M) and HCl (0.004 M) were mixed and used as the electrolyte in electrolysis process. Prior to anodization, the mass of the part of each silver rod, which will be immersed in the electrolyte, is determined to calculate the amount of charge needed to convert 15 percent of that part of mass to AgCl. In this method, Ag-AgCl electrodes were prepared by N times applying Ag2O paste to an Ag tube with Rh coating (99.99% Ag, 1 mm inner diameter and 1.6 mm outer diameter), followed by its thermal decomposition (100 •C for 30 minutes followed by 500 •C for 2 hours) each time. The block diagram of preparation steps of silver oxide paste is shown in Fig. During the noise test, temperature, humidity and air pressure inside the electromagnetically shielded box were measured. Since all the measurements were done in almost same environmental conditions (such as constant temperature, humidity, and air pressure), system noise was assumed to be the same for all measurements. The noise spectrum of system, captured for 2000 seconds, is shown in Fig. As mentioned in new ThE method section, to investigate the effect of the number of applied silver oxide layers (N in Fig. The third pair of electrodes with N=3 (named B3) were tested immediately after insertion to the electrolyte, after three days, six days, and ten days being kept in the same electrolyte. The noise spectrum of the recorded voltages, captured for 20,000 seconds, is shown in Fig. One of the reasons for temporal degradation of the adhesion between silver oxide layers could be the fact that the three layers of deposited silver are not exactly similar to each other: the first silver oxide layer is heated in the furnace three times while the second layer is exposed to heat twice and the third layer is exposed to heat only once. Therefore, the disparity between different layers would be one of the most probable reasons for adhesion degradation between layers. Another perception from Fig. Other than the offset voltage in the noise spectrum, the variance of the recorded potential difference in face to face measurements is also correlated to the noise level of the electrodes. We calculated the variance of the recorded data while doing differential noise measurements and compared them for different pairs of electrodes. Fig. Despite the more porous structure of type B3 against type A, the degradation of adhesion between three silver oxide layers in type B3 increases its noise level after a while being kept in the electrolyte solution. All fabricated electrodes through our proposed methods have much lower noise level in comparison with the commercial double-junction Ag-AgCl pair. The electrode pair type B1 has the lowest noise level among other types, which regards to its dc offset voltage in noise spectrum. At frequency of 1 Hz, its noise level at steady state is around 16 nV/√Hz which is acceptable among reported noise levels of reference Ag-AgCl electrodes so far. In this paper we proposed two different techniques for fabrication of low noise silver-silver chloride (Ag-AgCl) reference electrodes that are widely utilized in biomedical precise measurements. To find the optimum approach to fabrication of an ultra-low noise reference electrode, the electrochemical and noise properties of four different pairs of electrodes were measured and compared to each other. The noise was characterized by measuring the differential potential from Ag-AgCl electrode pairs in aqueous NaCl (3 M) electrolyte. Electrode noise performance is highly correlated to its DC offset voltage in the noise spectrum and the variance of the recorded data, while performing differential measurements. In this paper, we demonstrated a new scheme for fabricating pairs of electrodes using the proposed novel ThE method with one layer silver oxide paste, resulting in 16 nVRMS noise voltage at 1 Hz and 3 pVRMS noise variance, measured while located face-to-face in electrolyte environment.