Magnon spintronics is a prosperous field that promises beyond-CMOS technology based on elementary excitations of the magnetic order that act as information carriers for future computational architectures. Unidirectional propagation of spin waves is key to the realization of magnonic logic devices. However, previous efforts to enhance the Damon-Eshbach-type nonreciprocity did not realize (let alone control) purely unidirectional propagation. Here we experimentally demonstrate excitations of unidirectional exchange spin waves by a nanoscale magnetic grating consisting of Co nanowires fabricated on an ultrathin yttrium iron garnet film. We explain and model the nearly perfect unidirectional excitation by the chirality of the magneto-dipolar interactions between the Kittel mode of the nanowires and the exchange spin waves of the film. Reversal of the magnetic configurations of film and nanowire array from parallel to antiparallel changes the direction of the excited spin waves. Our results raise the prospect of a chiral magnonic logic without the need for fragile surface states. Spin waves (SWs) 1-6 can transport information in high-quality magnetic insulators such as yttrium iron garnet (YIG) 7-10 free of charge flow and with very low dissipation. Based on the interference and nonlinear interactions, the phase information of SWs 11-14 allows the design of wave-based logic circuits spin waves are not chiral, i.e. the travel equally well in all directions. Recently, Wintz et al. Here, we report unidirectional propagation of exchange spin waves (ESWs) down to wavelengths of 60 nm in ultrathin YIG films capped by an array of Co nanowires functioning as a nanoscale magnetic grating. The SW propagation direction can be controlled by changing the relative directions of the Co and YIG magnetizations from parallel (P-state) to antiparallel (AP-state). The chirality is strongly suppressed when the magnetizations are non-collinear. This property is important to realize either planar For negative (positive) applied fields, we observe signal transmission by spin waves in the -y (+y) direction only, respectively. At FMR frequencies around 1 GHz (low-frequency mode in Fig. For large n values, the SWs in the film are safely in the exchange-dominated regime with quadratic dispersion as shown in Fig. where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, H 0 is the applied field, A = 4.88 × 10 -13 J m -1 is the exchange stiffness constant and μ 0 M S = 143.9 kA/m is the saturation magnetization of sputtered YIG films It changes sharply when the YIG magnetization switches from the parallel (P) to antiparallel (AP) configurations as shown in Figs. where |η| = 1 indicates perfect unidirectional spin-wave propagation. |η| increases with the increasing mode number n as shown in Figs. 2e and 2f for P and AP states, respectively. The exchange spin waves with n ≥ 8 (cf. Fig. We confirmed the unidirectionality of SW propagation by micro-focused Brillouin light scattering (μ-BLS) spectroscopy excited by a coplanar antenna . (5) In the P configuration and the exchange regime, ω n -≠ 0 and ω n + = 0, indicating perfect chirality or η = 1 . For AP magnetizations, m ̂YIG = (m ̂x k , -m ̂y k ) yields ω n -= 0 and ω n + ≠ 0 , indicating a reversed chirality compared with the P state as observed in perfect agreement with the analysis of the experimental data shown in Fig. The interaction between the magnetic modes in the nanowire array and the continuous film is strong, i.e. total coupling strength ω n = |ω n + | + |ω n -| can be measured in terms of the anticrossing gap between the Kittel mode of Co nanowires and the YIG SW modes Micromagnetic simulations based on the object oriented micromagnetic framework (OOMMF) In conclusion, we report generation of unidirectional beams of non-chiral exchange spin waves in YIG film with wavelengths down to 60 nm when brought to resonance with a Co nanowire grating coupler 