A detailed understanding of quantization conductance (QC), their correlation with resistive switching phenomena and controlled manipulation of quantized states is crucial for realizing atomic-scale multilevel memory elements. Here, we demonstrate highly stable and reproducible quantized conductance states (QC-states) in Al/Niobium oxide/Pt resistive switching devices. Three levels of control over the QC-states, required for multilevel quantized state memories, like, switching ON to different quantized states, switching OFF from quantized states, and controlled inter-state switching among one QC-states to another has been demonstrated by imposing limiting conditions of stop-voltage and current compliance. The well defined multiple QC-states along with a working principle for switching among various states show promise for implementation of multilevel memory devices. Driven by the demand for improved computing capability, the semiconductor industry is following the extension of Moore's law which says that the density of transistors in an integrated circuit doubles every two years. However the current technology, charge based flash memory, has reached its limits of miniaturization. As one for the most promising candidate for future non-volatile memories, resistive random access memory (ReRAM) with simple two-terminal sandwiched structured devices exhibit attractive performances due to their scalability down to atomic level, CMOS compatibility, low-power consumption, and high-speed features. Several kinds of control over stable QC-states in a resistive switching device are required to achieve multilevel quantized state memories. These particular kinds of devices have not been fully explored, partly because of the lack of appropriate materials and lack of design & working principles. Many groups have demonstrated quantization in several ReRAM Here, we demonstrate control over the events of switching ON to different QC-states, switching OFF from QC-states, and inter-QC-state switching in Al/Niobium oxide/Pt device. Firstly, stable and reproducible QC-states with integer and half-integer multiples of quantum of conductance (G 0 = 2e 2 /h ~77.4 S) were achieved, indicating formation of well-controlled atomic point contacts in the conducting filaments. Then, the devices were manipulated to exhibit hundreds of different inter-QC-state switching, both in the direction of SET (higher G 0 ) or RESET (lower G 0 ) starting from any particular QC-state. The initial and final QCstates, for each switching event, were found to be stable. The device exhibited longer retention times for higher QC-states. Rules for controlled switching are evolved with stopvoltage and current compliance limits during current-voltage (I-V) measurements. The working principles demonstrated in this work, to achieve QC-states and to induce inter-QCstate switching, is a crucial step towards realization of multilevel memory devices. Switching ON to QC-state: The resistive switching and QC characteristics are demonstrated using I-V measurements on Al/Nb 2 O 5 /Pt devices in air at room temperature. These devices, in their pristine state, were found in high resistance OFF state (HRS) of the order of ~10 9 Ω. Initially, the device was switched to low resistance ON state (LRS) at a forming voltage ~4 V with current compliance (I c ) of 5 μA, as shown in the inset of Figure The stability of a particular QC-state depends on the strength of the corresponding conducting filament. The conducting filament diameter increases as the G 0 of QC-states increase, thus making them more and more robust. The magnitude of applied read voltage during retention measurement was also found to influence the stability of QC-states (supplementary fig2b). Inter-QC-state switching: Once a device is switched ON to a particular QC-state, voltage sweep and current compliance conditions could be controlled to exhibit many different inter-QC-state switching in the device, be in the direction of SET (higher G 0 ) or RESET (lower G 0 ). Figure During the voltage sweep with I c = 1.5 mA, the device exhibited instability around 12 G 0 state (Figure During RESET switching, the critical parameter was the stop-voltage instead of the current compliance limit. For example, during the voltage sweep in Figure Hundreds of inter-QC-state switching events in both SET and RESET directions were performed. The SET and RESET inter-QC-state switching (Figure In summary, stable and reproducible QC-states were achieved in Al/Nb 2 O 5 /Pt devices by limiting current compliance during the current-voltage measurements. All the states were stable at least for 500 s, and the higher conductance states exhibited longer retention times. The stable quantized states could be controllably switched to higher G 0 (SET direction) or to lower G 0 (RESET direction) states, by imposing the current compliance or stop-voltage limits, respectively. The conditions for complete RESET, starting from any quantized state, could also be selectively induced by lifting limiting conditions on current or voltage during RESET voltage sweep. The possibility of utilizing the QC-states in the resistive devices for multilevel logic shows potentials for achieving high-density storage. Additional details on device fabrication, switching characteristics and stability; the interquantized-state switching in SET as well as in RESET directions. support. This work was financially supported partly by DST INSPIRE Fellowship and partly by CSIR network project AQuaRIUS (PSC0110). 