It is well recognized that the miniaturization of electromechanical devices will bring a revolution to humanity in the coming decades synonymous with the effects of miniaturizing electronic devices in those previous. An electromechanical actuator -a device that converts electrical energy to mechanical deformation or motion -is the core component of many such devices. Consequently, research interrogating mili-, micro-, and nano-actuation has, and will continue to become increasingly essential. The challenge is that behaviour of actuators at small size scales vastly differs to those at the macroscale. We cannot simply shrink the size of conventional actuators at the macroscale down to the micro/nanoscale. In addition, conventional actuation materials (such as piezoelectric ceramics and shape memory alloys) have poor properties and performances when fabricated at small length scale. There is an urgent need to discover novel actuation materials at small length scale. This paper will review recent advances of graphene-based actuation materials. We will focus on different actuation physical mechanisms of this most well-known two-dimension material. The in-depth physical understanding and insights will lay the ground for further optimization/development of graphene-based actuators. They may also provide valuable knowledge for the design and development of other twodimensional actuation materials and actuators. In the final quarter of the twentieth century, a unique paradigm shift was experienced amongst the medical community. Discovered by therapeutic practitioners, the adverse effects to patients undergoing surgery were frequently caused by intraoperative trauma when gaining access to the treatment site, rather than the treatment itself. This new understanding motivated a transition from traditional largeincision techniques to practices that minimised postoperative trauma, giving birth to the field of minimally invasive surgery (MIS), so coined by Wickham in 1987 MIS has yielded a myriad of advantages since its inception for patients, surgeons, therapeutic insurance agencies and taxpayers alike. Studies have shown that MIS results in reduced convalescence, decreased pain, smaller incisions and thus better cosmesis, less risk of infection, better postoperative immune function and lower rates of morbidity and mortality, compared with traditional cut-and-sew techniques A significant shortfall of current micro-robotic MIS equipment is that the majority of the operative tooling must remain outside the patient, thereby severely compromising the surgeon's ability to reach locations deep within the body. This is predominantly due to the limitations in size and versatility of current micro-actuator design, reducing its feasibility to enter the patient via small incisions made in order to conduct MIS. The success of micro-robotic MIS development therefore hinges on the advancement of micro-actuation technology. More broadly, it is well recognized that the miniaturization of electromechanical devices will bring a revolution to humanity in the coming decades synonymous with the effects of miniaturizing electronic devices in those previous. They promise and deliver a myriad of applications within industry, including those within the automotive, electronic, aerospace, environmental, and defence The drive for smaller actuators has led to various proposed methods of generating forces and displacements at the millimeter, micrometer, and nanometer scales. Many attempts have been made to simply shrink traditional actuators and motors, from which it has been concluded the behaviour of actuators at small size scales vastly differs to those at the macroscale. Table The electromagnetic actuator, found today in countless products ranging from industrial machinery to consumer electronics, achieved widespread use due to its exceptional energy density and longevity Electrostatic force -the attraction/repulsion between two charged objects -offers an actuation mechanism that could potentially address this need. Unlike the electromagnetic actuator, electrostatic actuation improves with a reduction in size, scaling with the inverse-square of the characteristic length (F ~ L -2 ) The thermal actuator, operating due to the thermo-mechanical response of a material (i.e., mechanical deformation caused by a change in temperature), has proven to be very useful for select applications within the micro-device industry In addition to these alternative actuation principles, there exist other options. These include magnetostrictive (elongates under the application of a magnetic field) As a building block for carbon nanotubes, the two-dimensional single atomic carbon sheets of graphene (Fig. Owing to its large surface area, low density, high carrier transport mobility, superior mechanical properties, and excellent thermal/chemical stability, graphene is an ideal material for use in mirco/nanoelectromechanical systems (MEMS/NEMS). These are of great interest both for fundamental studies of mechanics at the nanoscale and for a variety of applications, including force Graphene is also an exceptional nanoscale building block for constructing macroscopic threedimensional (3D) bulk assemblies for widespread applications Three-dimensional graphene cellular foam is another type of macroscopic graphene-based material, which is currently under extensive study Recently, Qiu et al. employed a freeze-casting technique to fabricate superelastic graphene foams as shown in Fig. 1d The different forms of graphene-based materials offer a significant repertoire in the design of electromechanical actuators that harness the excellent properties of graphene. Recent experiments have seen the use of monolayer graphene, graphene papers, and graphene foams in different actuator designs, showing excellent characteristics and rich novel physics Volume expansion of graphite upon electrolyte ion intercalation is a well-known phenomenon. Theoretical studies have shown that the insertion of ions among graphite layers can lead to directional large volume expansion (>700%) perpendicular to the basal plane direction of graphite Porous graphene papers assembled from the chemically converted graphene are a promising alternative. This type of paper consists multiple graphene layers that are well aligned (Fig. successfully demonstrated prototype actuators based on chemically converted graphene membranes using an ionic liquid (BmimBF4) pre-expansion treatment (Fig. were fabricated using the filtration process similar to those used in Ref. These features are consistent with predictions from the Coulomb effect in EDL Graphene is a surface-dominated bulk material with ideally 100% of the atoms on the surface. This provides a unique opportunity to control its bulk physical properties by surface chemical modification. Indeed Xie et al. found that after using oxygen and hexane plasma to treat different sides of a graphene paper (Fig. The distinctive actuation performances between plasma treated graphene paper attributed the significantly enhanced strains to the quantum mechanical effect. An in-depth analysis, however, suggests possible novel physics for electrochemical actuations in this system. In Xie's experiments, the maximum injected charge was estimated as -0.01e/C-atom. According to ab initio simulations, the quantum mechanical strain for a pristine graphene is around 0.05% at this charge level From experimental investigation, the strain magnitude of the graphite foam is proportional to the surface area However, several inconsistencies should be noted. First, the measured strain, 1.1% at about 0.01e/C-atom, is much higher than the pristine graphene paper experiment (~0.03%) Liu et al. presented a durable actuator based on a three-dimensional graphene-polypyrrole (PPy) hybrid foam In a comparative study, Liu et al. found that the pure graphene foam, operated under similar conditions as previously, produced a strain output of 0.15% and pure PPy film (note: currently impossible to fabricated pure 3D PPy foam) exhibited a much large strain 0.45% In 2009, Chen et al. successfully fabricated monolayer graphene resonators with micrometer sized width and length Tuning the gate voltage can control the tension in the graphene layers and thus leads to a significant change in resonance frequency. It is a unique feature for devices with thickness near the atomic scale such as graphene and single-walled carbon nanotubes, not observed in multi-layer graphene and other NEMS resonators fabricated using top-down deposition/etching techniques. Using a classic model for membrane resonator, and in light of graphene's ability to sustain mechanical strain up to 25-30%, Chen et al. proposed that introducing an additional 1% strain in a graphene resonator could allow a GHz frequency range to be achieved. For other NEMS, the enhancement of frequency is often achieved through a reduction in dimension. This is done, however, at the cost of both output signal magnitude and signal amplitude at the onset of nonlinearity, decreasing the dynamic range and creating difficulties with gigahertz-range. The authors estimated the sensitively of their best device sample could approach 2zg. Suspending graphene layers over trenches requires complex fabrication techniques, which severely limits a large-scale production of resonator devices. Recently van der Zande et al. developed a new method to transfer graphene grown by chemical vapor deposition to various substrates To realize the full potential of graphene based electromechanical actuators, an in-depth understanding of the exact mechanism behind their actuation is vital. In their original manuscript, Baughman et al. postulated that the high elongation strains of SWNT sheets measured upon electrolyte immersion and charging were likely due to some combination of two phenomena: QM (Fig. Via ab initio density functional methods, this section will reveal the physics behind the actuation of monolayer graphene immersed in an ionic liquid (IL) electrolyte, which incorporates the complete ion-ion, ion-electron, and electron-electron interactions that exist in real electrochemical EDLs. Interest in ILs has been intense in recent times, predominantly due to their high energy storage capacities in EDL supercapacitors DFT calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP v.5.2.2), making use of the projector augmented wave pseudopotentials and the generalized gradient approximation To simulate true monolayer graphene using the plane wave code, very high vacuum volumes were Our investigations revealed that it is necessary to separate adjacent layers by at least 60 Å in order to simulate isolated monolayer graphene with jellium charge compensation. This is based on the convergence of the graphene electromechanical strain as a function of the interlayer spacing for a given charge injection. Lower values than this are feasible for models incorporating EDLs, such as that of Pastewka et al., as the EDL screens the interlayer electrostatic interactions To study the EDL charging of a single graphene layer, dopant atoms were introduced aside the graphene in accordance with Fig. Given this method of graphene charge injection, it was necessary to establish a procedure to quantitatively measure the charge transferred between the graphene layer and the EDL ions. There are a vast number of approaches available to do this, with much scrutiny as to their accuracy for various systems. For a summary and analysis of the available methods, see the recent article by Manz and Sholl The charge-strain relationships for monolayer graphene in the presence of a simulated Li ion EDL using the Bader method are shown in Fig. It is difficult to measure the QM strain of graphene in experiments, with currently no direct experimental results available. An estimate from the pristine graphene paper actuator experiments is < 0.03% at a ~0.008e/C-atom electron injection, which agree favorably with our ab initio computational results. Comparing the EDL and QM strain results in Fig. Recent experiments of a graphene paper actuator indeed show a dominant EDL strain in aqueous electrolyte (Fig. since the gravimetric surface area of monolayer graphene is optimal (graphene resembles a perfectly 2D structure), and we employ an IL electrolyte, for which maximum EDL charge concentrations are attainable. By taking the difference between the strains predicted from ab initio simulations for the two models in Fig. Evidently, the charge-strain and potential-strain relationships are parabolic in Fig. (1) where k is the elastic constant of graphene, s is the deformation, q is the quantum charge, f is the electrostatic potential, and C is the differential capacitance. The thermal energy has been assumed negligible, and there is no externally applied force and thus no work term. The internal force (F) can be equated to these terms of the energy equation by differentiating it with respect to the deformation (s), giving where a is a simplified capacitive coupling coefficient. Given that at static equilibrium the internal forces (F) reduce to zero, the deformation and thus EDL-induced strain becomes a quadratic function of the injected charge: s ~ q 2 . This agrees with the ab initio simulation results very well (Fig. model based on Eqns. ( The chemical exfoliation of bulk graphite has become a popular method of synthesizing graphene, due to its potential for economical large-scale production Given the significant difference in atomistic structure between clamped and unzipped GO, it is foreseeable that each could behave very differently upon electromechanical actuation. For example, if it is possible to modulate the degree of rippling in the respective GO structures, this effect could serve as an origin for a new graphene-based in-plane actuation mechanism. Indeed, our ab initio simulations expose the superior electromechanical actuation performances of the GO. intertube electrostatic strains in excess of 10% for strips of aligned CNT sheets Further inspection of Fig. To verify this proposed unzipped GO contraction origin, which is quantum-mechanical in nature, it is necessary to consider the excess charge density distributions. In Fig. Upon hole injection into clamped GO, the energy profile is modified (Fig. Practically speaking, it is desirable that induced actuation be fully reversible. Due to the very high energy barrier transitioning from the unzipped to clamped configurations in Fig. A long-standing challenge in actuation research is the development of an actuation material that mimics the behaviour of mammalian skeletal muscle (a so-called "artificial muscle"). In order for a material to mimic skeletal muscle, it must be capable of delivering sufficient strain (20%-40%) and volumetric work density (0.008-0.04 J/cm 3 ), at reasonably fast rate (>50%/s) Figure Such an intrinsic electromechanical actuation has not been observed in other materials before. Hole injection into this GO configuration is also rather interesting. Upon low concentration hole injection (0.025 e/C-atom), contraction (-1.3%) is initially observed followed by large expansion (up to 9.6%) with further hole injection (Fig. As for the low concentration hole (0.025e/C-atom) induced contraction of C4O-asym-unzip GO, we believe that the above molecular orbital discussion is, by itself, insufficient to fully describe this phenomenon, which is similar to that seen in pristine graphene (albeit with a much greater magnitude). We find that a quasi-linear relationship exists between the charge injection and the C-O interatomic bond length change, where hole injection always leads to a contraction of the C-O bond. This C-O bond length contraction tends to enhance the overlap of C atom's p orbital with the O atom's sp 2 lone pair orbital. As such, we postulate that for low concentration hole injection, this effect overwhelms the shrinkage of the two orbitals due to the removal of electrons, and thus, results in an observable decrease of the C-O-C bond angle. To assess the potential suitability of C4O-asym-unzip as a building block for the development of artificial muscles, consider the strain (e), strain-voltage coefficient (Sv), and volumetric work density (Wvol) comparisons in Table Our ab initio simulations for the ordered clamped and unzipped molecules expose a great potential for graphene-oxide in electromechanical actuation applications. These GO molecules have a much higher actuation strain/stress or work density output than other carbon based materials (Table They also exhibit distinctive features, such as contraction upon electron injection, to address the demands of some special applications, such as its use as an artificial muscle. The second example could be a monolayer graphene-oxide resonator with GHz frequency. Predicted by Chen et al. introducing 1% in-built strain in graphene can enhance the resonance frequency from MHz to GHz. The impressive contraction strain -4.8% of the C4O molecule provides a promising route to achieve this goal. The third example is a biomimetic molecular robot. A proof-of-concept design will be presented in next section. It is reasonable to anticipate that the vast diversity of graphene oxide molecular structures will bring a rich material database for micro/nano-actuation materials design that will fulfill requirements for the coming decades. Design of molecular robots at a nanometer scale is an interesting but challenging topic. After millions of years' evolution, strategy adopted by nature can provide valuable inspirations. As shown in Fig. One appealing solution is to attach different chemical functional groups at either end of GO molecule. Through differing chemical interactions between these chemical functional groups and a substrate, the desired asymmetric gripping effects can be achieved. In this section, we will present a proof-of-concept theoretical study for some prototype designs. Both ends are functionalized with different chemical groups. To investigate the effect of end chemical group substitution on the quantum mechanical strain output, we undertake ab initio simulations. Similar simulation parameters were adopted as those used in previous unzipped GO investigations discussed in section 4.1, with all the possible combinations of end chemical groups depicted in Fig. Figure We believe that such a proof-of-concept study presented in this section is merely the beginning of graphene oxide's potential in the design of biomimetic robots. It is our hope that these ab initio investigation results will stimulate future collaborative studies among theorists and experimentalist in this field. With a unique combination of two-dimensional molecular structures and superior mechanical and electronic properties, graphene and related materials are ideal candidates for micro-and nanoelectromechanical actuators. Since its discovery in 2004, there has been a rapid progress in the research and development of graphene based actuators, with excellent and encouraging results reported. However, compared with other intensive research areas, the study of its actuations is noticeably behind Although studies on graphene based electromechanical actuation has attracted much attention, understanding of the underlying physical mechanisms is still quite poor. Ab initio simulation provides a powerful tool to reveal novel actuation physics and helps to stimulate new design ideas. Theoretical models that can predict the actuation performance based on the mechanical, physical, and electrochemical properties of actuation materials are highly desirable as a key to efficiently unlocking novel atomistic based phenomenon. With more in-depth knowledge, we believe that the challenges, such as increasing the strain output, response time, energy conversion efficiency and service life, can be successfully achieved.