We study anomalous mesoscopic transport effects at the onset of the superconducting transition focusing on the observed large Nernst-Ettinghausen signal in disordered thin films. In the vicinity of the transition, as the Ginzburg-Landau coherence length of preformed Cooper pairs diverges, short-range mesoscopic fluctuations are equivalent to local fluctuations of the critical temperature. As a result, the dynamical susceptibility function of pair propagation acquires a singular mesoscopic component, and consequently, superconducting correlations give rise to enhanced mesoscopic fluctuations of thermodynamic and transport characteristics. In contrast to disordered normal metals, the root-mean-square value of mesoscopic conductivity fluctuations ceases to be universal and displays strong dependence on dimensionality, temperature, and under certain conditions can exceed its quantum normal state value by a large factor. Interestingly, we find different universality as magnetic susceptibility, conductivity, and transverse magnetic thermopower coefficients all display the same temperature dependence. Finally, we discuss an enhancement of mesoscopic effects in the Seebeck thermoelectricity and Hall conductivity fluctuations as mediated by emergent superconductivity. Quantum-mechanical interference between different paths of electrons experiencing impurity scattering in conductors gives rise to important transport phenomena. The most notable examples are weak-localization and mesoscopic conductance fluctuations (see Ref. When superconductivity is induced at the boundary of the mesoscopic sample via the proximity effect, the universality of fluctuations remains almost intact It should be noted, however, that even without superconductivity there are circumstances when mesoscopic fluctuations become anomalously large. One example is given by the Seebeck thermopower Returning to the discussion of the superconducting systems, we should mention that theoretical studies devoted to various aspects of mesoscopic fluctuations cover a diverse range of topics. These works include mesoscopic effects on thermodynamic properties such as the Josephson current In this work we show that the interplay of interactions in the Cooper channel and local mesoscopic fluctuations has a profound effect on kinetics of superconductors near T c . In particular, we find that in the temperature range of the Ginzburg region, Gi ≪ (T -T c )/T c ≪ 1, with Gi ≃ 1/g being the Ginzburg number, where superconducting correlations manifest in the fluctuation-induced transport The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we provide qualitative arguments and estimates for the physical picture of strong mesoscopic fluctuations in superconductors. In Sec. III we place these ideas on the firm footing of microscopic diagrammatic analysis. Specifically, we compute diagonal and Hall conductivities, longitudinal thermoelectric and transverse thermomagnetic coefficients, as well as magnetic susceptibility fluctuations. We close this paper in Sec. IV with a brief discussion of the experimental situation and present ideas for further developments in the regime of quantum fluctuations. It was emphasized early on , where g = νDL d-2 is the dimensionless conductance of the d-dimensional cube. With this probability density one estimates the typical local fluctuation of the gap and, consequently, critical temperature δT c /T c ∼ Gi (ξ/L) (4-d)/2 . These estimates and line of reasoning closely follow earlier ideas by Ioffe and Larkin, who considered superconductors with local fluctuations of T c within the phenomenological approach We begin with the definition of kinetic coefficients concentrating on the linear response analysis. The electric J e tr and heat J h tr transport currents are related to the electric field E and temperature gradient ∇T by the matrix of thermoelectric coefficients where σ is the electric conductivity tensor, α and β are the thermoelectric tensors ( β = T α due to Onsager relations), and κ is the thermal conductivity tensor. Applying the open-circuit condition to Eq. ( We assume that magnetic field H is applied in the z-direction. The are two important aspects in the calculation of N that need to be discussed. The first point concerns the role of magnetization currents. At the technical level of the Kubo formula, the microscopic electric (J e ) and heat (J h ) currents contain both transport and magnetization contributions, namely: J e = J e tr + J e mag , J h = J h tr + J h mag . In the presence of an applied electric field, it was shown in Ref. Therefore, we need to know the magnetic susceptibility M = χH, which will be computed diagrammatically along with β xy . The importance of the magnetization contribution to α xy in the context of superconducting fluctuations was elaborated by Ussishkin The second point concerns the role of particle-hole asymmetry in response tensors. In the normal state, diagonal elements of electrical σ and thermal κ conductivities are present already at the level of perfect particle-hole symmetry, i.e., neglecting any contributions which arise due to asymmetry around the Fermi surface in properties such as the density of states and transport scattering time, whereas off-diagonal elements vanish. The conventional result for the thermoelectric tensor α in the normal metal (the so-called quasiparticle contribution) also vanishes in this limit, as can be seen from the Mott formula for α xx and Sondheimer formula for α xy . However, it was emphasized in Ref. It is known that superconducting fluctuations enhance the conductivity close to T c due to the so-called Aslamazov-Larkin Within the linear response analysis, the diagonal Aslamazov-Larkin conductivity is determined from the following current-current Kubo kernel K ee xx where [K ee xx ] R indicates the retarded component of K ee xx (Ω m ) as it is analytically continued from the discrete Matsubara frequencies into the entire complex plane iΩ m → Ω + i0. The pair susceptibility propagator of fluctuating Cooper pairs is of the form which is an asymptotic formula valid at small momenta and frequencies, namely, {Dq 2 , ω} ≪ T (here ν is the singleparticle density of states in the normal state). With the same accuracy one can treat ln(T/T c ) ≈ (T -T c )/T c . In the definition of the current response kernel we also made use of the current vertex which diagrammatically corresponds to the triangular block of electronic Green's functions of the AL diagram. This expression for B e (ω, q) is derived under the same approximations for typical frequencies ω ∼ (T -T c ) ≪ T and momenta q ∼ ξ -1 GL ≪ L -1 T of superconducting fluctuations as in Eq. ( The corresponding Aslamazov-Larkin contribution to the transverse thermoelectric coefficient can be found from the mixed electric current-heat current Kubo response function K eh xy where with the heat vertex We finally define magnetic susceptibility from the equilibrium magnetization. Diagrammatically, it can be calculated to linear order in H by considering the current response to a magnetic field at a finite wave-vector Q where ǫ αβγ is the anti-symmetric Levi-Civita unity tensor, x is the coordinate operator in the momentum representation, and Π(ω, q) is the electronic polarization operator given the usual loop diagram composed of the product of two Green's functions (we recall that resummation of these loops gives exactly Eq. ( With these technical prerequisites, we proceed with the calculation of superconductivity-induced mesoscopic fluctuations in σ xx , β xy , and χ. In particular, we will compute their root-mean-square values, e.g. rms{σ, α, χ}. The first step in the derivation of the defined kinetic coefficients requires the consideration of discrete sums over Matsubara frequencies ω n = 2πnT . Such summations over bosonic frequencies can be conveniently done with the help of closed contour integration in the complex plane by using the following formula: In application of Eq. Integrating over q and ω with the help of Eqs. ( In order to calculate the mesoscopic (disorder-irreducible) correlation function of the pairing susceptibility propagators, one has to draw two copies of diagrams for P, each representing a given realization of the disorder potential, and then connect their diffusive parts by additional impurity lines. Such construction involves four colliding diffuson-cooperon ladders and, on a technical level, requires computation of four-and six-order Hikami boxes As anticipated [see discussion in Sec. II] the induced mesoscopic effect is weak, δP 2 ∝ Gi 2 , however it exhibits an extremely singular behavior in the long wave-length limit {ω, q} → 0 where δP 2 ∝ (T -T c ) -4 . The precise value of the numerical factor A ∼ 1 is not of principal importance in view of the strong dependence of the whole expression on temperature and system size. It is then straightforward to show that IP R (ω 1 , q 1 )RP R (ω 1 , q 1 )IP R (ω 2 , q 2 )RP R (ω 2 , q 2 ). ( For convenience in further integration, we define the following dimensionless units: x = ηq 2 , y = πω/8T , and ǫ = ln(T/T c ) ≈ (T -T c )/T c . In these variables, the interaction propagator and vertex function become and for a two-dimensional geometry of a thin superconducting film, integrations transform as where we expanded sinh y ≈ y since the major contribution comes from the range of parameters {x, y} ∼ ǫ ≪ 1. With these notations Eq. ( The integrations are elementary and can be made separable in all variables by rescaling first y i → (x i + ǫ)y i and then x i → ǫ x i . As a result, the root-mean-square value of conductivity fluctuations takes the form (suppressing the numerical factor of the order of unity) where we introduced the quantum of conductance σ Q = e 2 /(2π ). This estimate is valid at length scales L > ξ GL , whereas fluctuations saturate to rms σ xx ∼ σ Q Gi(T/E Th ) 3/2 when min{L T , ξ} < L < ξ GL . This happens because the continuous spectrum of soft superconducting excitations becomes quenched by the finite-size quantization and Thouless energy provides a natural cutoff, Dq 2 → E Th , in a pair-propagator. For completeness, we have also analyzed the mesoscopic Maki-Thompson part in fluctuation-induced diagonal conductivity, in particular its anomalous piece, which is the most singular near T c . Technically it follows from the same currentcurrent kernel K ee xx , but is given by a different diagram where is the cooperon (the summed impurity ladder in the particleparticle channel), and τ φ is its dephasing time. It should be noted that the same dephasing time should appear in the pair propagator as well, but its net effect is to shift the critical temperature T c → T cπ/(8τ φ ). An additional integral over ε represents the fermion loop in the MT diagram. It is worth noticing that the typical scale of ε ∼ T , whereas {Dq 2 , ω} ∼ T -T c . For this reason, the above expression can be simplified by setting the hyperbolic cosine in the denominator to unity and integrating the product of two cooperons dεC R (2ε + ω, q)C A (2ε + ω, q) = (π/2)C(q), where we define the static cooperon C(q) = [Dq 2 + τ -1 φ ] -1 . The resulting variance of the anomalous MT diagram then reads In the most interesting regime of weak dephasing, τ φ ≫ τ GL , where τ GL = π/8(T -T c ) is the Ginzburg-Landau time, one finds after integrations so it is similar to Eq. ( We can build on this result to consider emergent mesoscopic fluctuations in the transverse thermoelectric coefficient. We start from Eq. 8 where we need only contributions linear in Q, which can be easily extracted by expanding the pair propagator and noticing that ∂P(ω, q) ∂q x = -B x (q)P 2 (ω, q). ( As a next step, we have to sum the resulting expression for K eh xy (Ω m , Q) in Eq. ( Now using Eq. ( where l H = √ c/eH is the magnetic length. One should notice that β xy has the same scaling with temperature as the conductivity σ xx . As shown by Ussishkin and carry out the remaining calculation up to a factor modulo one (we will absorb all the numerical factors into the redefinition of coefficient A). Since most relevant frequencies ω ∼ T -T c are small compared to temperature we can approximate coth(ω/2T ) ≈ 2T/ω. Transforming the above expression into dimensionless variables followed by rescaling and integration, one finds where we introduced a quantum unit of thermopower β Q = e/(2π ). It remains to consider fluctuation-induced corrections to magnetic susceptibility and its mesoscopic fluctuations. From Eq. 10 we get for the Aslamazov-Larkin term where derivatives of the polarization operator can be easily computed: Π ′ x,y = -(πνD/4T )q x,y , Π ′′ yy = -(πνD/4T ), and Π ′′ xy = 0. Already at this level, by simple power counting of integration variables, one can deduce that χ ∝ T c /(T -T c ). Consequently one expects that δχ 2 will also scale with T -T c in the same way as the conductivity and thermomagnetic coefficients. Indeed, which, as in the previous examples, reduces with standard steps to where χ P is the Pauli susceptibility in the diffusive metal. We briefly discuss next the longitudinal thermopower α xx (Seebeck coefficient) and transverse conductivity σ xy (Hall coefficient). The Aslamazov-Larkin contribution to α xx is found from the mixed electric-heat currents Kubo response function Summation over the Matsubara frequency ω n and analytical continuation follows the same way as in the case of the conductivity calculation, and we obtain Without particle-hole asymmetry, α xx is zero. Indeed, [IP R ] 2 is even in frequency while the rest of the integrand is odd. We have to use a generalized form of the pair propagator. Gauge invariance dictates that which generalizes Eq. ( where now both propagators are taken at Υ ω → 0. The resulting expression for α xx is logarithmically divergent in momentum x-integration that has to be regularized by introducing an upper cut-off x max ≃ 1/ǫ [in the original notations this corresponds to (ξ GL q max ) 2 ≃ 1]. This choice is natural since P R , in the form we use here, was obtained from the expansion in small momenta, which is justified only as long as max{Dq 2 , ω} < T . As a consequence, , where γ pha = (d ln T c /d ln E F ). Extending this analysis to account for mesoscopic fluctuations gives as a final result Generally speaking, in a disordered sample, mesoscopic fluctuations of thermopower are present and strong even in the absence of superconducting fluctuations, since per our earlier discussion in the introductory section, particle-hole asymmetry is broken from the scale of Fermi energy down to Thouless energy. In order to calculate the Hall coefficient, we need to know the transverse component of the current-current correlation function K ee xy . In the presence of Landau quantization the vertex in real space becomes an operator Bi = -2νη(-i∇ i + 2eA i ), where we choose the vector potential in the Landau gauge A = (0, Hx, 0). Different components of the vertex, Bx and By , do not commute and the matrix elements are where â, â † are the harmonic oscillator operators. Recalling that n|â|n ′ = n ′ |â † |n = √ nδ n,n ′ +1 , we see that only transitions between nearest Landau levels n → n ± 1 are allowed. With these ingredients one finds for the Matsubara response kernel [P n+1 (ω, q)P n (ω -Ω, q) -P n (ω, q)P n+1 (ω -Ω, q)] . In the weak field limit, H → 0, one needs only the first term in the expansion in powers of 1/n and then replace summation over n by an integration: (1/l H ) 2 n → q . Taking into account ∂ n P n = 2ν(η/l 2 H )P 2 n and, after some algebra the previous expression can be reduced to where we also used integration by parts with respect to the energy variable. Since [IP R (ω, q)] 3 is odd in energy then without particle-hole asymmetry σ xy vanishes. As in the case of thermopower we expand P R to the lowest nonvanishing order in Υ ω and integrate to find σ xy = (e 2 /48)(ω c τ tr )γ pha [T c /(T -T c )] 2 , where ω c = eH/mc is the cyclotron frequency, and τ tr is the transport scattering time. The mesoscopic part of σ xy is then given by rms It should be recalled that the transverse conductance σ xy of small normal samples at low temperatures displays universal fluctuations similar to those in σ xx , however unlike σ xx these are asymmetric in the magnetic field The main results of this work are expressions Eqs. ( It is instructive to estimate the order of magnitude for these effects. First, we notice that all terms contain an extra smallness in Gi ∼ 1/g ≪ 1, which is natural for a quantum interference correction. However, the resulting variation of fluctuations has strongly pronounced temperature dependence, rms{σ xx , β xy , χ} ∝ Gi [T c /(T -T c )] 2 , which is more singular than the corresponding dependence of their mean values {σ xx , β xy , χ} ∝ T c /(T -T c ). We observe that for the system size L ∼ ξ GL and at the threshold of applicability of the Gaussian theory of superconducting fluctuations, T -T c ∼ Gi T c , the scale of conductance fluctuations [per Eq. ( The calculations presented in this work have been carried out for homogeneously disordered superconductors. Therefore, our results cannot be directly compared to the existing experimental findings in which the samples were granular in their origin As an outlook, we briefly mention possible extensions of this work geared towards future research in the area of magneto-thermo-transport phenomena in superconductors. The regime of quantum fluctuations is of great interest. One could distinguish regimes where superconductivity is suppressed by orbital or spin effects. In particular, in the latter case of Pauli-limited superconductivity, fluctuation effects are dominated by virtual rather than real pair excitations 