We report ionic strength-dependent phase shifts in second harmonic generation (SHG) signals from charged interfaces that verify a recent model in which dispersion between the fundamental and second harmonic beams modulates observed signal intensities. We show how phase information can be used to unambiguously separate the ! ! and interfacial potential-dependent ! ! terms that contribute to the total signal and provide a path to test primitive ion models and mean field theories for the electrical double layer with experiments to which theory must conform. Finally, we demonstrate the new method on supported lipid bilayers and comment on the ability of our new instrument to identify hyper-Rayleigh scattering contributions to common homodyne SHG measurements in reflection geometries. The application of second harmonic generation (SHG) and sum frequency generation (SFG) to charged aqueous interfaces has been an area of substantial interest for several decades. Here, !(0) is the interfacial potential present at the zero plane of the interface, referenced to zero potential in the bulk solution. The ! ! term in eq. 1 originates from molecules that are net oriented at the interface. The interfacial potential-dependent ! ! term is present at charged interfaces due to the presence of a static (DC) E-field generated by the surface charge and primarily results from the reorientation and polarization of water molecules in response to the static E-field. Many attempts have been made to disentangle the ! ! and ! ! contributions. where !! ! is the wavevector mismatch of the optical process (calculation of !! ! can be found in the SI, Section 2). We now report phase measurements obtained using a new instrument that we analyze using model (2) so as to unambiguously separate the ! ! and interfacial potentialdependent ! ! terms. The results provide a path to test primitive ion models and mean field theories for the electrical double layer with experiments to which theory must conform. Moreover, the approach advances the utility of SHG from charged interfaces as an "optical voltmeter". The phase angle ! in model (2) is not the phase inherent to ! ! , which varies when ! ! is on or near resonance. Rather, ! results from the fact that the DC-field induced ! ! signal is generated throughout a range of depths away from the interface. For clarity, we will subsequently label this phase angle the DC phase angle, ! !" , in order to distinguish it from the phase of the overall signal, ! !"# , measured in the subsequently described experiment using a-quartz against 100 mM NaCl as a reference state. We see from eq. 3 that ! !" is a function of the ionic strength of the bulk solution (which determines the Debye screening length) and the wavelengths and angles of the input and output beams. The result of the interference is both a modulation of the amplitude of the ! ! term and a shift in its phase as ionic strength is varied. Simply put, eqs. 2 and 3 show that the "+" in model (1) must be replaced with "+" or "-" or any value in between, depending on the ionic strength of the aqueous solution, as is now done in model (2). In the case of non-resonant SHG measurements, the inherent phases of ! ! and ! ! are expected to be purely real, i.e. precisely in phase (0°) or out of phase (180°) with respect to the excitation field. However, eq. 2 makes it clear that the overall DC-field induced ! ! term can still be phase-shifted relative to the ! ! contribution. Our earlier study Standard (homodyne) SHG experiments measure only the intensity of the SHG signal, not its phase. Heterodyne-detected SHG (HD-SHG), capable of resolving phase, requires interference between the SHG signal and SHG generated from a reference, called the local oscillator (LO). We earlier demonstrated In this Letter, we report SHG phase measurements from the fused silica/water interface with a significantly improved signal to noise in order to directly measure phase shifts that occur due to changing EDL thickness. We correct for the temporal dispersion caused by the fused silica hemisphere with a calcite time delay compensator (TDC) and minimize spatial dispersion and chromatic aberration by recollimating with an achromatic off-axis parabolic (OAP) mirror (see SI, Section 3, for calculations of the spatial and temporal dispersion in our setup). We utilize a "sample-first" geometry and generate the LO in a 50 μm z-cut α-quartz plate. With this HD-SHG instrument, we directly measure phase shifts in the SHG signal from the fused silica/water interface at different ionic strengths, as predicted by eq. 2. The instrument is designed such that homodyne SHG is readily measured in the same setup as HD-SHG through removal of the reference α-quartz crystal (see schematic in Fig. Homodyne SHG control studies measured in this way show the expected quadratic dependence of detected signal intensity on input power as well as the expected narrow bandwidth of the detected signal centered around the second harmonic wavelength of our fundamental beam (SI, Section 4). We next show that the HD-SHG instrument yields the expected interference between signal and LO. Fig. Equation 2 predicts a difference in the phase of ! !"# from a fused silica substrate in contact with 2 μM air-equilibrated water vs. 100 mM NaCl, with the exact magnitude of this phase shift determined by the relative amplitudes of the ! ! and ! ! terms. Though our previous study Separation of ! ! and ! ! contributions from the detected signal intensity in order to use SHG as an optical voltmeter has been a longstanding goal. Previously, without phase information, it was impossible to determine if the observed changes in ! !"# resulted from changes in the ! ! term, the ! ! potential-dependent term, or both. We now demonstrate how this goal is experimentally attainable using HD-SHG. Figure The optical process is illustrated in a vector diagram of the signal field in the complex plane, shown in Fig. 2, ! !"# is modeled to be the sum of a ! ! term (shown in red and purely real in our non-resonant experiments), and a ! ! !(0) term, shown in blue, whose phase and amplitude are modulated by ! !" . From trigonometry, we find that Here, every factor on the right side of eq. 4A is measured (! !"# , ! !"# ) or can be calculated ( ! !" ), and, once this is determined, the same holds true for eq. 4B. Thus, with the additional phase information from HD-SHG measurements, we disentangle the ! ! !(0) and ! ! terms from ! !"# , provided we know the Debye screening length. Given the experimental 6 and computational where the overall signal is nearly entirely real. Considering the noise performance of our instrument illustrated in Fig. decreases significantly with increasing ionic strength, attributable to increased screening within the EDL as the concentration of ions increases. In contrast, ! ! remains comparatively constant across 3 orders of magnitude of ionic strength, though changes on the order of ~30% are seen. Note that the magnitude of the uncertainties on the point estimates is largely due to error propagation according to eqs. 4A and 4B. The best fit of ! ! !(0) with the Gouy-Chapman model yields a surface charge density of -0.0024(18) C/m 2 and is represented by the blue line in Fig. On a slightly different albeit highly relevant note, we mention at this point a recent investigation by Dreier et al. Part of this difference was attributed to hyper-Raleigh scattering (HRS) contributions to the detected SHG intensity. As HRS is produced incoherently, any HRS emitted from the samplewhile it may be present in the homodyne measurements -would not contribute to the interference from which the amplitude and phase of the signal SHG are extracted in HD-SHG. Thus, our HD-SHG measurements are free from any potential convolution with HRS. Indeed, our HD-SHG apparatus should be ideal for separating out any possible contributions of HRS to the SHG signal generated from any interface. To test this idea, we obtained ! !"# from supported lipid bilayer/water interfaces as a function of ionic strength measured with different instruments (Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated an experimental apparatus capable of measuring the phase of SHG signals from buried interfaces. We used this apparatus to measure the phase shift in SHG generated at the fused silica/water interface as a function of ionic strength, a direct result of charge screening compressing the width of the EDL as ionic strength increases. Furthermore, we showed how this additional phase information can be used to unambiguously separate the ! ! and ! ! contributions to detected SHG from charged interfaces, a longstanding goal in the field. While model ( We envision several avenues of future study in which the instrument described here can be impactful. In one avenue, determination of the absolute magnitude of the ! ! and ! ! components could be made through comparison with a known absolute reference, similar to the approach used in heterodyne SFG spectroscopy. This comparison, in combination with the isolation of the ! ! contribution described here, would allow for a direct, optical quantification of the surface potential at oxide/water interfaces, without relying on the Gouy-Chapman model or the assumption that ! ! remains constant. In another avenue, we foresee coupling the phase measurements described in this study with a system containing an electrode under potential control. By controlling the potential and thus the magnitude of the ! ! contribution, the comparison of observed phase shifts with the phase shifts predicted by model ( Despite our advance, we caution that physics and chemistry not described in model ( A detailed description of the optical setup, as well as sample and solution preparation can be found in the SI, Section 6. HD-SHG requires interference between the sample SHG signal and the LO generated in an α-quartz crystal. The detected total signal intensity, ! !"# , produced by the coherent interference between the signal and LO is governed by the following equation: 31 Where α is the overlap parameter that represents the degree of spatial and temporal overlap between the two beams, ! !"# and ! !" represent the phases of the signal and LO, respectively, and ! !"# represents the additional phase shift introduced by the PSU. We vary ! !"# by translating the reference α-quartz crystal along the beam path, taking advantage of the slight optical dispersion in air, according to the following equation: Scanning the position of the α-quartz crystal shifts the phase between the signal and LO and results in an interference pattern in ! !"# as a function of stage position. We fit the interference pattern to the following equation: where ! is the stage position and ! ! , !, !, and ! !"# are parameters free to be optimized. The fitting is carried out using SciPy in JupyterLab in two sequential steps. First, each individual scan from a dataset is fit to eq. 6 with every parameter free to be optimized. As the phase of cosine functions can only be rigorously compared within a set of cosines with precisely the same frequency, the patterns are then fit a second time with f held at the average of all the f values from the data set, and these final parameters are subsequently analyzed. As the signal to noise ratio of the interference patterns is high, the difference in the relevant parameters between these two steps is generally < ~0.5%. By comparing eqs. 5 and 6, it can be seen that ! !"# ∝ !. We do not attempt to deduce the absolute phase of the SHG signal and only interpret its changes in phase. Because ! !" is constant and ! !"# is varied in the same manner in each scan, changes in ! !"# must originate from changes in ! !"# , i.e. !" !"# = !" !"# . To move from !" !"# to ! !"# , the phase of the sample under a specific condition must be known (or assumed). We assume that at 100 mM NaCl ! !"# = 0° as ! ! and ! ! are purely real and at 100 mM NaCl the Debye length is sufficiently short such that ! !" is near 0°. The sign of ! depends on the sign convention of the z-axis, a point of disagreement in the literature. where ! = ! ! !! . The derivation can be found for instance in Roke et al. Writing it in polar form gives: where: Finally, from the following triangle: we find that: For SFG/SHG in the reflection geometry as defined above where the ! (!) process is occurring in Medium II, !! ! is given by the following equations: 1-3 and ! !,!! can be determined by incident angles and the refractive indices of Media I and II. With Medium I = fused silica, Medium II = water, ! !,! = ! !,! = 60°, n water @ 1030 nm = 1.3247; n water @ 515 nm = 1.3357; n fused silica @ 1030 nm = 1.4500; n fused silica @ 515 nm = 1.4615; angle = 60 degrees in fused silica, we find !! ! = 1.1 × 10 7 m -1 . The refractive (n) and group (n g ) indices of the fundamental and SHG wavelengths are shown in Table the common path length in the fused silica hemisphere of 1.27 cm, we predict upon exiting the hemisphere the fundamental pulse will lead the SHG pulse by 1060 fs. As our pulse length is ~200 fs, this necessitates the use of the calcite time delay compensator. The approximately Gaussian fundamental beam has a 1/e 2 diameter of 4.5 mm. We focus with an f = 7.5 cm lens, and the fundamental and SHG are recollimated using a f = 10.16 cm silver OAP, at which distance the fundamental beam diameter = 6 mm. The diameter of the sample SHG beam is theoretically The SHG output angle, ! !! , for co-propagating, reflected beams is: 5 where ! ! is the input angle. Using the values from Table The 2D intensity profile of one beam with a diameter of 4.2 mm in diameter can be represented as: Wavelength (nm) Refractive Index (n) Group Index (n g ) 515 1.4615 1.4877 1030 1.4500 1.4627 Table S5 where !"#$h = the 1/e 2 radius, or 2.1 mm in our case. We then calculate the overlap efficiency between the two beams as the integral of the product of the two offset Gaussians normalized by the integral of the product of the two Gaussians with no offset: where ! ! = the offset. We numerically solve the integral above and find the overlap efficiency with an offset of 1.4 mm = 0.64. Thus, despite the separation of the two beams, we still expect appreciable interference, even without the use of spatial compensating optics. slightly lower than the estimate calculated by the spatial separation of the two beams, 0.64 (Section 3). This lower value is likely because the time mismatch is not perfectly compensated by the TDC. A. Optical Setup. PR-SHG measurements were performed using 200 fs pulses centered at 1030 nm at a repetition rate of 200 kHz (Light Conversion, Pharos). The incident pulse energy during experiments was kept below 0.4 μJ (80 mW), well within the regime where the quadratic dependence of I SHG on input power was confirmed (SI, Fig. and Glan-Taylor polarizer (Thorlabs, GT-10), filtered with a long pass filter to remove any residual SHG, and focused into the sample with an f = 7.5 cm lens (Thorlabs, LA1608) with an angle of 60°±1°. The reflected fundamental and generated sample second harmonic were recollimated using an off-axis parabolic mirror (Thorlabs, MPD149-P01) to limit chromatic aberration and avoid further temporal dispersion. The two orthogonally-polarized pulses were then re-overlapped in time with a calcite TDC (Newlight Photonics, CAL12200-A). See SI, Note S2 for a calculation of the amount of spatial and temporal overlap expected of the SHG and fundamental pulses after they exit the hemisphere (64% efficiency). The newly-overlapping pulses were then passed through a 50 μm thick z-cut α-quartz window (Precision Micro-Optics, PWQB-368252) to generate the LO. Azimuthal rotation of the α-quartz was used to tune the intensity of the LO. The reference α-quartz window position along the beam path was controlled by a motorized translational stage (Standa, 8MT193-100). Following LO generation, the pulses were then passed through a second Glan-Taylor polarizer to select the output polarization, a short-pass filter to remove the fundamental beam (Edmund Optics, 45-646), and a bandpass filter (Thorlabs, FBH520-40) to isolate the SHG light prior to incidence upon the detector. For the bandwidth measurement, a monochromator (Dynasil, MC1-02) was inserted into the beam path prior to the detector. Detection was achieved with a photomultiplier tube (Hamamatsu, R585 and H8259-01) in conjunction with a gated photon counter and preamplifier (Stanford Research Systems, SR400 and SR445A) with a gate width of 50 ns. Spurious counts were subtracted from the detected signal intensity using the second channel of the SR400 with the gate offset from the laser pulses. Though we limit our measurements to the S in , P out polarization combination, we note that this experimental geometry could be extended to any polarization combination, including P in , P out , using selective half-wave plates, as demonstrated recently in an SHG microscope. 6 B. Sample and Solution Preparation. One inch diameter fused silica hemispheres (ISP Optics) were clamped to the aluminum exterior of a home-built flow cell. The wetted interior of the flow cell is PTFE and is sealed to the hemisphere with a fluoroelastomer o-ring. Prior to measurements, the hemispheres were treated with NoChromix for 1 hour, sonicated in methanol for 5 minutes, sonicated in water for 5 minutes, rinsed copiously with water, dried, plasma cleaned (Harrick Plasma) for 1 minute, and immediately stored in pure water prior to the start of measurements. The solutions were prepared with Millipore water (18.2 MΩ*cm) and NaCl was procured from Sigma Aldrich (#746398, >99%). All solutions were equilibrated overnight with atmospheric CO 2 and were thus at pH 5.7. This CO 2 -equilibrated water is assumed to have a total ionic strength of 2 μM, consistent with our prior measurements. C. Lipid Bilayer Preparation. For the HD-SHG/homodyne SHG comparison of the lipid membrane/water interfaces, POPC in chloroform was purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids. Rough LPS (rLPS) from Salmonella enterica serotype minnesota Re 595 (Re mutant) was purchased from Sigma Aldrich as lyophilized powder and suspended in neat chloroform (B&J Brand, HPLC grade) to 2 mg mL -1 by sonicating for at least 20 minutes. Following our previously published work, were prepared by extrusion though a 0.05 μm membrane filter (Avanti, 610000) in 1 mM NaCl:2 mM HEPES at pH 7.4 after 4 cycles of freeze-thaw, 5 minutes each. The vesicles were diluted to 0.5 mg mL -1 with appropriate salt concentration for a final buffer concentration of 150 mM NaCl:2 mM HEPES at pH 7.4 immediately before forming supported lipid bilayers using the vesicle fusion method. 