A set of sp 2 amorphous carbons involving natural mineral shungite carbon and antraxolite as well as two synthetic carbon blacks were investigated by using neutron powder diffraction and inelastic neutron scattering at low temperature. NDP revealed nanographite-like structure of all the samples, stacks of which are formed by basic structure units representing framed graphene molecules of ~2.5 nm in lateral dimension. INS study showed the presence of hydrogen atoms in the BSU framing area as well as of adsorbed water in the samples pores. Simulated INS spectra of adsorbed water showed its mono-layer disposition within the pores of the studied amorphics. Due to BSUs radical character, their INS spectra were simulated in the framework of both spin-nondependent (DFT) and spin-dependent (UHF) molecular dynamics. The obtained results allowed suggesting a specific INS classification of sp 2 amorphous carbons with respect to their hydrogeneousness based on "H-standard" INS spectra, on the one side, and riding-stimulated spectrum of heavy atoms, on the other. Exceptionally rich allotropy is one of the outstanding characteristics of carbon, one niche of which is occupied by amorphous carbons (ACs), or carbon amorphics. Seemingly simple at first glance, the niche covers an extended set of species, both natural and synthetic, among which the former part is rather scarce and is usually presented by soots and coals, including charcoal, while the latter is quite rich including black, glassy, and activated carbons, carbon nanofoams, carbid-derived carbon, carbon fibers, diamond-like amorphous carbon (-C:H and (ta)-C carbons), and others (see reviews The natural amorphics are products of the activity of natural laboratory during geological billion (shungite) -million (anthraxolite) years of life. Once varied as any other geological minerals, the species are nevertheless well determined and posses a number of rather standard physical and chemical properties. Synthetic amorphics are industrially manufactured in the form of hundreds of defined commercial grades that vary in their primary particle size, aggregate size, shape, porosity, surface area, and so on, just providing a very large scale of their physical and chemical properties. On this background, natural amorphics look like well characterized references, a comparison with which may threw light to the microscopic features of the synthetic ones. The current study is aimed at showing that such a comparison may be effective and fruitful. Three types of carbon amorphics related to sp 2 -carbons of the highest carbonization have been chosen to achieve the goal: two natural ones, namely, shungite carbon (ShC) and anthroxalite (AntX), and carbon black (CB) as one of the most widely used synthetic AC products. Thermal neutron scattering, once not quite appropriate at first glance due to the fact that carbon atoms are poor scatterers, is suitable since the selected ACs are not really 'true carbons', in contrast to, say, diamond or graphite, since their carbon content is not 100% and varies for the most carbonized species in the range of 82-95 wt % The paper is organized as following. Section II presents methods in use exhibiting studied samples and the used facilities at IBR 2 reactor of the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research at Dubna as well as computational treatment of INS spectra. Sections III is devoted to neutron diffraction and inelastic neutron scattering experiments. The obtained data are discussed in Section IV along with the results of computational experiment. Conclusion presents the main essentials resulted from the study performed. sp 2 ACs are usually presented as graphitic carbons with a characteristic graphitic structural pattern Neutron scattering study was performed at the high flux pulsed IBR-2 reactor of the Frank Laboratory of Neutron Physics of JINR by using NERA spectrometer Inelastic neutron scattering from amorphous solids, consisted of both coherently and incoherently scattering nuclea, is usually considered in the one-phonon incoherent approximation where (2) and . ( Here is generalized vibration density of states (GVDOS) weighted with squared lengths of neutron scattering (either coherent or incoherent) of the k-th nucleus as well as with amplitude of this nucleus (atom) displacement in the j-th phonon mode. Other details are given in In the current study calculations of the virtual GVDOS-spectra were performed in the frame of both spin-nondependent (molecular density functional theory) and spin-dependent (unrestricted Hartree-Fock approximation) molecular dnamics. In the former case, the DFT generalized gradient approximation (GGA) of the exchange-correlation functional was applied, employing the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional sp 2 Amorphous carbons belong to a specific class of amorphous solids made of platelets. The platelets, or basic structure units, represent graphene molecules, stacks of which exhibit short-range order followed with irregular distribution of the stacks. The ACs stack structure evidently predetermines a graphite-like image of their diffraction. Actually, Fig. As seen in Fig. Applying the relation to the data presented in Fig. for ShC and AntX is practically the same and corresponds to 2.5 nm thus evaluating the thickness of BSU stacks covering ~7 graphene layers while BSU stacks of CB624 and CB632 are 7.8 nm and 2.2 nm, respectively, corresponding to 23 and 6 graphene layers. In the latter case, upshifting the peak maximum is significant as well. Apparently, both the width of the peak and its maximum position may be influenced by pronounced turbostratic arrangement of BSU in stacks. The problem needs a further examination. As pointed in a CSR L , which determines the lateral dimension of graphene-like BSUs, is characterized by the width of Gr(110) reflex located at 1.24Å in graphite. As seen in Fig. A comparative analysis of the NPD plottings has allowed revealing the following structural regularities related to the studied ACs. 1. The selected natural and synthetic amorphics do belong to graphitic carbons, the main structural fragments of which consist of stacks of graphene-like BSUs albeit of different structure. 2. The coincidence of Gr(002) reflex maxima positions for natural amorphics at 3.47 Å evidences a similarity of the structural composition of their BSU stacks consisting of 7 graphene layers. 3. The difference in the maxima positions of Gr(002) reflex for CB632 and CB624 at 3.57 Å and 3.40 Å, respectively, as well as drastic difference in the peaks width point to remarkably different BSU stacks consisting of 6 and 23 graphene layers. The lateral dimensions of the relevant BSUs differ drastically as well constituting structure concerning not only their linear dimensions, but turbostratic disordering as well that is evidently large in the case of the CB632 sample. There were two experimental sessions in due course of the project fulfillment differing by cryostats used and temperature regimes. Figure A comparative analysis of the obtained TOF INS spectra has allowed revealing the following regularities related to the studied amorphous carbons. 1. The INS intensity from natural amorphics presented by wet AntX and ShC is quite high and comparable while that one from synthetic amorphics varies from barely measurable (CB632) to very low (CB624). 2. The INS spectra of all the amorphics (besides CB624) are composed of two contributions related to adsorbed water and the solid carbon cores. 3. Both INS contributions of the natural amorphics are comparable evidencing hydrogen enriched nature of their carbon cores. 4. Water contribution to INS spectra of synthetic amorphics either dominates (CB632good adsorbent) or is not fixed at all (CB624 -poor adsorbent) leaving the contribution of their carbon cores at very low level in all the cases and evidencing non-hydrogeneous nature of the latter. To make clear the chemical content of the studied amorphics carbon cores, we turn to energetic plottings of the recorded spectra in terms of GVDOS -in the form of Ex. Experimental GVDOS spectra, corresponding to TOF INS ones presented in Fig. Water is willingly adsorbed in both natural and synthetic amorphous carbons, which is clearly seen in Fig. Thus obtained TOF INS spectra were converted into GVDOS ones, presented in Fig. In experiment, results of which are presented in Fig. Experimentally determined, the amount of adsorbed water in the studied as prepared wet ACs forms a series of 4 wt%, 2 wt%, 1.5 wt%, and 0.6 wt% related to ShC, AntX, CB632, and CB624, respectively It should be noted that the total amount of confined water is evidently governed by two main factors, namely: the core size and the content of oxygen atoms in the inner shell of the pores. As was determined empirically According to a comparative study of spectra (2) in Fig. Virtual "H-standard" spectra are presented in Fig. ( Model BSU structures on the top of Fig. The current study has shown one more time that both neutron diffraction and inelastic neutron scattering are powerful techniques to investigate intimate details of nanostructured materials concerning the size, structure and chemical composition of their basic structure units. Particular sensitivity to hydrogen (protium) contribution makes the INS techniques to be able to reveal the nucleus (atom) contribution at the level of ~0.1wt%/ which cannot be surpassed by any other modern analytical techniques. This exclusive feature makes hydrogen marking of the materials a strongly distinguishing characteristic. Stemmed from this, the available data on the INS study of different carbons, including results obtained in the current study, allow suggesting a clear their attribution to different subclasses. Thus, natural sp 2 amorphous carbons, namely, shungite carbon The suggested INS classification of sp 2 amorphous carbons is deeply rooted in the structural atomic-chemical composition of the materials basic structure units. This issue alongside with the great advantage of neutrons to vibrational spectroscopy concerning the ease of the spectrum simulation from the output of modern quantum-chemical calculations makes any attempt to match a virtual BSU model to the reality highly tempting. However, as shown in the current study, addressing INS to sp 2 ACs changes the attitude to the solution of dynamical problem concerning the determination of vibrational frequencies and atom displacements. The amorphics BSUs of the current case are large molecular stable radicals 