Motivated by recent experimental progress, we study the effect of mechanical deformations on the superconducting pairing symmetries in monolayer black phosphorus (MBP). Starting with phonon-mediated intervalley spin-singlet electron-electron pairing and making use of realistic band parameters obtained through firstprinciples calculations, we show that the application of weak mechanical strain in the plane of MBP can change the effective s-wave and p-wave symmetry of the superconducting correlations into effective d-wave and fwave symmetries, respectively. This prediction of a change in the pairing symmetries might be experimentally confirmed through angular dependence high-resolution tunneling spectroscopy, the Meissner effect, and critical temperature experiments. The idea of manipulating the superconducting symmetry class by applying planar mechanical strain can be extended to other anisotropic materials as well, and may help in providing important information of the symmetries of the order parameter, perhaps even in some high-Tc superconductors. Black phosphorus (BP) is a puckered orthorhombic semiconductor with a tuneable direct band gap, offering striking prospects and unprecedented opportunites to field-effect transistors, photoelectrics, and photonics devices Raman spectroscopy is a powerful technique to study the phonon modes and the structural dynamics of materials Motivated by recent experimental progress described above, here we use realistic values for the band parameters of monolayer black phosphorus (MBP) under the influence of strain and show that, remarkably, the exertion of a proper biaxial strain in the plane of MBP can convert the effective symmetry class of s-wave and p-wave superconducting correlations into d-wave and f -wave classes, respectively. To uncover the pairing symmetry change, starting with phononmediated intervalley spin-singlet electron-electron pairing we derive the anomalous Green's function f and examine the intervalley spin-singlet correlations as a function of k x and k y . Our findings demonstrate that the pseudospin-triplet spinsinglet correlation is also nonzero with odd symmetry in parity. We extract the coefficients of momenta k 2 x and k 2 y as a function of applied strain and determine the desired range and type of strain for achieving the change of pairing effective symmetries. We also consider the exchange field interaction, h, that can be provided experimentally by proximity coupling of MBP to a ferromagnet. In the presence of h, the spin-triplet components of f can be nonzero. We find that the change of symmetry classes occurs for these now nonzero spin-triplet correlations too. We finally discuss how the predicted change of pairing symmetry classes can be detected by angular-dependence high-resolution tunnelingspectroscopy experiments, the Meissner effect, and may alter the superconducting critical temperature. MBP in the presence of strain, ε ii , is described by the following low-energy effective Hamiltonian where x and y label the coordinates of the plane of MBP. Here τ x,y are the Pauli matrices in pseudo-spin space. In what follows, for biaxial strain both ε xx and ε yy are nonzero, while for uniaxial strain only one of them is nonzero. To include an exchange field, h = (h x , h y , h z ), we invoke the real spin degree of freedom and assign three directions of spin to each valley by h x σ x + h y σ y + h z σ z in which σ x,y,z are the Pauli matrices. Hence, in the presence of spin degree of freedom, the field operator associated with the above Hamiltonian reads ; the pseudospins and spins are labeled by AB and ↑↓, respectively. The band parameters of MBP, appearing in the Hamiltonian, are given in Table We begin with singlet superconductivity that can be described by that is, phonon-mediated intervalley electron-electron coupling with opposite spins. Note that, generally, other pairing amplitudes can be nonzero as well. Nevertheless, we assume that they can be ignored because the considered mechanism is most likely favored experimentally, as is also found for graphene where t, t designate the imaginary time, T is the imaginarytime-ordering operator, and ψ τ σ are field operators. Here, indices τ τ and σσ stand for the pseudospin and spin degrees of freedom, respectively. In the Nambu particle-hole space, the propagators are related to the Hamiltonian through: in which ω n = π(2n + 1)k B T is the Matsubara frequency, n ∈ Z, k B is the Boltzman constant, T is temperature, and ∆(r) determines the spatial dependence of superconducting gap. Also, Ĥ(r) is obtained by replacing k → -i∇ in H(k). The matrix form of the propagators is represented by ǧ(iω n ; r, r ) which is expressed as: Here, 4 × 4 matrices are symbolized by a "hat", ˆ , and 8 × 8 matrices by the "check" symbol, ˇ . We first set the exchange field to zero, h = 0. Also, in line with experiments, we assume that the system is translationally invariant in the xy plane and thus diagonal in momentum. Consequently, one ends up with a set of algebraic equations in momentum space. After solving for the Green's function, we obtain the following pairing components: and we defined The other components of f can be obtained similarly, and can also be inferred from the symmetry relations among the components of the anomalous Green's function. We find that the superconducting correlations with equal spins in both equalpseudospin and unequal-pseudospin states, i.e., Eqs. (6a) and (6c), vanish. This is consistent with the preliminary assumption we started with, namely, it follows directly from ∆ AB ↑↑ = ∆ AA,BB ↑↑ = 0. One nonzero superconducting correlation is the equal-pseudospin opposite-spin pairing, i.e., Eq. (6b). This component is purely imaginary, odd in frequency, and odd in parity (i.e., changing k x , k y to -k x , -k y ). Thus, f AA ↑↓ belongs to the p-wave symmetry class. The most important pairing correlation is given in Eq. (6d). This pairing involves unequal-pseudospin opposite-spins and is even in frequency. According to Eqs. (8), both terms Ω and Λ have the x and k 2 y in Ω and Λ, given in Eq. ( form "ak 2 x + bk 2 y + c". For Ω, we find while for Λ we have Our conclusions for the change of pairing correlations' symmetry classes hinge solely on the actual forms of Ω and Λ, i.e., "ak 2 x + bk 2 y + c", and the relative sign of a/b. Hence, when sgn(a/b) is positive, k y Λ and Ω (and Λ) belong to pand s-wave symmetry classes, respectively. Depending on the applied mechanical strain, sgn(a/b) can change to negative. Consequently, the leading symmetry classes change to f -and d-symmetries, as now Ω and Λ are given by (see also the numerical illustrations in the next paragraph). Expanding (χ y k y -iΛ) 2 in Eq. (6d), we find a term proportional to belonging now to pand f -wave classes. In a rotated frame by unitary transformation U = exp(iπτ y /4), the term Λ in the Hamiltonian shall be attached to a τ z matrix rather than τ x . In this case, we find Note that in the absence of anisotropic term χ y k y , the pairing correlations possess effective s-wave symmetry and f AA ↑↓ vanishes. Also, the applied strain can modify the band structure as Ref. 55 and Appendix A throughly discuss. The pairing correlation f AB ↑↓ is a complicated function of the momenta k x and k y . Therefore, to determine the effective symmetries of f AB ↑↓ , we employ realistic values for the band parameters given in Table ↑↓ and Imf AB ↑↓ , with identical parameter values used in Fig. Having uncovered the symmetry conversion of superconducting pairings, in order to provide a broader view of the parameter space where these symmetry crossovers occur, we have separated out the coefficients of k 2 x and k 2 y in Eq. ( x in Ω and Λ are denoted by Ω x (ε xx , ε yy ) and Λ x (ε xx , ε yy ) (identical to coefficients "a" given above), while the coefficients of k 2 y are shown by Ω y (ε xx , ε yy ) and Λ y (ε xx , ε yy ) (equivalent to coefficients "b" introduced above). Employing the band parameters given in Table x + |b|k 2 y which possess the s-wave symmetry class. In contrast, for the set of strain used for obtaining Fig. For the case of higher strain, i.e., ε xx = ε yy = +0.15 shown in Fig. These combinations produce terms of types ±|a|k 2 x ∓ |b|k 2 y that have d-wave symmetry class. We note that our analyses are independent of the chemical potential as long as MBP develops superconductivity As stated in the Introduction, the optical band gap only is ∼ 1.52eV that appears in our model Hamiltonian as δ 0 in Table x and k 2 y given in Eqs. ( where αα , ββ are pseudospin and spin indices. The interaction potential function can be expanded through the spherical harmonics. Thus, for an s-wave, V ∝ 1: x -k 2 y ); and so forth. When an appropriate interaction potential is specified, ∆ αα ββ (k) provides an integral equation to find temperature dependence of the superconducting gap. In practice, when the interaction potential V (k, k ) supports the symmetries explored through the Green's function, our results suggest that the superconducting critical temperature, initially pertaining to s-wave superconductivity, can be significantly altered by applying an appropriate either uniaxial or biaxial strain, as the superconducting pairing symmetry turns into a d ax 2 -by 2 . This prediction can be checked in an experiment. Another experiment that provides distinctive and direct evidence for our prediction of symmetry change is an angular point contact tunneling spectroscopy experiment. Such an experiment determines the angular dependence of superconductivity before and after applying the biaxial strain, thus differentiating between angle-independent and angle-dependent symmetry classes. An alternative approach that can reveal the symmetry change of superconducting correlations is the Meissner effect. This method may provide a clear and direct image of the symmetry change discussed above In our analyses above, we have simply adopted the BCS scenario of superconductivity in which two particles with opposite spins and momenta are coupled from different pseudospins. We have assumed that the influence of strain in superconducting MBP is encoded in the electron-electron coupling interaction potential so that it changes by the amplitude of this interaction. Nonetheless, if it will be experimentally proven that strain introduces momentum-dependent changes to the electron-electron coupling interaction potential, similar to those discussed above, then one should repeat the above calculations with momentum-dependent potentials. First-principles calculations show that BP withstands high strains up to 40% without any rupture or dislocations Exploiting both a Green's function approach in the equilibrium state and the low energy effective Hamiltonian of MBP, we derive the components of anomalous Green's function in the presence of intervalley spin-singlet superconductivity. We show that equal-pseudospin spin-singlet correlations emerge, which are odd in parity. More importantly, making use of realistic values to the band parameters of MBP (obtained through first-principles calculations), our results reveal that MBP under the influence of an appropriate weak strain (>6%) can change the symmetry class of s-wave and p-wave superconducting correlations into d-wave and f -wave classes, respectively. This finding offers MBP as a fertile platform to devise superconducting pairing symmetry switches with externally adjustable parameters and may advance understanding of the underlying mechanism of some high-T c superconductors. eters. We clarify the generic conditions under which the transformations discussed in the symmetry profile of superconducting pair correlations are guaranteed. We also refer to a recent work where a good agreement between the first-principles calculations and experimental observations in black phosphorus subject to strain was reported When the superconducting monolayer black phosphorus is confined, the band structure gains nontrivial features at low energies. To illustrate how the low energy band structure is modified in a finite size system subject to strain, we consider a situation where the system is confined in the y direction with length d S = 50 nm. In this case, momentum in the x direction is invariant and allows us to plot the band structure vs k x . Figure in which D is given by