We examine a new method for predicting the atomization energies of Au13 + clusters by a nonlinear regression model using interatomic and centroid distances as descriptors to improve the efficiency of density-functional theory calculations. Learning data were created using the time-series data of atomic coordinates and Kohn-Sham energy generated by molecular-dynamics simulations. This approach predicted the atomization energies of fifteen known stable/metastable structures of Au13 + clusters well. Moreover, we found that the fitting to the test data could be markedly improved by eliminating the descriptors representing the short interatomic distance. Density-functional theory (DFT) calculations require large computational resources, although they can predict the various properties of materials to high accuracies. To deal with the problem, several strategies have been explored so far: the adoption of algorithms suitable for parallel computation such as the finite difference method with real space grids In this study, we examined a new approach combining DFT calculations with machine learning, where the learning data were efficiently generated using time-series data from a molecular-dynamics (MD) simulations, and descriptors were constructed from the information of atomic coordinates only. The new method was applied to the prediction of the atomization energies of Au13 + clusters. The gold clusters, composed of metallic bonds, had flexibility in their bond angles, unlike the clusters made of covalent or ionic bonds. This allowed the gold clusters to have various structures. In addition, Au13 + clusters seemed to be suitable for verifying this approach because Gilb et al. reported 15 stable/metastable structures. where EKS(X) refers to the Kohn-Sham energy of species X. Machine learning: All machine-learning calculations in this study were based on the scikitlearn package, which is a collection of APIs for machine learning in Python. GBR produces a regression model in the form of ensemble decision trees. It evolves the model in a stepwise manner by optimizing the loss function via its gradient. We used least square regression as the loss function (loss = "ls"). The learning rate at which the contribution of each decision tree shrank and the number of boosting stages to perform were set in a very conservative way to avoid overfitting (learning rate = 0.0001 and n_estimators = 25000). In addition, the maximum depth, minimum samples split, and maximum feature parameters of the scikit-learn gradient-boosting regression module (ensemble.GradientBoostingRegressor) were set to 5, 3, and 2, respectively. Stable and metastable structures of the Au13 + cluster: We prepared the test data to verify the present machine-learning approach. Gilb et al. showed 15 stable and metastable structures of Au13 + clusters obtained from quantum chemical calculations that were consistent with crosssection measurements, and reported the optimized atomic coordinates of the clusters. To sample the learning data efficiently, it was preferable to set the simulation temperature such that the atoms could move actively. However, we found that when the temperature was too high the cluster was divided into two parts during simulation. Thus, we set the temperature to 1500 K, which was slightly higher than the melting point of Au (1337 K). Design of the descriptors for the Au13 + cluster: Molecular structures were easily calculable descriptors. The interatomic distances were the first choice for such descriptors and the subject of the initial investigation. The distance also had the advantage of being invariant to rotational and translational motions. However, since there were N! cases for indexing a molecule comprising N atoms, the descriptors should be independent of atomic numbering. For such descriptors, we first considered those descriptors in which the interatomic distances were rearranged in the ascending order. Figure To improve the results, it was necessary to examine descriptors that were different from interatomic distances. Although three-and four-body terms such as bond and dihedral angles were candidates for descriptors, We considered the distance between each atom and the mass center of the cluster. We called it the centroid distance. The centroid distances were also arranged in the ascending order, as in the case of interatomic distances. Figure The R 2 values of the training and test data were 0.864 and 0.579, respectively. We also show the case where both interatomic and centroid distances were used to extend the descriptors (Figure The prediction of atomization energy was improved when centroid distances were used as the descriptors. To investigate this, we examined feature importance by constructing a GBR model. The least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (Lasso) is often used to examine the feature importance in a linear regression model. However, Lasso cannot be used for nonlinear regression models such as GKRR because it results in data selection instead of feature selection. In contrast, it was possible to calculate the importance of each feature in the GBR model. Figure The above results suggest that the features corresponding to short interatomic distances did not contribute much to the prediction of atomization energy. To confirm this, we examined how the R 2 score of test data changed with respect to the number of features by a sequential decrease by 5 from the feature representing the short interatomic distance. Near the peak R 2 score, the number of features was cut one by one. If all 78 features representing the interatomic distances were cut, the features comprised 13 corresponding to the centroid distances. The result is shown in Figure Dependence on learning data: Finally, we examined the dependence of prediction accuracy on the choice of learning data. We used 60000 steps of time-series data obtained from the MD simulation starting from the most stable structure (S0 in Figure We found that the atomization energy of the Au13 + cluster could be predicted using interatomic and centroid distances as the descriptors. From the analysis of feature importance, we also found that features corresponding to the long centroid distance were important. Furthermore, by eliminating the features by about half from the shorter distance in the ascending order of interatomic distance, the fitness to the test data was markedly improved. These results indicate that the features corresponding to longer distances were important for describing the atomization energy of the cluster. This was contrary to the intuition that the chemical bond is local and the descriptors corresponding to shorter distances were expected to be important. The energy was estimated based on the cluster structure in this machine-learning approach. It could thus be interpreted that the emphasis was placed on the descriptors corresponding to longer distances, which were more likely to reflect the shape of the entire cluster. In this study, we focused on a 