We report a method to monitor the setting process of bone-graft substitutes (calcium sulphate) using ultrasonic backscattering techniques. Analyzing the backscattered fields using a pulse-echo technique, we show that it is possible to dynamically describe the acoustic properties of the material which are linked to its setting state. Several experiments were performed to control the setting process of calcium sulphate using a 3.5-MHz transducer. The variation of the apparent integrated backscatter (AIB) with time during the setting process is analyzed and compared with measurements of the speed of sound (SOS) and temperature of the sample. The correlation of SOS and AIB allows to clearly identify two different states of the samples, liquid and solid, in addition to the transition period. Results show that using backscattering analysis the setting state of the material can be estimated with a threshold of 15 dB. This ultrasonic technique is indeed a first step to develop real-time monitoring systems for time-varying complex media as those present in bone regeneration for dental implantology applications. Dental implants require sufficient bone volume to achieve stability and durability. The loss of tooth affects the quality and thickness of the bone Ultrasound has been used fruitfully to characterize the physical properties of bone. Technology for bone density estimation is nowadays mature In addition, ultrasonic waves travelling in bones are strongly scattered in a diffuse way due to their complex heterogeneous micro-structure. In this way, the interference of multiple scattered waves from internal micro-structures can be received at source position. During last two decades, different techniques based on the backscatter energy evaluation have been proposed for bone characterization Many ultrasonic backscattering techniques are based on measurements of the apparent backscatter transfer function (ABTF) During bone regeneration process, its mechanical properties are modified from the initial bone graft to the consolidated bone. A change of state is produced as a consequence of osseointegration. Thus, a solution for detecting possible anomalies during the healing of bone in GBR applications consist of monitoring the ultrasonic properties of tissue during time. In this sense, ultrasound techniques have been applied for characterization of slowly time varying materials. One relevant example are cements, that have been characterized by ultrasonic methods for more than 80 years, see e.g, In this work, we propose a proof of concept to monitor the GBR by sinus augmentation using ultrasonic backscattering methods. Thus, the time-varying acoustical properties of the material under inspection are obtained using an echo-impulse technique. In particular, we use a phantom of calcium sulphate Calcium sulphate type IV (Ventura Pinkmod) is the synthetic bone substitute used to perform the experiments. In particular, in its powder state the material is calcium sulfate hemihydrate (CaSO 4 • 1 2 H 2 O) in its α form. When the hemihydrate is mixed with water, calcium sulphate dihydrate is formed in a moderate exothermic reaction as 29 : In this way, during the setting process the material shows a change of phase from a viscous liquid to porous solid. The total setting time is around 20 minutes. To study repeatability, four experiments were performed with samples composed of in 23 ml of water and 50 g of calcium sulphate. The powder was dissolved in water at 20 ±0.2 • C and mixed up to get homogeneous samples. The material was deposited in a cylindrical plastic container with a diameter of 36 mm to provide samples of 18 mm of thickness. An Olympus V382 transducer with a nominal central frequency of 3.5 MHz and a bandwidth of 2.34 MHz (-6 dB) was used as emitter and receiver using a pulse-echo technique. Figure The speed of sound (SOS) was calculated as the distance ratio between two times the thickness of the sample and the time of flight between the first two echoes from the end of the sample as where L is the thickness of the sample and ∆t is the time of flight, estimated as the times corresponding to the peak value of first two echoes. SOS was estimated during setting time, and a purely phenomenological model was fitted. The proposed model describes a smooth and asymmetric transition between two phases, fluid and solid, and is given by: where c 1 is the speed of sound in liquid state, c 2 is the speed of sound in solid phase, γ models the speed of the transition from liquid to solid phase, t is the setting time, t m is the half-time of the setting process and β is related to the symmetry of the function. Using this model we can compare the setting process of several experiments. Two quantitative parameters based on the backscatter energy were considered in this work: the apparent backscatter transfer function (ABTF) and the apparent integrated backscatter energy (AIB). Both have been proven to be reliable and robust to characterize bone tissue where P s (f ) is the frequency-dependent power of a backscatter signal p s (t) using a time window of duration τ w , and P ref (f ) is the frequency-dependent power of the first echo from a reference reflector, e.g., steel plate On the other hand, the AIB is obtained as the frequencyaveraged ABTF as where ∆f = f 2 -f 1 , and f 1 and f 2 are given by the -6 dB bandwidth of the transducer. The reference pulse and its spectrum are shown in Figs. The experimental signals of one experiment are shown in Fig. From t = 0 μs to t = 2 μs, all ultrasonic signals have a maximum value of 0 dB corresponding to the emission pulse. Then, vertical grey traces appear corresponding to the received backscattered waves. First, when the experiment is started, the sample presents a viscous fluid state. At the beginning of the experiment time, at the top of Fig. Dashed lines in Fig. Here, the traces of the captured backscattered waves match the analysis window marked by the dashed white lines. Backscatter parameters have been referenced to a signal obtained from a flat steel plate, shown in Fig. The evolution of the SOS with the setting time is shown in Fig. The maximum temperature variation is achieved at 21.6 min, corresponding to 1.9 • C/min. This point corresponds to the maximum exothermic chemical activation As expected, it can be observed that the change of the state of the material corresponds to an abrupt increase of the SOS. This particular smooth transition was measured in all samples, and can be described by three different phases: the liquid state, the transition and the solid state. The experimental SOS data was fitted to the phenomenological model given by Eq. ( First, the parameter c 1 is linked to the physical SOS at the initial viscous-liquid state of the sample. The mean value of c 1 over the four experiments is 1514.5 ± 98.0 m/s. As the material at the initial process is mainly water with undissolved powder, the SOS measured for the sample is close to the SOS of the water. The final value of the SOS in the experiment is related to c 2 , i.e, the SOS of the material in solid state. The mean value of c 2 is 2858.1 ± 155.5 m/s. The transition time for the setting process is given by the parameter t m . This parameter takes a mean value of t m = 20.4 min, very close to the peak of maximum exothermic chemical activity (21.6 min for sample 1). The factor γ is related to the duration of the transition from liquid to solid state, its mean value is 1.8 ± 0.3 min -1 . Finally, the factor β is related to the symmetry of the function and takes a mean value of 0.345 ± 0.016. The dispersion of the parameters is low, and all experiments present similar transition curves. However, some discrepancies are observed in SOS values, that can be associated to uncertainness on estimating the thickness of the sample L. In addition to SOS, energetic parameters also can provide information about the change of phase of calcium sulphate. In particular, we show in Fig. However, as the reaction continues (after minute 17) both the scattering energy and the peak amplitude of the echo increase: the intrinsic absorption of the consolidated synthetic bone substitute is lower compared to its viscous-fluid phase. Thus, AIB progressively increases and its dispersion is reduced. During this time the transition of state in the setting process is produced; the mechanical and acoustic features of the sample are drastically modified and the microstructure of the porous solid material starts to consolidate, leading to a increase of the amplitude of the backscatter signal. The consolidated material present less absorption, and at the middle of the transition the echo from the back arrives with remarkable amplitude. However, as the porous solid consolidates its inner microstructure the backscatter energy increases. As a consequence, the amplitude of the 1st echo of the back is again reduced as waves reach the end of the sample with lower amplitude. After some small oscillations during the transition the AIB ends with a value of about -5 dB at 25 min. Finally after 30 min, the sample is transformed to solid state and the AIB is smoothly increased from -5 dB to a plateau reaching a maximum value 0 dB at 50 min. Therefore, while the dispersion of the AIB is low and it reaches a stable value, the amount of the energy of the ultrasonic pulse that reaches the end of the sample is reduced due to scattering processes. This is caused by the final properties of the bone graft substitute that present high micro-heterogeneity and porosity. After this time, the setting process is completed and the material is mechanically and acoustically stable. While at the initial and the end of the setting time AIB takes different values, AIB presents some oscillations during the setting period. These can lead to uncertainness if used to monitor the setting of the material. A deeper analysis can be performed by showing the correlation between AIB and SOS. Figures A concentration of experimental points can be observed in two zones, marked by arrows. On the one hand, when the material is in its viscous liquid phase is when the values of SOS are minimum. On the other hand, when the material is a porous solid both SOS and AIB present maximum values. As experimental data concentrates in these two limits, we can apply clustering techniques to identify them. A density-based spatial clus-tering of applications with noise (DBSCAN) technique The change of state of a bone graft substitute (calcium sulphate) has been monitored and characterized by ultrasonic backscattering analysis. Temperature, speed of sound (SOS) and apparent integrated backscatter energy (AIB) were measured during the setting process of the sample using a pulse-echo technique. The evolution of SOS shows a smooth transition between two limiting values, corresponding to the viscous-fluid and porous solid state of the calcium sulphate samples. An excellent agreement is found between the evolution of the SOS and a simple phenomenological model to describe the setting process. The experiments also show good repeatability. In addition, the evolution of AIB is shown to be correlated with SOS. The apparent integrated backscatter energy is proven to be an appropriate parameter to describe the transition from a viscous-liquid state, with values around -15 dB, to a complex porous solid, with values around 0 dB. This relation confirms that the backscattering analysis with ultrasound is a powerful tool to monitor complex materials with time-varying mechanical properties using a single transducer and pulse-echo techniques. This study represents a contribution to the use of ultrasound for the monitoring of GBR, which is necessary for the successful placement of dental implants. A synthetic bone substitute has been used as a bone phantom because its mechanical properties change during the setting process from a viscous liquid to a rigid porous material, as, under reasonable simplifications, occurs in GBR applications. However, many practical questions remains open and should be explored. These include the effect of the varying coupling of the transducer and the tissue between acquisitions, the mechanical/acoustical behaviour of real tissue during bone regeneration, the scattering properties of these unconsolidated and consolidated tissues, patient variability, or the impact of the intrinsic properties of real bones during regeneration (porosity, tortuosity, viscosity, ...) in the estimated parameters. These issues should be explored in future studies. Finally, it is worth to mention that one advantage of backscattering analysis with respect to speed of sound is that using backscattering techniques there is not needed to know the thickness of the sample. Note using a single transducer the estimation of the thickness of the sam-ple is critical to accurately estimate SOS and, therefore, scattering techniques might be preferred. This is a significant benefit to envisaged implant applications in-vivo where the GBR can be monitored.