The discovery of high critical temperature Tc superconductivity in highly compressed H3S has opened up the question of searching for strong electron-phonon coupling in the hydrides outside the transition metal series. The specific objective of this work is to explore the possibility of discovering a material that exceeds the superconducting transition temperature of H3S. Our study includes the materials H3X (X=As, Se, Br, Sb, Te, and I), is limited to the Im3m crystal structure. The procedure we adopt involves performing linearized augmented plane wave (LAPW) calculations for many different volumes to compute the electronic densities of states and their pressure variation. This is combined with Quantum-ESPRESSO (QE) calculations from which we obtain the phonon frequencies and the electron-phonon coupling constant λ, and followed by applying the multiple scattering-based theory of Gaspari and Gyorffy (GG) to obtain the Hopfield parameters and the McMillan-Allen-Dynes theory. It should be stressed that the GG approach decouples the electronic contribution to λ from the corresponding phonon contribution, and provides additional insights for the understanding of superconductivity in these materials. Based on our analysis, the hydrogen is the main contributor to the Tc in these materials as it makes up 75 ∼ 80 % of the total λ. Our calculations for H3Se and H3Br give a Tc∼ 100 K. For the other materials in our study we find that H 3 As is unstable and H 3 Sb, H 3 Te and H 3 I have small values of the McMillan-Hopfield paramters which makes it unlikely to give high T c . However, according to both of our rigid band model and virtual crystal calculations, we predict a Tc ∼ 150 K for H3Br with a small amount of hydrogen doping. Our basic conclusion is that the materials studied here could not reach very high Tc because the Hopfield parameters, which are the strongest contributor to high Tc, are not large enough. Recently high temperature superconductivity at temperatures exceeding 200 K was predicted by Duan et al. [1] at extreme pressures above 200 GPa in H 3 S in the Im3m crystal structure. Using the Gaspari-Gyorffy (GG) theory However, metallizing hydrogen requires extremely high pressure The hydrides are considered as unusual but conventional superconductors since their behavior can be explained with traditional electron-phonon interaction while a few details differ from the conventional ones Although it is commonly accepted that hydrogen is the main contributor to T c in H 3 S, other hydride-forming elements may have a dramatic impact on the hydrogen contribution. The purpose of this work is to present a comprehensive study of the electronic structure of the hydrides H 3 X (X=As, Se, Br, Sb, Te and I) in the Im3m crystal structure and using the GG theory to calculate the Hopfield parameter η. To explore the possible superconducting properties of these materials and compare with the well established H 3 S, we make estimates of the phonon frequencies from Refs. The electronic structure calculations are performed with the all-electron Linearized Augmented Plane Wave (LAPW) method The key step to estimate T c is the determination of the electron-phonon coupling λ, which, as pointed out by McMillan where N (E F ) is the total DOS per spin at the Fermi level E F , I 2 is the electron-ion matrix element, ω 2 j is the average phonon frequency and the index j corresponds to X element and hydrogen. The Hopfield parameter η j , which only describes electronic properties, is calculated using the GG formula based on the scattering theory. This formula allows us to express the electronic contributions to the λ j in local terms in the following form where both δ j l and v j l = N j l ( F )/N j(1) l are orbital l and site j dependent. The phase shifts δ j l are defined through the following equation: where L l = u l /u l is the logarithmic derivative and j l and n l are spherical Bessel and Neumann functions. The free scatterer DOS N j(1) l is defined as follows: where u l is the radial wave function and the upper limit of the integral is the muffin-tin radius R s . It should be stressed here that the GG formula Eq. 2 requires the use of an all electron potential and therefore it should not be compatible with pseudopotential methods. Finally, T c is evaluated using the Allen-Dynes equation In Eq. 5, λ = λ X + 3λ H where λ X represent the acoustic modes of the element X and λ H the optical modes of H. This separation is exact for these materials and was pointed out long time ago for other hydrides . The phonon dispersions and electron-phonon couplings are calculated using density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) Fig. Similar information can also be found in Fig Fig. We have calculated the Hopfield parameter η j using Eq. 2 in Section II. In this formulation the index j indicates that we obtain separate η j for hydrogen and the element X. This also results in having two separate electron-phonon coupling constants λ j which give total λ = λ X + 3λ H . This approach differs from the approach of other authors, who directly compute the total λ. Our approach has the advantage of studying the electronic contribution to λ from each element separately and being able to pin down which aspects of the band structure affect superconductivity as is described below. The summation Eq. 2, in a cubic approximation, has three terms which we identify as the sp (for l=0), pd (for l=1) and df (for l=2) channels. For the hydrogen component η H the dominant term comes from the sp channel. For the X component, η X of the H 3 X compounds the dominant term comes from the pd channel. It should also be noted that each term of the sum consists of the product sin 2 (δ j l -δ j l+1 )v j l v j (l+1) . The v j l v j (l+1) term of the product is usually larger but the sin 2 (δ j l -δ j l+1 ) is not negligible. In Fig. The term v j l v j (l+1) in Eq. 2 plotted against pressure is shown in Fig. As an example we plot the quantities N (E F ), η X and η H for X=Br and Se in Fig. We retain the two-component approach separating the acoustic from the optic modes in these materials as justified by the small mass of hydrogen The Hopfield-McMillan parameter η j we analyzed in the previous section which we calculated directly by the Gaspari-Gyorffy theory, and identified the importance of the different terms in the GG formula. In order to calculate the force constants we recast McMillan Eq. 1 into the following form where λ j is calculated from independent Quantum-Espresso for H 3 S, H 3 As, H 3 Se and H 3 Br. The QE calculations, in addition, give ω log needed for T c . The results from both QE and the GG theory are summarized in Table Our QE results for both H 3 Se and H 3 S give values for ω log and λ very close to previous works Refs. In Table This Table For instance, while having slightly smaller η's in H 3 Br (η Se = 4.19 and η H = 1.33 eV/ Å2 ) than H 3 Se, the λ of H 3 Br is about 10% larger than that of H 3 Se at the P = 2 Mbar. This is mainly because H 3 Br has smaller ω j 's in the denominator of Eq. 1. The decrease of ω j in H 3 Br which leads to the increase of λ, will also reflect on the prefactor ω log in Eq. 5 which lowers the T c . As a result, with similar η values in both H 3 Se and H 3 Br, having nearly 32% larger ω log in H 3 Se only gives 18% difference in its T c . The importance of ω log in high T c superconductivity is sometimes overemphasized. H 3 Se and H 3 S have very similar ω log , however the T c of H 3 S is higher by more than 100 K. On the other hand, as discussed earlier, H 3 Se and H 3 Br having similar η values leads to vary close T c despite the significant ω log difference. The reason becomes clear by comparing the η j of H 3 X (X=Se, Br and S) in Fig. Although from a numerical standpoint, a high T c is rather the optimal condition of the interplay between λ j and ω log as in the case of H 3 S. The parameter η, which depends solely on the electronic structure, is the only factor that can be optimized independently The value of the Hopfield parameters η j can in prin-ciple change by a lot more because they depend on the Fermi level values of the angular momentum decomposed electronic densities of states and how close to a van Hove singularity the Fermi level is. So our finding is that the Hopfield parameter is a quantity more sensitive from material to material than the average phonon frequency. Therefore, our conclusion is that within the Im3m crystal structure a significant increase of the Hopfield parameter from its value in H 3 S is needed in order to raise T c in the direction of room temperature. We believe that values of η j larger than 10 eV/ Å2 are needed for higher T c than in H 3 S. Our approach based on the GG theory has the advantage of keeping the decoupling of the electronic component of λ from the phonon component. In addition, separating the contribution of the element X from that of hydrogen identifies the distinct contributions of acoustic and optic modes. So those two decouplings i.e. separation of electronic from phononic contributions and separation of the two elements X and H offer more insights in the understanding of superconductivity in these materials. Regarding the three materials in the second row we found small values of η j and we conclude that given their larger masses it is unlikely that their force constants would be be small enough to raise λ to the desired value for high T c . Therefore we did not carry out phonon spectra calculations for those. Fig. To better understand how the electronic properties could potentially affect λ and T c , we also consider T c versus electron number within a rigid band model. This is shown in Fig. It should be mentioned here that the idea of substitution of the element X has been applied in the H-S-Se system by Liu et all We have calculated the parameters determining superconductivity in the group of hydrides H 3 X (X=As, Se, Sb, Te and I). Our approach combines LAPW electronicstructure calculations, which yield the total and angular momentum decomposed DOS in the Im3m crystal structure, with the Qauntum-ESPRESSO code from which the phonon spectra are calculated We also use the Gaspari-Gyorffy theory to evaluate the McMillan-Hopfield parameter η j and obtain additional insight on the mechanism of superconductivity in these materials. We conclude that the elements X play the role of stabilizer of these compounds to keep H metallized under pressure. The highest superconducting transition temperature 112 K is found for H 3 Se, which is isoelectronic to the well-established H 3 S. For H 3 Br we calculate a little smaller T c = 98 K, but using a rigid band model and a VCA calculation we predict T c ∼ 150 K with electron doping We find that the road to high T c depends mainly on high values of the Hopfield parameters on the hydrogen sites. Our analysis shows that the variation of the parameters η H or of the matrix element I 2 H is more important than the variation of the phonon frequency. This is consistent with the view of Pickett and Eremets 