Grain boundaries in Sr-doped LaMnO3±δ thin films have been shown to strongly influence the electronic and oxygen mass transport properties, being able to profoundly modify the nature of the material. The unique behaviour of the grain boundaries can be correlated with substantial modifications of the cation concentration at the interfaces, which can be tuned by changing the overall cationic ratio in the films. In this work, we study the electronic properties of La0.8Sr0.2Mn1-yO3±δ thin films with variable Mn content. The influence of the cationic composition on the grain boundary and grain bulk electronic properties is elucidated by studying the manganese valence state evolution using spectroscopy techniques and by confronting the electronic properties of epitaxial and polycrystalline films. Substantial differences in the electronic conduction mechanism are found in the presence of grain boundaries and depending on the manganese content. Moreover, the unique defect chemistry of the nanomaterial is elucidated by measuring the electrical resistance of the thin films as a function of oxygen partial pressure, disclosing the importance of the cationic local nonstoichiometry on the thin films behavior. Engineering the transport properties of complex oxides is considered one of the major challenges for launching the next generation of highly performing solid state devices. In this direction, mastering the implementation of interface-dominated materials represents a powerful engineering tool with implications in many different fields. For instance, grain boundaries (GBs) and dislocations have been demonstrated to substantially increase oxygen diffusion in La0.8Sr0.2MnO3±δ (LSM) thin films, improving their performance as cathodes in solid oxide fuel cells. In this work, we delve into the electronic conduction mechanism of La0.8Sr0.2Mn1-yO3±δ (LSMy) thin films by studying, first, the impact of the different Mn/(La+Sr) ratios on the bulk behaviour by spectroscopy techniques and, second, the GB properties in polycrystalline samples by confronting them with epitaxial LSMy with variable Mn content. The first analysis on the bulk defect chemistry is particularly important since large Mn deficiencies are explored in this study. In this sense, it is well-known that a change in the B/A ratio creates negative cation vacancies in LSM (V Mn ,,, or V La ,,, ) that need to be compensated by positive defects (V O •• and/or Mn 4+ ), strongly affecting the electronic conduction properties. Using this first analysis for defining the bulk references, we aim to identify then the distinct conduction mechanism occurring at the GBs, stressing the importance of these interfaces in the overall functional properties of thin films. Finally, we discuss the impact of the specific local nonstoichiometry at the GBs on the electronic mechanism, showing the central role of Mn in defining the interface properties. LSMy thin films with variable Mn content were deposited by combinatorial Pulsed Laser Deposition (c-PLD) on 5mm x 10mm Sapphire (0001) substrates and on 100 nm YSZ / Si 4" wafers in a large-area system from PVD Products (PLD-5000), equipped with a KrF-248 nm excimer laser from Lambda Physics (COMPex PRO 205). C-PLD is a technique based on the alternate deposition of two different parent compounds (in our case La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 and Mn3O4 commercial targets) at two opposite sides of a large area substrate. Structural and surface characterization of the thin films was performed by X-ray Diffraction (XRD) (Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer system), Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) (FEI TITAN Low Base operated at 300 kV) and by non-contact Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM, XE 100 Park System Corp.). Figure ) would result in a great oxygen deficiency and a much higher increase of bulk oxygen diffusion than the one observed in our previous works. Although this mechanism is not commonly observed in bulk perovskites, similar anti-site defects have been recently reported by Qiao et al. in Cr deficient epitaxial LaCrO3 films. In order to clearly identify the contribution of GBs on the electrical properties of polycrystalline LSMy films, we compared two sets of equivalent polycrystalline (on sapphire First, the in-plane electronic conductivity above room temperature of polycrystalline and epitaxial films with different Mn content have been represented using an Arrhenius plot in Figure According to this model, the polarons can move to the Nearest Neighbour Hopping (NNH) site with the assistance of phonons, leading to the following expression of conductivity in the case of adiabatic limit: 28 Where E a refers to the activation energy of the hopping mechanism, k b is the Boltzmann constant and σ 0 is the pre-exponential factor. shows the evolution of the pre-exponential factor with the B/A ratio. In the epitaxial films, a small increase could be measured with increasing the Mn content in the films. The pre-exponential factor is defined in the case of considering on-site coulombic repulsions as: Where e, ν, a are the electron charge, the polaron attempt frequency and the site to site hopping distance, respectively. In the grain bulk, since negligible manganese valence changes were measured, the pre-exponential directly increases with the Mn content, σ 0 ∝ Thus, a decrease of the Mn concentration generates fewer sites for the polarons to hop, resulting in lower values of conductivity. As a matter of fact, the preexponential factor of the epitaxial LSMy films perfectly follows this theoretical trend (blue dashed line in Figure With T 0 being the characteristic temperature and p the exponential term, that equals to 1⁄4 in the case of a Mott regime The appearance of the SE-VRH could indicate that the charged defects in the GBs promote polarons trapping or that the density of states at the fermi level is not constant (see Section S.6. in the supplementary information for additional details on the ES-VRH model). 