In this study, we investigate experimentally and numerically the mode I intra-laminar fracture and size effect of Discontinuous Fiber Composites (DFCs) as a function of the structure thicknesses. By testing geometrically-scaled Single Edge Notch Tension (SENT) specimens a notable structure size effect on the nominal strength of DFCs is identified. As the specimen size increases, the nominal strength decreases. For small specimens, we find a limited size effect with enhanced pseudo-ductility and a strong divergence from Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM). For sufficiently large specimen sizes, the scaling of the nominal strength follows closely LEFM with a strong brittle failure. As the thickness increases, the size effect decreases. We identify the fracture energy and the effective size of the fracture process zone as a function of the thickness of the structure. To do so, we integrate equivalent fracture mechanics and stochastic finite element modeling. Experimentally, we collect the nominal strength of geometrically-scaled Single Edge Notch Tension (SENT) specimens. The numerical stochastic model captures the complex, inhomogeneous mesostructure of DFCs by explicitly generating the platelets. From the integrated analysis, it is found that the fracture energy depends significantly on the structure thickness. It is shown to increase gradually up to 2 mm and saturates after 3 mm to a value of 57.77 N/mm, which is 4.81 times larger than a typical aluminum alloy. Discontinuous Fiber Composites (DFCs) made of chopped fiber platelets offer unique advantages over traditional unidirectional composites. The possibility of manufacturing DFC components by compression molding thanks to the outstanding formability, makes DFCs a highly viable option even for very complex geometries Another interesting feature of DFCs is their mechanical behavior compared to more traditional composites. Recent studies have shown that DFCs tend to exhibit a more pseudo-ductile behavior The foregoing interesting mechanical properties, however, have been shown to be significantly dependent on the material mesostructure and the structure size and geometry. In Similar tests were conducted by Wan and Takahashi They investigated different manufacturing methods such as open, closed mold, and vacuum-bag-only. They found that the manufacturing conditions affect the mechanical performance of DFCs in a substantially different manner compared to continuous fiber composites. For instance, they found that DFCs show little correlation between the void contents and the tensile strength. Leveraging a three-dimensional mesoscale model and experimental tests, Kravchenko et al. In order to shed more light on this critical aspect, this study presents an investigation of the intra-laminar fracture and the size effect in DFCs for four distinct structure thicknesses. The size effect on the structural strength of geometrically-scaled SENT specimens is characterized for each thickness. To capture the size effect and characterize the fracture energy, G f , and the effective length of the fracture process zone, c f , for each thickness, the approach combining equivalent fracture mechanics and stochastic finite element modeling proposed by Ko et al. In previous studies To investigate the effect of the thickness, four different plate thicknesses were investigated: 4.1, 3.3, 2.2, and 1.1 mm. These values are chosen considering typical applications of DFCs. For each thickness, four different geometrically-scaled specimen sizes were investigated with all the dimensions being scaled (Fig. To create a notch, a diamond-coated razor saw of width 0.2 mm was used. We choose to saw the specimens because it prevents the development of the Fracture Process Zone (FPZ) before the tests We tested the specimens using a servo-hydraulic, closed-loop Instron 5585H with 200 kN capacity. To prevent strain rate effects, a 0.2 %/min nominal strain rate calculated as N om = δ/L where δ = displacement from the Instron machine and L = gauge length was used for all the specimens. The load was recorded with a sampling frequency of 10 Hz. In addition, we captured the digital images with a sample rate of 1 Hz using a Nikon D5600 DSLR camera with two lenses: A Nikon AF micro 200 mm and a Sigma 135 mm DG HSM. All the digital images were analyzed using GOM Correlate software We calculated the nominal displacement, u, by taking the relative average displacement between two horizontal lines across the width placed symmetrically with respect to the notch. To scale this nominal displacement with the specimen size, the distance from the notch was chosen to be 1.2 times D. The load and the nominal displacement curves were analyzed after the fracture tests (Fig. Another aspect to notice is the increased scatter of the strength as the structure thickness decreases. For DFCs with 1.1 mm thickness (see Fig. Representative intra-laminar fracture surfaces of the tested specimens are plotted in Figs. Further, the fracture paths and the location of the fracture initiation depend on the structure size and thickness relative to the platelet size. For size-1 (see Figs. In addition to the structure size, the structure thickness also influences the process of fracture initiation and propagation. This is clearly shown in Figs. We define the nominal strength as the failure load, P c , over the gross cross-section: σ N c = P c /Dt where D and t are the specimen width and thickness. The experimental results of the average nominal strength are summarized in Table To capture the scaling of the structural strength in DFC structures weakened by stress-free notches, we combine an equivalent fracture mechanics approach featuring a characteristic length-scale accounting for the finite size of the FPZ and stochastic finite element analysis to account for the random distributions of the platelets To consider the FPZ, an equivalent crack length, a, is defined as the sum of the initial crack length, a 0 (see Fig. Based on Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM), the energy release rate, G can be written as a function of the dimensionless crack length, α = a/D: Here, the nominal stress is σ N = P/Dt where P is the load, D is the specimen width, and t is the specimen thickness, E * is an effective elastic constant, and g is the dimensionless energy release rate which typically accounts for the effects of the geometry on the energy release rate. If the structure is homogeneous, g depends only on the geometry of the structure and takes the same value for geometrically-scaled specimens regardless of the structure size We can rewrite the Eq. ( where the effect of the size D on the dimensionless energy release rate is explicitly introduced. In contrast, t is not introduced in the equation since Eq. ( At incipient failure, G must be equal to the fracture energy, G f , which is assumed to be a material property. Substituting Eq. ( where σ N c is the nominal strength at failure. We further expand Eq. ( Eq. ( where g D (α 0 , D) = ∂g ∂α (α 0 , D). The subscript D corresponds to the partial differentiation with respect to α for a constant structure size D. It is noteworthy that Eq. ( In order to characterize the fracture energy, G f and the effective FPZ length, c f , we need to calculate the dimensionless energy release rate parameters, g(α 0 , D) and g D (α 0 , D). These two parameters are related to a release of elastic energy caused by the creation of new crack surfaces. Due to the inhomogeneous mesostructure, the release of energy is strongly related to two elements in addition to the geometry of the structure: the platelet constitutive properties, and the orientation distribution of the platelets. Therefore, modeling explicitly the distribution of the platelets is key. More details on the algorithm and its implementation can be found in Using the mesostructure generation algorithm, we first investigate the mesoscale morphology of DFCs with respect to the structure thickness. The distributions of the average platelet orientations through the thickness are considered. We generate a size 1 specimen (L = 178, D = 80 mm) for 4 different thicknesses using the same Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) of in-plane platelet orientations. The range of the platelet orientation is -90 • ≤ θ ≤ 90 • . We calculate the average absolute platelet orientations through thickness, θ A , in each partition. Figure The completed mesostructure is now transferred to Abaqus/Standard Especially, for the thickness of 4.1 mm, there is hardly no dependency in g and g D with the size of the structure. This is because for sufficiently large thicknesses spatial distribution of platelets becomes almost uniform, and the in-plane behavior becomes closer and closer to the one of an homogeneous medium. As a result, g and g D do not change for the geometrically-scaled structures. However, the effect of the material inhomogeneity remains strong for the t = 1.1 mm. As can be noted from Fig. To find the fracture properties G f and c f , we combine the experimental results and the stochastic finite element model using Eq. ( Using theses variables, Eq. ( with: Finally, the fracture energy, G f , and the effective size of FPZ, c f , are: Figures As can be noticed, the intra-laminar mode I fracture energy of DFCs are outstanding compared to Al5083, G From Fig. When DFCs contain a sufficient number of platelets, the mesoscale morphology becomes more uniform and the amount of fracture area created in the FPZ tends asymptotically to a limit value, leading to no further changes of G f with increasing plate thickness. This result provides an important index for the engineers who want to optimize the thickness of DFCs. Increasing the thickness of DFCs will not provide a further benefit in terms of the G f after t ∼ 3 mm. For decreasing the thickness, we recommend paying extra attention because the fracture energy starts to drop significantly below t ∼ 2 mm. The effective FPZ size, c f also follows the similar trend. The c f for the thickness of 4.1, 3.3, 2.2, and 1.1 mm are 3.69, 8.67, 3.63, and 1.78 mm respectively. This is an agreement with noticeable quasi-ductile fracturing behavior of thicker DFCs. We can also plot the size effect curves using the experimental values and the finite element modeling results. To do so, the Eq. ( where . The normalized size effect curves are plotted using the following axes: In Fig. As can be noticed, regardless of all the explored thicknesses, DFCs show a strong size effect. Additionally, the experimental data clearly show a transition from stress-driven to energy-driven failure. This transition can be explained by considering the relative size of the FPZ compared with the structure size. The relative size of the FPZ, which is a material property, increases as the structure size decreases. Therefore, the nonlinear effect induced by the micro-damage in front of the crack-tip becomes non-negligible. For sufficiently small structures, the effect is so significant to cause a strong deviation from the LEFM. On the other hand, the effect of the FPZ is reduced as the structure size increases and the size effect is well captured by the LEFM. The characteristic size of the FPZ, c f , increases with the range of thickness tested in this study (see Table Based on the foregoing observations, we can conclude that the strong quasibrittleness must be taken carefully when we design the DFC structures with sharp notches or defects. Neither traditional LEFM nor strength-criteria has the capability to precisely extrapolate the structural strength from the tested specimens, most of which belong to the transitional zone. When estimating the strength of larger structures, LEFM significantly underestimates the strength whereas strength-criteria overestimates it. If we continuously adapt LEFM in designing of DFC structures, the underestimations of strength capability may hinder the possible applications of DFCs in engineering applications. Therefore, a proper model equipped with a characteristic length scale such as SEL or other equivalent models must be utilized to capture the quasibrittleness of DFCs. Another useful parameter to compare the fracturing behavior of a structure is called a brittleness number, β However, after reaching the thickness of 3.3 mm, we observe a slight increase in the β. This is in fact the β is a function of c f which estimates the size of the fracture process zone. Irwin Combining experiments and stochastic finite element modeling, this work studied the fracturing behavior and scaling effect of Discontinuous Fiber Composite (DFC) structures with different thicknesses. The following conclusions are drawn based on the results of this study: 1. The experimental results on geometrically-scaled Single Edge Notch Tension specimens of four distinct thicknesses showed a significant size effect on the nominal strength of DFC structures. For a given thickness, smaller specimens exhibited a pronounced pseudo-ductile fracture behavior with minimum scaling effect. In contrast, when the size of the specimen was sufficiently large, the scaling of the nominal strength approached Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM) asymptotically and fracture occurred in a very brittle manner; 2. The transition from pseudo-ductile to brittle fracture with an increasing specimen size is related to the development of a significant Fracture Process Zone (FPZ) whose dimensions were found to be comparable to the platelet size. In the FPZ, signicant non-linear deformations due to sub-critical damage mechanisms, such as platelet delamination, matrix microcracking, and platelet splitting/fracture, promote strain redistribution and mitigate the intensity of the stress field induced by the crack/notch. This phenomenon is more pronounced for small structures since the size of a fully-developed FPZ is typically a material property and thus its influence on the structural behavior becomes increasingly significant as the structure size is reduced. For sufficiently large structures, the size of the FPZ becomes negligible compared to the structure's characteristic size in agreement with the inherent assumption of the LEFM that non-linear effects are negligible during the fracturing process; 3. A significant effect of the thickness was also found on the nominal strength of DFC structures and its Coefficient of Variation (CoV). For a given specimen size, thinner specimens tended to fracture in a relatively brittle way with the nominal strength being closer to LEFM compared to thicker specimens. At the same time, the scatter of the experimental data increased with decreasing thickness from values in the order of 9.31% for a thickness of 4.1 mm to 21.26% for a thickness of 1.1 mm for the size 1 specimens; 4. The highest scatter of the tests on thinner specimens was confirmed by the analysis of the fracture morphology. For a given specimen size, the fracture process in thick DFCs was mostly driven by the FPZ developing at the notch tip. In contrast, the fracture of thin specimens was often initiated far from the notch, showing that failure was driven by random weak spots in the material rather than the notch. This phenomenon is related to the average number of platelets through the thickness: when this number is low, the probability of having weak spots with platelets that are not favorably oriented with respect to the load increases if one assumes the distribution mechanism of platelets is not affected by the thickness. This was clearly showed in this work by numerical simulations that reported a shift of the PDF of average platelet orientation through the thickness towards larger angles compared to the load axis with decreasing thickness; 5. To investigate the effect of the plate thickness on the fracture energy, G f , and the effective length of the fracture process zone, c f , the approach combining equivalent fracture mechanics and stochastic finite element modeling proposed in 7. For all the thicknesses investigated in this work, the analysis of the fracture tests highlighted outstanding fracture energy of DFCs, from 2.9 to 5.3 times larger than the one of a typical Al5083 or a Quasi-Isotropic laminate made from the same prepregs for the platelet size investigated in this work. This result is particularly interesting in view of a possible use of DFCs for crashworthiness applications; The critical investigation of the foregoing results can pave the way for the development of novel strategies for the tuning of the fracturing behavior leveraging the DFC mesostructural morphology. partitions. This partition size is chosen based on a balance between accuracy and computational cost for the given platelet size The platelet information (e.g. platelet orientation) is then saved for each partition within the boundary of the platelet. Besides simulating the random in-plane distributions of the platelets, it is also important to capture the local thickness variations. For DFCs, the local thickness is a spatial random variable. We found that the CoV for the average platelets through the thickness (∼ 24) was 0.22 To match the foregoing morphological information, we control the platelet generation following specific rules. First, a platelet-limit zone is created to limit the deposition of the platelets at certain partitions. If the number of platelets in the partitions reaches μ (1 + CoV) with μ = desired average number of platelets, the limit zone is assigned to reject further depositions. Second, the platelet generation process is subdivided into multiple stages called saturation steps. At each saturation step, the CoV is enforced on the current system of platelets. An example of a completed mesostructure with the target average platelets through thickness equals to 24 is shown in Fig. where δ is the equilibrium displacement, t is the thickness, and Π is the potential energy of the structure. In the Abaqus/Standard The reaction force, P as well as the Π are recorded. 10 different lengths of cracks are simulated for each structure. The size of a crack increment is equal to the size of the partition divided by 20. This results in ∆α ≈ 0.008 for D = 6.5 mm. In a previous study Al f = 12.0 N/mm and even to the QI laminate composite, G * Averaged FE simulation results of each thicknesses.