This paper proposes a noise insulation cavity composed of two parallel plates and a micro-perforated plate insertion parallel to the plates, which divides the cavity between the plates into two parts. A theoretical model was established that takes into account of all the couplings among the major parts of the structure, namely the two solid plates, the perforated plate, and the air cavity, together with the simply support boundary conditions. Numerical calculations were performed with different parameters of the micro-perforated plate including its position, perforation ratio, plate thickness, and hole diameters. The calculations indicated that the proposed double-panel structure with a micro-perforated plate insertion exhibited significant improvements in the sound transmission loss (STL) in certain frequency range as compared to a double-or triple-panel structure without a micro-perforated plate. Below 200 Hz the improvement in STL is mainly due to the weakening of the resonances by the energy dissipation of the perforated plate, while in the medium to high frequency range the STL enhancement is mostly due to the dissipation by the perforated plate in the broad frequency band. The theoretical results are in good agreement with the experimental results. A double-panel, or double-leaf structure is an air layer sealed between two plates. Given the high sound transmission loss (STL) characteristics, the structure is widely used in aviation, automobiles, trains, machinery, etc. A micro-perforated plate is a good sound-absorbing device. It was first proposed by This study deals with the STL of a sound blocking structure composed of a finite-sized double-plate with micro-perforated plates (DPMPP) inserted in between. The above-mentioned aspects are all included in the theoretical model. The paper is divided in the following sections. Section 0 introduces the theoretical model for calculating the STL of the structure. Section 3 describes the experiment for validating the theoretical model. Based on the coupling model proposed in Section 0, Section 4 compares the effect of the micro-perforated plate parameters on the sound insulation performance. Figure For the incidence panel: For the MPP: For the radiation panel: E is the Young's modulus; μ is the Poisson's ratio, and p(x,y,z,t) is the pressure response in the cavity. In the above equations, the fluid loadings on the outside of both the panels are ignored, because it was found that fluid loading effects are absent even for the cases of a rubber membrane only 0.2 mm thick(Z. For cavity I: For the cavity II: where δ(x-x 0 ) denotes the Dirac delta function, c denotes the speed of sound, ρ 0 denotes the air density, and v MPP (x,y,t) denotes the normal velocity of the MPP. It is assumed that the distance between the MPP holes is significantly shorter than the acoustic wavelengths, and the particle velocity at the MPP surface is modified by the fluid flow velocity v h through the holes. Net particle velocity v MPP formed by combining the normal velocity of the MPP ṽ MPP and the fluid motion velocity v h is expressed as follows where σ denotes the perforation ratio, or the fraction area of the holes. Particle velocity v h is expressed in terms of the pressure difference of the cavities at its position and the acoustic impedance Z MPP as follows: Acoustic impedance of the MPP Z MPP for a circular hole with diameter d and length t h (thickness of the MPP) that are much smaller than the acoustic wavelength is given by Maa as follows where η denotes the viscosity coefficient of air, and k h denotes the ratio that is √2 times the small-hole radius ( 2 / 2 d ) over the viscous boundary layer thickness ( 2/  ) and is expressed as follows: where μ = η/ρ 0 is the kinematic viscosity. The displacement of the panel is expanded in terms of the structural modal shape φ n as follows: The solutions under the simply supported boundary condition are where the superscript "cavity" represents either cavity I or cavity II. In equations ( For the incidence panel: For the MPP: For the radiation panel: For cavity I: For cavity II: In the above equations, ξ j denotes the modal damping ratio of the jth mode, ζ j denotes the jth modal factor of the cavity, M j denotes the jth modal mass of the panels, and P IN j denotes the amplitude of the jth modal pressure. Additionally, C jn denotes the modal coupling coefficient characterizing the coupling strength between the jth structural or acoustic mode and nth acoustic mode. Equations ( x , where x is the number of truncated modalities . The modalities are combined into a group of linear equations as follows: The coupled algebraic equation ( The sound power transmitted by the radiation plate is given as follows: where p trans denotes the sound pressure radiated by the radiation panel on its surface. It is expressed in terms of v RE using Rayleigh's integral representation of radiated pressure. The TL of the system is obtained as follows: where τ denotes the power transmission ratio that is the ratio of transmitted power Π trans to incident power Π inc. This is expressed as follows: The model proposed in the preceding section is validated based on the aforementioned assumptions and simplifications. Therefore, to confirm the assumptions and simplifications and investigate the possibility of the practical applications by employing MPP and the air-cavity-subdivision technique, experiments were performed using a rigid box using heavy and rigid boards. The experimental set-up is shown in Figure As the sound field in the transmission side is now confined within a rigid box of finite size, the formula for sound power in semi-infinite space in Eq. ( In the actual experiments, the sound field at 24 positions inside the box was averaged. The experimental data agree well with the theoretical results and suggest that the coupled model is effective for predicting the general acoustical properties of the DPMPP. At frequencies below 250 Hz, the theoretical curve matches well with the experimental. In particular, the experimental frequency of the first resonant mode, which is manifested as a STL dip around 170 Hz, is in good agreement with the one predicted by theory. The STL peak near 140 Hz is due to the anti-resonance of the plates with surface averaged displacement close to zero The above trend observed by experiments is reproduced correctly by the theory. As seen in Fig. Having established the advantage of MPP in enhancing STL in the double panel structure, we now numerically investigate further the effects of the MPP on the STL with different MPP positions and structural parameters. An MPP with a thickness of 0.25 mm is inserted in the double panel. The other geometrical parameters of these panels are listed in Table When ζ is equal to 50%, the MPP is located at equal distance to the incident and radiation panels, which is the case in the previous chapter. When the value is less than 50%, the MPP is closer to the incident panel. When the value exceeds 50%, the MPP is closer to the radiation panel. Due to transmission reciprocity, only the variation of ζ between 0 and 50% is considered here. The cases for a normal plate of the same thickness as the MPP in replacement of the MPP in the cavity (triple-panel) are also studied for comparison. Figure The cases where a normal plate of the same thickness as the MPP is in place for the MPP are also investigated, and the results are shown in Here we discusses the effect of the perforation ratio on the STL of the DPMPP with ζ fixed at 50%. An MPP or a normal plate of thickness 0.25 mm is inserted in the middle of the double panel. The STL spectra of a triple-panel and with a DPMPP structure with various MPP perforation ratios are shown in Fig. Next we discusses the effect of the hole diameter of the MPP on the TL of DPMPP. The MPP is located in the middle position between the incident and the radiation plates. The perforation rate and the position of the MPP were kept constant, while changing the micro-pore diameter. As shown in Fig. Similar to the cases in the previous section, the averaged normal displacement of the MPP in the DPMPP is significantly smaller than the solid plate in the triple-panel structure. The reasons for such phenomenon are much the same as the ones in the previous section. In the work, the sound transmission loss improvement by the introduction of a micro perforated plate in a cavity formed by two normal plates is systematically investigated. An analytical model that takes into account of the full coupling of the major components of the double-panel micro perforation plate structure, namely the two panels of the air cavity, the air in the cavity, and the perforation plate, has been developed, and tested by experimental results. The experiment verifies the validity and reliability of the theoretical model using a reverberation box. The improvement in the transmission loss at low frequencies is significant when compared to the cases without the MPP, and when the MPP is replaced by a normal solid plate of the same thickness as the MPP. The major findings are summarized below: 1) When the MPP is placed in the middle of the cavity, the STL in the medium and high frequencies is improved, and the first-order resonance of the structure is suppress when it is set on one side. 2) The STL of the structure at low frequencies increases with the increase of the perforation rate of the MPP and the diameter of the small hole, whereas the effects of the perforation rate and diameter of the small hole are not evident at high frequencies. 3) The displacement of the MPP skeleton can be ignored in the frequency range below about 600 Hz, while it is comparable to a solid plate of the same thickness in the high frequency range. The results obtained in the present study can aid researchers in designing a high-performance multi-layer structure that uses an MPP to improve the low-frequency sound insulation performance of conventional multi-plate structures and acoustic metamaterials.