Appearance of strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC) is apparent in ternary equiatomic compounds with 5d-electrons due to the large atomic radii of transition metals. SOC plays a significant role in the emergence of unconventional superconductivity. Here we examined the superconducting state of HfIrSi using magnetization, specific heat, zero and transverse-field (ZF/TF) muon spin relaxation/rotation (μSR) measurements. Superconductivity is observed at TC = 3.6 K as revealed by specific heat and magnetization measurements. From the TF-μSR analysis it is clear that superfluid density well described by an isotropic BCS type s-wave gap structure. Furthermore, from TF-μSR data we have also estimated the superconducting carrier density ns = 6.6 ×10 26 m -3 , London penetration depth λL(0) = 259.59 nm and effective mass m * = 1.57 me. Our zero-field muon spin relaxation data indicate no clear sign of spontaneous internal field below TC, which implies that the time-reversal symmetry is preserved in HfIrSi. Theoretical investigation suggests Hf and Ir atoms hybridize strongly along the c-axis of the lattice, which is responsible for the strong three-dimensionality of this system which screens the Coulomb interaction. As a result despite the presence of correlated d-electrons in this system, the correlation effect is weakened, promoting electron-phonon coupling to gain importance. In recent years, ternary silicides and phosphides have drawn considerable attention due to their unusual superconducting properties 111-based ternary compounds T rT X crystallizes in two type of layered structures: (a) the hexagonal Fe 2 Ptype (space group P 6m2), A polycrystalline sample of HfIrSi was prepared by melting stoichiometric amounts of high purity Hf, Ir, and Si in a water-cooled arc furnace. To obtain the target phase the as cast ingot was overturned and remelted several times. The sample was annealed in a sealed quartz tube for 168 hrs at 1273 K. The sample HfIrSi was characterized using a conventional X-ray diffractometer with CuK α radiation. Magnetic susceptibility measurements were performed using magnetic property measurement system (MPMS) in a temperature range of 2.0-5.0 K in an applied magnetic fields. Specific heat measurements were performed by an adiabatic heat-pulse method down to 0.3 K using a commercial HfIrSi crystallizes in the orthorhombic structure with space group P nma (No. 62) Fig. 1(d) shows the temperature dependence of the electronic specific heat C e , obtained by subtracting the In order to investigate the nature of the pairing mechanism and the superconducting gap structure of HfIrSi compound, we performed ZF-and TF-μSR measurements. The TF-μSR asymmetry spectra above and below T C are shown in the Figs. where f = [1 + exp(-E/k B T )] -1 is the Fermi function and ∆ i (T, 0) = ∆ 0,i δ(T /T C )g(φ). The temperature variation of the superconducting gap is approximated by the with a typical value of μ * = 0.13, give λ e-ph = 0.5685. As HfIrSi is a type II superconductor, supposing that approximately all the normal states carriers (n e ) contribute to the superconductivity (n s ≈ n e ), the magnetic penetration depth λ, superconducting carrier density n s , the effective-mass enhancement m * have been estimated to be λ L (0) = 259.59 nm, n s = 6.605 × 10 26 carriers m -3 , and m * = 1.577m e respectively, for HfIrSi. ZF-μSR were used to check for the presence of any hidden magnetic ordering in HfIrSi. Fig. The ZF-μSR data well described using a damped Gaussian Kubo-Toyabe (KT) function, where 2 )], is known as the Gaussian Kubo-Toyabe function, A 3 is the zero field asymmetry of the sample signal, A bg is the background signal, σ KT and λ μ are the muon spin relaxation rates due to randomly oriented nuclear moments (the local field distribution width H μ = σ/γ μ , with muon gyromagnetic ratio γ μ /2π = 135.53 MHz/T. The fitting parameters A 3 , A bg and σ KT are found to be temperature independent. There is no noticeable change between the relaxation rates at 4.0 K (≥ T C ) and 0.1 K (≤ T C ). Fits to the ZF-μSR asymmetry data using Eq. 4 and shown by the solid lines in Fig. In this section we focus upon the Uemura classification scheme ), determined from μSR measurements of the superconducting penetration depth. Within this scheme strongly correlated "exotic" superconductors, i.e. high T C cuprates, heavy fermions and organic materials, all lie within a particular part of the diagram, which is indicative of a degree of universal scaling HfIrSi belongs to the P nma(62) space group and possess the orthorhombic crystal system with the mmm point group symmetry. We use Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) for density-functional theory (DFT) electronic structure calculations. The projected augmented wave (PAW) pseudo-potentials are used to describe the core electrons, and Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional is used for the exchange-correlation potential. Cut-off energy for plane wave basis set is used to be 500 eV. The Monkhorst-Pack k-mesh is set to 14 × 14 × 14 in the Brillouin zone for the self-consistent calculation. We obtained the relaxed lattice parameters as a = 3.944 Å, b = 6.499 Å, c = 7.376 Å and α = β = γ = 90 • . To deal with the strong correlation effect of the d-electrons of the Ir atoms, we employed LDA+U method with U = 2.8 eV. For the Fermi surface and density of states calculations, we have used a larger k-mesh of 31 × 31 × 31. We repeat the calculation with SOC and find no considerable change in the low-energy spectrum. Due to the involvement of the strongly correlated transition metals as well as possible SOC, one may anticipate superconductivity to be exotic in this material. However, the observation of conventional, time-reversal invariant superconductivity leads to an essential question: how does the phonon mediated attractive potential win over the strong Coulomb interaction to form conventional superconductivity. To address this point, we investigate the DFT band structure as shown in Fig. We have presented the magnetization, heat capacity, ZF and TF-μSR measurements in the normal and superconducting states of HfIrSi, which crystallizes in the orthorhombic crystal structure. Our magnetization and heat-capacity measurements confirmed bulk superconductivity in this material with T C = 3.6 K. From the TF-μSR we have determined the muon depolarization rate in the field cooled mode associated with the vortex lattice. The temperature dependence of σ sc is better fit by an isotropic s-wave gap model than a dwave model. The value of 2∆(0)/k B T C = 3.38 obtained from the s-wave gap fit, suggests a weak-coupling BCS type superconductivity in HfIrSi. The ZF-μSR measurements reveal no sign of spontaneous field appearing below the superconducting transition temperature which suggests that time-reversal symmetry is preserved below T C . Theoretical investigation suggests Hf and Ir atoms hybridize strongly along the c-axis of the lattice, which is responsible for the strong three-dimensionality of this system which screens the Coulomb interaction. As a result despite the presence of correlated d-electrons in this systems, the correlation effect is weakened, promoting electron-phonon coupling to gain importance. To date, a large number of equiatomic ternary metal compounds have been discovered with high superconducting transition temperatures and high critical magnetic fields, but μSR investigations have been carried out just on a few compounds. The present study will provide an invaluable comparison for the future μSR investigations on these families of compounds. The present results will help to develop a realistic theoretical model including the role of strong spin-orbital coupling to understand the origin of superconductivity in HfIrSi and also may help us to arrive at an empirical criterion for the occurrence of superconductivity with strong SOC and high T c and H c2 in other equiatomic ternary systems.