We explore the effect of local constraints on one-dimensional bosonic and fermionic ground state phases. Motivated by recent experiments on Rydberg chains, we constrain the occupation of neighboring sites in known phases of matter. Starting from Kitaev's topological superconductor wire, we find that a soft constraint induces a stable gapless Luttinger liquid phase. While Luttinger and Fermi liquids are usually unstable to superconducting proximity effects, the constraint suppresses pair creations, allowing for an emergent U (1) symmetry and gaplessness. We substantiate this intuitive picture using field theoretical and Bethe ansatz methods. In particular, in the hard constraint limit, the model is explicitly U (1)-symmetric and integrable. For the corresponding spin-1/2 chains related by a Jordan-Wigner transformation, the Luttinger liquid is stabilized by the Z2 spin flip symmetry. Longer-range constraints stabilize gapless phases even without Z2 symmetry, connecting to the seminal work by Fendley, Sengupta and Sachdev [Physical Review B 69, 075106 (2004)], clarifying how the gapless floating phase observed therein can be vastly extended. Introduction.-Locality is a basic tenet of many-body quantum theory, often accompanied by the Hilbert space being a tensor product of smaller spaces (e.g., qubits). Imposing local constraints gives rise to low-energy effective Hilbert spaces which need not have a tensor product structure, and such constrained models have a rich history. The archetypal example is water ice In recent years, there has been a surge of interest in the one-dimensional setting with quantum simulators made of cold Rydberg atoms Our motivation is to study the possible structure of general ground state phase diagrams. In particular, what phases can be realized given certain symmetries? How to characterize them? Is the classification in terms of symmetry-breaking and symmetry-protected topological (SPT) phases? Such questions have only recently been answered in the unconstrained case To appreciate the precarious nature of gaplessness, consider H =i c † i c i+1 + h.c. , the simplest Luttinger liquid (i.e. a one-dimensional Fermi liquid). Its dispersion is ε k = -2 cos k, hence its Fermi surface/points are at k F = ±π/2. This model is susceptible to so-called charge-densitywave (CDW) and superconducting (SC) instabilities. These involve the repulsion between two bands, opening up a gap at the Fermi points. The CDW instability entails breaking translation symmetry, allowing c k to couple to c k+π . The SC instability entails breaking U (1) symmetry, allowing particles (c † k ) to couple to holes (c -k ). We hence need translation and U (1) symmetries to stabilize the gapless phase. Note that the SC instability leads to the well-known Kitaev chain This Hamiltonian forms a gapped topological phase protected by the Z 2 fermionic parity symmetry and consequently exhibits Majorana edge modes In our work, we add the soft ('Rydberg') constraint U i n i n i+1 to the Kitaev chain. For large U , a stable Luttinger liquid (LL) emerges despite the Hamiltonian not being U (1)-symmetric. This can be understood intuitively: if the density of particles is not too dilute, pair fluctuations come with a penalty cost ∼ U ; their suppression leads to an emergent U (1) symmetry at low energies. More quantitatively, in the strong-coupling limit U → ∞, the effective Hamiltonian in the constrained Hilbert space coincides with a known U (1)symmetric, integrable model While we focus on the fermionic context, particle statistics are not a key player in one dimension: the Jordan-Wigner transformation allows to equivalently discuss spin-1/2 models (listed in Appendix A). One key difference in the spin chain language is that the Z 2 spin flip symmetry-which corresponds to the fermionic parity symmetry stabilizing the LLcan be broken (either spontaneously or explicitly). However, we show that longer-range constraints give rise to regions where the LL parameter K < 1/8, implying stability without Z 2 symmetry. For constraints on nearest and next-to-nearest neighbors, the phase is very narrow in the phase diagram, consistent with observations by Fendley, Sengupta and Sachdev In addition to showing the ubiquity of stable Luttinger liquids in constrained systems, we touch upon the issue of what other phases of matter can be realized in constrained Hilbert spaces. In particular, we numerically study the effect of terms that break U (1) and translation symmetry. For weak perturbations, we confirm the stability of the LL. For strong perturbations, various distinct topological and symmetry-breaking phases emerge. Constraining the Kitaev and Ising chain.-Starting from the Kitaev chain with a chemical potential, we energetically introduce a soft constraint: Figure For finite U , we see a large gapless phase which is entered by a Berezinski ǐ-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition We mention in passing that the spin-1 /2 chain corresponding to H soft is the transverse-field Ising chain with a soft constraint. Interestingly, using a nonlocal (Kramers-Wannier) transformation, this spin chain can be mapped onto the axial/anisotropic next-nearest neighbor Ising (ANNNI) chain. This mapping is also nonlocal in parameter space, e.g. mapping the U → ∞ limit onto a single ('multiphase') point. Hence, H soft puts the ANNNI model in a new light. For example, H soft having a gapless phase for g = 0 (numerically observed in Fig. where P i = 1n i projects onto an empty site. (This may be dubbed the PXXP model, akin to the PXP model The superconducting terms have disappeared! This is because they would violate the constraint. Remarkably, this model is known to be integrable and a LL for -2 ≤ g ≤ 1 (see Appendix C for the complete effective Hamiltonian at this order). However, we now show that these terms do not destroy the U (1) symmetry at low energies: the gapless phase is robust for -2 ≤ g 0.0697. This stability can be understood from the Luttinger liquid parameter K. A defining characteristic of K is that it is the inverse of the scaling dimension of pair creation. Hence, if K < 1/2, superconducting fluctuations have a scaling dimension larger than two and are thus irrelevant in the renormalization group flow. From the Bethe ansatz solution of Eq. ( This is plotted in Fig. For -2 ≤ g < 1 /2 soft . The dashed line separates the region where K ≤ 1 /2. The black dot denotes where this line crosses g = 0. The three arrows indicate values of K in the constrained limit U → ∞ (for g = -2, 0.0697 and 1; see Fig. The model also avoids the CDW instability. It can be shown that K = (1ρ 0 ) 2 , where ρ 0 is the ground state filling In summary, the effective model ( A nearby integrable model with soft constraint.-In the previous section, we saw that in the U → ∞ limit of Eq. ( In the constrained limit U → ∞, this leads to the same effective Hamiltonian as before! In other words, soft for large U . In particular, whenever H soft is a Luttinger liquid phase with K < 1 /2 (with appreciable values of U ), we can expect H soft to be critical. FIG. U (1) soft with U (1)-breaking terms, we expect the region with K < 1 /2 to remain gapless. This indeed qualitatively matches the gapless phase of H soft in Fig. Stability in the spin chain language through longer-range constraints.-The above demonstrated the stability of LLs in fermionic chains. However, in the hardcore boson/spin chains obtained by a Jordan-Wigner transformation, single-particle fluctuations can occur. These are considerably more effective at opening gaps: their scaling dimension is 1 /4K, which is relevant whenever K > 1 /8. There are two ways out of this instability: either we enforce the Z 2 parity symmetry by hand, or we introduce stronger constraints; we explore the latter. A natural way of suppressing single-particle fluctuations is by penalizing two particles within a distance C (until now C = 1). One can then think of each particle as effectively extending over C + 1 sites. If the density is not too dilute, there will be no more room for single-particle fluctuations. Such generalized constraints are softly implemented by the term U i C r=1 n i n i+r . Adding this to the Kitaev or Ising chain and taking U → ∞ gives us a generalization of Eq. ( where the projector P (C) i = P i • • • P i+C-1 ensures that we remain in the constrained Hilbert space. Remarkably, this model is integrable for any value of C There is a BKT transition into a topological phase at λBKT ≈ 0.21 and an Ising transition at λIsing ≈ 0.97, beyond which translation symmetry is spontaneously broken. For λ = 1, we have the longerrange Kitaev chain in the constrained Hilbert space. (b) Phase diagram for H δ in Eq. ( the relationship between K and g (For C = 1, this reduces to Eq. ( For C = 2, we can make a conceptual connection with the work of Fendley, Sengupta and Sachdev U (1)-breaking and dimerization in the nearest-neighborconstrained Hilbert space.-Above we have shown how constraints can stabilize a LL against perturbations that break U (1), Z 2 and translation symmetry. In this last part, we explore what phases are realized when making such perturbations strong. This touches upon the question of what phases of matter can be stabilized in constrained Hilbert spaces. As our starting point, we use H hard in Eq. (3) (i.e. C = 1). In the unconstrained case, breaking the U (1) symmetry of the fermionic chain yields a topological phase (a symmetrybreaking phase in the spin chain). Alternatively, introducing bond-alternation forms a symmetry-protected topological phase: the so-called Su-Schrieffer-Heeger chain in the fermionic case First, we perturb H hard with U (1)-breaking terms: where H K is the second-nearest-neighbor Kitaev chain and P is the projector onto the constrained Hilbert space; such a term is perturbatively generated in 1/U . The phase diagram obtained with iDMRG is shown in Fig. Secondly, we introduce bond-alternation to H hard at g = 0: We know that the LL is stable for small enough δ (see Fig. Conclusion.-In this work we have elucidated how soft and hard constraints in one-dimensional systems can give rise to emergent U (1) symmetry and gaplessness without fine-tuning. Experimentally verifying and exploring these gapless phases-including the longer-range constraints-is within reach A natural question is whether the same principle might also help to stabilize, e.g., Fermi liquids in higher dimensions. Or staying in one spatial dimension, one could explore larger symmetry groups and, relatedly, central charges c > 1. An important open problem is the classification of phases in the constrained Hilbert space. Above, we have discussed how any unconstrained phase can be trivially realized in the constrained Hilbert space by breaking translation symmetry. It is natural to explore realizations that preserve translation symmetry. More exotically, might there be phases that can only be realized and stabilized in constrained Hilbert spacesmuch like how enforcing symmetry vastly expanded the zoo of one-dimensional phases of matter then we obtain We thus see that the model is equivalent to the ANNNI model (where we have used its traditional parametrization). This mapping allows us to plot the phase diagram in Fig. , where the generator of the U (1) symmetry is ∝ i Xi Xi+1 .) Despite the (soft-)constrained model in the main text mapping to the ANNNI model, there are two important differences in the representation of these models, with distinct physical consequences. Firstly, they are related by a non-local (Kramers-Wannier) transformation. Hence, whereas the model in the main text has emergent U (1) symmetries whose charges are local, the gapless phase in the ANNNI model has a non-local U (1) symmetry. (More precisely, its generator is an matrix product operator, and operators with the smallest possible charge are non-local string operators.) Conceptually, this makes the model in the main text (and its phenomenology, such a stable gapless phases) arguably easier to understand. Quantitatively, it for example affects the oscillations of the correlation functions: in the model in the main text, the X i X j correlation functions do not have (sign-changing) oscillations. For the corresponding ANNNI model, however, the Xi Xj correlations (in addition to having a different scaling dimension), pick up large oscillations determined by the k F wavevector. (Relatedly, the values of K shown in Fig. Secondly, the parameters in the Hamiltonian are also non-locally related. In particular, the interesting and integrable limit U → ∞ with g finite, is mapped to a single point of the ANNNI phase diagram: Γ = 0 and κ = 1 /2. This is yet another way in which the model of the main text is easier to analyze than the ANNNI model. In particular, there are two hotly-debated questions about the ANNNI model which are straightforwardly addressed in terms of the model of the main text: 1. Does the gapless phase of the ANNNI model have a finite extent at κ = 1 /2? This is equivalent to asking whether the model of the main text is gapless for g = 0 and U large. We answered this in the positive by first using Bethe ansatz to show that the U → ∞ limit is gapless, and subsequently arguing that this is stable for finite (but large) U due to K < 1 /2. Moreover, we numerically found that for g = 0, the model was gapless for U 50; this means that the ANNNI model is gapless for κ = 1 /2 and Γ 0.04. 2. Does the PM phase reach Γ → 0? A perturbative calculation around the Γ = 0 and κ = 1/2 limit seemingly proved that the PM phase terminates at a finite value of Γ 