Mechanical properties of a nanomechanical resonator have a significant impact on the performance of a resonant Nano-electromechanical system (NEMS) device. Here we study the mechanical properties of suspended membranes fabricated out of low-pressure chemical vapor deposited silicon nitride thin films. Doubly-clamped membranes of silicon nitride with thickness less than 50 nm and length varying from 5 μm to 60 μm were fabricated. The elastic modulus and stress in the suspended membranes were measured using Atomic Force Microscope (AFM)-based nanomechanical spectroscopy. The elastic modulus of the suspended membranes was found to be significantly higher than those of corresponding thin films on the substrate. A reduction in the net stress after the fabrication of suspended membrane was observed and is explained by estimating the contributions of thermal stress and intrinsic stress. We establish a mathematical model to calculate the normalized elastic modulus of a suspended membrane. Lastly, we study the capillary force-gradient between the SiNx suspended membrane-Si substrate that could collapse the suspended membrane. frequency of a doubly-clamped membrane resonator depends on its elastic modulus and stress as given below. ( where E is the elastic modulus, σ is the stress in the suspended membrane, ρ is the density of the material, m is the effective mass, L, w and t are the length, width and thickness of the suspended membrane respectively. Verbridge et al. For thin films grown on substrate, depending on the growth conditions, the mechanical properties can vary significantly from that of the bulk material. And thermal stress is the result of thermal expansion coefficient mismatch between the film and the substrate material. In this paper, first we describe the fabrication of silicon nitride suspended membranes. Then we explain the measurement techniques used to calculate the elastic modulus and stress in the SiNx suspended membranes and corresponding values on substrate thin films. The stress in the suspended membranes is studied based on relaxation of stress in the corresponding on substrate thin films. While the variation of elastic modulus with the thickness of the suspended membrane is analyzed using a model based on surface-energy considerations. In the end, the capillary force-gradient between the suspended membrane and bottom substrate is modeled based on the force-separation curves for the collapse of suspended membranes. LPCVD process was used to deposit silicon nitride films of thickness 47 nm, 51 nm and 88 nm on a Si/SiO2 substrate. The fabrication process of doubly-clamped membranes is illustrated in figure where E is the elastic modulus of the suspended membrane, σ is the stress in the suspended membrane, δ is the deformation in the suspended membrane, L, W and t are the length, width and thickness of the suspended membrane. The coefficients of δ and δ terms in equation (2) include elastic modulus and stress. The elastic modulus and stress values were obtained after fitting the Force vs. Deformation curve to the experimentally observed data. For each thickness of the suspended membranes, the elastic modulus and stress measurements were performed on three different membranes of 5 μm length. For comparison with suspended membranes, the elastic modulus of the silicon nitride thin films on Si/SiO2 substrate was measured. We use the nanoindentation where σ is the thermal stress in the film. E , α and θ are the elastic modulus, coefficient of thermal expansion and Poisson's ratio of the SiNx film material. α is the coefficient of thermal expansion of the substrate material. ∆T is the difference between the deposition temperature and room temperature. For calculations, the measured value of E using nanoindentation method was used and average values of α = 3.2 × 10 / • C (for SiNx) and α = 0.65 × 10 / • C (for SiO2) were considered. The elastic modulus, net stress, thermal stress, and intrinsic stress of the films on substrate are given in Table GPa. The LPCVD process-parameters were same for all three films except for the gas flow ratio (NH3: H2Cl2Si). For the 51 nm thick film, the gas flow ratio was 10:100 while for the other two films the ratio was 10:70. Increasing the gas flow ratio from 1:2 to 1:20 for nitrogenrich LPCVD SiNx films has a negligible effect on the residual stress. While for the 88 nm thick film, thermal stress was about 30% of the total stress due to its higher elastic modulus. The thickness of suspended membranes (Table A high value of ∆t also indicates that that a large fraction of the highly-stressed region at the bottom of SiNx film on substrate is etched during the fabrication of suspended membrane. The values of ∆t are 0.83, 0.42, and 0.49 for the on-substrate films of thickness 47 nm, 51 nm and 88 nm respectively. It can be observed from Table This implies that most of the highly stressed regions of the 47 nm thick SiNx film near the substrate were etched after fabrication of the suspended membrane. Hence, there was a drastic reduction in stress from 1.432 GPa (for 47 nm thick on substrate film) to 242 MPa (for 8 nm thick suspended membrane). The thermal stress in the 88 nm thick film was about six times higher than that in the 51 nm thick film (Table From Table The 30 nm thick suspended membrane had the highest elastic modulus of 222 GPa. We expect that the calculated elastic moduli of the suspended membranes are slightly overestimated. The two main reasons for this are the surface effects and offset of the tip from the center of the suspended membrane during the indentation. In AFM based indentation methods, repulsive interaction forces between the tip and surface of the specimen leads to a value of elastic modulus higher than the one obtained from nanoindentation techniques. The trend in the values of elastic modulus is difficult to understand as it is not monotonic. Hence, the elastic modulus of suspended membranes was further investigated using and approach that is similar to the one followed by Fedorchenko et al. where θ is the Poisson's ratio of the film = 0.3 (assumed), E is the bulk elastic modulus of the film material, ε is the film strain. Table Curve fitting yields a value of 0.27 ± 0.06 for p. The fitted curve is shown in figure Hence, the dynamics of pull-in of the suspended membranes is governed by viscous damping. The net relaxation of the AFM cantilever in the region R (figure While for the 60 μm long suspended membrane, the cantilever relaxed completely before the pull-in process was completed and then lost contact with the suspended membrane. As a result of the small gap, capillary condensation occurred between the AFM cantilever and the suspended membrane that is now attached to the substrate (stage (iv) in figure In all the three suspended membranes, the piezo moves down in Z direction and the tip presses down on the hard SiNx on Si substrate after the pull-in of suspended membrane is over. During this process, only the AFM cantilever is deflected and that is why an infinite slope is observed in the force-separation curves. The cantilever continues to deflect until the force setpoint is reached (stage (v) and (vi) in figure A suspended membrane collapses when the sum of capillary force gradient and stiffness of suspended membrane becomes zero as given in equation ( where, is the capillary adhesion force-gradient, K is the stiffness of the suspended membrane and h is the gap between the SiNx suspended membrane and the bottom Si substrate. Integration of equation (9) shows that the capillary force varies as . with the distance between the suspended membrane and surface of bottom substrate. Consider a section parallel to the width of a suspended membrane and passing through the center of a suspended membrane. For this cross-section, the central portion of the suspended membrane has a finite radius of curvature because the width of the suspended membrane (~ 1 μm) is comparable to the deflection (~ 300 nm). Therefore, an expression for the capillary force between the suspended membrane and bottom substrate can be determined analytically using a sphere and flat plate model shown in figure In summary, we fabricated silicon nitride suspended membranes of thickness 8 nm, 30 nm, and 45 nm from the LPCVD high-stress SiNx films of thickness 47 nm, 51 nm, and 88 nm respectively. Using AFM based indentation method, we studied the variation in elastic modulus and stress of a 5 μm length suspended membrane for three different thickness. Thermal stress in the films is relaxed after the fabrication of suspended membrane but the relaxation of intrinsic stress depends on the fractional reduction in thickness (∆t) after the fabrication of suspended membrane. Higher the value of ∆t, higher will be the relaxation of intrinsic stress after fabrication of the suspended membrane. The obtained values of elastic modulus in these suspended membranes are higher than the actual value due to surface effects and offset between the tip and center of the suspended membrane. A model is developed to determine the variation of normalized elastic modulus with the normalized thickness of the suspended membrane. This understanding of the variation of elastic modulus and stress in the suspended membranes is important for developing more efficient NEMS resonators. Finally, the collapse of 30 nm thick suspended membranes under large deformation is explained based on the capillary condensation and force-separation curves. And it is found that the capillary force-gradient varies inversely as square of the gap between suspended membrane and bottom substrate. This result can be particularly helpful in the design and fabrication of suspended membrane-based NEMS devices so as to prevent failure due to condensation induced capillary adhesive forces The steps involved in the fabrication process were: (i) RCA cleaning of the Si/SiO2 substrate. (ii) Deposition of LPCVD grown high-stress silicon nitride thin film on the substrate. The process parameters are listed in Table (vi) Wet etching of sacrificial silicon dioxide using 13:2 buffered oxide etch (BOE/BHF), followed by Critical Point Drying (CPD) to release the suspended membranes. The topography of the suspended membranes was acquired in AFM by scanning with a constant force of 10-40 nN in Peak Force Quantitative Nanomechanical Mapping (PFQNM) The thickness of SiNx films and SiO2 layer was measured using Variable Angle Spectroscopic Ellipsometer (VASE) 36 J.A. Woollam Co. M2000U. The measurement is performed at an incident angle of 65 • , 70 • , and 75 • . The thickness of the SiO2 layer is 300 nm. Measurement of elastic modulus and stress in on substrate SiNx thin films The elastic moduli of the silicon nitride thin films were measured using nanoindentation technique. Hysitron TI 950 Triboindenter with a Hysitron spherical diamond tip (radius 1 μm) is used to indent the sample in load control mode. Loading and unloading Force vs. Displacement curves are acquired in a load control of 100 μN, 180 μN and 500 μN for the films of thickness 47 nm, 51 nm, and 88 nm respectively. The elastic modulus is obtained by fitting the unloading curve using the Oliver-Pharr model. where, Z is the displacement of the piezo in the Z direction, δ is the deformation of the suspended membrane and δ is the deflection of the cantilever. The spring constant of the selected AFM cantilever was such that there was significant deformation of the suspended membrane with a detectable voltage difference on PSPD. The spring constant of the AFM cantilever used for the suspended membranes fabricated from 51 nm and 88 nm thick films was 31 N/m. For the relatively softer suspended membranes fabricated from 47 nm thick film, a cantilever of spring constant 17 N/m was used. The spring constant was calibrated using the thermal tuning. 3. Hysteresis in the mechanical behavior of 8 nm thick suspended membranes Fig. The experimental parameters for the pull-in of suspended membranes is caluclated from the force-separation curves and is listed in the table below. 