Laser powder bed fusion is a well-established additive manufacturing method that can be used for the production of net-shaped Nd-Fe-B sintered magnets. However, low coercivity has been one of the drawbacks in the laser powder bed fusion processed Nd-Fe-B magnets. In this work, we have demonstrated that the grain boundary diffusion process using low-melting Nd-Cu, Nd-Al-Ni-Cu, and Nd-Tb-Cu alloys to the selective laser sintered NdFeB magnets can results in a substantial enhancement of coercivity from 0.65 T to 1.5 T. Detailed microstructure investigations clarified formation of Nd-rich grain boundary phase, introducing Tb-rich shell at the surface of Nd2Fe14B grains, and maintaining the grain size in nano-scale are responsible for the large coercivity enhancement. Additive manufacturing (AM) or colloquially called 3D printing of permanent magnetic materials offer new possibilities in advanced applications through the design freedom of the magnetic parts. The object is fabricated in a layer-by-layer manner of formless of form-neutral construction material by means of thermal or chemical processes. Magnets manufactured by AM methods have several advantages compared to traditional manufacturing methods like sintering or injection-molding of polymerbonded magnets. Advantages include net shape capability, reduced waste, and mechanical flexibility, etc. Fused Deposition Modelling (FDM) is a reasonable and rapid AM method to process polymer-bonded NdFeB magnetic material Laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) is well established method to produce sintered and fully dense metallic objects For sample fabrication a commercial Farsoon FS121M LPBF-machine was used. It is equipped with a continuous wave 200 W Yb-fibre laser with a wavelength of 1.07 μm and a spot size of 0.1 mm. The spherical MQP-S-11-9-20001 powder produced by Magnequench Corporpation was used in this study Considering its powder size distribution and morphology, the MQP-S powder meets the requirements of the recoating process during LPBF processing In this study, we plan to additively manufacture specimens from the MQP-S powder and infiltrate them with low-melting point eutectic alloys in order to investigate the effect of the infiltration process on the magnet's coercivity. Since a high surface to volume ratio enables an efficient diffusion of the alloys through the grain boundaries, we produced specimens with a micro-porous inner structure. This is achieved by only sintering and not fully melting the MQP-S powder during the LPBF process. Therefore, the process parameters of the LPBF machine were adjusted accordingly. The printing was performed under argon atmosphere with oxygen content below 0.1 %, a layer thickness of 20 μm and the powder recoating was done with a carbon fiber brush. All specimens were printed without support structured directly onto a steel substrate plate to ensure proper heat dissipation. To find a proper parameter regime, melt track studies were performed. For the production of single melt lines the parameters laser power P and scan speed v were varied according to a matrix: P was varied between 20 W and 100 W and v between 50 mm/s and 2000 mm/s. To minimize the effect of chemical mixing between the MQP-S powder and the steel substrate during laser exposure, five lines were printed stacked upon each other with a layer thickness of 20 μm. For interpretation purposes, we introduce the artificial magnitude line energy E line , which reads as P over v. As a result, completely molten tracks were produced for P ≥ 40 W and E line ≥ 0.1 J/mm. Since full melting of the powder is improper for sintering, we focused on line energies between 0.03 J/mm and 0.07 J/mm at 40 W for the production of volumetric specimens. For the production of volumetric specimens, parallel melt tracks are produced next to each other with a defined offset, called hatch spacing h. Together with the above mentioned parameter combinations of E line and P , h was varied between 0.1 mm and 0.14 mm to find proper parameter sets for the production of intactly sintered cubes with dimensions of 5 × 5 × 5 mm 3 . The produced specimens were inspected optically concerning their structural integrity. Intact cubes could be produced for volume energy inputs E vol between 0.14 and 0.21 J/mm 3 . The volume energy input reads as E line over the layer thickness and hatch distance. The average density of the cubes was determined to 65 ± 2 % by dry weighing each cube, which is in good accordance with the MPQ-S powder's tap density of 61.4 % as measured by Low melting point melt-spun ribbons with compositions of Nd 70 Cu 30 , Nd 80 Cu 20 , Nd 60 Al 10 Ni 10 Cu 20 , and Nd 50 Tb 20 Cu 20 were prepared by single role melt-spinner. The ribbons were crashed into the flake and the surface of LPBF processed Nd-Fe-B magnets were covered by the flakes with the mass ratio of 10 to 1 followed by annealing at a temperature of 650 • C for 3 h under vacuum. The magnetic properties of the LPBF processed Nd-Fe-B magnets and diffusion processed magnets were measured using a superconducting quantum interface device vibrating sample magnetometer (SQUID-VSM). Microstructure of the samples were studied using Carl Zeiss CrossBeam 1540EsB. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed using a Titan G2 80-200 TEM with a probe aberration corrector. Energy dispersive Xray spectroscopy (EDS) was collected using a Super-X EDX detector. In this image, the brightly imaged contrast corresponds to the Nd-rich phase and the grayly imaged phase corresponds to the Nd 2 Fe 14 B matrix. Fig. Laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) is a well established additive manufacturing (AM) method for the production of metal high performance metallic parts. Recently, several research groups work on AM methods for hard or soft magnetic objects. However, low coercivity of Nd-Fe-B magnets processed with LPBF has been one of the draw backs of these magnets. The commercial isotropic NdFeB powder MQP-S from Magnetquench meets the powder requirements for the LPBF process. For an efficient diffusion of the low melt-ing point alloy, the powder is only sintered and not fully melted during the LPBF process. The printing parameters are optimized in order to produce mecchanically stable parts with a similar volumetric mass density as the powder tab density. The coercivity of the sintered parts is with 0.65 T slightly lower than the coercivity of the powder (0.88 T). This low coercivity is a result of the absence of the Nd-rich grain boundary phase which separates nano-sized Nd 2 Fe 14 B grains as well as of the existence of soft α-Fe phase in the microstructure. For the coercivity enhancement of the printed parts, low melting point melt-spun ribbons with compositions of Nd fusion source results in achieving a larger coercivity of 1.5 T in the samples. After diffusion process, the samples showed a full density of above 7.5 g/cm 3 . Enrichment of Tb at the surface of Nd 2 Fe 14 B grains increases magnetocrystalline anisotropy field at the interfaces hindering nucleation of reversed domains at the interfaces resulting an increase in the coercivity.