This paper analyzes the non-trivial influence of the material anisotropy on the structural behavior of an anisotropic multilayer planar beam. Indeed, analytical results available in literature are limited to homogeneous beams and several aspects has not been addressed yet, impeding an in-depth understanding of the mechanical response of anisotropic structural elements. This paper proposes an effective recovery of stress distribution and an energetically consistent evaluation of constitutive relations to be used within a planar Timoshenko beam model. The resulting structural-analysis tool highlights the following peculiarities of anisotropic beams: (i) the axial stress explicitly depends on transversal internal force, which can weigh up to 30% on the maximal magnitude of axial stress, and (ii) the anisotropy influences the beam displacements more than standard shear deformation and even for extremely slender beams. A rigorous comparison with analytical and accurate 2D Finite Element solutions confirms the accuracy of the proposed approach that leads to errors exceptionally greater than 5%. Effective analysis and design of timber and composite structures unavoidably require beam and plate models capable to handle the material anisotropy. Nowadays the need of accurate analysis tools is even more urgent due to the fast development of novel technologies. As an example, additive manufacturing allows to create structural elements with variable orientation of fibers Engineering research has spent great effort in terms of beam and plate modeling within the last decades. Nevertheless, most of models were derived under the hypothesis of isotropic or, at most, orthotropic material Limiting the discussion to planar problems, the generalized 2D Hook's law of an isotropic material is represented by a block diagonal matrix. Consistently, beam constitutive relations are represented by a diagonal matrix i.e., axial deformation, curvature, and shear deformation uniquely depend on axial internal force, bending moment, and transversal internal force, respectively. Conversely, anisotropy leads the generalized 2D Hook's law to be represented by a full matrix More recently, Karttunen and Von Hertzen An other significant aspect that has to be carefully handled is the length of zones where boundary effects extinguish according to the Saint-Venant principle. While for a isotropic beam boundary effects are negligible at a distance greater than the maximal size of the cross-section, for an anisotropic beams such a distance depends on the ratio between axial and shear modulus and may be greater than six or seven times the maximal cross-section dimension Nowadays, effective and accurate cross-section analysis tools (e.g., This paper proposes a simple planar beam model that effectively describes the linear elastic behavior of anisotropic multi-layer structural elements accounting for the previously introduced issues. Specifically, the beam model will assume that the beam cross-section behaves rigidly, in analogy to the Timoshenko beam. On the one hand, this choice limits the accuracy and the applicability of the proposed beam model. On the other hand, it leads to Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) for which an analytical solution can be computed and easily interpreted by simple physical considerations, allowing for a deep understanding of the structural behavior of anisotropic beams. The main novelty of the developed model is an enhanced and effective stress recovery based on a two-steps iterative procedure. The former step uses the first 2D constitutive relation for the recovery of axial stress and allows to handle the effects of the anisotropy on the stress distribution. The latter step uses the horizontal equilibrium PDE for the recovery of shear stress, in analogy with standard Jourawsky approach Numerical results will demonstrate that the proposed beam model describes the behavior of anisotropic structural element with a good accuracy, leading to an extremely convenient cost-benefit ratio. In particular, the proposed beam model effectively predicts: (i) the highly non-linear distribution of axial stresses, obtained despite deformations have a linear distribution and the material is linear-elastic, (ii) the explicit dependency of horizontal stress on transversal internal force and load, (iii) the fact that the anisotropy influences the beam displacements more than shear deformation. The outline of the paper is as follows: Section 2 defines the problem and illustrates the beam model ODEs, Section 3 derives the ODEs analytical solution, Sections 4 and 5 discuss some meaningful examples, and Section 6 resumes main properties, advantages, and limitations of the proposed method and delineates future research. This section introduces the 2D problem as well as notations (Section 2.1), it discusses the beam compatibility and equilibrium ODEs (Section 2.2), the recovery of cross-section stress distribution (Section 2.3), and the beam constitutive relations (Section 2.4). The beam longitudinal axis L and the beam cross-section H are closed and bounded subsets of x-and y-axes defined as where l, h, and 0 < β < 1 are the beam length, the beam thickness, and a dimensionless parameter defining the distance between the x-axis and the lower boundary of the cross-section, respectively. The beam depth b denotes the cross-section size along the z coordinate and, in the following, we assume that b = 1. As illustrated in Figure Finally, we assume that the body is slender (i.e., l ≫ h) and behaves under the hypothesis of plane stress and small displacements. Anisotropic multilayer beam with arbitrary orientation of principal directions. Geometry, coordinate system, dimensions and adopted notations. We introduce the displacement vector field s s s (x, y) = [s x (x, y) , s y (x, y)], the stress tensor field σ σ σ (x, y) = [σ x (x, y) , σ y (x, y) , τ (x, y)] T , and the strain tensor field ε ε ε (x, y) = [ǫ x (x, y) , ǫ y (x, y) , γ xy (x, y)] T using the engineering notation. Furthermore, a distributed load f f f = [f x , f y ] is applied within the domain and suitable Boundary Conditions (BCs) are assigned on the boundary of domain Ω. The 2D compatibility PDEs read ǫ x (x, y) =s x,x (x, y) (3a) ǫ y (x, y) =s y,y (x, y) (3b) where the notation ( • ) , i for i = x, y represents partial derivatives. The 2D equilibrium PDEs read The beam is made of a linear-elastic and anisotropic material. As represented in Figure The coefficients of the material constitutive relations can be collected in a matrix D D D that is defined as where R R R (y) reads 2 sin (θ (y)) cos (θ (y)) sin 2 (θ (y)) cos 2 (θ (y)) -2 sin (θ (y)) cos (θ (y)) -sin (θ (y)) cos (θ (y)) sin (θ (y)) cos (θ (y)) cos 2 (θ (y)) -sin 2 (θ (y)) E 11 (y) , E 22 (y) , G 12 (y), and ν (y) are the parameters defining the mechanical properties of the material with respect to the principal directions. The quantity θ (y), with -π/2 < θ (y) < π/2, is the rotation of the principal direction of the material with respect to the x-axis. Remark 2.1. Due to the definition (6), E xx (y), E xy (y), E yy (y), and G (y) are even functions of the material principal direction rotation θ (y) whereas the material coupling terms G x (y) and G y (y) are odd. For convenience, we define the axial stiffness A * , the dimensionless parameter β introduced in Equation (1), and the bending stiffness Remark 2.2. Due to Definition (8), the origin of the adopted Cartesian coordinate system O coincides with the so-called stiffness centroid that is equal to the cross-sectional geometric centroid only if the cross-section is symmetric and, in particular, when the beam is homogeneous, as discussed also by Kosmatka et al. As usual for standard Timoshenko beam models, the 2D displacement field s s s (x, y) = [s x (x, y) , s y (x, y)] T is represented in terms of three 1D functions, indicated as axial displacement u (x), cross-section rotation φ (x), and transversal displacement v (x). Therefore, the displacement field components are approximated as follows Introducing the generalized strains defined as the axial strain ǫ (x), the curvature χ (x), and the shear strain γ (x), the beam compatibility is expressed through the following ODEs where the notation ( • ) ′ denotes derivatives with respect to x. Remark 2.3. In light of Remark 2.2, kinematic approximation (9) differs from standard Timoshenko one. In fact, u (x) represents the axial displacement of the stiffness centroids and, in general, it does not coincide with the mean value of the cross-section axial displacements (i.e., u Similarly, ǫ (x) is not the mean value of the axial strain evaluated within the cross-section, but just represents the axial elongation evaluated at y = 0 (i.e., ǫ (x) = 1/h H ∂s x (x, y) /∂x dy). We introduce the axial internal force N (x), the bending moment M (x), and the transversal internal force V (x) defined as Furthermore, we assume that f x = 0 and we introduce the transversal load Considering the axial, rotational, and transversal equilibrium of a infinitesimally long beam-segment, the equilibrium ODEs read The stress recovery is based on a recursive procedure that leads to define a distribution of stresses that satisfies the first constitutive relation (5a) and the first equilibrium PDE (4a). Conversely, we assume that transversal stress vanishes i.e., σ y (x, y) = 0, aiming at the maximal simplicity of the model. In order to set the recursive procedure up, it is convenient to isolate Equations (5a) and (4a) for the variables σ x (x, y) and τ (x, y), respectively The iterative procedure is resumed in Figure + int. forces def. Eq. ( + beam equil. ODEs Eq. ( cross-section OUTPUT: where Remark 2.4. In Definitions (17c) and (17d), the second and the third addends satisfy Equation Equations (16a) highlights that axial stress σ x explicitly depends on transversal internal force V (x) and load q. Similarly, also the shear stress τ explicitly depends on the transversal load q. To the authors' knowledge, only Karttunen and Von Hertzen On the one hand, similarity of Equations ( To complete the Timoshenko-like beam model, simplified constitutive relations have to be defined. To this aim, we introduce the stress potential Substituting the stress recovery relations Introducing the definitions of stress distributions (16a) into Definition (20b), we obtain that ǫ M = χ N = 0 due to the choice of the origin of the Cartesian coordinate system introduced in Equation ( Such an deep influence of the material anisotropy on beam constitutive relations is ignored by most of the literature. To the authors' knowledge, the coefficients ǫ V = γ N was analyzed only in Remark 2.5. The extremely simple assumptions on kinematics (9) do not allow to tackle any higher order and boundary effects, as usual for all FSDT. Therefore, the proposed beam model has not the capability to describe deformation of the cross-section and the phenomena that occur in the neighborhood of constraints and concentrated loads. This section discusses the analytical solution of beam model ODEs ( , and 1/G x = 0. In the top layer material principal direction is rotated with respect to the beam axis of an angle θ, therefore E xx = E 11 /μ and G = G 12 /κ. The dimensionless parameters μ and κ account for the reduction of axial and shear modulus due to the rotation θ of the material principal direction where the dimensionless coefficients P i for i = 1 . . . 6 (reported in Appendix Appendix B) account for the influence of geometry and material on the structural element stiffness. The solution of ODEs ( where C i for i = 1 . . . 6 depend on BCs. Notations ( • ) EB , ( • ) T , ( • ) c , and ( • ) r highlight dependency of addends on the axial stiffness E 11 , the shear stiffness G 12 , the coupling term G x , and the ratio G 2 x /E 11 , respectively. Furthermore, few calculations allow to conclude that the addends denoted as ( • ) EB coincide with the solution of the Euler Bernoulli (EB) beam theory whereas the addend denoted as ( • ) T coincides with the shear deformation considered by Timoshenko beam theory. Considering a cantilever (see Figure Requiring ODEs solution Finally, introducing the dimensionless parameter λ = l/h, the maximal transversal displacement of the beam reads where the dimensionless coefficients Q i for i = 1 . . . 4 are reported in Appendix Appendix C. Equation Looking at Equation ( Finally, it is worth mentioning that • stress distributions , and γ V = 6/ (5G 12 h) for α = 1, analogously to homogeneous prismatic isotropic beams, h) for α = 0, similarly to anisotropic beam model proposed by Murakami et al. confirming that the presented beam model can recover analytical solutions already available in literature. This section compares the solution of the beam model discussed in Section 2 with the analytical solution derived in Being ψ (x) a beam model variable, the solution computed by means of ODEs ( Assuming θ = 45 deg the rotation of the constitutive relation ( Figure This section reports numerical results for two examples: Subsection 5.1 considers the cantilever already introduced in Section 3 and Subsection 5.2 analyzes a doubly-clamped beam (see Figure In the following we set l = 500 mm i.e., we choose λ = 5. This assumption leads to consider a beam geometry that is close to the well known limit of validity of the FSDTs and, therefore, it will allow to identify Due to considered loads N mod (x) = 0 and, due to BCs, also u EB (x) = 0 (see Equation ( Figure Figure Figures Figures In order to complete the discussion of the proposed model capabilities, Tables Furthermore, Table Figure This section considers the statically indeterminate multilayer beam depicted in Figure Analytical expression for the coefficients C i for i = 1 . . . 6 turns out to be extremely complex and, for brevity, they will not be reported. Anyway, it has to be noticed that all the coefficients depends on all mechanical properties E 11 , G 12 , and G x . As a consequence, the subdivision of displacements in components ( • ) EB , ( • ) T , ( • ) c , and ( • ) r introduced in Equation ( Tables As already remarked in Section 5.1, EB beam model leads to errors that are often bigger than 10 %, leading to estimations that are too coarse for most of engineering applications. Conversely, the proposed beam model leads to errors that are generally three-six times smaller and always below 5 %. Only Table This paper has proposed a simple beam model that effectively handles the influence of anisotropy on the beam constitutive relations and the stress distribution. The independent variables of the model are the internal forces and the standard Timoshenko kinematic parameters. Despite its simplicity, the beam model has allowed to highlight the following peculiarities of anisotropic beams. 1. Material anisotropy leads transversal internal force to contribute up to 30 % of the magnitude of axial stress, deeply affecting also the beam strength, not explicitly considered in this paper. 2. In beam constitutive relations, non-vanishing out-of-diagonal terms that relate transversal internal force with curvature (and bending moment with shear strain) exist and deeply influence the response of the structural element. 3. In addition to the standard bending contribution (proportional to cube beam-slenderness) and the shear one (proportional to beam-slenderness), a third term, depending on material coupling term and proportional to square beam-slenderness, contributes to transversal displacement. 4. The contribution depending on material coupling terms can be bigger than the contribution given by shear deformation and it may be non-negligible for length vs thickness ratios greater than fifty. A systematic comparison with analytical results and 2D FE solutions, obtained using highly refined meshes, demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed modeling approach. In general, the proposed beam model has a computational cost similar to simplest beam models used in engineering practice and it estimates significant displacements and internal forces with relative errors usually smaller than 5 %. Conversely, coarse adaptations of beam models developed for isotropic structural elements may lead to errors greater than 20 % in the prediction of both internal forces and displacements. Furthermore, analysis of stress distributions demonstrates that stress recovery tools developed for isotropic structural elements are no longer effective for anisotropic ones, but ad-hoc routines has to be developed. The main limitations of the proposed model are the assumptions on kinematics that do not allow to describe higher order effects like cross-section warping and distortion as well as phenomena that occur in the neighborhood of constraints and concentrated loads. Future research will include the application of the proposed modeling strategy to higher order planar beams and its generalization to 3D beams and plates. 