We study the structure of Abrikosov vortices in two-band superconductors for different external magnetic fields and different parameters of the bands. The vortex core size determined by the coherence lengths are found to have qualitatively different behaviour from that determined by the quasiparticle density of states spatial variation. These different vortex core length scales coincide near the upper critical field, while the discrepancy between them becomes quite significant at lower fields. Within the diffusive approximation we demonstrate several generic regimes in the field dependence of the vortex core sizes determined by the disparity of diffusion constants in the two bands. Vortex matter in multiband superconductors demonstrates many unusual properties which are drastically different from that in single-band materials The high resolution of STM allows to explore individual vortex cores in details by measuring the quasiparticle local density of states (LDOS) The relation between zero-energy LDOS N (r) and ∆(r) is quite straightforward in diffusive superconductors when the magnetic field B is close to the upper critical field H c2 so that H c2 -B ≪ H c2 . In this regime as shown by de Gennes where N is normalized to the normal metal DOS and ∆ 0 is the gap function amplitude in the absence of magnetic field. At lower fields the relation between N (r) and ∆(r) has not been checked even in the simplest case of singleband superconductors. In the present paper we demonstrate that in general the behaviour of these two profiles with decreasing magnetic field becomes quite different so that it is not possible to extract the information about coherence length from STM measurements by applying directly the Eq.( The behaviour of gap and LDOS profiles can be even more intriguing in two-band superconductors. According to the recent experiments The structure of this paper is as follows. In Sec. II we introduce the formalism of the quasiclassical Green's functions to describe the properties of dirty multiband superconductors and discuss numerical approach for the solution of self-consistency problem. In Sec. III, the results of the numerical calculations are presented. First, in Sec. III A we checked method in the single-band limit. In Sec III B, we examine in details the field dependencies of the gap and LDOS profiles in different bands and calculate characteristic length scales in two-band model. The work summary is given in Sec. IV. We use the formalism of quasiclassical Green's functions (GF) and introduce retarded/advanced GF, ĝR/A k , for two-band (k = 1, 2) superconductor which obey in the diffusive limit the Usadel equation Here D k is diffusion constant in each band, ∆k = 0 ∆ k -∆ * k 0 is the gap operator, and ∇ = ∇ - where τ3 is the Pauli matrix, square brackets denote commutator operation and φ 0 = π/e is the flux quantum. Note that we use theoretical units k B = = c = 1. To describe the vortex structure at arbitrary fields we employ the circular cell approximation In the θ-parameterization, GF in Nambu space read as where φ k is band-gap phase. In cylindrical coordinates, Eq. ( This set of equations has to be solved self-consistently with gap order parameters determined by conditions where λ kk ′ are intra-and interband interaction constants which form matrix λ, ω n = πT (2n + 1) are Matsubara frequencies and Matsubara GF parametrized by θ n (r = R) = 0 leading to zero gradient of gap modulus at the vortex-cell boundary. We normalize magnetic field by upper critical one which in the two-band model is determined by condition | Â| = 0, where | Â| = Det Â and Here Except for zero and critical temperatures, H c2 (T ) has to be calculated numerically. In the limit T → 0, upper critical field is given by the expression 2 √ q 1 q 2 /T c = πe g+/2-C , where and C ≈ 0.577 is the Euler constant. Note that in weakcoupling limit the critical temperature of a two-band superconductor is , where ω D is Debye energy cut-off and 4Ω = e G0-C . To find the self-consistent order parameter distributions we start by calculating gap order parameters in the cell taking first initial distributions of |∆ 1,2 (r)|. By initializing guess functions θ scheme from the beginning and find gaps in iterative process with needed precision. The zero-energy LDOS in different bands is given in θparametrization by N k = cos(Imθ (k) ) at ε = 0 . To find N k , we consider imaginary part of Eq. ( The approach presented in Sec. II reduces to the single-band model, if λ 12 = λ 21 = 0 and D 1,2 = D. For λ 11 > λ 22 , it corresponds to the description of the independent stronger-superconductivity band. Fig. In Fig. To check our numerical results we test the obtained profiles against the validity of de Gennes relation (1) at low temperatures and close to H c2 . In Fig. Fig. For lower fields, half-widths w σ and w ∆ have qualitatively different behaviours manifesting significant difference between the squared gap and LDOS profiles and violation of simple relation For very sparse vortex lattices, B/H c2 ≪ 1, both scales are characterized by linear field-dependence and for the gap we obtain w ∆ (B)/w ∆ (0) ≃ 1 -B/H c2 . Such a behaviour indicates that spatial evolution of the gap profile is affected by the term linear in the vector potential. This behaviour can be checked by calculating vortex core sizes in the absence of vector potential. In result instead of the linear behaviour we get the low-field plateaus in the dependencies of w ∆ (B) and w σ (B) shown by the dashed lines in Fig. The two-band superconductivity is defined by the matrix of interaction constants λ and by the ratio of diffusion coefficients in the bands D 1 /D 2 . For calculations we consider typical parameters In contrast to the gap profiles, LDOS in separate band is strongly affected by the band diffusion coefficients. This is seen from Usadel Eq. ( Apart from the characteristic scales determined by the diffusion coefficients there is another characteristic length which is the circular cell radius R. Changing the diffusion coefficients in different bands independently one can obtain the unusual situation peculiar for two-band model when the length scale of LDOS variation in one of the bands is much larger than the cell radius. In this case the LDOS corresponding to the band with larger diffusion coefficient changes within vortex cell very weakly in the wide range of the fields. This situation is illustrated in Fig. Another unusual situation generic for two-band model only can be realized when LDOS corresponding to the band with smaller diffusion coefficient varies within vortex cell on a distance which is much smaller than cell radius. This case is demonstrated in Fig. Let us discuss the relations between gap functions ∆ 1,2 (r) and LDOS deviations from the normal state, 1 -N 1,2 (r), shown Fig. , where c k is small constant, see As a result, we obtain the relation between the LDOS and order parameter in the two-band model which is valid at fields very close to upper critical one This formula generalizes the de Gennes relation (1) for the multiband system and arbitrary temperatures. Indeed, in the one band case one restores the relation (1) at low temperatures T → 0 by taking into account single-band limiting value eDH c2 /∆ 0 = 1/2. However, in two-band case the relation between bulk gap in particular band and the upper critical field depends strongly on two-band model parameters, in particular, the ratio of diffusion constants. For our parameters of two-band model and T = 0.1T c we have ∆ 1,20 /T c ≈ 2.05; 0.81 and √ q 1 q 2 /T c ≈ 1.51; 0.38 for D 1 /D 2 = 0.2; 10, respectively. According to the Eq. ( Next we calculated LDOS variations within the vortex cell defined as σ k = δN k (r)/δN k (0), where δN k (r) = N k (r) -N k (R), shown in Fig. The case D 1 ≪ D 2 shown in Fig. The opposite regime D 1 ≫ D 2 illustrated in Fig. Finally, we have calculated field dependencies for the lengths w ∆1,2 determined as the half-widths of |∆| 2 1,2 and w σ1,2 defined as the half-widths of σ 1,2 , see Fig. As expected, the length scales w ∆1,2 obtained in Fig. To conclude, we demonstrate that the vortex core size w ∆ k determined by the healing of the gap order param-eter has qualitatively different magnetic-field behaviour from the one w σ k defined by the spatial LDOS variations in single-and two-band dirty superconductors. We have found several generic regimes peculiar for multiband superconductor only. First, the vortex core size w σ k related to the LDOS variations in the band with larger diffusion constant scales with the vortex-cell radius having field dependence stronger than the one for w ∆ k . Second, size w σ k determined by the LDOS variations in the band with smaller diffusion constant can have field dependence significantly weaker than for w ∆ k . These peculiarities can explain qualitatively the recent STM measurements of vortex cores in multiband superconductors.