We report large enhancement of upper critical field H c2 observed in superconducting Sr 2 RuO 4 thin films. Through dimensional crossover approaching two dimensions, H c2 except the in-plane field direction is dramatically enhanced compared to bulks, following a definite relation distinct from bulk one between H c2 and the transition temperature. The anomalous enhancement of H c2 is highly suggestive of important changes of the superconducting properties, possibly accompanied with rotation of the triplet d-vector. Our findings will become a crucial step to further explore exotic properties by employing Sr 2 RuO 4 thin films. Superconductors with a multicomponent order parameter, represented by spin-triplet superconductors, have attracted great interest as a ground of rich physics originating in the internal degrees of freedom. Among them, a layered-perovskite superconductor Sr 2 RuO 4 has been a leading candidate possibly having chiral p-wave symmetry In general, bulk superconducting state or pairing symmetry can be altered in the thin film form, affected by dimensionality change, inversion symmetry breaking, and/or epitaxial strain Particularly in the case of Sr 2 RuO 4 , it has been theoretically suggested that the d-vector can flip from perpendicular (chiral p-wave) to parallel to the RuO 2 ab plane in the reduced dimensions, while the system still can host the Majorana modes While growth of the superconducting films had been extremely challenging over the past decades since the discovery of Sr 2 RuO 4 Upper critical field H c2 is one of the fundamental superconducting parameters related to superconducting symmetry, and thus has been intensively investigated in the study of Sr 2 RuO 4 bulks Here we report detailed dependences of H c2 in Sr 2 RuO 4 thin films, by measuring lowtemperature magnetotransport systematically changing the field angle. The superconducting films are grown on a lattice-matched cubic substrate, yielding extremely limited defects in the films Superconducting single crystalline Sr 2 RuO 4 films as displayed in Figs. do not yet reach the high standard quality of Sr 2 RuO 4 bulk single crystals Figures Detailed field angle dependence of H c2 approaches 2D behavior with reducing the system thickness. Figure H c2 is assumed to be dominated by the diamagnetic pair breaking process originating from the screening currents, known as the orbital limit. The coherence length along the c axis ξ c , calculated from the GL expression ξ c = Φ 0 H c2||c /2πH c2||a 2 , is 3.2 nm, which is much larger than the lattice spacing of the RuO 2 layers. In this regard, superconductivity in the Sr 2 RuO 4 bulk is not classified into ideal 2D systems As shown in Figs. Considering that the film thickness is 50 nm, the film can be understood to be located in a dimensional crossover region. In a very low angle region, H c2 seems suppressed compared to the 2D model. One possible origin of the deviation is the 2D-3D crossover. In such an intermediate superconducting state, the following empirical model interpolating Eqs. 1 and 2 has been proposed to explain the transitional angle dependence The curve fitting is improved by adopting this model with α ranging about from 0.8 to 0.9 (for details see Supplemental Material [30]), also suggesting that the system is located in the crossover region. H c2 around H a may be affected also by the presence of the Pauli limit, as discussed later. Fig. While the superconducting state approaches 2D like in the Sr 2 RuO 4 thin film, the anisotropy ratio Γ = H c2 a /H c2 c itself is reduced to 10 near T c and 6 at the lowest temperature. This primarily results from increase in H c2 c , about four times over the bulk. As confirmed in Fig. In the right hand side, material dependent parameters are only the coupling ratio a and the in-plane Fermi velocity v F,ab . For example, if we assume the BCS limit a = 3.5 and take an experimental value of v F,ab = 9.3 × 10 4 m/s averaged on the active γ band Because all the other possible origins, such as film quality, epitaxial strain, and quantum confinement, are carefully excluded, the enhancement of H c2 c or a is most likely related to the observed dimensional crossover. Electrons may couple more strongly in the real space through the dimensional crossover, resulting in the shorter ξ ab . Its microscopic mechanism will need to be further elucidated from theoretical aspects, while it may be also consistent with the recent theoretical prediction on two-dimensional Sr 2 RuO 4 films, as discussed below. While H c2 is largely enhanced centered at H c, it remains relatively low for H a. One origin of this difference is a change in the out-of-plane electronic structure by quantum confinement in films. However, an increase in the out-of-plane Fermi velocity v F,c , which may account for the elongation of ξ c , is less likely in terms of the mass enhancement due to the confinement. Another possible origin of this relative suppression is the Pauli limit. The presence of the Pauli limit for H a is not generally consistent with the d-vector direction (d c) in the 2D p x ± ip y state In summary, we have revealed changes of the Sr 2 RuO 4 superconducting state induced by confining it into thin films. Through the dimensional crossover, H c2 is intrinsically enhanced centered at H c compared to bulks, while it remains suppressed for H a. The anomalous enhancement of H c2 suggests important changes of the spin-triplet superconducting state in the reduced dimensions. Taken together, these findings are compatible with the triplet state with the d-vector flipped parallel to the RuO 2 plane, which still could support the Majorana modes at edges and vortices The dashed curve is calculated following Eq. 4. (b) Mean free path l ab vs coherence length ξ ab summarized for the Sr 2 RuO 4 bulks and films. l ab is estimated from the common-l approximation l ab = hc/2e 2 ρ ab,N i k F,i , with the interlayer spacing c/2 and the i-th Fermi wave number k F,i For reference, data in MgB 2 