Three independent components of critical current density, one for the H//c axis and the other two for the H//ab plane, have been studied in CaKFe 4 As 4 single crystals. When the magnetic field is applied along the c axis, we observed fish-tail-like peaks in the M-H hysteresis loop, and the magnetization at higher temperatures exceeds that at lower temperatures at high fields. When the field is applied parallel to the ab plane, a dip structure is observed in the M-H hysteresis loop near the self-field. In addition, for the H//ab plane, we succeeded in separately evaluating the large and significantly anisotropic in-plane and out-of-plane J c . Transmission electron microscopy revealed the presence of planar defects parallel to the ab plane in CaKFe 4 As 4 , which have not been observed in any other iron-based superconductors. We discuss the possible relationship between the anomalous J c behavior and the planar defects. The discovery of iron-based superconductors (IBSs) in 2008 Recently, a new type of IBSs, i.e., 1144-type with CaKFe 4 As 4 as one of their representatives, has been found In this study, phase-pure CaKFe 4 As 4 single crystals are synthesized and detailed superconducting properties including anisotropic J c are evaluated. We observed a non-monotonic temperature dependence of in-plane J c . When the magnetic field is applied parallel to the ab-plane, a pronounced dip structure in the magnetization hysteresis loop around the self-field is also observed. Furthermore, we find a very large anisotropy between the in-plane and out-of-plane J c when the field is applied parallel to the ab-plane. Transmission electron microscopy revealed the presence of planar defects along the ab-plane, which naturally explains the large anisotropy of J c when the field is applied parallel to the ab-plane. Single crystals of CaKFe 4 As 4 were synthesized by the self-flux method using FeAs. We used Ca pieces (99.5%), K ingots (99.5%), and FeAs powder as starting materials. FeAs was prepared by sealing stoichiometric amounts of As grains (6N) and Fe powder (99.9%) in an evacuated quartz tube and reacting them at 900 o C for 10 h after heating at 500 o C for 10 h. A mixture with a ratio of Ca : K : FeAs = 1 : 1.2 : 10 was placed in an alumina crucible in an argon-filled glove box. The alumina crucible was sealed in a tantalum tube using the arc melting method. The tantalum tube was sealed in an evacuated quartz tube. The whole assembly was heated for 5 h at 1180 o C after a preliminary heating at 650 o C for 5 h, and cooled to 1050 o C at a rate of 26 o C/h, followed by cooling to 930 o C at a rate of 1.5 o C/h for the crystal growth. Bulk magnetization was measured by a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometer (MPMS-5XL, Quantum Design). For the evaluation of two components of J c for the H//ab plane, samples were cut into a rectangular shape using a focused ion beam. Electrical resistivity was measured with a Quantum Design physical property measurement system (PPMS) in the ac mode. For magneto-optical (MO) imaging, an iron-garnet indicator film was placed in direct contact with the sample surface and the whole assembly was attached to the cold finger of a He-flow cryostat (Microstat-HR, Oxford Instruments). MO images were acquired by using a cooled-CCD camera with 12-bit resolution (ORCA-ER, Hamamatsu). Cross-sectional observations of the single crystals were performed with a high-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM; JEOL, JEM-2100F). The specimens to analyze using TEM were prepared by digging and milling using a focused-ion beam (FIB), which is called the microsampling technique. The final milling using FIB was conducted at an acceleration voltage of 30 kV and with a very weak ion current of approximately 10 pA without tilting the specimen. The phase identification was carried out by means of powder x-ray diffraction (XRD) with Cu-Kα radiation (Smartlab, Rigaku). Figure Figures Next we performed magneto-optical (MO) imaging of a CaKFe 4 As 4 single crystal to evaluate its homogeneity and the value of in-plane J c . in the present case) In-plane J c in a CaKFe 4 As 4 single crystal was also evaluated from magnetization measurements by applying the magnetic field along the c-axis using the extended Bean model This value is consistent with that evaluated from the analysis of the MO image. Figure As a result, J c at higher temperatures (~20-25 K) becomes larger than that at lower temperatures (~5-15 K) above 20 kOe. In most IBSs, the increase of J c at higher temperatures at a fixed field has not been observed except for over-doped BaFe 2 (As,P) 2 Next, we evaluated the critical current density for the H//ab plane. As shown in Fig. M-H loops for the two in-plane field directions are shown in Fig. Calculated J c2 and J c3 near zero field and higher fields corresponding to the dip and return branch of the hysteresis loop in Fig. To reveal the presence of anisotropic defects, observations by a high-resolution scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) were performed. Figures Figure Despite the high phase purity of the crystal, the observed peaks are broad. The inset of Fig. (Ba,K)Fe 2 As 2 shows a sharp single set of (008) peaks from Cu K 1 and K 2 , while multiple (008) peaks are observed in CaKFe 4 As 4 . This indicates that the lattice constant along the c axis is inhomogeneous. It should be caused by inhomogeneous stacking periodicity along the c axis in CaKFe 4 As 4 and is consistent with the presence of planar defects observed by STEM shown in Fig. We found anomalous features of magnetic hysteresis loops in CaKFe 4 As 4 single crystals. First, when the magnetic field is applied along the c-axis, magnetization at higher temperatures exceeds that at lower temperatures at high fields as shown in Fig. Such field-induced pinning centers can be created due to the local distributions of T c in the crystal such as KFe 2 As 2 and CaFe 2 As 2 , which are possibly embedded as impurity phases in CaKFe 4 As 4 They can pin vortices only at higher temperatures than their T c . Another possible origin for the anomalous temperature dependence of J c is the presence of large-scale local variation of superconducting properties due to chemical inhomogeneities. However, as shown in Fig. properly in other iron-based and even cuprate superconductors. For instance, Ba(Fe,Co) 2 As 2 and Fe(Te,Se) single crystals are reported to show isotropic J c Needless to say, the very large J c of CaKFe 4 As 4 due to naturally-introduced defects is advantageous for applications. J c can be further enhanced by introducing defects by particle irradiation. Actually, it has been demonstrated that J c in the 122 system is enhanced significantly by swift particle irradiation Finally, we comment on a recent report by Singh et al. on the same material In summary, CaKFe 4 As 4 single crystals were synthesized and their critical current density was characterized including its anisotropy. The sharp onset of diamagnetism with low residual resistivity demonstrates their high phase purity, and MO images confirmed uniform flow of the shielding current. When the magnetic field is applied along the c axis, the temperature dependence of J c shows non-monotonic temperature dependence. We interpret this anomalous behavior as an enhanced fish-tail effect rather than field-induced pinning centers. From the magnetization measurements and their analyses for a magnetic field parallel to the ab plane, we have successfully evaluated two components of J c , i.e., one parallel to the ab plane (J c2 ) and another parallel to the c axis (J c3 ). J c2 turns out to be much larger than J c3 and even larger that in-plane J c for the magnetic field parallel to the c axis. TEM observations clarified the presence of planar defects along the ab plane. We interpret the strong enhancement of J c2 and J c3 at low fields due to the geometrical matching of vortices to these planar defects. 