Bulk boundary correspondence in topological materials allows to study their bulk topology through the investigation of their topological boundary modes Topological materials host unique boundary states that cannot be realized as standalone electronic systems but only on the boundaries of a topologically classified bulk. These include the chiral edge modes of the quantum Hall state, the helical modes on the surface of topological insulators (TIs), Fermi-arc bands on the surface of a Weyl semimetal and Majorana modes in topological superconductors An example of such 'structural' surface-bulk correspondence is the surface step edge that emanates from the termination point of a bulk SD on the material surface. The only way to realize a step edge that terminates at a point on the surface, away from the surface boundaries, is by its continuation into the bulk in the form of a SD (Fig. Bi, an extensively studied low-density semi-metal, has a rich history of intriguing quantum phenomena like electron fractionalization Nevertheless, several studies demonstrate phenomenology which implies non-trivial topology in Bi, both in bulk crystals, thin films as well as in its two dimensional (2D) limit of a bilayer We measured Bi samples derived from crystals of GdPtBi grown in Bi flux (see section S1 in the Supplementary Information) We next investigate the 1D edge mode on the step edge, and its topological origin. Amidst all the energy dispersing QPI modes in Fig. To resolve the topological origin of the extended edge mode in Bi we examine its behavior at crystallographic defects. A topographic image of a single Bi-bilayer high step edge, terminating at a SD on the Bi(111) surface, is shown in Fig. The topographic dip signature (located about 7 nm from the left end) signifies a missing atom on the step edge. Both this vacancy, and even more so the SD, serve as scatterers to the impinging electrons. On the open terrace we find a faint quantized QPI pattern marking that both the step edge on the right and the SD indeed serve as strong scatterers for the 2D surface electrons (see also Fig. To further examine the spatial structure and propagation of the edge mode near the SD as a function of energy, we overlay on a topographic height map in Fig. we detect the edge mode localized on the edge of the top terrace, all across the step edge, down to the SD. Right on the SD we observe a slight increase of the LDOS which agrees with the continuation of the mode into the SD. We observe similar behavior also at lower energies around -100 meV, shown in Fig. Absence of backscattering and hybridization of the 1D edge mode along the step edge followed by its apparent channeling into the SD seems to reflect the phenomenology of a weak TI rather than of a higher order TI. For a material characterized by non vanishing weak indices ν = (ν 1 , ν 2 , ν 3 ), a bulk SD with Burger's vector b, is expected theoretically to bind a helical mode if ν • b = π (mod 2π) While the phenomenology in the vicinity of the SD strongly suggests the existence of non-vanishing weak indices, this is inconsistent with the majority of theoretical models of Bi We extract the strain field induced by the SD directly from the gradient of the measured topography, ∇z(x, y). Its phase, arg(∇z), shown in Fig. Indeed, a single bilayer long Burger's vector along the < 111 > direction is incompatible with the ABC stacking of the Bi bilayers (Fig. Intriguingly, our ab initio calculations for the response of Bi to a uniform strain (Fig. shows that a small amount of strain is sufficient to result in band crossing at the L TRIM point We also note that recent experiments on single crystals of Bi seem to identify valley symmetry breaking due to spurious strain fields in the samples We argue that the observed phenomenology on all boundaries of Bi including surfaces, step edges and SDs is strongly influenced by the small energy gap at the L TRIM point. This small energy gap positions Bi in the vicinity of a topological phase transition into a strong TI with nonvanishing weak indices. The surface and edge states that disperse between the corresponding projections of the bulk T and L TRIM points, on the Z 2 trivial side of the phase transition, are the precursors of the helical boundaries modes that would be firmly established beyond the critical transition point (for instance under application of strain or Sb doping). Indeed, doping Bi with Sb was shown to invert the bulk energy gap at L, while hardly affecting the surface states dispersion around the Γ point Their penetration depth, the critical length associated with the phase transition, is expected to diverge as the energy gap narrows In summary, we have mapped the surface and edge spectra of Bi(111). We find surface and edge modes that disperse in energy and momentum between the projections of the bulk T and L TRIM points. The edge mode withstands crystallographic irregularities, without showing any signs of backscattering and gapping. In particular, the edge mode seems to bind to bulk SD as expected for TI with non-vanishing weak indices. These observations disfavor the recent identification of the edge mode as a hinge mode of a higher order TI class which, in the absence of protection, would be highly susceptible to hybridization by such structural perturbations. We argue that the small scale of the bulk L energy gap, which in our ab initio calculation amounts to 5 meV, positions Bi within the critical region of a topological phase transition to a strong TI with non-vanishing weak indices. It also facilitates strain induced transition into the topological phase in the vicinity of the SD, as well as throughout the crystal by spurious crystallographic defects. This demonstrates that SD can serve not only as a probe for the topological classification of materials but also as a tool to manipulate and alter this classification. The STM measurements were carried out using commercial Pt-Ir tips. The tips were char- 