Predictions of the anisotropic coefficients of thermal expansion are needed to not only compare to experimental measurement, but also as input for macroscopic modeling of devices which operate over a large temperature range. While most current methods are limited to isotropic systems within the quasiharmonic approximation, our method uses first-principles calculations and includes anharmonic effects to determine the temperature-dependent properties of materials. These include the lattice parameters, anisotropic coefficients of thermal expansion, isothermal bulk modulus, and specific heat at constant pressure. Our method has been tested on two compounds (Cu and AlN) and predicts thermal properties which compare favorably to experimental measurement over a wide temperature range. While experimental measurements of the coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) can be done using a number of experimental techniques In this work, an algorithm is developed to determine the thermal properties of both isotropic and anisotropic systems using density functional theory (DFT) and density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) calculations. This algorithm utilizes the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (vasp) To demonstrate the abilities of our methods, two systems with distinctive symmetries are compared to a variety of experimental results. The first system, pure copper (Cu) In section II, an outline of the calculation methods is provided and in section III, we analyze the results of our methods via comparison to available experimental data for Cu and AlN. Finally, in section IV, we provide a concluding discussion. An appendix is provided that outlines the algorithm used to generate the necessary files for the vasp and tdep calculations, gather the necessary results, and perform the needed temperature dependent calculations. Our software launches both DFT and DFPT calculations using vasp For each ground state and configuration calculation, the iterations of the total energy were stopped once the differences in energy between successive iterations were less than 0.01 meV. To calculate the dielectric, elas- tic, and Born effective charge of our material, we used finite-differences as implemented within vasp where only symmetry-inequivalent atomic displacements were used to calculate the Hessian matrix. The elastic tensor was used to determine the Debye temperature and the isentropic bulk modulus, as outlined below. The dielectric tensor and Born effective charge tensor were used to account for the long-range electrostatic interactions in semiconducting compounds within tdep. It is important to note that there is a fundamental relationship between the isoentropic bulk modulus (via the elastic tensor) and the isothermal bulk modulus (found by fitting the equation of state) directly related to the ratio of specific heats. While this ratio is nearly identical to one (see below) we will distinguish here due to the differences in the methodology used to determine the quantities. Using the elastic tensor, one can determine both the Debye temperature and isentropic bulk modulus of the system using the following relationships. First, the Voigt average of the bulk (B) and shear (G) moduli (upper bound for polycrystalline materials) are found from the components of the elastic tensor, C ij (i, j = 1..6), as With the bulk and shear moduli one can then calculate the longitudinal and shear sound velocities (v l and v s ) as 46 and where ρ is the density of the material. Then, the Debye temperature can be calculated as 46 where h is Plank's constant, k B is Boltzmann's constant, and m is the number of atoms per volume and, unlike in Ref. 46, we do not separate the acoustic bands and use all the phonon bands to calculate the Debye temperature. Since the Debye temperature is calculated from the elastic tensor, which is calculated at zero temperature within vasp, it also represents the ground state (0 K) Debye temperature. While one could, in principle, calculate the elastic properties as a function of temperature The Debye temperature is used within tdep to generate an initial guess for the force constants of the system. They are in turn employed to generate configurations based on a canonical ensemble. Here, twelve configurations are generated as follows: with the Debye temperature and symmetry of the cell, one generates an initial guess for the interatomic force constants and solves the equations of motion for the system by finding the resulting eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Then, these eigenvalues and eigenvectors are used to determine the amplitude and velocity of each atom chosen such that these quantities are normally distributed over a canonical ensemble. The configurations consisted in this study of 208 atoms for Cu and AlN. The ensemble is generated at a finite temperature (here designated the configuration temperature) with Bose-Einstein statistics used to determine the mean normal mode amplitude The extracted force constants are used to find the phonon frequencies and phonon density of states on a q mesh in reciprocal space (in this work 30 × 30 × 30 points were used) using the tetrahedron integration approach where λ is the phonon mode index and both the vibrational density of states (g(ω)) and phonon frequencies ω λ depend on x. U is the volume dependent total electronic energy of the system. In order to minimize the free energy, a set of lattice parameters is generated automatically by applying strain to the system around the ground state equilibrium lattice parameters. This was in the present work done by finding a series of six lattice parameters in each symmetry unique direction such that the new lattice parameters range between one percent compressive and four percent tensile strain. This provided a smooth free energy surface at each temperature. The optimized lattice parameters x 0 (T ) are found by fitting the free energy to a polynomial function f i,j,k are the coefficients of the polynomial fit. Here, we used fourth-order polynomials, and varied a (a and c) in the case of Cu (AlN). To determine the minimum of Eq. ( Using either of these produces practically identical results as assumed by Slack where β T is the isothermal compressibility which is the inverse of the isothermal bulk modulus B. To determine B, we fit the free energy at a fixed temperature versus volume of the cell using the Birch-Murnaghan equation of state To test the accuracy of our vasp and tdep calculations and the accuracy of our algorithm, we will compare our calculated values to experimental results for well-known systems: bulk Cu and AlN. Bulk Cu is a face-centered cubic structure (space group F m 3m) from 0 K to its melting point of approximately 1357 K The temperature dependent lattice parameters of Cu and AlN are shown in Figs. We performed a polynomial fit to the extracted lattice parameters, shown as the solid lines in Figs. The calculated specific heats of these materials also agree very well with experimental measurement as shown in Figs. Finally, during our fitting of the equation of state, we extract the isothermal bulk modulus and its pressure derivative at zero external pressure as a function of temperature. The isothermal bulk modulus and the CTE are used to calculate the specific heat at constant pressure for both Cu and AlN. In Figs. Our algorithm calculates the thermal properties of both isotropic and anisotropic materials using the DFT, DFPT and TDEP methods. Several related thermal properties are also calculated including the isothermal bulk modulus and specific heat at constant pressure. Agreement between our calculations and experimental results for the temperature dependent lattice parameters, specific heat at constant pressure, and isothermal bulk modulus give us confidence in our calculation methods. The correspondence between our calculations and experiment for the CTE is only moderate at temperatures above the Debye temperature. This may e.g. be due to unattributed numerical inaccuracies, the present level of theory (PBE-GGA), or due to an inadequate sampling of the anharmonic interactions at elevated temperatures due to the finite number of configurations used in this calculation. Nevertheless, most of our predictions are very well aligned with experiment, which makes us confident that this software can be used to determine the CTE for many more materials of experimental interest either with individual calculations or as part of a high-throughput framework. We have undertaken several careful convergence studies of the number of configurations, super-cell size, and k-point mesh density to minimize the error between our calculations and experimental measurement over the entire temperature range. We have determined that using the k-point mesh density given above provides a reasonable accuracy between our calculated CTE and experiment. Additionally, we have determined that the configuration temperature used by tdep should be slightly smaller than the Debye temperature to account for a reasonable amount of the anharmonic interactions as the temperature approaches the melting temperature. Here, we show results with the configuration temperature equal to 80% of the Debye temperature and have tested both higher and lower configuration temperatures as well with similar results. While not shown here, the present algorithm can be used to calculate the CTE from a completely anisotropic system. Additionally, this algorithm can easily be integrated into existing high-throughput software workflows that we hope will enable subsequent researchers in e.g. designing the next generation temperature-dependent electronics. While one must use caution when calculating temperature-dependent properties, and carefully consider the convergence of many of the DFT, DFPT, and tdep input parameters, this software thus provides an algorithm for automatically calculating the CTE and related temperature-dependent properties of any material with a periodic unit cell. The symmetry and size of this unit cell may be limiting factors of the choice of materials, since it may be prohibitively expensive to perform calculations on very large unit cells with low symmetry with currently available high performance computing resources. with respect to pressure is unit-less, and the cohesive energy is in eV. Finally, the specific heat at constant volume and constant pressure are calculated using Eq. ( modulus. Lower panel: Experimental data for the unit-less pressure derivative at room temperature, shown as a red plus sign, comes from Ref. 73 using the isoentropic bulk modulus.