THz photoconductive antennas are among the most popular devices for THz wave generation and detection. A novel and accurate circuit is proposed to model the performance of such antennas, especially those which are frequency dependant. The suggested equivalent circuit consists of an external source voltage, a source input admittance, a loss resistance related to the electrode loss resistance, a frequency-dependant capacitance associated with capacitive behaviour of the gap between the electrodes, and a controlled voltagedependant source representing the screening of photo-carriers. Based on this model, the radiation from a simple frequency dependent antenna, i.e. a dipole antenna, is investigated. Excellent agreement is observed between the obtained results by the proposed equivalent circuit model and those by measurement. Terahertz (THz) band is defined as the region of the electromagnetic spectrum ranging from 0.1 THz to 10 THz which is between the millimeter and far-infrared frequencies To realize THz generation and detection several approaches are demonstrated, among which THz photoconductive antennas have been of significant attention in established THz experimental setups An appealing approach to analyze the performance of THz photoconductive antennas is to model its radiation characteristics via an equivalent circuit model. To this end, four distinct equivalent circuits have already been proposed. The first model included two constant resistance representing the antenna input impedance and the associated loss of the photoconductive material, and a constant capacitance related to the gap capacitance of the electrodes In this paper, our aim is to develop an accurate and comprehensive circuit model to model photoconductive antennas including those having dependency to the operation frequency. To this end, we start with considering the frequency domain counterpart of the equations previously used to analyze photoconductive antennas in time domain. We then develop an accurate and efficient model for them. Finally, we confirm the validity of the model by obtaining the radiation characteristics of a simple dipole antenna and comparing them with those obtained by measurement. The schematic diagram of a typical THz photoconductive antenna is depicted in Fig. 2) A frequency dependant source admittance Y s (ω) representing the behaviors of the laser pulses and the photo-carriers. To drive the parameter Y s (ω), we first calculate the carrier density N (ω, T ) generated by the illumination using Drude model given by where T is temperature, τ c is the carrier lifetime, h is the Planck's constant, ν opt is the laser frequency, I l (r, ω) is the optical pulse intensity and α(T ) is the optical absorption coefficient defined as in which K abs is a definite constant which is about 9.7 × 10 15 for GaAs where E g (0) is the energy gap at 0 K which is about 1.519 eV for GaAS, α and β are material-specific constant which are about 5.41 × 10 -4 eV K and 204 K for GaAs, respectively in which I l is the laser peak intensity, R and w 0 are power reflection coefficient and beam waist radius, respectively, and τ l is the laser pulse duration. Making use of Eqs. 1 and 4 N (ω, T ) can be written as Assuming that the mobility of electrons is much higher than the mobility of holes, the source admittance of the antenna will be obtained as where L, W and t g are antenna gap length, width and thickness, respectively, and σ s (ω, T ) is of the form where e is electron charge and μ e (T ) is the mobility of electrons obtained based on Einstein equation as in which D and k are diffusion and Boltzman constant. By substituting Eqs. 2 and 7 into Eq. 6, the value of the source admittance can easily be calculated. 3) A resistance R loss taking into account the loss resistance of the electrodes and photoconductive material. 4) A frequency-dependant capacitance C(ω, T ) corresponding to the screening effect of the photo-carriers near the electrodes. We will obtain an accurate expression for C(ω, T ) in the following of the paper. 5) A frequency-dependant voltage-controlled source controlled by the voltage across the capacitance, i.e. Γ(ω, T )V c (ω, T ). We will also obtain the accurate expression of Γ(ω, T ) in the following. 6)The antenna impedance, Z a (ω) which is assumed to have dependency to frequency. We next focus our attention to find the values of proposed parameters C(ω, T ) and Γ(ω, T ). Applying circuit analysis in the circuit shown in Fig. Using Eq. 9, the gap voltage V c (ω, T ) can be easily obtained as We then match Eq. 7 to the physical carrier transport behavior of the photoconductive antenna when illuminated by laser pulses. The electric field distribution in the antenna gap is formulated in Table Reflection Coefficient R 0.318 Laser frequency Once the parameters Γ(ω, T ) and C(ω, T ) are calculated making use of Eqs. 14 and 15, the equivalent circuit of the photoconductive antenna will be accomplished. It is worth mentioning that some simplified assumptions have been applied during modeling process. Fist of all, it is assumed that the electric field distribution in the gap is uniform. Moreover, according to According to basics of the THz photoconductive antennas in which V c (ω, T ) is the antenna gap voltage obtained based on Eq. 10. Once the induced photocurrent in frequency domain is calculated, the temporal behaviour of the photocurrent can simply be obtained by taking inverse Fourier transform. Fig. The radiated THz field of the photoconductive antenna is then investigated. From the basics of the THz photoconductive antennas, the radiated field of a THz photoconductive antenna is proportional to the derivative of the THz photocurrent at the antenna gap As expressed, the temporal behaviour of the radiated field can be obtained by applying an inverse Fourier transform. Fig. In this paper, we proposed a novel equivalent circuit model for frequency dependant THz photoconductive antennas. The proposed equivalent circuit was composed of an external source voltage, a source input admittance, a loss resistance regarding the electrode loss resistance, a frequency-dependant capacitance representing capacitive behaviour of the gap between the electrodes, and finally a controlled voltage-dependant source representing the screening of photo-carriers. The elements of the circuit were determined, one by one. The radiation from a simple frequency dependent dipole antenna was then investigated based on the proposed equivalent circuit model, and compared with the results carried out by measurements. Excellent agreement was observed between these two results confirming the accuracy of the model.