Hydroxyapatite (HAp) is a widely used biomaterial for the preparation of bone and dental implants. Despite the relevance of HAp in medicine, exciting applications involving this material as a bio-compatible photocatalyst, depend on how well we understand its fundamental properties. Experimental evidence suggests that oxygen vacancies play a critical role in the production of surface radicals upon exposure of HAp to ultra-violet (UV) light. However, very little is known about the underlying physical and chemical details. We present a hybrid density-functional study of the structural and electronic properties of oxygen vacancies in large HAp supercells within the plane-wave formalism. We find that under equilibrium conditions, vacancies occur either as a simple vacant oxygen site (in the neutral charge state), or as extended structures replacing several crystalline moieties (in the double plus charge state). Large atomic relaxations upon ionization make the oxygen vacancy a negative-U defect, where the single plus charge state is metastable, being only accessible under UV excitation. From inspection of the transition levels, we find that electron promotion from the valence band top to the donor state of the vacancy, involves a zerophonon transition of 3.6-3.9 eV. This mechanism is the most likely explanation to the 3.4-4.0 eV absorption onset for the observation of photocatalysis using HAp under persistent UV illumination. Hydroxyapatite (HAp) [Ca 10 (PO 4 ) 6 (OH) 2 ] is the main mineral component of bone tissue and teeth, along with the organic component (collagen) and living bone cells (osteoclasts, osteoblasts and osteocytes). The collective interactions between OH dipoles confer to HAp properties like ferroelectricity, pyroelectricity and piezoelectricity, In a latter report, using X-ray photoemission (XPS) and Fourier-transform infra-red (FTIR) spectroscopy, Nishikawa Recently, several point defects in HAp were inspected by means of local density density functional theory, where it was found that an oxygen vacancy in the phosphate (PO 4 ) unit introduces a fully occupied state in the lower half of the gap. In a recent work, we have shown how the quality of the exchange-correlation treatment affects the above properties. In view of the above, we present below a theoretical study of the electronic properties of oxygen vacancies in HAp, which allows us to connect their structure stability, charge state transitions and photoionization energies with the optical excitation needed for the observation of efficient photocatalytic activity. The calculations were carried out using density functional theory (DFT), as implemented by the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP). Oxygen vacancies were introduced in hexagonal supercells made up of 2 × 2 × 2 = 8 polar HAp unitcells (spacegroup P 6 3 and #173 in the crystallographic tables), comprising a total of 352 atoms. Although the monoclinic phase P 2 1 /b was found to be more stable, For the HAp unit cell, we have shown previously that convergence of the electron density and energy is obtained when sampling the band structure with a Γ-centered 2 × 2 × 3 mesh of k-points within the first Brillouin zone (BZ). By doubling the size of the cell along all principal directions, reciprocal lattice vectors are contracted by a factor of two, so that a 1 × 1 × 2 kpoint grid would actually improve on the sampling quality. From convergence tests, we found that the total energy of the 352-atom bulk supercell obtained with a 1 × 1 × 1 grid (Γ-point sampling) differs by less than 0.1 eV from a 1 × 1 × 2-sampled calculation. More importantly, relative energies and ionization energies of defects differ by about 1 meV only. Therefore, all defect calculations employed a Γ-point sampling. The formation energy of a defect in a crystalline sample (with arbitrary volume) can be written as, 62 (1) which depends primarily on the energy difference between defective and pristine crystals, namely E and E HAp , respectively. The defect is considered on a particular configuration R and charge state q. The third and fourth terms account for any stoichiometric and charge imbalances between the first two terms. Accordingly, μ i are chemical potentials for any species i which are respectively added (∆n i > 0) or removed (∆n i < 0) from or to the perfect crystal the make the defect. The last term accounts for the energy involved in the exchange of electrons between the defect in charge state q and an electron reservoir with a chemical potential μ e = E v + E F , where E v and E F stand for the energy of the valence band top and Fermi level, respectively. The latter mostly depends on the type and amount of defects and impurities in the crystal, and can vary in the range 0 ≤ E F ≤ E g , where E g is the band gap width of the material. For an oxygen vacancy, ∆n O = -1 and ∆n i = 0 otherwise, so that the third term in Eq. 1 reduces to the oxygen chemical potential (μ O ). In the present work we are mainly interested in the electronic properties of the oxygen vacancy, which are independent of the choice of the chemical potentials. Hence, we simply consider μ O as the energy per atom in molecular oxygen. This was calculated by placing a molecule in a box (edge length 20 Å) in the spin-1 ground state. Finally, we note that because we are using periodic boundary conditions, the calculation of a defect with net charge q within the supercell would lead to a diverging total energy. This is avoided by spreading a uniform background counter-charge with density ρ back = -q/Ω over the cell volume Ω. Crystalline HAp has oxygen atoms on four symmetry-inequivalent sites, which are referred to as oxygen types I-IV. Types I, II and III are in the phosphate units, while type IV oxygen atoms are located in the OH -anions. These are denoted as O(I),...,O(IV) and are shown in the upper half of Figure Before describing the structure of the oxygen vacancies it is convenient to leave a few words about notation. An oxygen vacancy in charge state q is denoted as V q O(R) , where R stands for a particular structure label. It is important to understand that q is the net charge of the whole defect (enclosing its core and possibly many ligands) and must be distinguished from the oxidation state of the moieties that make the core of the defect. Access to such information would be provided with a description of the electronic state of the defect, preferably using a compact recipe. For instance, the creation of a neutral oxygen vacancy in the HAp lattice can be described as a replacement of a PO 3-can be rationalized as the removal of neutral O from OH -, leaving an hydride anion to maintaining charge neutrality of the whole system. In the neutral charge state we have a [H -] 0 OH structure, where after structural relaxation the hydride species becomes located close to the In V O(I) -V O(IV) defects, all atoms (but the missing oxygen) remain essentially close to their original crystalline coordinates, hence the use of subscripted O(I)-O(IV) labels to identify their structure. However, additional structures, hereafter referred to as extended structures, were also found for the oxygen vacancy in HAp. One type of such extended structures can be described as a pair of neighboring oxygen vacancies connected by an O-interstitial, 2V O + O. A second type is best described as a complex made of an OH-vacancy next to an H-interstitial, V OH + H. Two defects of type 2V O + O are singled out and labeled V O(A) and V O(C) . They are shown in Figures are unstable and relax to an extended configuration. For relaxations in charge state +2 that started from structures I and III the final structures were respectively A and C. Here, the P atom of the PO 3 unit in V O(I) (or V O(III) ) moved across the plane defined by the three O atoms to connect to the O atom from the nearest PO 4 moiety. Such a severe relaxation can be explained by electron transfer from a neighboring PO -3 4 anion to the empty P(sp 3 ) orbital of ending up in the V + O(IV) state. Conversely, when starting from V 0 O(B) , the state shown in Figure now ending up in the V 0 O(II) state. Relative defect energies in all charge states of interest are reported in Table In broad terms, Table O defect, the ground state is structure C (see Figure ) by conferring some p-character to the lone states of the bridging O atom, and making V 2+ O(A) metastable by at least 1.3 eV. This is evident in Figures Although further work is necessary, we may speculate that once a V ++ O(B) defect is formed, the separation of V + OH and H + is most likely to take place via consecutive jumps of neighboring OH -anions into the positively charged OHvacancy. Defect structures described above were only investigated in neutral, positive and double positive charge states. Inspection of the Kohn-Sham eigenvalues at k = Γ confirmed that V O defects are all donors. The diagram in Figure The energy of the highest occupied states in Figure Equation 1 allows us to construct a phasediagram for the oxygen vacancy in HAp as a function of the chemical potentials and Fermi energy. This is particularly useful for defects which adopt different structures in several charge states, allowing us to immediately identify the most stable states for a particular position of the Fermi energy. The value of E F for which two solutions E f (q) and E f (q + 1) from Eq. 1 become identical, defines a threshold above which V q O is more stable than V q+1 O . This is the defect transition level and can be calculated with respect to the valence band top as, (2) where we distinguish any possible different structures R q and R q+1 for charge states q and q + 1, respectively, E is the total energy (cf. Eq. 1), which incorporates a periodic charge correction for q = 0, and I bulk = E bulk (q = +1) -E bulk (q = 0) is the ionization energy of a bulk supercell. Note that alternatively, one could have replaced I bulk in Eq. 2 by the energy of the highest occupied Kohn-Sham level from a bulk calculation. We have chosen to avoid the use of Kohn-Sham energies, keeping the results solely based on total energies. The Kohn-Sham band gap from B3LYP-level calculations (E KS g = 7.34 eV) is about 0.49 eV wider than the quasi-particle gap (calculated as Figure In line with the discussion above, among the formation energies of neutral defects (horizontal lines), that of V 0 O(IV) is lowest, with other structures being metastable by about 1 eV. For the positive charge state, pyramidal [PO are the most stable, with a slight preference for It is important to realize that under no circumstance the positive charge states are thermodynamically stable (irrespectively of the Fermi energy location). Formation energies of V + O defects are always higher than those of neutral and double positive defects. This property is usually referred to as negative-U, A consequence of a negative-U ordering of donor levels (as depicted in Figure (and/or possibly V 2+ O(B) ) may occur. These states are represented by thick lines in Figure For the sake of reference, we leave the reader with Table Our results suggest that under UV illumination, the most likely excitation channels for the oxygen vacancy are (i) electron emission from V 0 O(IV) to the conduction band, (ii) holeemission from V 2+ O(B) or V 2+ O(C) to the valence band (which is equivalent to the promotion of an electron from the valence band to the empty donor state of a double positive vacancy), or even (iii) electron emission from metastable V 0 O(I) -V 0 O(III) defects. For the first case, the energy needed to perform a vertical transition from the ground state structure, + e - is estimated to be higher than E ph ∼ 6.5 eV (see Kohn-Sham levels for structure IV in Figure O(I,II,III) + e -, corresponding to an absorption energy E ad = 5.51 eV, 5.49 eV, 5.16 eV for transitions where the final structures are V + O(I) , V + O(II) , and V + O(III) , respectively. In the above, ∆E(0/+) = 1.34 eV, 1.36 eV and 1.69 are donor transition energies considering R 0 = IV and R + = I, II and III, respectively, while E g = 6.85 eV is the calculated quasi-particle gap width. Although the adiabatic transition energies are closer to the experimental data, kinetic effects are expected limit the exchange of oxygen between neighboring PO 4 and OH moieties, where the first reactant and second product represent V 0 O(IV) and V + O(I,II,III) defects, respectively. We also note that being a negative-U defect, under persistent excitation a second ionization of V O(I,II,III) would immediately follow the first, but now with considerably lower energy, i.e. in the range 3.3-4.3 eV, leading to the formation of V 2+ O(A,B,C) defects. Mechanism (ii), namely a hole-emission from V 2+ O(C) or from V 2+ O(B) , would be likely in p-type Table Functional ∆E(0/+) R 0 /R HAp, where the Fermi energy is in the lower half of the band gap and the ground state is double positive (see Figure , where h + stands for a hole in the valence band, and the energy as estimated from the B3LYP one-electron energies is close to 7 eV. Such a large value results from the shallow donor nature of the extended defects, which place the donor transition very high in the gap (see Figure If we instead consider an adiabatic hole emission from V 2+ O(C) to the lowest energy V + O structure, i.e. V + O(III) , we find 3.6 eV, in rather good agreement with the optical experiments. involves an absorption of 3.7 eV, but in this case the mechanism implies the a displacement of OH -from the V 2+ O(B) structure (see Figures which we find to proceed spontaneously (without an impeding barrier) upon hole emission. In the transition above, the reactants and first product represent V 2+ O(B) and V + O(IV) defects, respectively. The energy needed for the transformation is 3.9 eV, also accounting well for the observed UV absorption energy. Finally, considering (iii) the photo-ionization of metastable neutral V O(I) -V O(III) defects (by promotion of electrons into the conduction band), which could be present in the material, we find again large vertical ionization energies (close to 6 eV), whereas adiabatic energies are in the range 4.1-4.3 eV, also close to the experimental threshold energy for the observation of photocatalysis. All the above transitions induce quite large changes to the local P-O bonding. That would explain the XPS and FTIR experiments of Refs. 38, 30 and 32, that show a clear transformation of the P-O bonds upon UV illumination of HAp. However, based on our results it is not possible to provide a final assignment to that effect. Decisive help would be provided by combining local vibrational mode calculations with vibrational FTIR spectroscopy on samples with good quality. Despite the uncertainty, our results suggest that the excitation channel (ii), which involves a photo-induced bond-breaking of extended structures, and shows a transition energy in excellent agreement with the observations, appears to be the strongest candidate to explain the onset absorption of HAp in the range 3.4-4.0 eV. We presented a study of the structural and electronic properties of oxygen vacancies in hydroxyapatite by means of hybrid density functional theory within the plane-wave formalism. The vacancies were investigated in large supercells, from which formation energies and electronic transition energies were calculated. We found that the vacancies essentially occur in two distinct forms, either as a simple vacant oxygen site (referred to as structures I-IV), or as an oxygen atom replacing two neighboring oxygen vacancies (extended structures A-C). The former type of vacancies are deep donors, while the latter are shallow donors with rather low ionization energies. No acceptor states (stable negatively charged defects) were found. Vacancy structures I-IV are more stable in the neutral charge state, while extended structures A-C are preferred in the double plus charge state. This means that the oxygen vacancy adopts rather different configurations on samples where the Fermi energy is in the upper or the lower half of the band gap. The large relaxation energies upon ionization makes the oxygen vacancy a negative-U defect, where the single plus charge state is metastable, being only attainable under excitation (for instance by UV illumination). From inspection of the one-electron Kohn-Sham levels, combined with the transition levels obtained from total energies, we find that electron promotion from the valence band top to the donor state of the positively charged structures, involves a zero-phonon absorption of 3.6-3.9 eV. This transition leads to a spontaneous breaking of either P-O-P or O-H-O bridgebonds, and most likely explains the 3.4-4.0 eV absorption onset for the observation of photocatalysis under persistent UV illumination. O defects in HAp are not stable in the negative charge state. moiety in pristine HAp by a PO3- 3 anion, both in the -3 oxidation state, thus ensuring charge neutrality of the whole sample. Along these lines, we introduce a more informative defect notation, namely [X n ] q Y , which represents a defect moiety X in oxidation state n, replacing a crystalline site/moiety Y with oxidation state m = nq, thus leading to a defect with net charge q. For instance, a positively charged oxygen vacancy can either be referred to as V + O or alternatively as a PO 2- 3 anion replacing a PO 3- 4 moiety, i.e., [PO 2- 3 ] + PO 4 . Among the many vacancy structures investigated, those shown in Figures1(a)-(e) are the most relevant as they showed lower energy. Metastable structures with more than 2 eV above the ground state (for each particular charge state) will not be discussed. Figure1(a) describes the formation of a pyramidal PO 3 structure, where removal of the O(I) atom in "Bulk Hap" highlighted using a bright red color, leads to V O(I) as shown in the lower part of the figure, where a "Defective HAp" region is shown. Analogous structures for V O(II) and V O(III) were obtained as well. In the neutral charge state the resulting [PO3- 3 ] 0 PO 4 structures display a fully occupied sp 3 orbital on the P atom, resembling the phosphine molecule. This is shown in Figure2(a), where an isosurface of the electron density corresponding to the highest occupied state is represented in blue for the specific case of V 0 O(III) . Figure1(b) shows the case of a missing O(IV) atom, leaving an isolated H atom in the OH channel. This defect