Atomically thin two dimensional (2D) materials are promising candidates for miniaturized high-performance optoelectronic devices. Here, we report on multilayer MoTe2 photodetectors contacted with asymmetric electrodes based on n-and p-type graphene layers. The asymmetry in the graphene contacts creates a large (Ebi ~100 kV cm -1 ) built-in electric field across the short (l = 15 nm) MoTe2 channel, causing a high and broad (λ = 400 to 1400 nm) photoresponse even without any externally applied voltage. Spatially resolved photovoltage maps reveal an enhanced photoresponse and larger builtin electric field in regions of the MoTe2 layer between the two graphene contacts. Furthermore, a fast (~10 μs) photoresponse is achieved in both the photovoltaic and photoconductive operation modes of the junction. Our findings could be extended to other 2D materials and offer prospects for the implementation of asymmetric graphene contacts in future low-power optoelectronic applications. Two dimensional (2D) van der Waals crystals have received great attention due to their excellent properties and versatility for a wide range of potential applications in optoelectronics. Thus, both the length of the channel and the quality of the contacts should be carefully chosen to optimize the photoresponse. In this study, we report on photodetectors based on MoTe2 with vertical asymmetric graphene contacts. We use p-type graphene grown by chemical vapour deposition (CVD) as the top contact and n-type exfoliated graphene as the bottom contact. This asymmetry in the graphene contacts is adopted to break the mirror symmetry of the internal electric field profile, thus creating a large built-in electric field Ebi. This feature combined with the short length of the MoTe2 optically active channel enables an efficient and fast photoresponse. The heterostructure exhibits a high and broad spectral photoresponse from the VIS to the NIR range of the electromagnetic spectrum (λ = 400 -1400 nm) without any external applied voltage: the photoresponsivity is R = 12.38 mA W -1 at λ = 1064 nm and R = 27.64 mA W -1 at λ = 550 nm. Through scanning photovoltaic mapping, an enhanced light absorption is clearly observed in the overlapping region of the graphene and MoTe2 layers. Furthermore, because of the short (l = 15 nm) MoTe2 channel, the response time of the heterostructure can be as short as ~ 6.15 μs, which is 1-3 orders of magnitude faster than that reported before for MoTe2-based photodetectors. Figure Figure1(b) shows the atomic force microscopy (AFM) image of one of our devices. The large and uniform exfoliated multi-layer graphene serves as a bottom electrode and has a thickness of 3.6 nm; the MoTe2 flake has a thickness of about 15 nm; the top CVD-graphene layer corresponds to single layer graphene. Raman spectroscopy studies were conducted to assess the quality of the individual flakes and heterostructure over an extended frequency range (from 200 to 2800 cm -1 ) with an excitation laser wavelength λ = 532 nm and power P = 100 μW. A large magnification (100 ×) objective lens was used to focus the laser to a spot diameter of 1.5 μm and probe different regions, including the MoTe2, exfoliated graphene, CVDgraphene and the region where all layers overlap. Figure MoTe2. To investigate the electrical properties of our devices, the current, Ids, was measured for different voltages, Vds, applied between the drain (top CVD graphene) and source (bottom exfoliated graphene) contacts. All the electrical measurements were carried out in vacuum (~5 mbar) at room temperature. We now examine in detail the photoresponse properties of our photodetectors. where α increases from 0.855 to 0.911 when Vds decreases from 0 to -0.20 V. Thus even without any applied source-drain voltage, the photo-generated electron-hole pairs can be effectively separated by the built-in electric field of the heterostructure to generate a photocurrent. Also, although α increases with decreasing Vds, its value remains always smaller than 1. This is the fingerprint of a photoconductivity gain that is influenced by charge traps in the layers and/or their interfaces. shows the normalized spectral response of the heterostructure at different illumination wavelengths (under the same power P = 0.63 W cm -2 ). It reveals a broad photoresponse from the VIS to the NIR range (λ = 400 -1400 nm) with two clear peaks around λ ~ 600 nm and 1150 nm. The peak at λ ~ 1150 nm corresponds to the excitonic absorption associated with the lowest direct optical transition at the K-point of the Brillouin zone. layers. To estimate the built-in electric field, Ebi, in the heterostructure, we fabricated and measured the transfer characteristics of FETs based on individual MoTe2, exfoliated graphene, and CVD-graphene layers on a SiO2/Si substrate. According to the transfer curves in Figure The Fermi energy, EF, for monolayer graphene, is derived from equation ( Here EF is measured relative to the neutrality point of the graphene band structure, Vg is the back gate voltage on the Si-substrate, VD is the charge neutrality point voltage from the transfer curves of graphene, vF ≈ 10 6 m s -1 is the Fermi velocity, ε 0 is the permittivity of free space, ε = 3.9 is the dielectric constant of SiO2, e is the electron charge and t = 300 nm is the thickness of SiO2. ⁄ )] and I(t)=I 0 exp(-t τ d ⁄ ), where τr and τd are the time constants for the rise and decay of the current. By fitting the rising and falling edges of the current versus time in Figure In summary, we have demonstrated high-performance heterostructure photodetectors based on multilayer MoTe2 with vertical asymmetric graphene contacts. The heterostructure not only exhibits a broadband photoresponse from λ = 400 to 1400 nm, but also shows high responsivity of up to R = 27.64 mA W -1 under zero bias. Thus even without any externally applied voltage, the photo-generated carriers are efficiently separated by the built-in electric field of the heterostructure. The photoresponse is significantly enhanced in the vertical overlapping region (exfoliated graphene/MoTe2/CVD graphene). Furthermore, the heterostructure shows a fast temporal response with decay and rise times in the microsecond range. The improved photoresponse indicate that van der Waals heterostructures with asymmetric graphene contacts are promising candidates for high-speed and self-powered optoelectronic devices. Device fabrication. The multilayer graphene was mechanically exfoliated using adhesive tape from a bulk single crystal. We find and identify the approximate thickness of the graphene flakes by optical contrast using an optical microscope. The accurate thickness of the flakes was determined by atomic force microscopy (AFM). The multilayer graphene was firstly transferred on a Si/SiO2 substrate (300 nm-thick SiO2) and served as bottom contact. Using the same mechanical exfoliation and transfer method, a MoTe2 flake was then transferred onto the bottom graphene layer. Finally, a CVD graphene microstamp was transferred onto the MoTe2 sheet to form the top contact. The CVD graphene was synthesized on a Cu substrate. By wet-etching, electron beam lithography and oxygen plasma etching, CVD-graphene was processed into microstamps prior to the mechanical transfer. Metallic contacts (Ta/Au) were fabricated on the substrate using standard photoetching, magnetron sputtering and lift off. All mechanical exfoliation and transfer processes were conducted inside a glove box. 