We have developed a flexible, interdigitated supercapacitor with high energy storage capacity for emerging wearable/flexible electronic applications. Locally obtained, low cost biomass (banana peel) was impregnated with KOH at high temperature under inert atmosphere to synthesize activated carbon with significant Brunauer-Emmett-Teller surface area of 62.03m2/g. The supercapacitor was fabricated by screen printing interdigitated current collector of conducting silver ink on a thin flexible PET substrate and subsequent deposition of activated carbon and drop casting of gel electrolyte. Fabricated supercapacitor exhibits high capacitance of 33.18 mF/cm 2 at 1mV/s scan rate and 20.12 mF/cm 2 at discharge current of 1mA and high energy density of 5.87μWh/cm 2 . The developed flexible supercapacitor retains its energy storing capacity (~90%) over several cycles of mechanical bending and repetitive electronic cycling tests (~5000 cycles). Locally available biomass based activated carbon and low cost screen printing technique can be used for large scale fabrication of supercapacitor. The flexible supercapacitor demonstrates high energy storing capacity and mechanical durability through multiple bending and charging and discharging through LED. Therefore, it can be used for further developing integrated wearable and printed electronic devices. Energy storage is equally important as energy generation as generating energy at all times is neither possible nor is economically feasible. Modern day electronic devices are predominantly powered by lithium based batteries which have limitations in terms of wearability. With the rise in demand for wearable electronic devices, need for flexible/wearable energy storing device has arisen. Supercapacitor has high energy storing capacity, long life, rapid charge/discharge ability, safe from explosions and leakage and also environment friendly. Banana peel (musa acuminata) was collected from local sources. The peel was then thoroughly washed with distilled water and dried overnight in vacuum oven at 80°C. Aqueous solution of KOH was prepared by mixing 3g of KOH flakes in 50 ml of deionized water. Small amount of dried peel (3g) was added to this aqueous KOH solution and was stirred at 200 rpm for 2 hours. The peel was removed from the solution and dried overnight in vacuum oven at 80°C. The KOH impregnated peel was heated in a muffle furnace in absence of air at 600 °C for 1 hr. The residue was washed with dilute HCL and distilled water several times until the pH reached 7 and was then dried overnight in vacuum oven at 80°C resulting in activated carbon. D and G bands at 1348 cm -1 and 1600 cm -1 respectively obtained from the spectrum corresponds to that of activated carbon. The PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte was prepared by adding 1 g of PVA into 10 ml of DI water under constant stirring for 2hrs. The whole mixture was maintained at 90°C. After a clear solution is obtained, 1ml of H3PO4 was added into the mixture and was stirred for another 1hr. where, I is the constant discharge current, td is discharge time, a= area of active part of device (12.25 cm 2 ), V' is effective discharge voltage (1.45 V, excluding IR drop), which was equal to 20.12 mF/cm 2 . Also the energy and power density of individual supercapacitor was calculated using Energy density, This work demonstrates a durable thin flexible interdigitated supercapacitor fabricated using simple techniques/methods and easily available inexpensive materials which reduces the overall cost of the device considerably. The fabricated supercapacitor has demonstrated high capacitance of 33.18 mF/cm 2 at 1mV/s scan rate and 20.12 mF/cm 2 at discharge current of 1mA (~ 82μA/cm 2 ) and high energy density of 5.87μWh/cm 2 . The flexible supercapacitor showed a satisfactory performance retaining ~ 90% of energy storing capacity after bending and multiple electronic cycling tests (~5000 cycles). Despite the good performance, silver ink based current collector gets degraded over time as it reacts with the acid present in the gel electrolyte. So, conductive ink based on carbon material can be used to print electrodes which would tolerate the acid for longer period and will further reduce the cost of the device. Activated carbon could be used along with conductive carbon material and nanosized transition metal oxides as electrode material to further enhance the performance of the supercapacitor. Hence, the developed thin flexible interdigitated supercapacitor with high energy storing capacity can be a better alternative as a wearable energy source. Also, the fabricated supercapacitor can be utilized for further development of emerging flexible/wearable electronic devices.