The giant spin Hall effect in magnetic heterostructures along with low spin memory loss and high interfacial spin mixing conductance are prerequisites to realize energy efficient spin torque based logic devices. We report giant spin Hall angle (SHA) of 28.67 (5.09) for W (Ta) interfaced epi-Co 60 Fe 40 /TiN structures. The spin-orbit torque switching current density (J Crit ) is as low as 1.82 (8.21) MA/cm 2 in W (Ta)/Co 60 Fe 40 (t CoFe )/TiN structures whose origin lies in the epitaxial interfaces. These structures also exhibit very low spin memory loss and high spin mixing conductance. These extraordinary values of SHA and therefore ultra-low J Crit in semiconducting industry compatible epitaxial materials combinations open up a new direction for the realization of energy efficient spin logic devices by utilizing epitaxial interfaces. Pure spin current based spintronic devices have advantages over conventional microelectronic devices owing to low energy dissipation, fast switching, and high-speed data processing etc., and can be integrated with microelectronic semiconductor devices for better functionality insulators exhibit the highest value of spin Hall angle, however their thin film fabrication is challenging. Therefore, present technological focus is to find CMOS (complementary metaloxide semiconductor) technology compatible material combinations with even larger SOTs, or more specifically larger spin angular momentum transfer across the interfaces in magnetic heterostructures. Spin manipulation in the bulk or at the interface plays a decisive role in building the next generation of spintronics devices, viz. spin torque magnetic random access memories (ST-MRAMs), spin logic devices, ST-transistors and ST nano-oscillators To optimize the bilayer stacks for devices, there is a need to control interfacial properties like spin backflow, spin memory loss and magnetic proximity effects that may arise at/near the interface in FM/NM bilayer structures, properties that demean the overall spin transport in the structures In this work, spin pumping measurements were performed interface at which the effective damping reverses sign is 1.82 (8.21) MA/cm 2 , which is comparable to the values reported for conductive topological insulators In-plane angle dependent FMR measurements reveal that the epitaxially grown CoFe thin films exhibit cubic anisotropy, as shown in SI. In the in-plane FMR configuration, the resonance field H r and full-width at half-maximum linewidth ∆H of the spectra were determined by using a lock-in-amplifier based FMR technique; in-plane FMR spectra are presented in SI and the estimated parameters are shown in Table profiles, respectively, to the FMR line-shape. The anti-damping τ AD torque acts against the intrinsic damping torque τ D in the FM layer. In case of interfacial SOI, the Rashba Edelstein effect contributes with a field-like torque (τ FL ) with direction opposite to that of τ Oe . At resonance, the temporal variation of the magnetization vector with respect to the direction of I rf produces due to the anisotropic magnetoresistance of the FM layer a time varying resistance that mixes with I rf yielding a dc voltage output. In our case, using a low-frequency (1 kHz) modulation of I rf the STFMR signal is detected using a lock-in amplifier. The observed STFMR spectra exhibit a combination of symmetric and anti-symmetric Lorentzian weight factors where V 0 is the amplitude of the mixing voltage. ) The line-shape parameters S, A, H r and H were obtained by fitting the STFMR spectra using Eq. ( where the spin current density J S =  SH MOD J C,dc (NM); STFMR spectra were recorded for different I dc in the range +5 mA to -5mA on W(6nm)/epi-CoFe(10nm)/TiN/Si and Ta(6nm)/epi-CoFe(6nm)/TiN/Si patterned structures. The recorded spectra were fitted using Eq. ( α eff (I dc ) increases from 0.00250.0006 to 0.01170.0004 for W(6nm)/epi-CoFe(10nm)/TiN/Si as I dc is varied from +5mA to -5mA, and from 0.00470.0025 to 0.00670.0019 for Ta(6nm)/epi-CoFe(10nm)/TiN/Si as I dc is varied from +6mA to 5mA. To make this data more understandable, the change in cubic for W and tetragonal for Ta) as reported in our previous work The results of f vs. H r and H vs. f are shown in Fig. 2 (e) and (f), respectively, together with fits employing the in-plane Kittel equation, f = and 2.14±0.01T for W(6nm)/epi-Co 60 Fe 40 (10nm)/TiN/Si and Ta(6nm)/epi-Co 60 Fe 40 (10nm)/TiN/Si, respectively, which closely match with the FMR determined values. The determined values of  eff are found to be 0.0073±0.0002 and 0.0056±0.0001 for W(6nm)/epi-CoFe(10nm)/TiN/Si and Ta(6nm)/epi-CoFe(10nm)/TiN/Si, respectively. Since the intrinsic damping  0 values of CoFe in both samples are nearly equal (cf. Fig. S6(c) of SI), the higher value of  eff in W(6nm)/epi-CoFe(10nm)/TiN/Si is due to a larger spin pumping contribution. The inhomogeneity contribution to damping H 0 is found to be 5mT and 1mT for W(6nm)/epi-CoFe(10nm)/TiN/Si and Ta(6nm)/epi-CoFe(10nm)/TiN/Si, respectively. To estimate the true  SH LS values of the W and Ta interfaced heterostructures, Eq. (2) must be corrected for the spin pumping contribution in the symmetric line-shape, and the TiN layer Oersted and interface field-like contributions in the anti-symmetric line-shape. from the W/Ta layer in the line-shape. The SOT contribution weight factor in the STFMR spectrum can be expressed as η SOT = 1 (1 + ISHE and V STFMR sym are the spinpumping and SOT contributions, respectively, to the total The frequency dependent η SOT values are calculated by using the method presented in Ref. 26 and out-of-plane FMR determined parameters values (See SI for details), and subsequently the interfacial parameters corrected spin pumping J C,dc ((W, Ta) + TiN) (R W,Ta × R TiN) + (R CoFe × R TiN ) + (R W,Ta × R CoFe ) )] and 72-cm, respectively. The charge current in the W (Ta) layer is about 7% (10%) of I dc . These values are close to the value reported by Huang et al. for the charge current in Ta (6.8% of I dc ) in Ta(5nm)/CoFeB(1.5-4 nm)/Pt(5nm) heterostructures 36 . However, Nan et al. 37 reported a charge current corresponding to 34.5% of I dc in the Ta layer in Ta(6nm)/Py(4nm) structures. Since our structures include a TiN seed layer with resistivity 98-cm, a significant part of I dc is expected to go through the TiN layer. The spin Hall angle