The path toward Li-ion batteries with higher energy-densities will likely involve use of thin lithium metal (Li) anode (<50 μm thickness), whose cyclability today remains limited by dendrite formation and low Coulombic efficiency (CE). Previous studies have shown that the solid-electrolyte-interface (SEI) of the Li metal plays a crucial role in Li electrodeposition and stripping behavior. However, design rules for optimal SEIs on Li metal are not well established. Here, using integrated experimental and modeling studies on a series of structurally-similar SEI-modifying model compounds, we reveal the relationship between SEI compositions, Li deposition morphology and CE, and identify two key descriptors (ionicity and compactness) for high-performance SEIs. Using this understanding, we design a highly ionic and compact SEI that shows excellent cycling performance in high specific energy LiCoO 2 -Li full cells at practical current densities. Our results provide guidance for rational design of the SEI to further improve Li metal anodes. separators, Li metal is highly reductive and reacts instantaneously with electrolyte constituents upon contact to form a surface film generally referred to as the solid-electrolyte-interface (SEI). Here, we first quantify the impact of Li metal thickness and CE on energy density and cycle-life of Li-metal rechargeable batteries. Then, using a model series of structurally-similar SEI-modifying compounds, we show the interrelationship between SEI compositions, Li deposition behavior, and CE. We identify two key descriptors (i.e. ionicity and compactness) for high performance SEIs using integrated experimental and modeling studies. Using this approach, electrolytes that result in a highly ionic and compact SEI enriched with LiF, Li 2 CO 3 , and Li 2 SO 3 , have been discovered, which form a dense Li film during electrodeposition (charge) and achieve both dendrite-free and high CE cycling. Li metal full batteries based on thin Li metal anodes (50 μm in thickness) and LiCoO 2 cathodes (theoretical areal capacity ~4.2 mAh cm -2 ) demonstrate stable cycling exceeding 240 cycles (to 80% capacity retention) at practical C-rates (0.2 C charge/0.5 C discharge, 1 C » 3.7 mA cm -2 ). For even thinner Li metal anodes (20 μm thickness), full cells still cycle for 130 cycles. Our results provide guidance for rational selection and optimization of SEI modifiers to enable practical Li metal rechargeable batteries. The calculated energy density, specific energy, and cycle life of Li metal batteries consisting of a high-area-capacity LiCoO 2 cathode (>4.2 mAh cm -2 ) and a lithium metal anode of various thicknesses (i.e. 20 μm-thick Li corresponds to ~4.12 mAh cm -2 ) are shown in Figure " #$%&'() *" +, [1] Here, Q cathode and Q Li are the area capacities of the cathode and Li metal anode, respectively; F p varies inversely with the percentage of Li excess of the battery, and naturally the battery reaches its highest energy density in the anode-free case, F p = 1. Thus in Figure -" #$%&'() [2] (Q cathode + Q Li )/n is the average Li loss per cycle. Here we assume charging to 100% state-of-charge, and that CE loss occurs only at the Li metal anode, not at the cathode. Therefore, Q Li passed per cycle is equivalent to Q cathode during cycling. From Equation 1 and 2, the relation between F p and cycle life (n) can be determined as: The F p versus n plots in Figure As shown in Figure The central theme of this work is to establish the selection criteria for SEI modifiers that create a stable Li metal anode interface, and one which has the potential to self-heal upon formation of cracks. The spontaneous reaction between Li metal and iodine (I 2 ), which is historically used in primary batteries and leads to the formation of a Li + conducting layer and solid separator during operation, Density-functional theory (DFT) calculations were used to probe reactions of a wide range of fluorinated organic compounds and lithium metal surface to determine their propensity to form a desired SEI (Supplementary Fig. To investigate the relationship between SEI composition and Li metal electrodeposition behavior, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed on the Li film deposited in EL-0, EL-1, EL-3, and EL-4 electrolytes using the LiCoO 2 -Li cells. The same Li films on which the XPS measurements were made were examined by SEM. The SEM used for this study was installed inside an argon-filled glovebox so that the samples were never exposed to air. Top-view SEM images showed that Li particles of several microns were deposited in EL-0, EL-1, and EL-4 (Figure In order to accurately measure Coulombic efficiency during plating and stripping, it is necessary to have a limited lithium source so that the loss of working lithium can be traced. This can be done with a full cell using an intercalation cathode, but any losses at the positive electrode may be difficult to separate from those occurring at the lithium metal electrode. We developed an asymmetric Li-Li cell test that is able to accurately quantify the average Coulombic efficiency occurring over a number of cycles, which we denote CE avg (Figure Replacing EC with a fluorinated EC such as FEC and DFEC significantly improved the CE avg to 97.0% and 96.2%, respectively. However, this beneficial effect was not observed for CF 3 EC, which showed a very low CE avg of 20.9%. The EL-4 electrolyte with 3wt% DTD additive showed the highest CE avg of 97.9%. High CE avg was observed for the cases where the SEI contained more ionic compounds and the deposited Li was denser. Li is deposited on bare metal current collector, since the use of thin Li anodes in a full cell in most instances will provide a better compromise between energy density and cycle life than the so-called "anode-free" configuration where deposition occurs on metal current collector. The cycling performance of the thin Li metal anodes in the presence of the different electrolytes and SEIs was further evaluated in Li metal full cells consisting of a "high-voltage" LiCoO 2 cathode (areacapacity ~4.2 mAh cm -2 when charged to 4.5 V vs Li + /Li), and a 20 μm-thick Li anode coated on a copper foil (areal capacity ~4.12 mAh cm -2 ), and a single-layer polyethylene separator. 2025-type coin cell cases made of 316L grade stainless steel and a single-layer polyethylene separator, were used for the tests. The full cells were cycled at 0.2 C charge-0.5 C discharge between 4.5 and 3.0 V. Three formation cycles were performed at 0.1 C before the long-term cycling tests. The LiCoO 2 -Li (20 μm) battery with the EL-0 electrolyte showed rapid capacity fade (Figure The performance of the Li metal full batteries with the EL-4 electrolyte is among the best reported for Li metal rechargeable batteries. Under the same test conditions, the EL-4 electrolyte provides even better cycling performance and CE than the previously reported dual salt electrolyte 10 (Supplementary Fig. In order to formulate the structure-property relationship between the electrolyte components and their function in full cells, we identify two descriptors that are key for a high performance, self-formed SEI. The two key factors are (i) the ionicity of the SEI, which is needed for ensuring low electronic conductivity More details on the rationale behind the two descriptors is discussed in the Supplementary Information. These two descriptors, used in conjunction, can rationalize the experimentally observed trends. Based on the descriptor for the ionicity of the SEI, among the present fluorinated solvents, the trend is CF 3 EC << FEC < DFEC. Using just this descriptor, we would conclude that DFEC leads to a more ionic SEI. However, when comparing the descriptor for compactness of the SEI, the incomplete decomposition of DFEC leads to much larger moieties for DFEC than FEC. These two factors taken together indicates that FEC should fare better due to a combination of an ionic and compact SEI. The case of DTD is special and it suggests a new strategy to enrich the LiF content in the SEI. Unlike the other electrolyte molecules considered, DTD decomposes along with LiPF 6 to form LiF, PF 5 , ethane-1,2-diolate (similar to FEC) and SO 2 2-anion. The latter eventually leads to the formation of Li 2 SO 4 , Li 2 SO 3 and ROSO 2 Li as observed in the experiments. For the two descriptors identified, DTD leads to the formation of a more ionic SEI while maintaining high density quite similar to FEC. We attribute the improved behavior seen in FEC-DTD case to increased LiF and Li 2 CO 3 formation from the DTD addition as well To avoid electrode contaminations caused by exposure to air, the Li electrodes were rinsed using fresh dimethyl carbonate, dried, sealed in a specialized holder inside the Ar-filled glovebox, and then transferred into the chamber of the XPS instrument. SEM characterizations were carried out using a Phenom-Pro scanning electron microscope installed inside an Ar-filled glovebox. The cross-section of the deposited Li films were prepared by slowly tearing the electrodes. Using a razor blade to cut the electrodes is not advised because it easily deforms the soft Li metal and appears to "smooth out" the deposited Li films. Electrochemical measurements. Electrochemical performances were measured using CR2025 coin-type cells. The Li metal full batteries were assembled using a LiCoO 2 cathode, a thin Li metal anode (20 or 50 μm in thickness) and one piece of polyethylene separator (Tonen), and <75 μL electrolyte per cell. Electrochemical tests were performed using battery cyclers (Shenzhen Neware, BTS4000-5V, 10/1.0 mA version, 0.05% current/voltage resolution). The coin cells were cycled inside temperature chambers set at 30 ± 0.2 °C. The lithium metal full batteries were first cycled at 0.1 C between 4.5-3.0 V for three cycles and then charged at 0.2 C and discharged at 0.5 C repeatedly. 1 C equals to ~3.7 mA cm -2 . DFT simulations. Self-Consistent DFT calculations were performed using the real space projectoraugmented wave method Each layer consisted of 3 ́3 Li unit cell. The solvent molecule along with Li + and PF 6 -ions were placed on top of Li surface and the structure was allowed to relax to determine the decomposition. Periodic boundary conditions were used for x and y directions and a vacuum of 10 Å was used in the z direction perpendicular to the surface on both sides of the slab. A real-space grid spacing of 0.16 Å was used and the Brillouin zone was sampled using the Monkhorst Pack scheme structures, trends in reactivity are well captured with this approach. The internal coordinates of these structures were allowed to relax to determine the decomposition products. Periodic boundary conditions were used for x and y directions and a vacuum of 10 Å was used in the z direction perpendicular to the surface on both sides of the slab. A real-space grid spacing of 0.16 Å was used and the Brillouin zone was sampled using the Monkhorst Pack scheme [8] with a k-point grid of (6 ́6 ́1). The calculations were converged to < 5meV accuracy with respect to k-points and grid spacing. A Fermi-Dirac smearing of 0.05 eV All simulations were converged to a force < 0.05 eV Å -1 . Bader analysis [9] was used to determine the amount of charge transferred from the lithium to the solvent during the decomposition and also volumes of the various decomposed species. To calculate the Bader charges and volumes, initially the electron density as a function of spatial coordinates was stored in a ".cube" file. The Bader analysis was performed on the ".cube" file. For charges, the Bader analysis was done by setting the vacuum charge density to zero. This was done to ensure that all charges are assigned to the appropriate molecular species. For calculating Bader Volumes of the atoms, the Bader analysis was done by setting the vacuum charge density to 0.0001 e Å -3 . This was the error of the electron density in the DFT calculations performed. Thus, a cutoff lower than this value would not be consistent. A larger value for the vacuum charge density cutoff leads to incorrect assignment of the electrons to different atoms. We checked for some different values in the appropriate range and found that the Bader Volumes calculated scale with those chosen number, but the trends in the volumes of different species remain the same as shown in the table shown below. This means that the specie with the largest Bader volume is invariant implying that the descriptor used will provide the correct trend for the classification problem. The Bader charge transferred to the solvent while decomposition was calculated as negative of the charge on the Li(100) slab because the overall system is charge neutral. The decomposed species were identified by considering bond distances between two atoms. Two atoms were considered chemically bonded if the distance between them was less than 1.75 Å. Thus, all the decomposed species were identified and their charge and volumes calculated by summing over the charges and volumes of the individual atoms. Test conditions: 0.6 mA cm -2 current density, 3.0 mAh cm -2 cycling areal capacity.