The existence of a charge density wave (CDW) in transition metal dichalcogenide CuS 2 has remained undetermined since its first experimental synthesis nearly 50 years ago. Despite conflicting experimental literature regarding its low temperature structure, there exists no theoretical study of the phonon properties and lattice stability of this material. By studying the first-principles electronic structure and phonon properties of CuS 2 at various electronic temperatures, we identify temperature-sensitive soft phonon modes which unveil a previously unreported Kohn anomaly at approximately 100K. Variation of the electronic temperature shows the presence of two distinct phases, characterized at low temperature by a 2 × 2 × 2 periodic charge modulation associated with the motion of the S 2 dimers. Investigation of the Fermi surface presents a potential Fermi surface nesting vector related to the location of the Kohn anomaly and observed band splittings in the unfolded bandstructure. The combination of these results suggests a strong possibility of CDW order in CuS 2 . Further study of CuS 2 in monolayer form finds no evidence of a CDW phase, as the identified bulk periodic distortions cannot be realized in 2D. This behavior sets this material apart from other transition metal dichalcogenide materials, which exhibit a charge density wave phase down to the 2D limit. As CDW in TMDC materials is considered to compete with superconductivity, the lack of CDW in monolayer CuS 2 suggests the possibility of enhanced superconductivity relative to other transition metal dichalcogenides. Overall, our work identifies CuS 2 as a previously unrealized candidate to study interplay of superconductivity, CDW order, and dimensionality. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) like Ta, Nb(S,Se) 2 have displayed interesting physics including charge density wave (CDW) formation and low temperature superconductivity. Though the superconducting behavior of TMDC CuS 2 is well known, Throughout this experimental debate, theoretical study of CuS 2 has remained extremely limited. In this context, we present ab initio calculations of the electronic and phononic properties of CuS 2 as a function of electronic temperature. Together, our results strongly suggest CDW order in bulk CuS 2 , and by identifying its origins, explain the absence of CDW in the 2D limit. We therefore present it as an exemplary platform to study the competition between superconductivity and CDW order, and in particular, the role dimensionality plays in these effects. We discuss the unique aspects of CDW formation relative to well-known TMDC materials, and further discuss pathways for enhancing superconductivity in both bulk and monolayer CuS 2 . In textbook 1D systems, the origin of CDW is conventionally analyzed in the Peierls instability picture Therefore, to investigate the occurrence of CDW in CuS 2 , we begin by considering its structural stability. We start with the experimental pyrite (Pa3) structure measured at ambient temperatures, In order to probe temperature-dependent phenomena in CuS 2 , we use the Fermi-Dirac smearing scheme to mimic an electronic temperature. All calculations where the smearing width or electronic temperature is not specified use a 0.001 Hartree smearing (equivalent to an electronic temperature of 315K). Finally, to compare the electronic structure of low-and high-symmetry structures, we apply a band unfolding technique. Here we determine the overlap of the supercell Bloch states with those of the primitive cell using a symmetry-averaged spectral function technique, Initial calculations of the phonon dispersion of the experimental, high-temperature structure using low-temperature smearing reveal four soft phonon modes at the R point shown in Fig. Motivated by past experimental work suggesting the existence of a 2 × 2 × 2 superstructure in CuS 2 at low temperatures, We identify the atomic displacements resulting from the four unstable phonon modes and observe each mode corresponds to 2 × 2 × 2 periodic side-ways motions of S 2 dimers, which cannot be captured in the single unit cell. These four modes collectively manifest themselves as an effective motion of the S 2 dimers with a period of 2a, twice the original unit cell lattice coefficient, as schematically shown in Fig. We perform energy minimization with respect to the ground state energy of the high-symmetry phase as a function of the magnitude of the eigendisplacements of each of these modes (for illustration of the individual modes and energy minimization, see Fig. The combination of the observed Kohn anomaly, periodic lattice distortion, periodic charge density modulation, and temperature-dependent phase crossover are all indicative of the presence of CDW in bulk CuS 2 . Our results therefore capture, for the first time in a theoretical study, a stable low temperature distorted phase of CuS 2 exhibiting strong indicators of CDW ordering. To understand the electronic origins of the potential CDW phase, we investigate the corresponding changes in the electronic structure. By using a band unfolding technique, we compare the effective band structure of the distorted supercell with that of the undistorted structure, seen in Fig. Additionally, we find that CuS 2 shows weak electronic correlation Despite the hints at Fermi surface nesting related CDW and band gap formation in bulk CuS 2 , we note that there are a number of possible mechanisms which could result in a gap opening Beyond our investigation of bulk CuS 2 , we extend our work to include its monolayer, which is formed as a quasilayered hexagonal structure along the close-packed (111) plane as illustrated in Fig. While the structural phase diagram of CuS 2 has remained a debate for years, we uncover critical information regarding its ability to manifest a CDW structure through theoretical and computational methods. We predict temperaturesensitive soft phonon modes that appear at low electronic temperatures in the experimentally reported structure of CuS 2 , corresponding to a Kohn anomaly at the R point for an electronic temperature of approximately 100K. We then realize the existence of a stable distorted phase with a 2a periodic lattice distortion and corresponding charge modulation at low electronic temperature. From this theoretical calculation, we establish a potential CDW transition and predict a crossover between the low and high symmetry structures at approximately 150K, in impressive agreement with what is reported in experiment. To further probe the electronic origins of the newly identified CDW structure, we observe a prominent band splitting near the Fermi energy at a wavevector half that of where the original instability occurred, similar to what is expected in the 1D perspective of CDW formation. Finally, we predict a stable monolayer with no CDW order signatures observed, in agreement with recent experiments, and note the potential difference in available dimer distortions as a possible reason for the lack of CDW in the monolayer. Through this investigation of the phonon properties and electronic character of CuS 2 , we report strong evidence of CDW in bulk CuS 2 , suggesting Fermi surface nesting as an explanation for its occurrence. Additionally, because CuS 2 lacks strong electronic correlations and simultaneously exhibits superconductivity, we identify this system as a promising platform to study the competition of superconductivity and CDW. In future work, we envision experimental studies of CDW order in bulk CuS 2 (and absence thereof in monolayer) through angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES and tr-ARPES), and low temperature scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM). ì R, half that of the vector where the Kohn anomaly was observed in the undistorted structure). We find that this wavevector, when overlaid with the Fermi surface