Mechanical metamaterials are designed to enable unique functionalities, but are typically limited by an initial energy state and require an independent energy input to function repeatedly. Our study introduces a theoretical active mechanical metamaterial that incorporates a biological reaction mechanism to overcome this key limitation of passive metamaterials. Our material allows for reversible mechanical signal transmission, where energy is reintroduced by the biologically motivated reaction mechanism. By analysing a coarse grained continuous analogue of the discrete model, we find that signals can be propagated through the material by a travelling wave. Analysis of the continuum model provides the region of the parameter space that allows signal transmission, and reveals similarities with the well-known FitzHugh-Nagumo system. We also find explicit formulae that approximate the effect of the timescale of the reaction mechanism on the signal transmission speed, which is essential for controlling the material. Mechanical metamaterials are artificially constructed and have mechanical properties defined by their structure Recent mathematical and experimental work examines properties of a class of one-dimensional bistable metamaterials A limitation of this mechanical regime is that the system must receive an external energy input before the transmission of an additional signal In section 2 we present a mathematical model that describes the discrete active mechanical system. Following this, we take a continuous limit of the discrete model The metamaterial presented by Raney et al. where γ is a damping parameter and V (u i , a i ) describes the potential energy of the bistable elements that connect each mass to the external wall In this study, we choose V (u i , a i ) to be a quartic where v describes the stiffness of the bistable elements and relates to the size of the energy gap between high and low potential energy configurations, u i = ±δ are the stable fixed points of V (u i , a i ) and u i = a i ∈ [-δ, δ] is the unstable fixed point which governs the symmetry of V (u i , a i ) (figure In our study we allow the symmetry of the potential function to vary in reaction to changes in the displacement, u i (t), by allowing a i = a i (t) and enforcing Physically, a i represents a biological subsystem that receives energy from external sources and induces it into the material at a rate proportional to . The parameter η > 1 determines the extrema of the reaction parameter so that a i (t) ∈ [-δ/η, δ/η]. This implementation means that if a user transmits a signal through the material by changing the displacement of a node (figure The discrete system is similar to other fast-slow bistable systems, such as the FitzHugh-Nagumo model If the length of the material is large relative to the separation of each mass, ∆, we can describe the material with a coarse grained continuous model Dividing equation (1) by ∆ and taking the limit ∆ → 0 results in the continuous model, A no flux boundary condition ∂u/∂x = 0 is applied at x = 0 and x = L. A key aspect of this study is to investigate the signal transmission speed through the parameter space, particularly as increases. We therefore nondimensionalise equations ( where κ = T ≥ 0, ν = vδ 2 ρ/γ 2 > 0, η > 1 and x ∈ (0, L). The behaviour of the system can now be studied through the three-dimensional parameter space (ν, η, κ) where: ν > 0 is the relative strength of the potential function; η > 1 describes the steady state locations of â(x, t); and κ ≥ 0 is the relative timescale of the reaction mechanism. In this non-dimensional regime, the stable states are located at û = ±1 where the high potential energy state is always given by sign(â). Previous studies provide evidence to suggest that the transmitted energy is input-independent and the biological response is kept as it was before the signal was initiated by setting â(x, 0) = -1/η. In figure changes in û(x, t). Results in figure Figure Substituting travelling wave variables f (z) = û(x, t) and h(z) = â(x, t), where z = xc t ∈ R, into equations ( which, in physical coordinates, corresponds to a wave profile connecting û = -1 to û = 1 as t → ∞. In figure where f 0 (z) will correspond to the solution to the fast wave. Under certain parameter transformations, equation ( where For physically realistic parameter combinations, equation An exact solution in the limiting case κ = 0 (equation ( where c 0 is given by equation ( In the inner region, we pose a perturbation solution of the form where f 0 (z) and h 0 (z) correspond to the shape of the fast wave at κ = 0, given by equation where f 1 (z) and c 1 are defined by the solution of a second-order boundary value problem, which can be solved numerically. Full details of this numerical scheme are given in the supporting material. These solutions are shown in figure In the outer region we denote solutions to the slow system using uppercase variables, F (Z) and H(Z). We expect the outer solution to apply for Z ∼ O(1) ⇒ z ∼ O(κ -1 ) and as z, Z → ∞. In the outer region, equation which has the solution This agrees with the sharp transition region seen at this scale in figure Full details of perturbation solution in the outer region are given in the supporting material. In summary, the solution to equation ( Figure To determine information about the slow wave, and to obtain more information about the fast wave, we follow Nadkarni et al. (26) For a parameter regime where the transition wave exists, the velocity will vanish in the far field so that f → ∓1 and df /dz → 0 as z → ±∞. Therefore some components of equation ( and Under the assumption |c| = 1, equation ( It is useful to note that, for f =tanh(σz), for some σ, which occurs as κ → 0 with σ = μ 0 , This suggests that only the component of h(z) near z = 0 is important in gaining any approximation from the integrability condition, provided f (z) has the form of a hyperbolic tangent function. Since a travelling wave connecting f (z) = 1 to f (z) = -1 as z → ∞ will always have a sigmoidal form (figure In the inactive model, where κ = 0, Nadkarni et al. where E k represents the total kinetic energy per density transported by the transition wave, and ∆V represents an energy gap or difference the potential energy between the high and the low potential energy states. This result can be used to find an upper bound for c for κ > 0: Since |h(t)| ≤ 1/η, and ∆V is a monotonically decreasing function of h(t), the available kinetic energy in the system is always bounded above by that which occurs when h(t) ≡ 1/η, which occurs for κ = 0. This suggests that c(κ) ≤ c 0 < 1 and substantiates numerical evidence seen in figure In the following subsections we apply the integrability condition to obtain approximations to c(κ) while holding ν and η constant. We also find the region of the parameter space that allows signal transmission. The advantage of these approximations is that they avoid numerical solutions to the continuous model to approximate the wavespeed. Numerical solutions to this model are not computationally inexpensive and it is generally difficult to obtain and verify the results. For κ 1 it is reasonable to assume that f ≈tanh(μz) where μ depends on κ, and μ → μ 0 as κ → 0. By assuming f (z) has a similar form to f 0 (z) for κ 1, it is reasonable to use the perturbation solution (equation ( Equation ( This result does not allow c and μ to be determined independently, so we consider a far field expansion of the travelling wave Substituting φ = e -μz and equation (32) into the travelling wave equation for h(z) (equation ( Substituting equation To obtain a useful analytical expression for c and μ, we pose a perturbation solution to equations ( where c 0 and μ 0 are given by equation ( We compare this estimate of c 1 from that calculated numerically by solving the boundary value problem that comes from the singular perturbation expansion, and that estimated from the continuous model, in table matches numerical results for c(κ). We denote f * (z) and h * (z) as the shape of the slow wave, which occurs as c → 0, and κ → κ * , where κ * is yet to be determined. In addition, we expect the curve c(κ) to be perpendicular to the κ axis at κ * to maintain continuity in the symmetry of the problem where solutions with a negative wavespeed are equally valid. To determine a governing equation for the slow wave, we take c → 0, so that equations ( which have the analytical solution where Direct substitution of f * (z) and h * (z) into the integrability condition (equation ( Equation Assuming that f ∼ tanh(μ(κ)z) provided c 1, where μ(κ * ) = μ * , and truncating the infinite series given by equation ( For η and ν fixed, c → 0 only as κ → κ * . Substituting c = 0 into equation Under the assumption that c(κ) is monotonically decreasing, the result in equation To gain information about the shape of c(κ) near κ = 0, we pose a perturbation solution around κ = κ * to the system governed by equation ( where μ * , given by equation ( Figure We can combine the approximations to c(κ) from the slow and the fast wave to obtain a curve that behaves like equation where we choose where c 0 is given by equation ( Results in equations ( Substituting the approximation for μ(κ) given by equation ( Currently, the inactive metamaterial described mathematically by Nadkarni et al. A key aspect of our study is to follow Nadkarni et al. The travelling wave analysis we conduct assumes a material of infinite length over a large period of time. However, applications of our material will a have finite length and may have properties not suitable for a continuum model. For example, in a material where the spacing between elements is not significantly different to the length of the material, a discrete travelling wave analysis may be more appropriate. The discrete problem is known to be substantially more difficult that the continuous problem To conclude, we have presented a novel, biologically inspired, active metamaterial that can reversibility transmit mechanical signals. This work provides an analytical expression that describes the mechanical properties of the material required for signal transmission. We also provide numerous approximations that quantify the effect of the mechanical properties, and the timescale of the biological response, on the transmission speed. This work demonstrates how a new class of biologically inspired metamaterials are able to produce useful new functionalities. The type of analysis we present is invaluable for tuning and controlling the active metamaterial. This article has no additional data. Key algorithms used to generate results are available on Github at github.com/ap-browning/rspa-2019. In this section, we explain the numerical scheme used to solve the continuous model in the main paper. The non-dimensional continuous model is given by 0 where x ∈ (0, L), with no-flux boundary conditions on x ∈ {0, L}, and initial conditions given by (2) To solve the system given by equation ( so that the system in equation ( Initially, the system is at rest, so that ŵ(x, 0) = 0. Next, we divide the domain, x ∈ [0, L] into S equally spaced subintervals, each of width δ x = L/S. We index the boundary of each subinterval with n ∈ {0, 1, ..., S}, such that ûn (t) ≈ û(nδ x, t). Doing this, we obtain the following system of first order, non-linear, ordinary differential equations, dû n dt = ŵn , ∀n, Next, we let X(t) = û0 , ..., ûS , ŵ0 , ..., ŵS , â0 , ..., âS such that equation ( We solve equation ( In the main text, we focus on the materials ability to transmit signals that are initiated at the left boundary. In addition to this, results shown in the main text allow sufficient time between signal reception at the right boundary and retransmission. In figure In this section, we detail the technique we use to approximate the wavespeed, c, from the solution of the continuous model. The technique used to solve the continuous model numerically is described in section S1. The numerical parameters used to solve the continuous model: for the purpose of estimating the wavespeed in table 1 in the main paper, are shown in table We first convert space-time data to wave-location time series data by defining the location of the front, x 0 (t), where As our data is typically discrete, we find x 0 (t) using a linear interpolation. We now have discrete data for x0 (t) where 0 ≤ t ≤ tmax . An example of this data is shown in figure Next, we determine a section of the wavefront curve that is at "late time" and sufficiently far from the right boundary. In this study, we found an appropriate region, to be automatically determined as t ∈ ( tlower , tupper ) = (0.8 tmax , 0.9 tmax ). This process gives us (approximately) linear data of the form {t (i) , x 0 }, where the slope is the estimate of the wavespeed, c. An example of this (approximately) linear data is shown in figure To approximate c, we linearly interpolate the data {t (i) , x 0 }, and choose c to be the gradient of the regression line. since μ 0 /κ 1. It is then trivial to see that the expansion for F (Z) contains only the leading order term, so that Therefore, the solution for H(Z) where Z > 0, H (R) (Z), is given by To find the solution for H(Z) where Z < 0, H (L) (Z), we pose a perturbation solution of the form Substituting this perturbation expansion into equation ( where the boundary conditions are given by lim The O(1) term in equation which has the solution where α 1 is to be determined by matching solutions in the inner and outer regions to O(1). The O(κ) term in equation which has the solution where α 2 is to be determined by matching solutions in the inner and outer regions to O(κ). In the inner region, we pose a perturbation solution of the form h(z) = h 0 (z) + h 1 (z)κ + O(κ 2 ), Substituting equations ( The O(κ 1 ) term in equation ( which has solution h 1 (z) = 1 c 0 μ 0 η log(cosh(μ 0 z))μ 0 z + α 3 , where α 3 is to be determined by matching solutions in the inner and outer regions to O(κ). To solve for f 1 (z), we consider that the O(κ 1 ) term in equation ( where c 1 is a yet undetermined correction term to the wave-speed, and The boundary conditions are chosen so that f 1 (z) is able to match the correction term in the outer solution, F 1 (Z) ≡ 0. We describe the numerical technique we use to solve this boundary value problem in section S6 of this supporting material document. Here, we apply van Dyke's matching rule In section S4 of this supporting material document, we find that f 1 (z) and Table 