The interplay between the nematic order and magnetism in FeSe is not yet well understood. There is a controversy concerning the relationship between orbital and spin degrees of freedom in FeSe and their relevance for superconductivity. Here we investigate the effect of S substitution on the nematic transition temperature (Tn) and the low-energy spin fluctuations (SF) in FeSe single crystals. We show that the low-energy SF emerge below the nematic transition. The difference between the onset temperature for the critical SF (TSF) and Tn is small for FeSe but significantly increases with S substitution. Below TSF the Korringa relation is violated and the effective muon hyperfine coupling constant changes a sign. Our results exclude a direct coupling of the low-energy SF to the electronic nematic order indicating a presence of multiple spin degrees of freedom in FeSe1-xSx. One of the most puzzling properties of FeSe is the nematic transition at T n without a long-range magnetic order down to low temperatures. To understand the nature of this state a number of theoretical and experimental approaches have been applied High-quality FeSe 1-x S x single crystals were synthesized in eutectic molten metal chlorides under a permanent temperature gradient as described in Ref. All investigated crystals show a sharp SC transition (see Fig. In spite of the similar trend in the temperature dependencies of Λ TF and 77 Se-NMR 1/T 1 the expected proportionality between them (Λ TF ∝ 1/T 1 ) is lacking. In particular, the critical behavior at low temperatures Λ TF ∝ T -n can be hardly found in the temperature dependence of 1/T 1 (Figs. The anomalous Clogston-Jaccarino plot (Fig. One of the possible microscopic interpretation is a coexistence of multiple spin degrees of freedom. The two spin components appear in Kondo lattice materials having both localized f electrons and itinerant conduction electrons for the magnetic field applied along the ab-plane and cond for the magnetic field applied along the c-axis. Thus, a dramatic change of the K A vs. χ dependence at T SF at the same time a very weak effect across the structural transition at T n can be explained within this model if the susceptibilities χ loc and χ cond have different temperature dependencies. The anomaly at T SF is seen, also in the transport properties. We observed that the onset of the low-energy SF has a strong effect on the temperature dependence of the Hall coefficient (Fig. Previously, the onset temperature of the stripe SF T SF was related to the nematic transition since both T SF and T n are very close for a stoichiometric FeSe. It was concluded that the nematic transition is primary responsible for the changes in the SF spectra In conclusion, we observed that the nematic transition at T n does not affect directly the low-energy SF in FeSe 1-x S x . The splitting between T n and the onset temperature of the critical SF, T SF , increases with S substitution from T n -T SF ∼ 10 K for FeSe to T n -T SF ∼ 30 K for x = 0.14. The region with critical SF shrinks with x indicating that S substitution moves the system away from the quantum critical point in accord with transport data 