Interface-dominated materials such as nanocrystalline thin films have emerged as an enthralling class of materials able to engineer functional properties of transition metal oxides widely used in energy and information technologies. In particular, it has been proved that strain-induced defects in grain boundaries of manganites deeply impact their functional properties by boosting their oxygen mass transport while abating their electronic and magnetic order. In this work, the origin of these dramatic changes is correlated for the first time with strong modifications of the anionic and cationic composition in the vicinity of strained grain boundary regions. We are also able to alter the grain boundary composition by tuning the overall cationic content in the films, which represents a new and powerful tool, beyond the classical space charge layer effect, for engineering electronic and mass transport properties of metal oxide thin films useful for a collection of relevant solid state devices. Perovskite manganites with general formula RE1-xBxMnO3±δ (where RE stands for a trivalent Rare-Earth element and B for a divalent alkaline ion) have been extensively investigated for their wide variety of intriguing properties, such as oxygen electrocatalysis in solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC), Alternatively, GBs are also known to deeply impact the electronic and magnetic properties of manganites, generally giving rise to a highly insulating and magnetically disordered region, In this direction, the present study correlates structural and local compositional changes in the vicinity of GBs with the changes observed in the electrochemical and electronic behaviour of LSM thin films, revealing the origin of both their superior ORR catalysis and their deleterious higher resistivity. Ultimately, we prove that the modification of the local composition at the GB level allows tuning these electrochemical, electronic and magnetic properties thus proposing a new and effective tool for engineering the functionality of these, and other technologically relevant materials. To understand the correlation between the superior performance of dense LSM layers and their local structure, we first prepared Mn-deficient polycrystalline films by means of Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD) on top of yttria stabilized zirconia (YSZ)-based substrates (YSZ/Si3N4/SiO2/Si), using a proper selection of deposition parameters. 2.5 (corresponding to a Mn oxidation state of ~3.4) and Energy Dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis (section S.3.2. includes a complete structural characterization of the combinatorial film). Importantly, the structural characterization of the LSMy film carried out by X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) confirmed the absence of secondary phases in the whole Mn/(La+Sr) range under study and independently of the substrate, indicating that the Mn was effectively introduced in the perovskite structure (Figure Here, we show the evolution of the electronic resistivity as a function of temperature (T= 85-575 K) for the polycrystalline LSMy series on a sapphire substrate. Note that, for comparison, the plot also includes results obtained for a 60 nm-thick epitaxial LSM film, grown on an NdGaO3 (110) substrate under the same deposition conditions than the polycrystalline LSM0.85 (see section S.2. for a complete characterization). This epitaxial film is expected to behave mostly like the grain interior of polycrystalline LSM0.85 and is taken as a reference to ensure that the effects observed are associated to the GBs. Indeed, the polycrystalline and epitaxial LSM0.85 thin films present the same bulk cationic composition, Mn oxidation state and, consequently, oxygen content. Complementary to the electrical measurements, we carried out the electrochemical characterization of the LSMy series as part of LSMy/YSZ/Ag cells, where YSZ is a pure ionic conductor acting as an electrolyte and the silver is playing the role of the backside electrode. allows the determination of their oxygen mass transport properties, The strong coupling of the two oxygen parameters, along with the observed oxygen depletion in the GBs, corroborate the hypothesis that the accumulation of oxygen vacancies is at the origin of the large improvement of the Oxygen Reduction Reactions (ORR) reported for manganite thin films by different authors. With these results we unambiguously show that the origin of the deleterious effects on the electrical behaviour and the superior oxygen mass transport properties rely on the evolution of the nature of the GB, which is dominated by the cation and anion local non-stoichiometry. A transition in the nature of GBs occurs at Mn/(La+Sr) ~ 0.9 in LSM, likely associated to a change in the local defect chemistry. Above this value, slightly Mn-deficient and Mn-rich films are characterized by a significant oxygen vacancies concentration (V O •• ), arising from the presence of highly reducing dislocations, However, this type of defect is hardly formed in strain-free bulk LSM due to the much bigger ionic radius of La 3+ compared to Mn 3+ /Mn 4+ . Several conclusions arise from this analysis: first, the formation of the oversized La Mn × defect is more favourable in the vicinity of the smaller Sr cations (Sr La ′ ); second, the formation energy is even lower in the presence of one oxygen vacancy, V O •• (additional Sr dopants in the cluster do not reduce this value); third, no significant variation was obtained when applying strain in the presence of Sr doping atoms and/or oxygen vacancies. All in all, this indicates that the driving energy for the antisite defect formation in GBs relies on a complex association of defects (V Mn ,,, , Sr La ′ and V O •• ) rather than a classical space charge mechanism. It is important to note that local cation non-stoichiometry in manganites was also observed in other type of interfaces, e.g. dislocations in epitaxial La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 on LaAlO3 In summary, we revealed the origin of the superior mass transport properties of interfacedominated LSM thin films by directly observing a strain-related accumulation of oxygen vacancies in the GBs that defines high diffusion pathways. We found a strong correlation between these changes and the local cation non-stoichiometry observed at the GB level, which we were able to actively modify for completely change the nature of the interface. Therefore, we present here a new tool for tailoring the transport properties of technologically relevant interfaces such as grain boundaries (beyond the traditional space charge layer engineering) suitable for direct application in a collection of solid state devices based on mixed ionicelectronic conductors, including thin film based solid oxide fuel cells, resistive switching devices, magnetoresistance or supercapacitors. Films. La0.8Sr0.2Mn1-yO3±δ (LSM) / Yttria-stabilized Zirconia (YSZ) polycrystalline heterostructures (100nm LSM / 100 nm YSZ) were grown by PLD on Si (100) substrates, electrically and stress passivated by 300nm Si3N4 / 100 nm SiO2 bilayers. The PLD system used is a large-area system from PVD Products (PLD-5000), equipped with a KrF-248 nm excimer DFT simulations. The calculations were performed using the plane wave DFT code CASTEP. In this work, Combinatorial Pulsed Laser Deposition (C-PLD) was used to grow La0.8Sr0.2Mn1-yO3±δ (LSMy) with variable content of Mn. C-PLD is a technique based on the combinatorial deposition of two parent compound (in this work LSM and Mn3O4) on a large area substrate. First, the parent compounds plumes were studied. Figure moles La LSm +moles Sr LSM Transforming the equation, we get: Where ρ is the density, M the molar mass, t the thickness. The result as a function of wafer position is shown in figure In this study, a composition span from B/A = 0.85 to 1.2 (corresponding to X = -45 mm and -8 mm, respectively) was analysed. For thin films with composition out of this range secondary phases were observed. The surface of the LSMy sample was studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Figure Figure It is important to note, though, that the quantification of GB composition in polycrystalline thin films can be susceptible to a non-negligible error. This is because slight differences in the GB angles with respect to the TEM incident beam can partially mask the compositional changes. The tilt of the GB angle can therefore explain differences in the ionic composition when comparing different GBs from a sample with similar overall cation content, such as the interfaces for B/A = 0.85 analysed here and the ones of Figure The LSMy combinatorial samples were analyzed in an in-plane four probe geometry, in accordance with our previous work. Figure These bulk changes are expected to play a secondary role on the conductivity of the polycrystalline samples both for low and high Mn content, since these films present orders of magnitude higher resistivity respect to the epitaxial thin films. The GBs are therefore expected to dominate the in-plane resistivity of the polycrystalline LSMy thin films. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is a powerful tool for characterizing the oxygen mass transport properties of high temperature MIECs. Where R ion is the ionic resistance, kb is the Boltzmann constant, zi is the number of charges involved in the transport, L and A are respectively the thickness and the surface area of the LSM, e is the elementary charge and cO2 is the concentration of oxygen in the LSM lattice. The surface exchange coefficient can be calculated from the surface resistance (Rs) by: Equation S4 The coefficient D q obtained by electrical measurements can be confronted with D* (obtained in the oxygen tracer experiments) considering a correlation factor of f = 0.69. /s) c Bulk surface exchange Surface exchange (cm/s) e