The concept of a self-consistent field in the theory of superconductivity based on the diagram method of the time-dependent perturbation theory is presented. It is shown that the well-known BCS equation for the order parameter of superconductivity is already realized in a zero approximation. The form of interaction Hamiltonian uniquely determines a chain of interconnected Green's functions which are easily calculated in this approximation. On the basis of the presented method a proximity effect in a normal metal-superconductor structure is studied. It was obtained the energy gap values induced in a normal metal. In contrast to the traditional McMillan and de Gennes theories with self-consistent Green's functions the selfconsistency over the order parameter gives a significantly smaller gap value induced in a normal metal. The frequency dependence of the homogeneous spectral density is obtained which qualitatively agrees with experiment. The study of the induced superconductivity in a normal metal adjacent to a superconductor has attracted the attention of many researchers for a long time Although it is obvious that T C is determined solely by the value of the electron-phonon coupling parameter for superconductor. This leads to an overestimation of the induced energy gap value in the proximity effect. It should be noted that a such consideration leads to a need to take into account the spatial dependence of the energy gap function which satisfies the Eilenberger differential equation The structure of the work is as follows: the second section presents the basic tenets of the self-consistent theory for normal metal; in the third section the BCS equation for the gap was first obtained by presented diagrammatic method. The derivation of this equation is based only on the graphical representation of the effective self-consistent field. In the fourth section the proximity effect in the normal metal-superconductor hybrid structure within the framework of a tunnel Hamiltonian is considered. The general expression for parameter of order is obtained and the temperature dependences of the induced superconducting energy gap in a normal metal are calculated. In the fifth section we study the spectral density of states of a normal metal with an induced energy gap function. In sixth section the main conclusions of the presented theory are given. The Hamiltonian of a normal metal in a site representation can be written as where the hopping integral t ij determines the band energy ( ) , μ and σ are the chemical potential and electron spin, respectively. The creation operators are presented as the Fourier transforms in a wave space. It is convenient to take the part of Hamiltonian (1) associated with the chemical potential energy as an unperturbed Hamiltonian. The question immediately arises about the validity of a such choice. Strictly speaking the remaining part in (1) is not a perturbation for the metal. However, this choice is fully justified since the chemical potential in the ground state always limits the electron energy. Therefore, an infinite series of perturbation theory with and perturbation Hamiltonian , , (3) will be converging. Indeed, we associate the bold line with the total causal Green's function which is presented in fig. A thin line corresponds to the unperturbed Green's function where a symbol 0, ... we have the following algebraic equation for unknown ( ) whose solution is trivial. In view of Eq.( Despite the triviality of deriving Eq.( As is known, the basis for describing the phenomenon of superconductivity in a metal is the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer Hamiltonian where for convenience the symbols of the creation and annihilation operators in the superconductor are denoted by the letter a + and a, respectively. In this case in the framework of suggested diagram method the Hamiltonian ( where M k -q and ω k-q are a matrix element of the electron-phonon interaction [10] and a phonon frequency, respectively. Thus, to calculate the order parameter it is necessary to know the expression for correlator a a . The classical expression for σ Δ k known as the BCS equation was obtained We will show that a zero approximation of the self-consistent field also eventually leads to the BCS equation for order parameter. In full analogy with previous section it is necessary to present the graphic images of interactions of the perturbation Hamiltonian are now connected and it is necessary to take into account two unperturbed Green functions: Fig. It directly follows from the graphic equation in fig. Fig. The following system of algebraic equations corresponds to graphical system of equations in fig. -q-q q q -qq q q q -q - where is the electron excitation energy with Cooper pairing. The solution ( . It determines the self-consistent equation for the unknown gap function σ Δ q according to Eq.( Summation over an infinite number of frequencies is carried out on the basis of the method proposed by Luttinger and Ward in with a factor ( ( ) 1) Thus, one can write Re s ( )( ( ) 1) From Eq.( are roots i E σ ω = ± q that allows to immediately write for the correlator (15) Substituting Eq.( is a matrix element of the electron-electron attraction. In this section it is obtained that a zero approximation of the self-consistent field is in fact an approximation of the molecular field in the theory of superconductivity. An influence of fluctuations can be taken into account by considering the contributions of loop diagrams in expressions for Green's functions. The presented theory allows us to consider the hybrid structure with normal metal and superconductor in which the induced superconductivity is realized as a phenomenon of proximity effect. Let us consider the hybrid structure with a normal metal and superconductor on the two sides of the junction. We assume that the connection between the metal and superconductor is carried out through a tunnel junction. Without applied voltage the two subsystems are in equilibrium with chemical potential μ. It turns out to be the simplest approximation of the selfconsistent field allows us to describe a proximity effect in this hybrid structure. It is supposed that the electronic subsystem of a normal metal can be in an ordered magnetic state. Then the unperturbed Hamiltonians of a normal "left" and superconducting "right" metals in the site representation have the following form, respectively: The total perturbation Hamiltonian for a whole system is where the tunnel Hamiltonian is presented by the next manner In full analogy with a diagram technique described in the previous sections let us draw graphically the possible types of interaction lines in a wave space in Fig. for part of the hybrid structure with a normal metal. Then the correlator c c for "left" normal metal is connected with four complete Green's functions, i.e. ( One can write these graphical system of equations in algebraic form: In spite of the fact that this system of equations is integral it is easy to find its solution. Indeed, the 2-nd and 3-rd equations are linear with respect to the Green's functions depending simultaneously on the p and q wave vectors. Thus, expressing the off-diagonal ( ) where Substituting the solutions (24) into the 1-st and 4-th equations of system (23) we obtain a system of two linear equations for the unknowns ( ) which do not depend on the summation over the wave vector q. For convenience we put the following notation % p p q q q q p pq q q q p p q q q q p 2 * 1 ( ) Here, the identity * T T = pq -p-q for the tunnel matrix element is used. Then the above system of linear equations takes the form: ( ) The solution of this system of equations is written as follows: where E σ q is the electron excitation energy from Eq.( where ξ ε μ = - ) p q q q q p p q q q q q q p p q q q q p p (31) The Green's function ( ) Where It is obvious that correlator c c as in the the previous section. The result is This correlator produces an energy gap function of induced superconductivity which is determined by the matrix element V % kp of electron-electron attraction in a normal metal by means of the standard equation Since the "left" metal is in the normal state the Eq.( As can be seen from Eq.( it is necessary to calculate the integrals (36) that is not difficult. We will neglect the exchange interaction of electrons, i.e. 0 0 J = . For a metal the obvious relation μ >> Δ is satisfied. The results of calculating the integrals (36) are given in the Appendix. In particular, it is obtained that at ξ Δ < p the function e. in a normal metal the electrons with an energy ξ p that exceeds the superconducting energy gap do not pair. In this case the proximity effect in a hybrid structure is not realized. At ξ Δ > p the expressions for ( ) φ ξ p and ( ) χ ξ p take the form (see (A.7) and Substituting functions (40) into Eq.( 2 ln 4 c r in accordance with the Landau bypass rule for the Debye frequency is taken into account, where 0 Δ = 6.6 K is the superconducting energy gap for Sn at T=0. In this case the root of equation ξ=c is determined numerically but not by the approximate formula (43). Then from Eq.(41) it is easy to find ( ) ( ) where ( ) . Obviously, the phase ψ of the induced energy gap has the form ( ) ( ) In fig. It is interesting to find the spectral density of states which is determined experimentally by differential conductivity is used. Then for a superconductor one can write the spectral density and for normal metal in the considered hybrid structure Further we are interested in homogeneous spectral densities ( ) for both the superconductor and metal, respectively. From Eq.( For a normal metal from Eq.(28) in the linear approximation with Г N it follows that N R σ ω approaches zero that reflects the strengthening proximity effect, when a normal metal acquires the properties of a superconducting (see curve 5 in Fig. Summing up, it can be stated that the presented diagram method of time-perturbation theory in a zero approximation of the self-consistent field gives results that coincide with the approximation of the molecular field for a metal in the normal and superconducting states. Also, for the first time in the framework of this method the appearance of a proximity effect in the form of a complex energy gap induced by a superconductor in a normal metal is predicted. In the limit of the low barrier transparency an absolute value of the induced energy gap was found to be only a few percent of the superconducting one. The temperature and parametric dependences of the energy gap Δ % as well as phase ψ of induced order parameter are obtained. It is consistent with an increasing the barrier transparency and decreasing an energy gap of the superconductor with approaching the critical temperature. A sufficiently large value of the tunnel matrix element leads to the destruction of the Cooper pairs and absence of the proximity effect in the considered hybrid structure. With increasing a barrier transparency the spectral density decreases that reflects the proximity effect strengthening when a normal metal acquires superconducting properties. However, with a high transparency (8r> Δ) the Cooper pairs in a normal metal are destroyed. When a barrier transparency decreases the density of states approaches a purely metallic one. The behavior is consistent with experiment although the existing quantitative differences are connected with the presence of the spatial dependence of the gap functions Δ % and Δ that is not taken into account in the considered approximation. Also, this theory essentially simplifies a subsequent account for corrections due to the influence of fluctuations. N R σ ω from Eq.(56) in a normal metal with an induced gap for the superconducting energy gap value Δ=2.12⋅10 -4 eV and μ = 8.16 eV with different barrier transparency coefficients N Γ are presented. From this figure it can be seen that with increasing N Γ the spectral density ( )