Machine learning technologies are expected to be great tools for scientific discoveries. In particular, materials development (which has brought a lot of innovation by finding new and better functional materials) is one of the most attractive scientific fields. To apply machine learning to actual materials development, collaboration between scientists and machine learning is becoming inevitable. However, such collaboration has been restricted so far due to black box machine learning, in which it is difficult for scientists to interpret the data-driven model from the viewpoint of material science and physics. Here, we show a material development success story that was achieved by good collaboration between scientists and one type of interpretable (explainable) machine learning called factorized asymptotic Bayesian inference hierarchical mixture of experts (FAB/HMEs). Based on material science and physics, we interpreted the data-driven model constructed by the FAB/HMEs, so that we discovered surprising correlation and knowledge about thermoelectric material. Guided by this, we carried out actual material synthesis that led to identification of a novel spin-driven thermoelectric material with the largest thermopower to date. Recent progresses of material science technologies enable us to obtain a lot of material data in a short time 1- . Accordingly, the development of data-processing technologies for such material big data is becoming indispensable. Machine learning technologies are believed to be a great solution due to not only their rapid data analysis To apply machine learning to actual materials development, collaboration between scientists and machine learning is becoming inevitable. Material scientists often try to understand the inside of the data-driven model to obtain some actionable information for materials development. However, such collaboration has been restricted so far because of the low interpretability in machine learning. For example, it is not easy for a person to understand the inside of data-driven models constructed by a deep neural network Here, we show an actual material development success story by using one type of interpretable machine learning called factorized asymptotic Bayesian inference hierarchical mixture of experts (FAB/HMEs) One of the most popular sparse modelling methods is LASSO, which constructs a linear model with L1 regularization Interpretable machine learning FAB/HMEs constructs a piecewise sparse linear modelling By searching for STE materials with improved thermopower SSTE (one of the most important figures of merit for thermoelectric phenomena) Material data. Figures The material parameters X ≡ {X 1 , X 2 , X 3 ... X 14 }, whose simple descriptions are shown in Table where X, I, S, and C are the material parameters X ≡ {X 1 , X ). The details are in Supplemental Information 1). The FAB/HMEs can solve data-classification and data-regression problems at the same time by maximizing a novel information criterion (factorized information criterion, which is referred to as FIC) with an EM-like algorithm (factorized asymptotic Bayesian inference, referred to as FAB), thus constructing a piecewise sparse linear model Fortunately, we sometimes obtain non-trivial knowledge from the data-driven model. We notice that there is a positive correlation between SSTE and product term X2X8, where X2 and X8 are the amount of Pt atoms and the Pt spin polarization, respectively. All regression models of magnetic materials (component 2, 3, and 4) have the X2X8 term as positive, as shown in Figure Figure Although the NN and SVM exhibit high prediction performance, it is not easy for scientists to investigate the data-driven model because of their low interpretability. Even though the RF, which tells us the feature importance of each descriptor, has better interpretability than the NN and SVM, further investigation is needed to understand the more specific relationship between VANE and descriptors. For example, if you only look at the RF model, it is difficult to notice the "positive" correlation between VANE and X2X8 "on the condition of" the magnetic material data (data with large X14). Actually, this surprising correlation was not achieved directly via the MLR, LASSO, NN, SVM and RF. On the other hand, the FAB/HMEs obviously visualized such a detailed relationship, as shown in Figure FAB/HMEs NN Here, we have utilized a simple 3-layer perceptron. The cross-validation with "caret (nnet)" package in the R programming language decides the number r of hidden units N H = 8 and the decay value D = 3.91 × 10 -3 . The CV-RMSE was 0.169454, as shown in Figure SVR 17 . The support vector regression (SVR) constructs a data-driven model with a kernel method. Here, we have used the radial basis function (RBF) kernel. We set the cost value C = 16 and sigma of the RBF σ = 3.125 × 10 -2 , which were decided by the cross-validation with "caret (svmradial)" package in the R programming language. The CV-RMSE was 0.132847, as shown in Figure RF LASSO Data preparation of thermopower SSTE. The spin-driven thermoelectric performance (thermopower SSTE) data were obtained by experiments including material fabrication processes and material characterization processes. The details are shown in Supplemental Information 1.