The ability to spectrally translate lightwave signals in a compact, low-power platform is at the heart of the promise of nonlinear nanophotonic technologies. For example, a device to link the telecommunications band with visible and short near-infrared wavelengths can enable a connection between high-performance chipintegrated lasers based on scalable nanofabrication technology with atomic systems used for time and frequency metrology. While second-order nonlinear (χ (2) ) systems are the natural approach for bridging such large spectral gaps, here we show that third-order nonlinear (χ (3) ) systems, despite their typically much weaker nonlinear response, can realize spectral translation with unprecedented performance. By combining resonant enhancement with nanophotonic mode engineering in a silicon nitride microring resonator, we demonstrate efficient spectral translation of a continuous-wave signal from the telecom band (≈ 1550 nm) to the visible band (≈ 650 nm) through cavity-enhanced four-wave mixing. We achieve such translation over a wide spectral range >250 THz with a translation efficiency of (30.1 ± 2.8) % and using an ultra-low pump power of (329 ± 13) μW. The translation efficiency projects to (274 ± 28) % at 1 mW and is more than an order of magnitude larger than what has been achieved in current nanophotonic devices. At its heart, nonlinear optics Nanophotonic spectral translation Various forms of spectral translation have been realized using χ 1: Nanophotonic telecom-to-visible spectral translation and efficiency comparison. a, Nanophotonic spectral translation uses a cavity-enhanced second-order or third-order nonlinear optical process (χ To achieve such an optimized χ The dispersion engineering required for a microring differs from that for a straight waveguide, in which phase-matching means that linear momentum of the input/output photons must be conserved. In a microring, phase-matching applies to the momentum of the whispering gallery modes along the azimuthal direction. We define the whispering gallery modes with the same polarization and radial mode order to be within one mode family. Within each mode family, a whispering gallery mode is specified by its azimuthal number m (electric field varies along the azimuthal angle φ as e imφ . The phase-matching condition for modes of the same family becomes a mode number matching criterion, i.e., ∆m = 0. For dFWM, the criterion is 2m pm tm v = 0, where m p /m t /m v are the azimuthal mode numbers for the pump/telecom (input signal)/visible (translated signal) modes Frequency matching in a microring is more challenging than in a waveguide due to the high-Q cavity resonances. Once phase-matching is satisfied for an appropriate set of modes, the energy conservation condition requires 2ω pω tω v = 0, and the involved pump/telecom/visible fields (ω p /ω t /ω v ) all have to be in resonance with the corresponding cavity modes ( ωp / ωt / ωv ). The maximum allowable frequency mismatch for the dFWM process is dictated by the loaded Q of the corresponding cavity modes, i.e., δω p,t,v = |ω p,t,v -ωp,t,v | < ωp,t,v /2Q p,t,v . This stringent frequency-matching requirement represents a major challenge for nanophotonic devices, necessitating the matching of frequencies separated over hundreds of THz with an accuracy within a cavity linewidth, e.g., ≈ 1 GHz for a loaded Q of 2 × 10 5 at a telecom wavelength. Our microring geometry uses a stochiometric silicon nitride (Si 3 N 4 ) core, bottom silicon dioxide cladding, and a top air cladding. This has two main benefits. First, it allows post-processing for dispersion tuning. For example, a postfabrication reactive-ion etching process can reduce the device height while maintaining the device lateral dimensions. Also, diluted hydrofluoric acid etching can change the device height and lateral dimensions simultaneously with nanometer accuracy. These two post-processing methods, when used with ellipsometric measurement, enable fine tuning of the dispersion of targeted mode sets for fabricated devices. Second, as described below, the asymmetric cladding allows for separation of the coupling tasks for pump/visible and telecom modes in a manner that would be difficult to implement in symetrically oxide-clad devices, by taking advantage of waveguide cutoff To demonstrate the potential range of χ As an approach to evaluate whether the chosen set of phasematched modes is indeed frequency-matched, we use spontaneous photon pair generation. When phase-matching and frequency-matching are satisfied, both spontaneous and stimulated degenerate four-wave mixing can occur. We can thus use the spontaneous photon-pair spectra to evaluate the phaseand frequency-matching for the stimulated process in the regime for which nonlinear frequency shifts are small The isolation at 1572.7 nm in the pulley waveguide is about 40 dB, consistent with the waveguide cutoff previously described, while the straight waveguide, as expected, does not show appreciable out-coupling of the visible translated signal. The spectra are relatively clean, with no broadband or narrowband noise or competing four-wave-mixing tones observed (the small peak near 1340 nm is an artefact of the optical spectrum analyzer). We optimize the translation efficiency at various pump/signal power levels and show the power-dependence in Fig. The translated signal power at 669.8 nm has a linear dependence on the input power at 1572.7 nm, as shown in Fig. Figure Recently, Ramelow et al. Discussion In summary, by using single fundamental mode familty (SFMF) engineering and precise mode identification to enable phase-and frequency-matched operation, we have demonstrated high-efficiency spectral translation from tele- AlGaAs microdisk χ The 500 nm thick Si 3 N 4 layer is deposited by low-pressure chemical vapor deposition on top of a 3 μm thick thermal SiO 2 layer on a 100 mm diameter Si wafer. The wavelengthdependent refractive index and the thickness of the layers are measured using a spectroscopic ellipsometer, with the data fit to an extended Sellmeier model. The device pattern is created in positive-tone resist by electron-beam lithography. The pattern is then transferred to Si 3 N 4 by reactive ion etching using a CF 4 /CHF 3 chemistry. The device is chemically cleaned to remove deposited polymer and remnant resist, and then an-nealed at 1100 • C in an N 2 environment for 4 hours. An oxide lift-off process is performed so that the microrings have an air cladding on top while the input/output edge-coupler waveguides have SiO 2 on top to form more symmetric modes for coupling to optical fibers. The facets of the chip are then polished for lensed-fiber coupling. After polishing, the chip is annealed again at 1100 • C in an N 2 environment for 4 hours. Translation Efficiency We assess the efficiency of spectral translation throughout the paper based on optical power. The translation efficiency η is defined as P SHG /P pump for secondharmonic generation (SHG, χ The device is tested with the experimental setup shown in Figure c : values calculated from representative data. i : internal efficiency. l