Spin dephasing via the spin-orbit interaction (SOI) is a major mechanism limiting the electron spin lifetime in III-V zincblende quantum wells. The dephasing can be suppressed in GaAs(111) quantum wells by applying an electric field. The suppression has been attributed to the compensation of the intrinsic SOI associated by the bulk inversion asymmetry (BIA) of the GaAs lattice by a structural induced asymmetry (SIA) SOI term induced by an electric field. We provide direct experimental evidence for this mechanism by demonstrating the transition between the BIA-dominated to a SIAdominated regime via photoluminescence measurements carried out over a wide range of applied fields. Spin lifetimes exceeding 100 ns are obtained near the compensating electric field, thus making GaAs (111) QWs excellent candidates for the electrical storage and manipulation of spins. The manipulation of electron spins in semiconductors has attracted much interest in recent years due to potential applications for quantum information processing In high quality GaAs QWs, the Ω SO is dominated by two major contributions. The first arises from the intrinsic bulk inversion asymmetry (BIA, also know as the Dresselhaus ) respectively, where the reference frame is defined by the axes 2 is the averaged squared wave vector along z, which is determined by the spatial extension d eff of the electronic wave function. γ and r 41 are the Dresselhaus and Rashba coefficient, respectively, and E z is the amplitude of the electric field applied across the structure. At low temperature, quadratric terms in k can be neglected. In this case, both the BIA and the SIA terms become parallel to each other and lie in the QW plane. Moreover, by choosing in order to make Ω SIA = -Ω BIA , it becomes possible to suppress DP relaxation by linear terms in k for all spin orientations In this contribution, we overcome this limitation by probing spins via a novel PL technique combining pulsed illumination and biasing. This technique enables measurements of the spin lifetime in (111) GaAs QWs embedded in n-i-p diode structures over a wide range of electric fields across the compensation point. We show that the lifetime τ z of optically injected, z-oriented spins initially increases with reverse bias, reaches a maximum, and then reduces for higher biases. The maximum is attributed to the transition between a regime dominated by the BIA contribution to another determined by the biasinduced SIA term: its observation provides a conclusive evidence of the SOI compensation mechanism. The measured compensation field E c yields ratios r 14 /γ (cf. Eq. 3) comparable to the ones reported in the literature The studies were carried out on two kinds of samples. The first consists of a GaAs multiple quantum well (MQW) grown by molecular beam epitaxy on a p-doped GaAs(111)B substrate tilted by δθ = 2 • towards x. As k 2 z in Eq. 3 is proportional to d -2 eff , the compensation field reduces for thick QWs. We took advantage of this fact by using thick (25 nm-thick) GaAs QWs. The MQW sample [cf. Fig. The time-resolved PL studies were performed at different temperatures in a cold finger cryostat with a window for optical access and electric feed-throughs for the application of high-frequency bias pulses. Care was taken during sample mounting to reduce the build-up of stress fields in the sample during the cooling process. Spin polarized charge carriers were selectively excited in the QWs using a circularly polarized pulsed laser beam with a wavelength of 757 nm and a repetition period of 80 ns focused on the sample surface by a microscope objective. The PL emitted by the QWs was collected by the same objective, spectrally filtered by band-pass filters, and split into two beams with intensity proportional to its left (I L ) and right (I R ) circular components using a quarter-wave plate followed by a polarizing beam splitter. The two beams were then detected with time resolution by a pair of photodetectors synchronized with the laser pulses. From the detected signals, we determined the temporal evolution of the electron spin polarization defined as ρ s Although the relaxation process from the optically excited high energy states to their quasi thermal equilibrium ones implies some reduction of the initial orientation of the electron spins, a significant fraction of the optically generated electron spin polarization is preserved in wide QWs The previous limitation was overcome by carrying out the experiments under pulsed reverse bias. Here, laser and bias pulses are synchronized and have the same repetition rate. The laser pulse hits the sample at the time instant t = 0 shortly after the application of a reverse bias pulse of variable amplitude V b . As in the previous experiments, the reverse bias prevents the recombination of the photoexcited spin polarized carriers, which remain stored in the QWs during the bias pulse. Information about the density of stored carriers and spins is extracted at the end of the bias pulse, when the diode structure is subjected to a small forward bias (V b = 1 V) to induce carrier recombination. I R (t) and I L (t) traces recorded under a 40 ns long bias pulse with a repetition period of 80 ns are illustrated in Fig. The remarkable difference in intensity of the I R and I L light pulses in Fig. ) in the presence of an in-plane magnetic field B = 120 mT (τR). The results were obtained from the decay of the spin polarization just after the laser pulse (filled and open symbols) and after the bias pulse (half filled symbols). The curves marked MQW in (a) are for the MQW at 33 K (dark blue squares) and 39 K (dark red circles). The measurement temperatures for the SQW are: 33 K (black squares), 39 K (red circles), 50 K (green up triangles), 60 K (blue down triangles). The solid and dashed lines are the lifetimes calculated at the same temperatures using the model described in detail in the text for B = 0 and B = 120 mT, respectively. gion beyond the compensation point is limited up to values of the electric field of about 1.5 -2 times longer than the required one for compensation. This maximum applied field is determined by field-induced carrier extraction under high reverse biases. According to Eq. 3, the compensation field E c depends on the ratio r 41 /γ between Rashba and Dresselhaus spinsplitting constants. The effective QW thickness of d eff = 28.6 nm was determined by calculating the penetration of the electronic wave function into the (Al,Ga)As barriers using a k.p model. For these wide QWs, the average thermal values k 2 ∼ 0.25 k 2 z at T > 30 K cannot be neglected and the higher order terms in Eq. 1 have to be taken into account. For this purpose, we have calculated the DP scattering rate τ i for spins along i according to (4) Here, τ * p is proportional to the momentum relaxation time and where we include in addition to the terms in Eqs. 1 and 2 the correction Ω (θ) BIA (k ) to the SOI due to the tilt δθ of the QW plane relative to the (111) orientation x + τ -1 z -1 ≈ 4τ z /3. Close to E c , in contrast, the z-component of Ω BIA (k ) (cf. Eq. 1), which is not compensated by the SIA term, leads to the τ R < τ z . The dependence of the spin lifetime on bias, temperature, and magnetic field is well reproduced by the dashed lines, which display the lifetime of precessing spins calculated using the model described in connection with Eq. 4. Note, however, that the temperature dependence of the peak lifetimes in Fig. In conclusion, we have experimentally demonstrated the electric control of the spin lifetime in GaAs(111) QW embedded in a n-i-p structure. In particular, the Rashba SOI field induced by the applied bias can compensate the Dresselhaus contribution, leading to spin lifetimes exceeding 100 ns. The experimental findings are well reproduced by a model for the spin relaxation mechanism, which yields the Rashba and Dresselhaus spin-splitting coefficients. The results presented here thus establish GaAs(111) QWs as excellent structures for the electrical storage and manipulation of spins.