We propose a generalized model of electronic structure modification in HTSC cuprates and ferropnictides under doping. In this model the role of doping consists in only a local change in the electronic structures of the parent phases of cuprates and ferropnictides due to the formation of trion complexes comprising a doped carrier localized in unit cell and charge transfer (CT) excitons around it. These CT excitons emerge in CuO4 or AsFe4 plaquettes in the CuO2 or FeAs basal planes (CT plaquettes) under the influence of doped carrier, restricting its itinerancy. As the dopant concentration is increased, CT plaquettes combine into clusters of the so called CT phase. It is this CT phase that is related in the model to the HTSC phase. In support of this assumption, we determined the ranges of dopant concentrations conforming to the existence of percolation clusters of the CT phase; these ranges were shown to coincide with the positions of the superconducting domes on the phase diagrams of these compounds. The model also perfectly describes subtle features of the phase diagrams of various cuprates and ferropnictides including the "1/8" anomaly, narrow peaks in the dependences of the London penetration depth on the concentration of the dopant, and other specific features. The mechanism of the generation of free carriers in the CT phase, provided by intrinsic self-doping, was considered. The mechanism is not directly related to external doping, but is due to the interaction of band electrons with so called Heitler-London (HL) centres inherently existing in the percolation cluster of CT phase and representing pairs of adjacent CuO4 or AsFe4 CT plaquettes in the CuO2 or FeAs basal planes. Material in CT phase was shown to represent a medium, in which the mechanism of excitonic superconductivity, specified by the interaction of band electrons with HL centres, can be realized. To date, there are two large families of high-temperature superconductors, cuprates and ferropnictides, which possess the most high superconducting-transition temperatures under ordinary conditions. Compounds of both classes are layered, and it is generally accepted that the quasi-two dimensional atomic planes of CuO2 and FeAs are responsible for superconductivity in them. As for the nature of the normal state and the mechanism of high-Tc superconductivity in these materials, these issues are yet far from being solved and are actively debated. We believe that one of the reasons for this situation is the use of a simplified doping scheme (as in the semiconductor) when constructing theoretical models, which, in our mind, does not quite adequately describe the process of the generation of free carriers in these materials. Here we would like to propose a mechanism for the heterovalent and isovalent doping common of both classes of materials, in which the generation of free carriers proceeds as if in two stages. In the case of heterovalent doping, at the first stage, introduction of dopant atoms leads only to a local modification of the electronic structure of cuprates and pnictides, and to the formation of separate trion complexes. Such a complex consists of a doped carrier, which selflocalizes in the nearest vicinity of the dopant due to charge-transfer (CT) excitons emerging under its impact. These excitons are generated in CuO4 and FeAs4 plaquettes bordering with the doped carrier localization region (CT plaquettes). At the second stage, with the dopant concentration rising, these CT plaquettes are joined into clusters of the so called CT phase, which is in fact a CT-exciton insulator, where free carriers are generated owing to the self-doping mechanism specific for this phase. That is, doped carriers proper (from dopants) are localized, and their role is only to form clusters of the CT phase, in which pairs of adjacent CT plaquettes (the so called HL centres) play the role of donors or acceptors. In the case of isovalent doping, embedding of dopant atoms is also accompanied with the deformation of the local electronic structure leading within some concentration range to the formation of CT phase clusters. / It is this CT phase that is related in the model to the HTSC phase. Herewith, the range of concentrations where a CT-phase percolation cluster can exist corresponds to the superconducting dome on the phase diagrams of cuprates and pnictides. The proposed model makes it possible to explain on a uniform basis many properties of cuprates and pnictides, including the wonderful features of their superconducting phase diagrams, spatial inhomogeneity of their electronic properties, pseudogap anomalies in cuprates and other features As is known, the predominant majority of undoped cuprates and pnictides are not superconductors. Superconductivity in them emerges as the result of heterovalent doping, i.e., at a partial substitution of an atom for another atom with higher or lower valency. Figure In an undoped state, cuprates and ferropnictides demonstrate essentially different properties. Undoped cuprates are antiferromagnetic Mott insulators in which the empty subband of copper 3d 10 states is separated from the occupied oxygen O2p band by a gap ib ~ 2 eV (Fig. It is seen (Fig. An important fact, which exphasizes the similarity of these compounds (and will be important for further consideration), is that the orbitals of the nearest Cu 1+ ions (in cuprates) do not overlap, as neither do the orbitals of As 2-ions (in ferropnictides), and no chemical (covalent or metal) bond forms between them The events corresponding to the generation of a CT exciton are, in cuprates, the occurrence of an electron on the central Cu cation and a hole distributed over four surrounding anions of O; in ferropnictides, a hole on the As anion and an electron distributed over four surrounding cations of Fe. This hydrogen-like ionic complex, for which the condition ct = 0 is satisfied and in which a CT exciton, resonantly interacting with the band states, can be formed, will be called a CT plaquette. In this complex, the state of a 2p-electron (in cuprates) and a 3dhole (in ferropnictides) should be considered as a superposition of band and exciton states. In a CT phase of cuprates (ferropnictides) each Cu (As) ion is the centre of a CT plaquette. CT excitons can form in cuprates and pnictides owing to the following features: (1) Low concentration of charge carriers. Even at an optimal doping, the carrier concentration in cuprates and ferropnictides is lower than 10 22 cm -3 , which corresponds to an average distance of rs > 0.4 nm between the carriers and exceeds the distance between the anion and cation. This means that the interaction inside the cell is essentially unshielded, which enables the existence of well-defined CT excitons (2) High ionicity of cuprates and ferropnictides, which suggests a large contribution of Madelung volume energy EM to the electronic structure of the basal planes and the possibility to locally change the electronic structure by doping with localized carriers. Therefore, if ib is somehow gradually decreased, we shall first arrive to a state with ib = , (Fig. Let us have a phase with ct = 0 (i.e.,  * ib  Eex). This phase (Fig. Thus, in the CT phase both cuprates and ferropnictides can be considered as exciton insulators, where two-particle transitions to and from become possible between two one-particle states (p electron + d hole) on the one hand and an excitonic two-particle state (d electron + p * ib  hole) on the other hand. Now let us consider how such systems in the CT phase become conductors and from where free carriers emerge. Let there be two hydrogen-like CT plaquettes centred on the nearest cations of Cu in cuprates (Fig. Similar to a molecule of H2, on an HL centre two electrons and two holes can form a bound state due to the possibility of two singlet holes (in cuprates) or electrons (in ferropnictides), being in the space between the central ions, to be attracted to, correspondingly, two electrons or holes being on these ions. An additional decrease of energy, EHL, in this case can be estimated from the ratio EHL  Eн2/ε ∞ 2  0.2 eV, where Eн2 = 4.75 eV is bond energy in the molecule of H2, and   4.5-5 (for cuprates) Continuing the analogy with the H2 molecule, we note that, apart from this molecule, a molecular ion H can also exist. Also, similarly with the molecular ion, an "ionized" HL centre can exist, on which two electrons and one hole (in cuprates) or two holes and one electron (in ferropnictides) form bound states. That is to say, the HL centre can act as an acceptor (in cuprates) or donor (in ferropnictides). As the result, free hole carriers in the O2p band (in cuprates, Fig. Thus, in the CT phase cuprates and ferropnictides are self-doped CT excitonic insulators, where, as the result of the interaction of band electrons or holes with HL centres, free carriers are generated. In cuprates, these are always holes; in ferropnictides, always electrons. These carriers are not associated with doping. Doping, as we will show below, is required only to form the CT phase in initially undoped cuprates and ferropnictides. + 2 To verify the proposed model, let us consider how doping deforms the electronic structures of undoped cuprates and ferropnictides to lead to the formation of regions of a CT phase in their basal planes, in which phase each Cu ion (in cuprates) or As ion (in ferropnictides) is the centre of a CT plaquette. This will enable us to determine the regions of dopant concentrations within which the percolation cluster of the CT phase (or, to be more exact, the percolation cluster of HL centres) can exist. We will show that these regions exactly coincide with the positions of the superconducting domes on the phase diagrams of all cuprates and ferropnictides, for which these diagrams are well established. Besides, we will show that this approach enables predicting with wonderful accuracy the positions of characteristic features on Tc(x) curves inside the superconducting dome, as well as the sharp peaks on the curves for the dependences of the London depth of penetration  on x for a number of compounds, which is indicative of a decrease in the density of pairs in the narrow ranges of dopant concentrations. Let us recall here once again: an HL centre is a pair of CT plaquettes (CuO4 or FeAs4) centred on neighbouring ions of Cu or As. An aggregate of non-intersecting HL centres, in which all ions of O or Fe can be went around by passing from one ion of O or Fe to another nearest ion, we will call a cluster of HL centres in the basal plane of CuO2 (or FeAs). As the gap ib in undoped cuprates and ferropnictides is largely determined by Madelung energy EM, we need to locally decrease the value of EM to form a CT plaquette centred on a given (Cu or As) ion. Hypothetically, this can be done by arranging additional localized charges of respective value and sign either on the central (Cu or As) ion or on one of four surrounding ions (of O or Fe). Interestingly, exactly this mechanism of decreasing ib appears to be realized in HTSCs under doping. The insertion of a heterovalent dopant ion into the lattice is accompanied with the emergence of an additional carrier (electron or hole) in the basal plane or near it. The charge of this doped carrier, in accordance with the symmetry of the environment, is spread over the nearest ions, inducing on them a fractional charge q* |e|/4 (Fig. At a hole doping a positive charge is induced on the nearest ions of O or As (Fig. As each CT plaquette formed by charge q* is bound to it by Coulomb attraction, the doped carrier self-localizes due to the formation of a trion complex, which includes the carrier |e| proper and its surrounding CT plaquettes. The localization of a doped carrier in the nearest vicinity of the dopant (at least at sufficiently low temperatures) has been confirmed by the results of works The localization boundary of the doped carrier is determined by the condition that the same charge q*+|e|/4 (-|e|/4) sufficient for CT plaquette formation be at this boundary per each anion (cation). In fact, we produce a trion complex where the doped carrier is bound to CT excitons that resonantly interact with the band states. By condition, each pair of neighbouring CT plaquettes forms an HL centre (Fig. In turn, trion complexes get ordered in the basal plane, enabling the formation of percolation clusters of HL centres (or CT phase regions). The dopant concentration range corresponding to the existence of a percolation cluster of HL centres (the superconducting CT phase) can be readily determined for each particular compound. The localization regions of doped carriers (non-highlighted central plaquettes in Fig. Optimal doping will conform to the complete (without overlapping) filling of the plane by the patterns shown in Fig. Note that in the 1111 system (LaFeAsO1-xFx), at the substitution of fluorine for oxygen, one electron is doped into the basal plane. The projection of the F ion onto the basal plane coincides with the position of the Co ion in Fig. Let us consider here the most demonstrable coincidences of the calculated ranges for the existence of HL centres' percolation clusters in various compounds with the positions of the superconducting domes on their phase diagrams. Let us begin with the simplest case, YBa2Cu3O6+x. Doping of the parent compound YBa2Cu3O6 is performed by introducing excess oxygen х into the plane of the chains. In the case when two consecutive positions in a chain are occupied with oxygen ions (Fig. Thus, in YBa2Cu3O6+x a doped charge is localized outside the basal plane, and the trion complex formed under doping represents two CT plaquettes localized in the CuO2 planes over different sides of the plane of the CuO chains (Fig. To form a CT plaquette on a Cu ion in the basal plane, it is required to fill two consecutive oxygen positions in the chain over/under it (Fig. Note that YBCO represents the only known example of HTSCs, where CT phase can cover the entire basal plane under doping. In the case of, e.g., another two-plane cuprate Ba2Sr2CaCu2O8+x, where 0 < x < 2, an inhomogeneous filling of excess oxygen positions leads to various charges q* on the apical ions of oxygen, a consequence of which is the co-existence of underdoped and overdoped regions, together with optimally doped ones, in one basal plane. Cases of three-or four-plane cuprates require special consideration owing to the occurrence of infinite (superconducting) layers of CaCuO2 with an unknown character of doping in their structure. In the cases when doped charges are in the basal plane they form four up to eight CT plaquettes depending on the symmetry of the environment (Fig. Let us have a domain in the basal plane where the trion centres are randomly distributed over the sites of a superlattice with parameter lD. The dopant concentration xmax = 1/l D 2 corresponding to the full filling of superlattice sites will be taken for the upper boundary of the optimal doping region. This boundary corresponding to the maximal concentration of HL centres also corresponds, according to our assumption, to the maximum Tc. For the lower boundary, xmin = 0.593/l D 2  0.6/l D 2 , we will conventionally take a dopant concentration corresponding to the site percolation threshold in a square superlattice with parameter lD This does not mean that the percolation cluster on a lattice with parameter lD should occupy the entire crystal, but only that such domains will exist within only this concentration In the case of La2-xSrxCuO4, the doped hole emerging at the substitution of Sr 2+ for La 3+ is in the CuO2 plane (Fig. Within the interval of 0.11 < х < 0.12, clusters of CT phase cannot exist. This is the so-called 1/8 anomaly, which, however, takes place not at х = 0.125 but, according to this consideration, at х = 0.115, in total agreement with experimental data In electron-doped ferropnictide Ca1-xLaxFe2As2 the substitution of La for Ca leads to the emergence of an additional electron in one of the two FeAs planes that imparts charge q* ( -|e|/4) to each of four Fe ions nearest to the projection of La (Fig. (with account for the fact that only each second La ion dopes an electron to the FeAs plane). Herewith, the bonding between the trion complexes will be performed via HL centres of the first type (Fig. Optimal doping as seen in Fig. All three concentration values (0.066, 0.13 and 0.22) coincide with the boundaries for the low-and high-temperature superconductivity regions on the experimental phase diagram of Ca1-xLaxFe2As2 (Fig. 2g Using Fig. Recent years have witnessed publications the authors of which observed in ferropnictides BaFe2(As1-xPx)2 x < 0.11, the number of HL centres will increase. The highest concentration of Co, at which the number of HL centres in a cluster could be maximized due to the ordering of trion complexes touching one another by their angles, is xCo1 = 1/18 (Fig. In between xCo1 and xCo2, any cluster will include a smaller number of HL centres, because it is impossible in this range to order all trion complexes forming them. Thus, the concentration of the superconducting pairs will have a minimum at (xCo1+ xCo2)/2  0.057, and the London penetration depth will have a maximum at the same value of x, which corresponds to the experiment In the compound BaFe2(As1-xPx)2, superconductivity emerges as the result of the isovalent substitution of P ions for As (Fig. To form a CT plaquette centred on an As ion, it is required that ions of P be at certain distances: 2a or a√2. Note that at x = 0.2 (at an ordered arrangement, Fig. (at an ordered arrangement) the number of CT plaquettes reaches a maximum (Fig. Here we propose a mechanism of superconducting pairing genetically inherent in such a system. The basis of the proposed mechanism is the interaction of electrons with HL centres. As the works Let us consider how this mechanism could work in cuprates and ferropnictides. According to the above said, incoherent transport in the CT phase of cuprates (ferropnictides) at T > 0 is performed by hole (electron) carriers emerging at the occupation of HL centres by electrons (holes). The concentration of free carriers n will be determined from the condition of equality of the chemical potentials for pairs on the HL centres and of electrons in O2p (or holes in Fe3d) band. For small concentrations when the occupation of separate HL centres can be considered to be independent one of another, the change of the chemical potential for pairs due to transition of part of electrons (holes) from a band to HL centres can be presented as where n is the two-dimensional concentration of formed free carriers, and f(n) is some function of occupation of HL centres. Herewith, the change of the chemical potential for band carriers μ ≈ -n/N(0), where N(0) is the density of states on the Fermi level in a band. Equating the chemical potential changes of pairs and band electrons, we find in an explicit form the dependence of hole concentrations n on temperature: . ( Thus, in the CT phase at low Т, n  T. At high Т, the concentration tends to a saturation, when the population of copper sites tends to unity (i.e., all HL centres are occupied). As it follows from (2), at T = 0 the pair level is empty, and incoherent transport is impossible owing to the absence of free carriers. At the same time, such a system where an electron and a hole are present in each CT plaquette enables coherent transport, when all carriers of the same sign move coherently, as a single whole, e.g., a superconducting condensate. The latter is possible given a superconducting pairing. We believe that in the proposed pattern based on the formation of local CT excitons and HL centres such an interelectron attraction in the CT phase emerges due to the formation of a bound state of two electrons (holes), getting on the central Cu (As) ions of an unoccupied HL centre, and two holes (electrons), with necessity emerging herewith on the surrounding O (Fe) ions. The value of the pairing interaction will be determined by the coupling energy of pairs of electrons and holes on HL centres. Note that under certain conditions we can observe in such systems a change of sign of carriers in the Hall effect at a superconducting transition. This change of carrier sign in some cuprates and ferropnictides is indeed observed in the experiment Thus, we propose a doping model common for cuprates and ferropnictids, which assumes the formation, around a doped carrier, of a trion complex consisting of the doped carrier and enclosing CT excitons. Each trion complex occupies an area of several neighbouring cells in the basal plane that form a geometric figure whose shape depends on the lattice symmetry, as well as the type and position of dopant. For each material from the above families, this shape is unambiguously determined by a simple common rule. In a certain range of dopant concentrations, trion complexes interacting one with another form percolation clusters of a CT phase. With the geometry of trion complexes known, these ranges can be readily determined for each compound. Calculations showed the concentration ranges corresponding to the superconducting dome on the phase diagrams of cuprates and ferropnictides to coincide with those for the formation of a CT-phase percolation cluster. This approach also enabled us to describe fine features of the phase diagrams of cuprates and pnictides, including the 1/8 anomaly in La2-xSrxCuO4, sharp rises of Тс(х) в YBa2Cu3O6+x and Ca1-xLaxFe2As2, as well as narrow peaks of L(x) in Ba(Fe1-xCoxAs)2 and BaFe2(As1-yPy)2. These results can serve as confirmation of the proposed model and at the same time indicate the incorrectness of the standard approach, which considers cuprates and ferropnictides as spatially homogeneous systems with carrier concentrations determined by the doping level. The fact that the proposed method of constructing phase diagrams proved similarly successful both for cuprates and ferropnictides serves as a serious argument in favour of the common nature of their normal state and gives grounds to attribute these materials in the HTSC phase to CT exciton insulators. In the case of cuprates, the use of the proposed approach to the analysis of the transformation of the electronic structure with doping allowed us to explain a number of their anomalies: Fermi arcs, "large" and "small" pseudogaps, etc. Accepting that high temperature superconductivity emerges in the CT phase, it can be assumed that the very mechanism of superconducting pairing is determined by special properties of this phase, in which electron states are a superposition of band and exciton states. This enables considering the basal planes of doped cuprates and ferropnictides in the CT phase as one more type of structures (in addition to one-dimensional Little chains 