Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides are promising candidates for ultrathin optoelectronic devices due to their high absorption coefficients and intrinsically passivated surfaces. To maintain these near-perfect surfaces, recent research has focused on fabricating contacts that limit Fermi-level pinning at the metal-semiconductor interface. Here, we develop a new, simple procedure for transferring metal contacts that does not require aligned lithography. Using this technique, we fabricate vertical Schottky-junction WS2 solar cells with Ag and Au as asymmetric work function contacts. Under laser illumination, we observe rectifying behavior and open-circuit voltage above 500 mV in devices with transferred contacts, in contrast to resistive behavior and open-circuit voltage below 15 mV in devices with evaporated contacts. One-sun measurements and device simulation results indicate that this metal transfer process could enable high-specific-power vertical Schottky-junction transition metal dichalcogenide photovoltaics, and we anticipate that this technique will lead to advances for two-dimensional devices more broadly. Two-dimensional (2D) semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), including MoS2, WS2, MoSe2, and WSe2, are promising for many optoelectronic applications, including high-specific-power photovoltaics To take advantage of the intrinsically passivated surfaces of TMDs, gentle fabrication techniques are needed to form metal contacts without damaging the underlying semiconductor. A number of new contact techniques have been presented recently, including one-dimensional edge contacts Recently, Liu et al have shown that transferring rather than evaporating metal contacts onto TMDs can yield interfaces with no Fermi-level pinning, where the Schottky barrier height can be predicted by the ideal Schottky-Mott rule To date, the above techniques for gentle contact fabrication have been applied to device geometries where carriers are collected laterally rather than vertically. Though laterally-contacted devices are important for electronic applications, such as field-effect transistors, verticallycontacted devices are necessary for optoelectronic applications that require scalable photoactive areas, such as solar cells. Van der Waals contacts could have an even greater advantage for these vertical device geometries, where the ratio of contact area to device area is often higher than in lateral device geometries. Schottky-junction solar cells represent one specific device geometry where van der Waals metal contacts could enable high performance in vertical devices. Although vertical-junction solar cells are more aligned with conventional photovoltaics Here, we develop a simple technique for transferring metal contacts, where all lithographic patterning is done on a donor substrate rather than on the active device. We apply this technique to vertical Schottky-junction solar cells with multilayer TMD absorber layers. Due to the tradeoff between bandgap energy and photoluminescence quantum yield, the theoretical maximum power conversion efficiency achievable for multilayer and monolayer single-junction solar cells is similar Fabrication of vertical WS2 Schottky-junction solar cells. We prepare vertical WS2 Schottkyjunction solar cells made from 16-nm-thick WS2 absorber layers, with Ag (fAg » 4.3 eV) and Au (fAu » 5.1 eV) as asymmetric work function contacts (Fig. The ideal band diagram of this Schottky-junction solar cell is shown in Fig. We develop a new, simple process for transferring metal contacts onto TMDs (Fig. Briefly, we create a SAM on clean thermally-oxidized Si chips in a vacuum desiccator We then deposit 20 nm of Au via electron beam evaporation. Using photolithography, we define the contact areas with positive photoresist and a positive photomask. We etch the Au outside the masked contact areas, then dissolve the remaining photoresist in acetone, leaving Au disks on the SAM-coated SiO2/Si substrates. We prepare a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp coated with the thermoplastic polymer polypropylene carbonate (PPC) on a glass slide Comparison of transferred and evaporated metal contacts. We measure I-V curves under illumination with a 633 nm laser focused to a ~1 μm 2 spot in a confocal microscope at room temperature. In devices with transferred metal contacts, we observe rectifying I-V curves and a pronounced photovoltaic effect (Fig. In contrast, we observe resistive behavior and a small photovoltaic effect in devices with evaporated top metal contacts (Fig. Previous work demonstrates that due to Fermi-level pinning, evaporated Au and transferred Ag have effectively the same barrier height for electrons and holes In devices with transferred contacts, the slope of the I-V curve at short-circuit increases linearly with increasing laser power, corresponding to a decreasing shunt resistance (Supplementary Fig. Device simulations can replicate this photoshunt pathway without the addition of any external shunt resistance (Supplementary Fig. Quantum efficiency and photocurrent generation. Light-beam induced current (LBIC, or photocurrent) maps, acquired with a 633 nm laser in a confocal microscope, show uniform current generation under the entire Au disk contact, except where shaded by the contact probe (Fig. The uniformity of the photocurrent demonstrates that the Au is homogeneously semitransparent and in good contact with the TMD. Importantly, this indicates that the area of the Au disk can be used to accurately define the device active area (Supplementary Fig. Further, it demonstrates that there are no visible bubbles created during the metal transfer process. The measured total absorption (Fig. To calculate the active-layer absorption in the experimental WS2 devices, we subtract the simulated parasitic absorption (the sum of the Au and Ag curves in Fig. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the device follows the spectral shape of absorption well, averaging 28% from 450 nm to 650 nm and reaching a peak of above 40% around 550 nm (Fig. IQEactive, calculated by dividing EQE by the active-layer absorption rather than the total absorption, is greater than 90% at its peak, and averages 74% between 450 nm and 650 nm (Fig. Performance under one-sun illumination. Vertical Schottky-junction WS2 solar cells with transferred top contacts achieve reasonable photovoltaic performance when measured under simulated AM1.5G illumination. Fig. By fitting the one-sun I-V curve using the diode equation with series and shunt resistances, we estimate a shunt resistance (RSH) of 231 W cm 2 and a negligible series resistance (RS), as shown in Supplementary Fig. The JSC of 4.10 mA/cm 2 that we measure with the solar simulator is within 10% of the JSC that we calculate by integrating the EQE over the solar spectrum (4.55 mA/cm 2 ). We believe that probe shading, which we correct for in EQE measurements but not in solar simulator measurements, accounts for the 10% discrepancy. Though the JSC varies due to differences in thickness and therefore absorption in exfoliated flakes, the VOC is replicable across all devices fabricated for this work. As shown in Supplementary Figs. To examine and further optimize the performance of these devices, we simulate a variety of device geometries. The assumed material parameters of the WS2 are detailed in Supplementary Table The simulated VOC of 646 mV and RSH of 2240 W cm 2 are considerably higher than the VOC of 256 mV and RSH of 231 W cm 2 observed in our one-sun measurements. This demonstrates that with further optimization, our device geometry could achieve higher voltages and less shunting than we currently see (Supplementary Fig. To identify a potential path towards high-efficiency vertical Schottky-junction WS2 solar cells, we simulate a series of optimized devices (Fig. We develop here a process for transferring metal contacts with near-atomically smooth interfaces that has high-yield, allows for batch fabrication, and eliminates aligned lithography. We expect that this procedure will be highly relevant and useful to the 2D community, as well as to researchers working on air-sensitive nanomaterials, as it allows all processing to be done on the contacts rather than the device. By applying this new technique to vertical Schottky-junction TMD solar cells, we demonstrate that transferred contacts are particularly advantageous for vertical device geometries, which are important for photovoltaic and other optoelectronic applications due to their scalable active areas. The rectifying I-V curves shown in transferred-contact devices and resistive I-V curves shown in evaporated-contact devices support the hypothesis that transferring contacts can reduce Fermi-level pinning and allow the work function asymmetry between the contacts to define the maximum achievable VOC. We observe active-layer absorption >55%, EQE >40%, and activelayer IQE >90% in these devices, demonstrating efficient collection of photogenerated carriers. Under one-sun illumination, we measure a VOC of 256 mV, a JSC of 4.10 mA/cm 2 , a fill factor of 0.44, and a power conversion efficiency of 0.46%. We highlight areas for improvement by simulating the behavior of optimized devices based on this architecture and show 8.9% simulated efficiency and 58 kW/kg simulated specific power in a device with transparent top contacts, optimized thickness, and ideal metal work functions for carrier extraction. Given the proof-of-concept performance and the clear pathways for improvement presented here for devices less than 150 nm thick, ultrathin vertical Schottky-junction TMD solar cells with transferred contacts are promising candidates for high-specific-power photovoltaic applications. We anticipate that this new metal transfer process will enable similar advances for 2D TMD devices beyond Schottky-junction solar cells, as well as for nanomaterial-based devices more broadly. Device fabrication. Template-stripped silver substrates are prepared as described previously WS2 is mechanically exfoliated directly onto template-stripped silver from the bulk crystal (HQ Graphene) using Scotch tape. For transferred contact devices, Au top contacts are prepared and transferred using the metal transfer technique summarized in the main text, and described in detail in Supplementary Note 1. The SAM used is trichloro(1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyl)silane (PFOTS, Sigma Aldrich), the photoresist used is S1813, and the Au etchant used is Transene Gold Etchant TFA. For evaporated contact devices, Au top contacts are patterned using standard photolithography techniques as described previously Photocurrent and power-dependent I-V. Photocurrent and power-dependent IV are measured on a scanning confocal microscope (Zeiss Axio Imager 2) using a long working distance objective (50x, NA = 0.55). Devices are contacted using piezoelectrically controlled micromanipulators (MiBots, Imina Technologies). I-V curves are measured with a Keithley 236 Source-Measure Unit using custom LabView programs. Laser powers are measured using a USB power meter (ThorLabs). All measurements are performed under ambient temperature and pressure. Absorption and EQE are measured using a home-built optical setup with a long working distance objective (50x, NA = 0.55). A supercontinuum laser (Fianium) is coupled to a monochromator to produce a tunable, monochromatic light source. A chopper and lock-in detection are used for all measurements. For absorption, the sample reflectance is measured using a NIST-calibrated photodetector (Newport 818-ST2-UV/DB) with a beamsplitter. A protected silver mirror (Thorlabs) is used to calibrate the reflectance based on its reported reflectance curve, and a dark background is subtracted from both measurements. For EQE, the current generated by the sample is probed using MiBots and compared to the current collected by the NIST calibrated photodetector when placed at the sample position, corrected by the photodetector's responsivity. Absorption and EQE measurements are both corrected by a shading factor of 1.39 that corrects for the shading of the MiBot tips, which is calculated by comparing absorption with and without the tips in place and averaging over the spectral range 450 nm-650 nm. Solar simulator. One-sun I-V curves are measured using a 1 kW Xenon arc lamp (Newport Oriel) with an AM1.5G filter (ABET Technologies). To ensure 100 mW/cm 2 incident power, the lamp power is adjusted to generate the correct current on a Si reference cell placed at the same location as the sample. MiBots are used to contact the device, and I-V curves are measured with a Keithley 2425 SourceMeter using custom LabView programs. The current density is divided by a spectral mismatch factor to account for the difference in bandgap between our WS2 sample and our Si reference cell and the difference in spectrum between our solar simulator and AM1.5G Device simulations. Absorption and generation are calculated using the transfer matrix method, with optical constants for WS2 taken from literature Etchant TFA for 10 seconds, then the sample is rinsed three times in DI water. The photoresist is dissolved in slightly heated acetone (60oC for 5 minutes). Step 2: PDMS/PPC stamps. A similar procedure is followed to that developed by Pizzochero et al Step 3: Transfer of metal contacts. The stage of a 2D transfer setup is heated to 60oC. A Si/SiO2 chip containing metal contacts is loaded onto the stage, and the desired contact is centered in the field of view. The PDMS/PPC stamp is loaded onto the top arm of the transfer setup. The thickest corner of the PDMS/PPC stamp is centered in the field of view. When the stamp is lowered, the polymer front should originate from this corner. The PDMS/PPC stamp and the desired contact are aligned so that the PPC completely covers the contact, but so that just the corner of the stamp will make contact with the substrate. The PDMS/PPC stamp is lowered slowly. Once the polymer front progresses just past the contact, the stage temperature is lowered to 40oC. After the temperature has reached 40oC, the top arm of the transfer setup is raised slowly. As the polymer front begins to move, but before it reaches the contact, the top arm of the transfer setup and therefore the PDMS/PPC stamp is raised very quickly, picking up the contact with it. The stage of the transfer setup is heated to 60oC again. The target substrate is loaded onto the stage of the transfer setup and the target flake is centered in the field of view. Once the temperature reaches 60oC, the contact on the PDMS/PPC stamp is aligned with the flake. The PMDS/PPC stamp is lowered slowly, until the polymer front progresses just past the sample. Immediately, and with the stage still at 60oC, the PDMS/PPC stamp is raised very slowly. The contact should delaminate from the stamp and stick to the flake. PPC that occasionally sticks to the flake can be removed by rinsing in chloroform for 5 minutes, then drying in nitrogen gas. 