Superconducting Weyl semimetals present a novel and promising system to harbor new forms of unconventional topological superconductivity. Within the context of time-reversal symmetric Weyl semimetals with d-wave superconductivity, we demonstrate that the number of Majorana cones equates to the number of intersections between the d-wave nodal lines and the Fermi arcs. We illustrate the importance of nodal line-arc intersections by demonstrating the existence of locally stable surface Majorana cones that the winding number does not predict. The discrepancy between Majorana cones and the winding number necessitates an augmentation of the winding number formulation to account for each intersection. In addition, we show that imposing additional mirror symmetries globally protect the nodal line-arc intersections and the corresponding Majorana cones. Dirac and Weyl semimetals (WSMs) feature prominently in the study of topological materials alongside other semimetallic systems such as nodal line semimetals and semimetals with higher order degeneracies The combination of WSMs and superconductivity is a powerful and robust platform for realizing novel topological phases of matter. In a topological superconductor (TSC), the quasiparticle spectrum has topologically protected, gapless Majorana modes that are essential to many topological quantum computing implementations Here C s denotes the first Chern number on the s-th disconnected Fermi surface, and ∆ s denotes the effective pairing gap on the s-th Fermi surface. Eq. ( In this work, we study TSC in TRS WSMs with dwave superconductivity. We demonstrate that intersections between the Fermi arcs and the nodal lines in the pairing potential naturally host Majorana cones. Interestingly, we show that additional, locally stable Majorana cones occur at the nodal line-arc intersections (NAIs) that the winding number cannot account for. Confronting this winding number limitation prompts a more careful study of the interplay between the WSM topology and the superconducting pairing potential to determine the presence of TSC. We address the limitation by recasting Eq. ( We begin with a phenomenological Bogoliubov de-Gennes (BdG) Bloch Hamiltonian that describes TRS WSMs with d-wave pairing In this formulation, h BdG (k) acts on the Nambu spinor where τ , s denote the Pauli spin vectors in the Nambu and spin spaces, respectively. Due to TRS, a Weyl node and its TRS partner have the same chirality, thereby ensuring a gapped bulk quasiparticle spectrum in the presence of d-wave superconductivity, so long as the Weyl nodes do not occur at nodal lines where i sums over all the NAIs in the BZ, ∇∆ i is the gradient of the pairing gap function at the intersection, and ûi is a unit vector tangent to the Fermi arc at the intersection and pointing along the orientation of the arc. To illustrate the importance of NAIs in understanding the nature of the surface physics, we note that, by definition, ∆(k) = 0 at NAIs. At these momenta, h BdG (k) decouples into particle and hole sectors which is the eigenstate of the surface Hamiltonian, satisfies γ † k ,z = γ -k ,z . This is precisely the criterion for a Majorana operator under open boundary conditions Eq. ( The inclusion of mirror symmetries such as those present in TaAs and TaP fundamentally alters the topological structure of the BdG Hamiltonian, thus changing the number of topologically protected Majorana modes at NAIs. To illustrate how the topological protection at NAIs changes under mirror symmetry, we consider a where σ i are the Pauli matrices that act on orbital space. The parameters A, B, and λ break IS that, by definition, sends k → -k. The last term is a Rashba coupling term that alters the connectivity of the Fermi arcs when λ is changed, as described below. h 0 (k) also respects the mirror symmetries M x/y := is x/y . The superconducting pairing matrix takes the form where ∆ α denotes the two types of d-wave pairing gap functions, either ∆ xy or ∆ x 2 -y 2 , given by Since the pairing potential vanishes at nodal lines for both intra-and inter-orbital pairing, we include only intra-orbital pairing and set the magnitude to be ∆ 0 = 1. In the BdG Hamiltonian, h BdG (k) satisfies M i symmetry if where k denotes the momenta unaffected by M i . For d x 2 -y 2 -pairing, the mirror symmetries are given by M x = iτ z s x , M y = is y , while for d xy -pairing the mirror symmetries are written as M x = is x , M y = iτ z s y . The difference in the form of M i between the two types of d-wave pairing arises from a U (1)-gauge choice in the hole sector of h BdG (k) depending on whether or not the pairing potential changes sign under the mirror reflection. To determine the topological classification under M i symmetry, we utilize the minimal Dirac Hamiltonian method, briefly summarized in Appendix B, which involves analyzing the existence or non-existence of additional symmetry-preserving extra mass terms in topological Dirac Hamiltonians There is a profound difference in the topological classification of the BdG Hamiltonian depending on the values of η i T , η i C . To illustrate the difference, we begin with d x 2 -y 2 -pairing that corresponds to η T = -1, η C = -1. We find that d x 2 -y 2 -pairing is always topologically trivial under both M x and M y symmetries. We may understand the emergence of trivial topology in the presence of d x 2 -y 2 -pairing by considering a bulk Weyl node situated away from any high symmetry points in the BZ and its TRS partner of the same chirality. Upon including either M x or M y symmetry, both Weyl nodes now have a partner of opposite chirality, as depicted in Fig. In contrast to d x 2 -y 2 -pairing, d xy -pairing, corresponding to η T = -1, η C = 1, supports a Z ⊕ Z classification Here the mirror Chern number, M Z BdG i , is defined as where C +,BdG i denotes the Chern number for h BdG,+ on the surface k y = i in the bulk Brillouin zone Turning to the tight-binding model given in Eq. ( In conclusion, we considered a TRS WSM with d-wave superconductivity and analyzed the resulting topological classification and gapless surface modes. We demonstrated, both analytically and numerically, the existence of locally stable Majorana cones at NAIs that the DIII winding number does not predict. Consequently, we provided an augmentation of the winding number formalism that specifies both the number and location of all Majorana cones that occur along an open boundary in the ẑ-direction. Given the mirror symmetries inherent to many experimentally observed TRS WSM, such as TaAs, TaP, and NbAs, we further analyzed how the topological classification changes when we incorporate the mirror symmetries of both the TRS WSM and the dwave pairing potential. We find that the mirror symmetries of the two d-wave pairing potentials considered, d xyand d x 2 -y 2 -pairing, give rise to drastically different topological classifications. The mirror symmetry under d xypairing protects surface Majorana cones, even when the Fermi arc connectivity is changed in a mirror symmetric manner, while the mirror symmetry of d x 2 -y 2 -pairing renders the system topologically trivial. Our results further extend predictions of topological superconductivity in TRS WSM, and highlight the crucial roles unconventional superconductivity, crystalline symmetries, and Fermi arcs play in understanding these exotic systems. this operator as an extra kinetic term increases the effective dimension of the Hamiltonian, while addition of γ 1 R as an extra mass term decreases the effective dimension of the Hamiltonian. The topological invariants for these higher (lower) dimensional Hamiltonians without reflection symmetry are in correspondence with the topological invariants of the Hamiltonian with the reflection symmetry.