We study the entropy jump associated with the first-order vortex melting transition (FOT) in Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ crystals by means of Hall probe magnetometry. The samples present a diluted distribution of columnar defects (CD) introduced by irradiation with Xe ions. The FOT is detected in ac transmittivity measurements as a paramagnetic peak, the height of which is proportional to the enthalpy difference entailed by the transition. By applying the Clausius-Clapeyron relation, we quantify the evolution of the entropy jump Δs as a function of the FOT temperature, T FOT , in both pristine crystals and crystals with CD. On increasing the density of CD, Δs decreases monotonically with respect to values found in pristine samples. The Δs versus T FOT dependence in the case of pristine samples follows reasonably well the theoretical prediction of dominant electromagnetic coupling for a model neglecting the effect of disorder. The data for samples with a diluted distribution of CD are not properly described by such a theoretical model. In high-temperature cuprate superconductors, vortex matter exhibits a first-order transition (FOT) where d is the spacing between adjacent CuO 2 planes, Φ 0 the magnetic flux quantum, and H FOT , T FOT , and B FOT the applied field, temperature and magnetic induction at which the FOT takes place. In the case of vortex matter in layered superconductors, magnetization experiments suggest that the entropy jump diverges on approaching T c . Here we unveil the effect of disorder on the temperature-evolution of the entropy-jump at the FOT by introducing a diluted distribution of strong, correlated pinning centers in the form of columnar defects (CD) induced by irradiation with high-energy Xe heavy ions. We study the case of two CD densities n d , sufficiently low so as for the FOT transition to persists to fields of up to 60 Oe. We find that there is a gradual decrease of the entropy jump on increasing n d . We also show that the temperature-evolution of Δs for a given density of CD falls apart from the functionality found for pristine samples in a way that cannot be explained by an enhancement of the relevance of Josephson coupling. We study Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ single crystals with a random, dilute distribution of CD's generated by irradiation with 1 GeV Xe ions performed at GANIL, France. We measure samples with matching fields B Φ  n d Φ 0 =10 and 30G; note that for B=B Φ the number of vortices equals that of CD's. Data in four pristine optimally-doped Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ samples We measure the sample stray field B using 16 x 16μm 2 active area two-dimensional electron-gas sensors (see inset to Fig. Figure Figure The entropy jump Δs can therefore be obtained by extracting the value of ΔB from the height of the peaks following Eq. 2, and estimating the derivative of H FOT with respect to the T FOT line obtained from the location of the paramagnetic peaks, see Eq. 1. The entropy jumps for samples with B Φ =10 and 30 G obtained in this way are shown in Fig. The data for the four pristine samples are well fitted by the expression Δs α 1/(1-(T FOT /T c ) 2 ) (EM coupling fit), shown with a full line in Fig. Nevertheless, our data in samples with disorder is well fitted with an empirical expression Δs α (1-(T FOT /T c ) 2 ) -α . These fits are shown in Fig. The temperature dependence of the entropy jump Δs at the first order transition of the vortex ensemble in irradiated superconducting Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 samples with a dilute distribution of columnar defects was obtained by measuring the paramagnetic peaks at the transition. Similar to the case of pristine samples, the temperature evolution of Δs diverges on approaching T c . The main effect of a diluted density of CD is a depletion of the entropy jump at lower temperatures. The rate of decrease of Δs enhances with matching field. A model based on EM coupling between pancake vortices does not properly fit the data. An empirical relation between Δs and the FOT temperature is found, but a satisfactory theoretical model taking into account the effects of disorder as well as the measured shape of the transition is still lacking.