The strong geomagnetic influences on mechanical properties of crystals due to their exposure to ultralow crossed magnetic fields, the Earth's field (~50 T) and the AC field (~3 T) in the electron paramagnetic resonance scheme, are discussed. Resonance relaxation displacements of dislocations in NaCl crystals are found both for a harmonic pump field and for a pulse AC field of resonance duration ~0.5 s. Resonant changes have been also detected in the microhardness of ZnO, triglycine sulfate, and potassium acid phthalate crystals after their exposure in the same EPR scheme. The both effects manifest new strongly anisotropic properties. In particular, the frequency of the resonance is very sensitive to the mutual orientation of the sample and the Earth's field. Physical mechanisms and practical significance of the phenomenon are discussed. The magnetoplastic effect (MPE) was discovered as the movement of dislocations in NaCl crystals held in a DC magnetic field B  0.5 T in the absence of a mechanical load The phenomenon manifests itself also in macroplasticity of crystals: under the active loading when the stress load is increasing with the constant rate: σ̇= const The magnetoplastic effect is observed in crystals of various types not only in a static magnetic field but also in crossed static and alternating magnetic fields in the electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) regime at the resonance frequency where the g-factor is usually close to 2, μ B is the Bohr magneton, and h is the Planck's constant. Such resonances in NaCl and silicon crystals were found by the three independent groups at the frequency of 9.5 GHz and the related magnetic field ~0.3 T More recently, a similar resonance in NaCl was detected and studied in ultralow fields: the Earth's field ~50 μT and the pump field with an amplitude of 3 μT and a frequency of ~1 MHz To create the EPR conditions, the samples were placed in crossed static and alternating magnetic fields. In most experiments as the static magnetic field the Earth's magnetic field was used. Its direction and magnitude were measured at the place of a sample. The vector of the Earth's magnetic field B Earth made an angle of 29.5 with the vertical direction and had a length of 49.97 μT. The alternating pump field B ̃ was produced in a screened coaxial chamber around rectilinear conductor 1 through which a sinusoidal current f lowed as shown in Fig. In situ effects were studied when the response of a crystal to the magnetic action occurs in the process of exposure and directly involves moving dislocations. "Memory" effects were also studied when the response occurs in a certain time after exposure. They were found by measuring the microhardness of ZnO, TGS, and KAP crystals. In the former case, histograms of paths of fresh dislocations in NaCl crystals introduced in the samples just before the exposure were measured. Using these histograms, the mean free paths l for various physical parameters and conditions was calculated. Their positions before and after exposure were determined by the selective etching method. In addition to the absolute mean path l, the normalized dimensionless path l√ρ which is the ratio of the l to the average distance 1/√ρ between dislocations was used. Here ρ ~10 4 cm -2 is the total density of dislocations. Their slip planes belonged to the {110} system. Here we described the experiments with the sample oriented so that the edge c was parallel to the Earth's field and the a edge was orthogonal to the plane of the magnetic fields {B Earth , B ̃} (see Fig. The intensity of the discussed resonance depends also on the mutual orientation of the fields B Earth and B ̃. However, this type of anisotropy is not universal and is manifested in different degrees in crystals with different impurity compositions. Figure Here the dependences of the resonance mean paths l r on the amplitude of the pump magnetic field B ̃, time t of exposure of samples to the magnetic field, and the concentration C of the impurity is discussed. Dislocations and crossed fields are chosen mutually orthogonal in order to ensure the maximum effect. Figure The value of the resonance frequency ν r = 1.38 MHz of the pump field in Fig. where ν 0 = 1.38 MHz. Each peak specified by Eq. ( (3) Such a pair of peaks in Fig. ArXiv19-Geomagnetic.docx 5/9 There is else the other variant of the dislocation EPR, when a magnetic harmonic pumping field is replaced by a pulsed one. In this case, the resonance frequency ν r in Eqn. ( (4) In the parallel fields B ̃ ∥ B Earth , the amplitude of the effect from which background paths are subtracted is almost half of that in orthogonal fields, which approximately corresponds to the relation for the same crystals under harmonic pumping. At the same time, the relative path l r √ρ observed under the optimal conditions of the orthogonal fields is larger than unity (the absolute value is l r ≈ 80 μm). This indicates a high degree of relaxation of the dislocation structure, particularly taking into account that the relative density of mobile dislocations approaches 100%. This result seems striking, because it is reached in a half of a microsecond. We recall that the same degree of relaxation under harmonic pumping was reached in ~5 min. It was assumed in Resonance memory effects Microhardness was measured by the Vickers method on a Neophot-21 optical microscope. Each value of microhardness was determined from the averaged size of diagonals of 20  25 dents of the indenter. The error of these measurements was 1.5 ÷ 3%. Measurements were performed before magnetic exposure, immediately after it, each hour during the first 4  6 h, and then 1 ÷ 3 times over the next several days. Preliminary exposure of the crystals in crossed magnetic fields for an appropriate resonance frequency of the pump field resulted in an increase in the microhardness in the ZnO crystal and in its decrease in TGS and KAP crystals. The maximum change in the microhardness (10  15%) was reached 1 ÷ 3 h after the magnetic treatment, the microhardness gradually returned to its initial value on the first day. Next, after a sufficient pause, the effect was completely reproduced under the same conditions. The delay of the response of the crystal to magnetic exposure occurs apparently because of diffusion processes after the spin transformation of impurity centres. Figure It was found that the most important anisotropic property of this effect is again the strong dependence of the resonance frequency on the sample orientation in the Earth's field. As is seen from Fig. Thus, in complete analogy with the dislocation effect in the NaCl crystal (see Fig. where for B loc ≫ B Earth one has Thus, we come to the observed dependence descby equation (2) which may be described by the effective g-factor g eff ≈ g cos θ. The features of the resonance magnetoplasticity in ultralow magnetic fields have been studied primarily for NaCl crystals, which have been used for a long time as a convenient model objects for the extensive studies of various properties of the magnetoplastic effect. This work concerns a new direction of studies where the exposure of crystals occurs in the EPR scheme with the use of the Earth's magnetic field and radiofrequency pumping. It has been found that the observed resonance of dislocation mobility has new, very specific, strongly anisotropic properties. The main such feature is the sensitivity of the mean path and the resonance frequency to the orientation of the sample and the directions of dislocations with respect to crossed magnetic fields. This sensitivity was not previously observed under usual EPR conditions corresponding to the pump frequencies of 10 GHz and 150 MHz. Pulse EPR has also been detected in NaCl crystals in the Earth's magnetic field. The resonance peak of paths appears in a narrow range of durations of a pump field pulse near 0.53 μs (see Fig. The resonance change in the microhardness of the ZnO, TGS, and KAP crystals after their exposure in the same EPR scheme in the Earth's magnetic field indicates that this phenomenon and its specific anisotropic features are fairly general. It occurs in the very different materials and is responsible for both ArXiv19-Geomagnetic.docx 8/9 in situ effects and magnetic memory effects. In essence, this concerns a very wide range of relaxation processes that have magnetic resonance nature. An important consequence of the existence of magnetic resonance transformations of defects is the recognition of new dangers of modern technical civilization. The mentioned processes can occur uncontrollably in critical elements of constructions and devices, leading to their degradation, when weak background radiofrequency fields are imposed on the Earth's magnetic field. These are not abstract possibilities but are real processes, e.g., the accidental observation in 1985 of mass displacements of dislocations in a NaCl crystal under the action of magnetic pickups because of click of a switch described in This work was partly supported by the Federal Agency of Scientific Organizations of Russia (Agreement No. 007-GZ/Ch3363/26) and by the Presidium of the Russian Academy of Sciences 