Nanomechanical resonators are used in building ultra-sensitive mass and force sensors. In a widely used resonator based sensing paradigm, each modal resonance frequency is tracked with a phase-locked loop (PLL) based system. There is great interest in deciphering the fundamental sensitivity limitations due to inherent noise and fluctuations in PLL based resonant sensors to improve their performance. In this paper, we present a precise, first-principles based theory for the analysis of PLL based resonator tracking systems. Based on this theory, we develop a general, rigorously-derived noise analysis framework for PLL based sensors. We apply this framework to a setting where the sensor performance is mainly limited by the thermomechanical noise of the nanomechanical resonator. The results that are deduced through our analysis framework are in complete agreement with the ones we obtain from extensive, carefully run stochastic simulations of a PLL based sensor system. We compare the conclusions we derive with the recent results in the literature. Our theory and analysis framework can be used in assessing PLL based sensor performance with other sources of noise, e.g., from the electronic components, actuation and sensing mechanisms, and due to the signal generator, as well as for a variety of PLL based sensor configurations such as multi-mode and nonlinear sensing. State-of-the-art nano-mechanical sensors are extremely sensitive, achieving yoctogram and single-protein resolutions in inertial mass sensing, thanks to their ever diminishing size and high quality factors Currently, there are two main architectures in use for resonant sensors: (i) Self-sustaining autonomous oscillator, in which a nano-mechanical resonator is used as the frequency selective element in a classic feedback oscillator configuration, with an amplifier and a delay line in the loop Recently, Roy et al. In this paper, we get to the bottom of this issue. We investigate in detail whether one can obtain better performance with larger damping in a PLL based sensor. Our conclusion is in the negative. We arrive at this result by developing a first-principles based noise analysis framework for PLL based sensor architectures, where each step and approximation is rigorously justified. The PLL system we consider is shown in Figure Our analysis framework does employ some approximations, and is based on some assumptions. Even though all of these are stated very clearly and justified rigorously in our development, we go further in order to verify our theoretical results. We report the results of extensive, carefully conceived stochastic simulations of the PLL system. The simulator does not employ any of the mentioned approximations and assumptions, and is based on realistic, detailed, full models of the system components. The system is simulated with full, high-frequency, nonlinear and time-varying models for the resonator and the demodulator as shown in Figure The outline of the paper is as follows. We present the models used for the PLL components in Section II. The theoretical development of our analysis framework is in Section III. The results obtained Variance, in order to make the paper as self-contained as possible. We consider a resonator that is modeled as a damped harmonic oscillator as follows where x is the displacement, m is the mass, F (t) represents a force excitation, ω r is the resonance frequency, and the damping rate Γ is given by where Q is the quality factor. The damping rate Γ determines the line-width of the resonator's frequency response (from input F (t) to output x(t)), which is given by Based on the fluctuation-dissipation theorem of statistical thermodynamics, the thermo-mechanical noise of the resonator can be modeled as a white noise source (input-referred, at the input of the resonator as in Figure where k B is Boltzmann's constant, and T is temperature (in Kelvins). With this noise source as the only input to the resonator, the mean kinetic energy of the resonator can be computed as follows where E[•] denotes the probabilistic expectation operator. The expectation above can be computed using the Wiener-Khinchin theorem as below where S x (ω) is the power spectral density (PSD) of the resonator displacement x(t), which can be computed with where j = √ -1. The integral in ( consistent with the equipartition theorem of statistical mechanics. The demodulator shown in Figure We can express the operations in the in-phase (real) and quadrature (imaginary) arms of the demodulator in a compact manner using complex arithmetic as follows. We first express the resonator output as s r (t) = A r 2 e j (ωr t+θr(t)) + e -j (ωr t+θr(t)) We next assume that the low-pass filters in the demodulator (shown as H L (s)) block the high-frequency, second term and pass the low-frequency, first term above. Thus, the outputs of the filters are given by (the real/imaginary parts of) Finally, the output of the arctan (•) block is then simply the phase difference between the resonator output and the control oscillator signal, expressed as where we assume that ω r ≈ ω o and θ r (t) -θ o (t) is a low-frequency signal. In the actual model of the system, we do take into account the non-ideal nature of the low-pass filter H L (s) by using a practical filter. The attenuation of the high-frequency component in We use a simple PI controller, as shown in Figure We discuss later how to choose the controller parameters K p and K i . The input to the controller is the phase error signal from the demodulator (phase difference detector) and the controller output is fed to the controlled oscillator, simply determining its frequency deviation from the nominal value ω o . The controlled oscillator is an essential component of the PLL. In an all-analog PLL system, it would be instantiated as a high precision analog voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), typically including a crystal as a time reference. In PLL tracking systems for NEMS applications, lock-in amplifiers (LIA) are routinely employed. In recent LIA based systems, the controlled oscillator is in fact digitally implemented on a configurable DSP/FPGA chip, as what is called a numerically controlled oscillator (NCO). The timing/frequency precision of the NCO is then determined by the time base of the DSP/FPGA, which may be locked to an external atomic reference. For the VCO/NCO, we will use a simple model as follows for its output where the frequency deviation ∆Ω(t) is the control signal produced by the PI controller. Due to the high precision of the VCO or the time base of the NCO, we will assume that the phase noise contribution of the controlled oscillator is negligible. However, both the theory and the simulator that we have developed can be very easily modified to include the phase noise contribution from the VCO/NCO, as well as noise from other components, such as the electronic amplifiers, the actuators and sensors that convert signals between the electrical and the mechanical domain. Our main goal in this paper is to decipher the fundamental sensitivity limitation due to resonator noise. The PLL based tracking system shown in Figure In order to develop this simple model, we consider the open-loop NCO-resonator-demodulator chain shown in Figure Instead, the second demodulator input is simply set to a sinusoidal signal at a constant frequency. In the final simplified model we will construct, we will take into account the fact that the second demodulator input is in fact set to the NCO output. In the development below, we set the resonator noise to zero and first construct a simplified model for the deterministic dynamics. We will then also consider the resonator noise and include it in the final model. We now walk through the chain, from the input (frequency deviation) ∆Ω(t) to the output (phase error) θ e (t). The phase deviation of the NCO, θ o (t) is related to the frequency deviation simply with an integral The output of the NCO is then given by The operation above constitutes a low-to-high frequency translation, from θ o (t) to s o (t). We next consider only the first term on the second line of In order to compute the effect of the resonator on the signal, we now transform to frequency domain, by computing the Laplace transform (bilateral) of s inr (t) above: where . " Resonator Output . ? Frequency Deviation Phase Error Fig. We now compute the output of the resonator (in the frequency domain) with its input as in ( where H BP R (s) is the resonator transfer function in and where s BB outr (t) is a base-band, low-frequency signal with its power concentrated around zero frequency. Combining ( We define as the base-band equivalent transfer function of the resonator, which is given by where we used (3) and ( We manipulate We note that ω in , we have ω ≈ 0. We then assume that ω ω o in The above can be interpreted as a sort of high-Q approximation, but our goal is to develop a theory that is valid even for low-Q resonators. We verify later against simulations (which do not incorporate any approximations) that the base-band resonator model based on the above approximations remains accurate for a Q that is as low as 10. With the above approximations, H BB R (jω) can be simplified as follows Finally, H BB R (jω) can be represented as a Laplace transform: We define the resonator time constant with and obtain The above is essentially a first-order, one-pole, low-pass transfer function, with a DC gain and an extra phase shift. If the input to the resonator is a pure tone at the resonance frequency ω o (corresponding to s = 0 in (32)), then the steady-state output (also a pure tone at the same frequency) will have a -π/2 phase shift with respect to the input. We note that a resonator model as in (32) was derived in and reveals the exact nature of the approximations involved. The base-band equivalent representation for band-pass signals is commonly used in the analysis of communication systems Next, we move along the signal chain and characterize the impact of the demodulator. The demodulator features high-to-low frequency translation, undoing the low-to-high frequency translation that was done by the NCO. That is, the signals at the output(s) of the multipliers in the demodulator, in Figure We substitute That is, the demodulator simply extracts the base-band equivalent, low-frequency, complex-valued resonator output s BB outr (t). However, this signal is further processed in the demodulator through the low-pass filter denoted by H L (s). This filter will nominally not modify s BB outr (t). However, it is required in order to remove the high-frequency signals (at the outputs of the multipliers) that will arise from the second term in The phase angle of the complex-valued output of the low-pass filters is produced with the arctan (•) block in the demodulator. Let the inputs to the arctan (•) block be the (real and imaginary parts of) where A d (t) is the possibly time-varying amplitude, and θ d (t) is the phase. The output θ e (t) of the arctan (•) block is simply the phase θ d (t). Then, we have Thus, we have obtained a compact and simple model for the entire signal chain from the phase deviation θ o (t) of the NCO to the phase error θ e (t), output of the phase detector. In doing so, we were able to capture everything with low-frequency signals, in a base-band equivalent manner. That is, the model in (36) does not have any explicit frequency translation operations, making it time-invariant. However, this model is still nonlinear due to the phase-to-complex conversion, i.e., e j• , in the NCO, and the complexto-phase conversion, i.e., arctan (•), in the demodulator. Next, we introduce a further approximation in order to obtain a simple, linear and time-invariant model for the entire signal chain from θ o (t) to θ e (t). We first observe that the arctan (•) block makes any scaling or DC gain factor up to that point along the signal chain irrelevant, i.e., the factor A o /2 in (20), the DC gain Q/ mω 2 o in (32), any DC gain in H L (s), and the factor A o in (34) are all immaterial for the final output of the demodulator. The final operation in the demodulator subtracts the phase set point from the computed phase, and is set to -π/2 due to the phase shift in (32) due to the resonator. (Please note that the -π/2 phase set point is, not related to, and distinct from the π/2 phase shift applied to the NCO signal for the quadrature arm of the demodulator.) Here, we assume that H L (s) does not introduce any extra phase shift for (complex-valued) DC signals. In this case, if the phase deviation θ o (t) of the NCO is time-invariant, set to a constant as θ o (t) = θ c , then the final output of the demodulator, i.e., the phase error θ e (t), is simply equal to this constant phase θ c . Thus, we remove all scaling factors, DC gains, as well as the -π/2 phase shift in resonator, from the signal path, without changing the final phase error output of the demodulator. We define which was obtained from (32) by removing the DC gain and the -π/2 phase shift. We assume that the low-pass filter H L (s) has a DC gain of 1 and introduces no phase shift for (complex-valued) DC signals, i.e., H L (0) = 1. We then modify (36) to obtain We next assume that the phase deviation θ o (t) is small enough so that we can use the following approximation The constant DC factor 1 above (real part) will go through H R (s) and H L (s) unmodified since H L (0) = H R (0) = 1, whereas jθ o (t) will be modified by the dynamics of these filters, producing where Thus, the phase error θ e (t) = θ d (t) (ignoring -π/2 phase set point) can be computed with Thus, we have obtained a simple, linear and time-invariant model for the entire signal chain from the frequency deviation ∆Ω(t) to the phase error θ e (t). In deriving the model above, we assumed that the second demodulator input is simply set to A o cos (ω 0 t), as in the open-loop model in Figure Having derived a simple model for the deterministic dynamics of the system, we now turn to doing the same for the noise dynamics. We consider the open-loop system in Figure We follow the noise path in Figure Next, this pass-band stationary noise process is fed into the two multipliers that generate cyclo-stationary noise, which can not be characterized with a simple PSD. For cyclo-stationary processes, the PSD is a function of two variables, the frequency ω and time t, i.e., S cyc (t, ω), where the t dependence is periodic and can be represented with a Fourier series as discussed in Apppendix B where s r (t) is the stationary noise signal at the output of the resonator with the PSD in (44). Then, the cyclic spectra of s mRe (t), as shown in Apppendix B, is given by The noise signal at the output of the quadrature (imaginary part) multiplier is given by It can be easily shown that the cyclic spectra of s mIm (t) is The cyclo-stationary noise signals s mRe (t) and s mIm (t) at the outputs of the multipliers are filtered with the low-pass filter H L (s). As shown in Apppendix B, this filter stationarizes these cyclo-stationary noise processes, and at the same time removes high-frequency components s dRe (t) and s dIm (t), at the output of these filters have the following PSD where S r (ω) is the PSD in (44). We next analyze the noise folding (discussed in Apppendix B) and filtering represented by (49). S r (ω) is a pass-band, two-sided PSD with power concentrated around ± ω o . Thus, S r (ω -ω o ) has power concentrated around 0 and 2ω o , whereas for S r (ω + ω o ) it is around 0 and Assuming that H L (jω) is a low-pass filter with an effective bandwidth that is much less than ω o , satisfying H L (±j2ω o ) ≈ 0, it will remove the noise component at 2ω o in S r (ω -ω o ) and the one at Then, the only noise components of interest are the ones around 0. We evaluate these components as follows. We first rewrite (44) as below and then S r (ω We then assume that ω ω o and use the following approximations due to the fact that we are interested in the above PSD only at low frequencies The above approximations are similar to the ones in (28) that we employed in simplifying the deterministic dynamics. With (52), (51) can be simplified as follows We substitute (53) above into (49) to obtain with H R (s) defined as in (37). Thus, Final stage in the demodulator is the arctan (•) block, a memoryless nonlinearity. Up till now, we assumed that the resonator-demodulator chain is driven by only the resonator noise source. In order to correctly evaluate the effect of the nonlinear arctan (•) block, we need to also consider the signal input to the resonator that is fed from the NCO output. With NCO output set to the deterministic components of the in-phase and quadrature signals at the inputs of the arctan (•) block will be the real and imaginary parts of based on where s dRe (t) and s dIm (t) are the noise signals at the inputs of arctan (•). We observe that the noise signal s dIm (t) above is much smaller than the DC signal term . Thus, Furthermore, the noise term s dRe (t) is also small. Thus, we use the following first-order Taylor's series expansion Hence, we have With the subtraction of the phase set point, i.e., -π/2 at the output of the demodulator, the phase error θ e (t) is given by Then, the PSD of θ e (t) can be computed based on (56) and (63): We use (31) in (64) and define as the PSD of a white, Gaussian noise process θ n (t). θ n (t) represents the thermo-mechanical noise of the resonator, in an input-referred manner, in the base-band equivalent phase domain model in Figure This noise process goes through two filters, H R (s) and H R (s), as in both (64) and Figure Having derived base-band equivalent phase domain models for both the deterministic and noise dynamics of the PLL components, we next proceed with the noise analysis of the closed-loop system based on Figure The closed-system is governed by the following equation, written directly in the frequency domain, by going around the loop in Figure We compute the transfer function from Θ n (s) to Θ o (s) by solving the loop equation above, and substitute ( We manipulate the above expression to obtain Due to We can then compute the PSD for the frequency deviation ∆Ω(t) of the NCO as follows with S θn (ω) as given in (65). We note that the transfer function in (68) satisfies with an appropriate low-pass filter H L (s) in the demodulator. That is, H ∆Ω θn (s) represents a low-pass filter, with a bandwidth that is essentially the loop bandwidth for the PLL. With S θn (ω) in (65) representing a white spectrum and due to (69), the frequency deviation ∆Ω(t) has the characteristics of band-limited (low-pass filtered) white noise. The phase deviation θ o (t), the (time) integral of ∆Ω(t), then has the characteristics of a random walk, albeit not in the form of a standard Wiener process (Brownian motion). However, for longer time scales (larger than the PLL loop time constant) θ o (t) does behave as a standard random walk process. We emphasize here that this random walk aspect of the phase deviation is not arising from the inherent phase noise of the VCO or NCO. We recall that we have set the inherent phase noise of the controlled oscillator to zero, upfront, when we started our analysis. The random walk nature of phase deviation we have derived above is due to the fact the thermo-mechanical noise of the resonator circulates around the loop. One can interpret that the loop dynamics converts the additive, thermo-mechanical noise (in amplitude) of the resonator into phase noise in the NCO. Our analysis above reveals, in a rigorous manner, precisely how this conversion occurs. This resultant phase noise in the NCO ultimately limits the frequency tracking accuracy of the PLL and represents a fundamental limit on the sensitivity of the resonator based sensor system. Based on the model and theory we have developed above, we next precisely characterize the frequency tracking accuracy of the PLL architecture in terms of Allan Deviation. Allan Deviation We define y(t) to be the fractional frequency deviation as follows where ∆Ω(t) is the NCO frequency deviation, and ω o is the nominal NCO frequency. The averaged fractional frequency deviation ȳ(t, τ ) is defined as where τ is the averaging time. The ith sample of ȳ(t, τ ) is given by ȳi = ȳ(iτ, τ ) where the sampling interval is chosen to be equal to the averaging time τ for standard Allan Deviation. Finally, Allan Variance is computed as follows where where E[•] denotes the probabilistic expectation operator. The Allan Deviation is then We note that the above definition implicitly assumes or postulates that σ 2 y (τ ) is a function of only the averaging time τ , and is independent of the sampling times represented by i and i + 1. This is the case when y(t) is a (wide-sense) stationary process. This is satisfied in our setting, since the frequency deviation ∆Ω(t) is indeed a stationary process, as the output of a stable, linear and time-invariant system (with transfer function H ∆Ω θn (s) in ( where S y (ω) is the PSD of y(t) given by due to (71) with S ∆Ω (ω) in (69). With the transfer function in (68), it is, unfortunately, not possible to evaluate the Allan Variance integral in (76) analytically. However, we can evaluate it numerically in order to compute the Allan Deviation for all values of τ , for any choice of the low-pass filter H L (s) and the controller parameters K p and K i . We will present results for this numerical evaluation in Section IV. On the other hand, it is really desirable that we have an analytical handle on the frequency tracking accuracy of the PLL system. We next evaluate the integral in (76) analytically, for values of τ that are larger than the loop time constant, thus computing a high-τ asymptote for the Allan Deviation of the PLL tracking system. This result will be practically valuable, since the PLL is able to track the frequency deviations of the resonator within its bandwidth, or in other words, at time scales that are longer than the loop time constant. Allan Deviation for values of τ larger than the loop time constant is important from a practical point of view. Frequency deviations that occur faster than the loop time constant are attenuated by the loop dynamics, rendering the PLL tracking system not useful at short time scales. The high-τ asymptote for σ 2 y (τ ) in ( where we used ( We note that τ r above is the resonator time constant defined by (31), whereas τ is the averaging time used in the definition of Allan Variance. The above result for σ 2 y (τ ) is valid for large τ , larger than the loop time constant. We use ( The factor (that multiplies 1/τ ) above is expressed in terms of the resonator parameters m, ω o , Q, Boltzmann's constant k B , temperature T , and the amplitude A o of the signal that drives the resonator. We would like to express this factor in terms of a Signal-to-Noise-Ratio (SNR) for the resonator. We define SNR as follows signal power at resonator input noise power at resonator input In the above, S thm is the input-referred, white (two-sided) PSD of the thermo-mechanical noise of the resonator given in Allan Variance in (80) can be expressed in terms of the product Q SNR: and Allan Deviation is The high-τ approximations above for Allan Variance and Deviation with 1/τ and 1/ √ τ dependence represent random walk phase noise In developing the theory in Section III, we used several approximations and assumptions: • We assumed that the resonator output signal is a strictly band-limited band-pass signal, and that the low-pass filters in the demodulator/phase detector completely remove the high frequency signal and noise components produced by the multipliers. This allowed us to develop simpler, base-band equivalent models for the resonator and the phase detector. • The base-band equivalent transfer function for the resonator and the thermo-mechanical noise PSD were approximated as in ( • We have used a linear(ized) model for the arctan (•) nonlinearity for both the deterministic and noisy dynamics of the PLL, as in (39), ( • In deriving the deterministic and noise models for the resonator and the phase detector, we used the open-loop setting in Figure , including the phase deviation θ o (t). In the closed-loop phase domain model in Figure Even though the above assumptions and approximations are well founded and justified, we still would like to verify them. We do this by comparing our analytical results against the ones obtained from extensive, carefully crafted and run, time-domain stochastic simulations of the PLL system. In these simulations, none of the above assumptions and approximations are used. The system is simulated with full, high-frequency, nonlinear and time-varying models for the resonator and the demodulator as shown in Figure We next provide details and describe specific choices for the resonator and system parameters. The PLL bandwidth is typically set to a small fraction of the resonance frequency and is limited by the capabilities of the loop components such as the LIA. We choose the controller parameters K p and K i as follows, as suggested in where ω PLL is the desired loop bandwidth. If we substitute (85) into (68), a pole-zero cancellation occurs in the transfer function, as shown in The bandwidth of the filters H L (s) in demodulator are set to be larger than the desired loop bandwidth ω PLL , implying Hence, we have Thus, the loop bandwidth is indeed set to be ω PLL , with an effective one-pole, first-order loop dynamics. Resonator and system parameters are chosen as follows, similar to the choices in Hence, the loop time-constant is equal to 2×10 4 periods of the high-frequency signal at the output of the resonator. The low-pass filters in the demodulator are chosen as 4th order Butterworth filters with pass-band edge frequency set to We define the dynamic range DR for the resonator in terms of SNR: We present results for two cases, a low quality factor, Q = 50, and a high one, Q = 10000, with the same resonance frequency. In order to compare these two cases at the onset of Duffing nonlinearity, we adjust the drive strength for the resonator in such a way so that as suggested in We set the duration of the simulation to be 10 8 periods of the high-frequency signal at the output of the resonator, which is equal to 5×10 3 loop time constants. In Figure (normalized). In Figure We note that there is excellent agreement between the analytical results and the ones obtained from It is noteworthy that the simulation results perfectly agree with the analytical results derived in Section III: If SNR and Q are related as in (90), the Allan Deviation is independent of Q for all values of τ . The results presented in Figure On the other hand, if the controller parameters K p and K i are not chosen as in (85), or if another type of controller is used, then the Allan Deviation will not be independent of Q for all values of τ , even when Q SNR is held constant. However, we emphasize, the high-τ asymptote (for values of τ larger than the loop time constant) will always be given by (84), i.e., independent of Q with constant Q SNR. The controller parameters and the particular controller design has an effect on the Allan Deviation only for low values of τ , at or below the loop time constant, which is not significant from a practical point of view, since the PLL system is useful in tracking frequency deviations only at time scales longer than the loop time constant. In order to illustrate this, we show in Figure Above, K 1 i is the same as in (85), and all other system and resonator parameters were chosen as described before. We observe in Figure The results we have derived and reported here are in stark contrast to the theory and results presented in A high precision NCO/VCO will not produce (or produce very little) random walk phase noise arising from its own, internal noise sources, provided that it is controlled with a constant, noiseless frequency control input. However, in the context of a PLL, the frequency control input is noisy, due to unavoidable noise from other sources (resonator, amplifiers, etc.) circulating around the loop and shaped by the loop We have presented a theory and noise analysis framework, and an associated simulator, for PLL based resonant sensors, which is useful in deciphering the fundamental limitations and understanding basic tradeoffs due to inherent noise and fluctuations arising from a number of sources. The framework we have described enables a firm analytical handle on the problem, but without forfeiting rigor and precision. In this paper, we considered a setting where the dominant source of noise is the thermo-mechanical noise of the resonator. In future work, we will extend the analysis framework and the simulator to take into account other types of noise and nonideal dynamics in the resonator In this appendix, we evaluate the integral in where with Please see We substitute (95), ( We substitute (2) into the above and reorganize: Next, a new variable of integration is defined as in We rewrite the integral in (97) as follows: where we used the fact that Based on the above, the double-sided integral in (97) was turned into a one-sided one with the new integration variable β, since the integrand is an even function of ω. The final form of the integral in (99) above can be evaluated, by defining Finally, we have APPENDIX B Please see Let s(t) be a zero-mean, stationary Gaussian random process with the auto-correlation function where E[•] denotes the probabilistic expectation operator. R(η) is a function of only η, not t, due to the stationarity of the process. The PSD of s(t) is defined as the Fourier transform of R s (η) Let m(t) = A o cos (ω o t) be a periodic modulating signal. We obtain the modulated signal (random process) c(t) from s(t) as follows The auto-correlation function of c(t) is also a (periodic) function of t and can be computed as follows where o 4 e j(ωo(t+η/2)) + e -j(ωo(t+η/2)) e j(ωo(t-η/2)) + e -j(ωo(t-η/2)) The PSD of c(t) is also a (periodic) function of t, in addition to ω. The t dependence can be expanded into a Fourier series where S (k) c (ω) are called the cyclic spectra. In (106), the Fourier transform F{R c (t, η)} is with respect to the variable η. For a stationary process, we have S The result above is valid for any input stationary process s(t) and for any (linear and time-invariant) filter H L (jω). We next consider the case when H L (jω) is a low-pass filter with an effective bandwidth that is much less than ω o , satisfying H L (±jω o ) ≈ H L (±j2ω o ) ≈ 0. This implies that In fact, we have Thus, the low-pass filter stationarizes the cyclo-stationary noise process c(t) by removing the high-order cyclic components removes any high-frequency noise components in c L (t), producing a low-pass noise PSD. In this appendix, we derive (76), which is reproduced here for convenience: Please see We define the timing deviation α(t) as the integral of the fractional frequency deviation y(t): Thus, the averaged fractional frequency deviation ȳ(t, τ ), defined by (72), can be computed based on Similarly, samples of ȳ(t, τ ) with a sampling interval of τ can be computed with ȳi = α((i + 1)τ ) -α(iτ where we defined Then, y (τ ) is postulated to be independent of the sampling times represented by the index i. In the above, the ith sampling time iτ was replaced with t. We define γ(t) = α(t + 2τ ) -2 α(t + τ ) + α(t) = [α(t + 2τ ) -α(t + τ )] -[α(t + τ ) -α(t)] (120) We note that γ(t) is assumed to be a (wide-sense) stationary process. However, α(t) does not need to be, in fact, often it is not. The stationarity of γ(t) implies that the expectation in (119) is independent of t. We then have where S γ (ω) is the PSD of γ(t). γ(t) is the output of a system that is the cascade of an integrator and two delay-difference operators, with input set to y(t). In the frequency domain: Hence, we can derive the following using Euler's formula and trigonometric identities: for some constant c and τ ≥ 0. The above follows from the fact that the Wiener process is the integral of stationary white Gaussian noise. It has independent increments 