The Shockley-Queisser model is a landmark in photovoltaic device analysis by defining an ideal situation as reference for actual solar cells. However, the model and its implications are easily misunderstood. Thus, we present a guide to help understand and avoid misinterpreting it. Focusing on the five assumptions, underlying the model, we define figures of merit to quantify how close real solar cells approach each of these assumptions. In 1961 Shockley and Queisser 1 (SQ) analyzed the limits of photovoltaic energy conversion, using the basic thermodynamic principle of detailed balance instead of phenomenological approaches, used earlier. First, we briefly describe the SQ-model in its initial form by illustrating its three fundamental steps, noting the energy losses associated with each of these. We then describe the five assumptions that are the essence of the model (Table Figure The solar radiation is described by photons with a distribution of energies, the solar spectrum (NB: while differing situations may require different solar spectra, the present analysis remains valid for any). Depending on their energy, these photons may have enough energy to create free electrons and holes. These electron-hole pairs, generated by photon absorption, can also annihilate themselves by releasing their energy in the form of photons (radiative recombination). The interaction of the photon with the semiconductor and the photovoltaic action in the solar cell proceed in three stages (1-3, as sketched in Fig. (Aoptical) absorption of a photon with creation of an electron-hole pair, (Bthermal) relaxation of this electron-hole pair towards EC and EV, (Celectronic) extraction of the electron and hole at two different contacts, or their radiative recombination followed by emission of a photon. Note that the extraction of charge carriers at different contacts requires a built-in asymmetry that separates electrons from holes and that may be achieved electrostatically via a pn-junction. However, while the pn-junction is featured in the title of the original SQ paper and used for illustration purposes in Fig. The electron-hole pair loses (to the absorber material's lattice) all excess energy above Eg, i.e., the pair relaxes in sub ps timescales to the average energy of a thermalized electron-hole pair (in thermal equilibrium with the cell at ). The underlying assumption 3 is that in the solar cell all relaxed electron-hole pairs are at the same temperature . ELECTRONIC: At this point, one of two things can happen to the electron-hole pair: Either the electron and the hole are collected at their respective contacts or they recombine radiatively by emission of a photon (this is the only allowed recombination mechanism, assumption 4). Note that for an actual recombination, the photon must be emitted to the ambient because reabsorption of the photon in the solar cell creates a new electron-hole pair and restarts the whole process from the beginning (photon recycling). cell The SQ-theory, assumes that the rate constants derived from the principle of detailed balance for thermal equilibrium are also valid in the non-equilibrium situation. states that each contact is ideal because each exchanges only one carrier type (electrons or holes) with the absorber (selective contact) and because it has negligible resistance. Nevertheless, collection of the electron-hole pair implies that its total energy is reduced from the band gap energy Eg to qV, the electrical work of transferring a charge carrier between the contacts. We denote this loss of potential energy 'isothermal dissipation' as it generates heat in the solar cell without a change of the temperature of electrons and holes (unlike during thermalization) and the carriers do not recombine (unlike during radiative recombination). Note that this loss can be subdivided further into different reversible and non-reversible contributions. The efficiencies depicted in Fig. We now describe departures from the ideal SQ-model for real-world single junction solar cells by successively relaxing the 5 assumptions. Given that quantitatively accounting for the losses in a physically meaningful way becomes quite detailed and technical in parts we encourage the casual reader to jump directly to the "Consequences" section. For readers preferring to quantitatively understand the consequences of these departures from the SQ-model, we express the current versus voltage (JV) characteristics of the solar cell in terms of a simple balance equation (Eq. ( (A) OPTICAL: No real solar cell can fulfill assumption 1, i.e, have a step function absorptivity A(E), e.g. because of broadened CB and VB edges, called band tails The consequence of violating assumptions 1 and 2 of the SQ-model are best understood in terms of the external photovoltaic quantum efficiency Q e PV (E), i.e., the probability that a photon of energy E, impinging on the cell, generates an electron-hole pair that, under short-circuit conditions, is extracted at the contacts. In general we have Q e PV (E) < A(E) and it is easily understood that also this leads to reduction of the short circuit current. Thus, violating assumptions 1 and 2 decreases the short circuit current from the ideal value J SC SQ to the real value J SC QE , determined by Q e PV (E). Because of the reciprocity between Q e PV (E) and the electroluminescence of a solar cell, Summarizing the loss resulting from assumptions 1 and 2, we use the ratios of short-circuit Violations of assumption 5, stating that electrons and holes can move freely everywhere in the absorber towards/from their electron (hole) contact are, in the simplest case, described by additional resistive elements in Fig. Returning to our initial question, we can now use the FoMs F SC , F em , Q e lum and F FF to measure how close a solar cell is to the SQ-model in the dimensions associated with 4 out of the 5 assumptions of the SQ-model (T cell is kept at 300 K). This procedure goes beyond a simple comparison of the photovoltaic parameters J SC , V OC , and FF with their respective SQ-reference values. Optimizing devices with respect to only one of the FoMs cannot be associated with the SQlimit because such optimization often goes at the expense of the others. This issue becomes even more critical if measurements are performed on incomplete devices or on photovoltaic absorbers only. For absorber materials, the external luminescence efficiency Q e lum is frequently measured by means of photoluminescence, The three steps (A-C) of the SQ-model, their time scales and energy losses, associated with them, and real solar cell departures from the five SQ-assumptions (Fig. The open-circuit voltage results from solving eqn (1) for J = 0. With successive changes from the SQ-case to a real situation, the gain term J SC decreases and the loss term J 0 increases, such that V OC decreases from the SQ-to its real solar cell-value. Here, q is the elementary charge. The loss of open-circuit voltage between that of the real device and the SQmodel, is described by the product of three FoMs (cf. The ratio between the real efficiency and the SQ-value is defined with the help of four FoMs. Note that F SC enters linearly as well as logarithmically via the open circuit voltage V OC real (cf. Eq. ( There is no analytical solution for the fill factor FF even in the simplest situation of an ideal diode. However, very precise approximate equations 