The existence of flat bands is generally thought to be physically possible only for dimensions larger than one. However, by exciting a system with different orthogonal states this condition can be reformulated. In this work, we demonstrate that a one-dimensional binary lattice supports always a trivial flat band, which is formed by isolated single-site vertical dipolar states. These flat band modes correspond to the highest localized modes for any discrete system, without the need of any aditional mechanism like, e.g., disorder or nonlinearity. By fulfilling a specific relation between lattice parameters, an extra flat band can be excited as well, with modes composed by fundamental and dipolar states that occupy only three lattice sites. Additionally, by inspecting the lattice edges, we are able to construct analytical Shockley surface modes, which can be compact or present staggered or unstaggered tails. We believe that our proposed model could be a good candidate for observing transport and localization phenomena on a simple one-dimensional linear photonic lattice. The propagation of waves in periodical systems are the natural framework to explore transport and localization phenomena in diverse fields of physics A very interesting feature of flat band systems is the possibility to construct highly localized eigenmodes by means of a destructive linear combination of extended linear wave functions Almost all studies on photonic lattices have considered single-mode excitation only. This has been reinforced due to the experimental complexity in the excitation of higher-order modes on a given lattice system, which has found a partial solution only by the implementation of a selective p-band population in cold-atom systems As it is well known, diverse interactions have been proposed during several years to achieve stable energy localization on a lattice. For example, disorder We study the propagation of light, in weakly coupled waveguide arrays, based on a coupled mode approach which originates from a paraxial wave equation and ends up with a set of Discrete Lineal Schrödinger-like equations In this work, we model a binary one-dimensional photonic lattice composed of an alternated configuration of waveguides, as shown in Fig. The possible interactions between modes at different neighboring waveguides are depicted in Fig. Here, u n and v n (x n and w n ) describe the amplitude of fundamental (dipolar) modes at the nth unit cell. The alternated orientation of our 1D binary lattice and the possibility of exciting two modes per waveguide generate a four-state effective system, which is described by these four coupled equations. It is important mentioning that, in order to have an effective dynamical interaction between the s and the p modes, ∆β ≡ β sβ p has to be of the order of V sp . If not, this detuning effectively decouples the interaction between these two modes and they simply do not interact We solve the linear spectrum of the system by inserting into (1) a standard plane-wave ansatz With this, we assume that the wave propagation occurs along the horizontal direction only, being k equal to the normalized transversal wavector. β represents the longitudinal propagation constant of the lattice eigenmodes (also known as supermodes), while β i represents the longitudinal propagation constant of mode i on a single waveguide. Without loss of generality, we include a gauge transformation on β p , with the purpose of reducing the model parameters and simplify the overall description. By doing this, we get a set of four coupled equations which can be written as follows with Ψ ≡ {A, B, C, D}. By solving this eigenvalue problem, we obtain four solutions, with three of them being determined by the following third-order equation where k ≡ k/2. These three bands are analytically non trivial and have no a simple and compact form for arbitrary parameters. Therefore, we show them graphically only in Figs. which corresponds to the lattice second band, as defined below. This trivial and completely flat band is related to the excitation of isolated vertical p modes only. As these modes possess no coupling at all with nearest-neighbor waveguides, once they are excited they remain localized at the input position as long as the system length. This can be understood easily by directly integrating the third equation in (1), getting x n (z) = x n (0) exp{iβ p z}; being, therefore, a trivial stationary solution. In Fig. This mathematical relation is physical and experimentally possible due to the fact that V sp > V s , as expected considering the s and p mode profiles. If we fix coupling V s , V F B sp grows monotonically as a function of detuning ∆β. Once this condition is fulfilled, the fourth band becomes completely flat with a value as shown in Figs. This profile is composed of both, s and p, modes simultaneously and a sketch of it, on an effective ribbon lattice, is presented in Fig. A study of the transport in this lattice, performed by exciting a single vertical bulk site only (a delta-like input condition) would show a transition between dispersion (transport), localization (insulation), and transport again, while varying parameter V sp . Localization would occur close to the FB condition V F B sp , while transport would manifest away this value. This behavior is quite similar to the one found for Sawtooth lattices When solving the eigenvalue problem (2), we look for solutions assuming an infinite lattice. Therefore, finite size effects, as for example linear edge modes, will not appear explicitly for n 1, with | | < 1 (which implies an exponentially decaying state). A, B and D correspond to the amplitudes of this mode to be determined by solving a set of coupled equations. We assume a zero amplitude for mode x n (C = 0), due to the no interaction of this mode with the rest of the system. (By taking x n = 0 the frequency of this amplitude will be just zero, what not necessarily coincides with the frequency of the edge mode β e . Additionally, there is always a perfectly localized edge state x n = Cδ n,1 , as a trivial FB solution.) We insert this ansatz into model (1) and write the equations for sites n = 1 and n = 2. We obtain two sets of three coupled equations, where the second set is recursively repeated for n > 2, what validates the proposed ansatz. These equations are the followings: and By applying some algebra to equations ( . This expression satisfies that 0 < γ < 1, what implies that -1 < < 1; i.e., this edge state is exponentially localized at the surface when this surface has a vertically oriented first waveguide. Additionally, as V sp > V s then (D/A) < (B/A); therefore, the edge localization is reinforced with a decreasing profile into the bulk of the system. In order to study the effective spatial size of these edge states, we compute an effective participation ratio, defined as . In order to characterize these states, we plot the decaying factor , the participation ratio R and the frequency β e versus the coupling V sp in Figs. This state is similar to the edge mode found in Sawtooth lattices After this regime, the decaying factor starts to grow slowly and profiles become completely unstaggered in their phase structure, as the example shown in Fig. Both limits (V sp → 0, ∞) gives us an extended mode which coincides with the β 4 -band modes of standard 1D lattices, where no surface states exist without distorting the lattice border V. ∆β = 0 LIMIT Although the case ∆β = 0 corresponds to a nonphysical solution in our photonic system We plot the linear spectrum in Fig. This amplitude profile is sketched in Fig. In conclusion, we have proposed a new model for the study of localization and transport of light in photonic lattices. In particular, our model consists on a rather simple 1D lattice having alternated orientation of elliptical waveguides. We found that, by assuming two -s and p -modes per site, a quasi-1D effective ribbon system emerges, which describes the light dynamics on this lattice. We found that there is always a FB on this system, which corresponds to vertically isolated dipolar states. These FB modes occupy a single site only being, therefore, the most localized FB states of any lattice configuration. By fulfilling a specific relation between lattice parameters, we found that a second non-trivial FB appears, which is composed of an hybridized state with s and p modes excited simultaneously. These FB states occupy only three lattice sites, with a rapidly decaying and perfectly compact profile. By investigating the edges of this lattice, we found that Shockley-like surface states exist on the system for edges having vertically oriented waveguides. We obtained an analytical expression for them and found that they could show different properties depending on the lattice parameters. At the end, we explored the case ∆β = 0 and found two dispersive and two flat bands for this binary 1D system. We believe that our simple model could show interesting features for non-diffractive image transmission applications as well as for presenting different transport properties depending on the input condition. For example, by exciting a vertically oriented waveguide with a fundamental state we would simply observe transport, while using a dipolar excitation would produce perfect localization, without the need of applying any extra interaction. This could be useful to excite two completely different states on the system, which could be of interest on optical signal processing.