We report on high-pressure (pmax = 2.1 GPa) muon spin rotation experiments probing the temperature-dependent magnetic penetration depth λ (T ) in the layered superconductor 2H-NbSe2. Upon increasing the pressure, we observe a substantial increase of the superfluid density ns/m * ∝ 1/λ 2 , which we find to scale linearly with Tc. This linear scaling is considered a hallmark feature of unconventional superconductivity, especially in high-temperature cuprate superconductors. Our current results, along with our earlier findings on 1T'-MoTe 2 (Z. Guguchia et. al., Nature Communications 8, 1082 (2017)), demonstrate that this linear relation is also an intrinsic property of the superconductivity in transition metal dichalcogenides, whereas the ratio Tc/TF is approximately a factor of 20 lower than the ratio observed in hole-doped cuprates. We, furthermore, find that the values of the superconducting gaps are insensitive to the suppression of the quasi-two-dimensional CDW state, indicating that the CDW ordering and the superconductivity in 2H-NbSe2 are independent of each other. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are a class of layered materials, which presently attract great interest because of their versatile physical, chemical, and mechanical properties A variety of novel physical phenomena have been reported in TMDs systems. Most recently topological physics with Dirac-type dispersion, exotic optical and transport behavior originating from valley splitting were predicted and observed Layered superconductors, with highly anisotropic electronic properties have been found to be potential hosts for unconventional superconductivity. The most prominent example are the cuprates, consisting of CuO 2 layers and the iron pnictides superconductors, with tetrahedra coordinated FePn 4 layers. Other examples for unconventional superconductivity in layered systems are a monolayer of FeSe on STO Here, we report on the substantial increase of the superfluid density n s /m * in van der Waals system 2H-NbSe 2 (1(a)) under hydrostatic pressure, which seems not to be correlate with the suppression of CDW ordered state. We find the superfluid density in 2H-NbSe 2 to scale linearly with T c . These results in combination to our previous results on MoTe 2 In figure From the obtained TF muon time spectra, we have derived the temperature dependence of the muon spin depolarization rate σ sc , which is proportional to the second moment of the field distribution (see Method section). In figure The second moment of the resulting inhomogeneous field distribution is related to the magnetic penetration depth λ as ∆B 2 ∝ σ 2 sc ∝ λ -4 , whereas σ sc is the Gaussian relaxation rate due to the formation of FLL Here, γ μ is the gyromagnetic ratio of the muon, and Φ 0 is the magnetic-flux quantum. Thus, the flat T -dependence of σ sc observed at various pressures for low temperatures (see Fig. To proceed with a quantitative analysis, we consider the local (London) approximation (λ ξ, where ξ is the coherence length) and employ the empirical α-model. The model, widely used in previous investigations of the penetration depth of multi-band superconductors Here λ(0) is the London magnetic penetration depth at zero temperature, ∆ 0,i is the value of the i-th SC gap (i = 1, 2) at T = 0 K, and ω i is the weighting factor, which measures their relative contributions to λ -2 (i.e. The results of this analysis are presented in Fig. As it can be seen, the s + s-wave provides a much better description of the data, thereby ruling out a out the simple s-wave model as an adequate description of λ -2 (T ) for 2H-NbSe 2 . The two gap s + s-wave scenario with a small gap ∆ 1 0.55(3) meV and a large gap ∆ 2 1.25 The London magnetic penetration depth λ is given as a function of n s , m * , ξ and the mean free path l, according to For systems close to the clean limit, ξ/l → 0, the second term essentially becomes unity, and the simple relation 1/λ 2 ∝ n s /m * holds. Considering the upper critical fields H c2 of 2H-NbSe 2 , as reported in detail by Soto et al. The strong enhancement of the superfluid density λ -2 (0) ∝ n s /(m * /m e ) in 2H-NbSe 2 under pressure, as discussed above, is an essential finding of this paper. It should be noted that the impairment of the chargedensity wave ordering, and the associated lowering of the charge-density wave ordering transition T CDW under pressure may cause the restoring of some electronic density of states at the Fermi surface. However, the electron and hole states that condense into the CDW ordered state comprise only ≈ 1 % of the total density of states at the Fermi surface in 2H-NbSe 2 The nearly linear relationship between T c and the superfluid density was originally observed in hole-doped cuprates In refs In conclusion, we provide the first microscopic investigation of the superconductivity under hydrostatic pressure in the layered superconductor 2H-NbSe 2 . Specifically, the zero-temperature magnetic penetration depth λ ef f (0) and the temperature dependence of λ -2 ef f were studied in 2H-NbSe 2 by means of μSR experiments as a function of pressure up to p 2.2 GPa. The superfluid densities at all pressures are best described by a two gap s + s-wave scenario. We find that the application of pressure causes a substantial increase of the superfluid density n s /m * . Moreover, we show that the superfluid density in 2H-NbSe 2 scales linearly with T c , this behavior was previously attributed to unconventional superconductors. Our current results, in combination with previous results on 1T'-MoTe 2 Sample preparation: Single-phase polycrystalline samples of 2H-NbSe 2 were prepared by means of high-temperature solid-state synthesis. Stoichiometric amounts of niobium powder (99.99 %) and selenium shots (99.999 %) were mixed and heated in a sealed quartz tube, under an inert atmosphere, at 750 • C for 3 days. In order to ensure high homogeneity, the samples were ground, pressed to a pellet, and reheated in a sealed quartz tube under an inert atmosphere at 750 • C for another 5 days. Eventually, the samples were quenched in water to ensure no selenium loss. Pressure cell: Pressures up to 2.2 GPa were generated in a double wall piston-cylinder type of cell made of CuBe material, especially designed to perform μSR experiments under pressure μSR experiment: In a μSR experiment nearly 100 % spin-polarized muons μ + are implanted into the sample one at a time μSR experiments under pressure were performed at the μE1 beamline of the Paul Scherrer Institute (Villigen, Switzerland, where an intense high-energy (p μ = 100 MeV/c) beam of muons is implanted in the sample through the pressure cell. The low background GPS (πM3 beamline) and low-temperature LTF instruments were used to study the single crystalline as well as the polycrystalline samples of MoTe 2 at ambient pressure. The TF μSR data were analyzed by using the following functional form: Here A s and A pc denote the initial assymmetries of the sample and the pressure cell, respectively. γ/(2π) 135.5 MHz/T is the muon gyromagnetic ratio, φ is the initial phase of the muon-spin ensemble and B int represents the internal magnetic field at the muon site. The relaxation rates σ sc and σ nm characterize the damping due to the formation of the FLL in the SC state and of the nuclear magnetic dipolar contribution, respectively. In the analysis σ nm was assumed to be constant over the entire temperature range and was fixed to the value obtained above T c where only nuclear magnetic moments contribute to the muon depolarization rate σ. The Gaussian relaxation rate, σ pc , reflects the depolarization due to the nuclear moments of the pressure cell. The width of the pressure cell signal increases below T c . As shown previously λ(T ) was calculated within the local (London) approximation (λ ξ) by the following expression (5) where f = [1 + exp(E/k B T )] -1 is the Fermi function, φ is the angle along the Fermi surface, and ∆ i (T, φ) = ∆ 0,i Γ(T /T c )g(φ) (∆ 0,i is the maximum gap value at T = 0). The temperature dependence of the gap is approximated by the expression Γ(T /T c ) = tanh {1.82[1.018(T c /T -1)] 0.51 }, 