ABSTRACT: The de Gennes extrapolation length is a direction dependent measure of the spatial evolution of the pairing gap near the boundary of a superconductor, and thus provides a viable means to probe its symmetry. It is expected to be infinite and isotropic for plain s-wave pairing, and finite and anisotropic for d-wave. Here, we synthesize single layer FeSe films on SrTiO3(001) (STO) substrates by molecular beam epitaxy, and measure the de Gennes extrapolation length by scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy. We find a 40% reduction of the superconducting gap near specular [110]Fe edges, yielding an extrapolation length of 8.0 nm. However, near specular [010]Fe edges the extrapolation length is nearly infinite. These findings are consistent with a phase changing pairing with 2-fold symmetry, indicating d-wave superconductivity. This is further supported by the presence of in-gap states near the specular [110]Fe edges, but not the [010]Fe edges. This work provides direct experimental evidence for d-wave superconductivity in single layer FeSe/STO, and demonstrates quasiparticle scattering at boundaries to be a viable phase sensitive probe of pairing symmetry in Fe-based superconductors. KEYWORDS: Pairing symmetry, FeSe, SrTiO3, scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy, edge scattering, de Gennes extrapolation length A central milestone in the search for high temperature Fe-based superconductors (FeSCs) Here, we present a systematic investigation of edge scattering in superconducting single layer FeSe/STO. Two types of films were grown by MBE in an ultrahigh vacuum system with a base pressure below 1.0×10 In the first case, single layer FeSe films (Figure The square arrays of bright features correspond to surface Se atoms. The Fe square lattice lies in the layer below and is diagonally aligned to the surface Se along the labeled x/y directions (Figure To determine the extrapolation length, spatially resolved dI/dV spectra were taken on both the specular [110]Fe edge on FeSe #1 (Figures For other [110]Fe edges in both types of FeSe films, similar analysis reveals a b of 7.8 nm near trench grain boundary (see Supporting Information Figure The behavior is quite different for the specular [010]Fe edges (Figure On the other hand, for plain s-wave (Figure We note that the weak-coupling theory previously developed for the extrapolation length is for single band systems, As discussed above, a nodeless d-wave pairing can also give rise to in-gap states at finite energies for specular [110]Fe edges, in contrast to the usually expected zero energy states for a nodal d-wave superconductor. Comparison to the expected signatures of several proposed pairing symmetries in Table The pair breaking effect should also be sensitive to the roughness of the edge. [010]Fe edge on FeSe #2 is shown in Supporting Information Figure In conclusion, we have epitaxially grown superconducting single layer FeSe films on STO(001) substrates with various types of edges. For the specular [110]Fe edge, spatially resolved dI/dV spectroscopy reveals a suppression of superconductivity near the edge with an extrapolation length of 8.0 nm. In contrast, at the specular [010]Fe edge, no suppression of superconductivity is observed with a near infinite extrapolation length. This edge orientation dependence on Cooper pairing destabilization is consistent with nodeless d-wave pairing symmetry, which is further supported by the presence of in-gap states near the specular [110]Fe edges, but not the [010]Fe edges. Our findings further demonstrate that quasiparticle scattering at the boundaries of nanostructures is a viable phase sensitive probe of pairing symmetry of Fe-based superconductors. 