Orbital angular momentum (OAM) has aroused a widespread interest in many fields, especially in telecommunications due to its potential for unleashing new capacity in the severely congested spectrum of commercial communication systems. Beams carrying OAM have a helical phase front and a field strength with a singularity along the axial center, which can be used for information transmission, imaging and particle manipulation. The number of orthogonal OAM modes in a single beam is theoretically infinite and each mode is an element of a complete orthogonal basis that can be employed for multiplexing different signals, thus greatly improving the spectrum efficiency. In this paper, we comprehensively summarize and compare the methods for generation and detection of optical OAM, radio OAM and acoustic OAM. Then, we represent the applications and technical challenges of OAM in communications, including free-space optical communications, optical fiber communications, radio communications and acoustic communications. To complete our survey, we also discuss the state of art of particle manipulation and target imaging with OAM beams. E Lectromagnetic waves carry both energy and momentum, where momentum comprises linear momentum P and angular momentum L. In particular, angular momentum has an additive component linked to polarization, spin angular momentum (SAM), and another one associated with spatial distribution, which is called orbital angular momentum (OAM). The relationship between SAM and OAM can be explained by referring to the model of electron rotation around the nucleus: the momentum generated by the circular motion of electrons around the nucleus is equivalent to OAM, and the momentum generated by the spin of electrons is equivalent to SAM. In 1992, Allen et al. first combined the concept of OAM with the idea of optical vortex The potential of employing OAM for communications are not restricted to electromagnetic waves at light frequencies. In 2007, Thidé et al. This paper is devoted to reviewing the research progress on the use of OAM waves for communications in the last three decades. Our survey includes optical, radio and acoustic OAM generation, detection and applications in communications, as well as the applications of OAM waves in particle manipulation and imaging. Main technical challenges are addressed and potential solutions are analyzed. The key contributions of this survey can be summarized as • Recent advances in OAM applications in free-space optical communications, optical fiber communications, radio communications and acoustic communications are carefully reviewed, so that the main technical problems and their potential solutions are discussed in details. Indeed, integrating OAM into existing communication systems presents some very serious challenges such as OAM beam divergence, misalignment between transmitter and receiver, atmospheric turbulence effects in freespace optical links, mode coupling in fiber links, and multipath effects in radio communication links. These effects need to be carefully considered in link design. • Since OAM has been considered as a potential solution for precise particle manipulation and target imaging, the application prospects of OAM in these fields are also briefly discussed. This is not the first survey on OAM waves, since there are other works on the subject, such as For each system we present a complete and accurate review of the generation/detection methods, their application and the most pressing technical challenges. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the main principles of OAM, introducing the basic characteristics of OAM waves and their application potential. Subsequently, the generation and detection methods for optical, radio and acoustic OAM communication systems are summarized and compared in Section III and Section IV, respectively. Section V focuses on the most recent advances in OAM applications to free-space optical, optical fiber, radio and acoustic communications including the corresponding technical challenges and potential solutions. Atmospheric turbulence effects in free-space optical links, mode coupling in fiber links, and multipath effects in radio communication links are all significant practical obstacles to the implementation of OAM-based communication systems. In addition, OAM beam divergence and misalignment also need to be considered in link design. Section VI discusses the application of OAM in other areas, including particle manipulation and imaging. Conclusions and perspectives then follow in Section VII. The angular momentum of the electromagnetic field associated with a volume V can be expressed as where S = ε 0 Re {E * × A} dV, In It has been demonstrated that vortex waves having helical phase structure can carry OAM There are several special OAM waves that can be well described by their radial intensity distributions, among which Laguerre-Gaussian (LG) beams are probably the most widely known. LG beams are paraxial solutions of the wave equation in cylindrical coordinates and homogeneous media (e.g., free space). In cylindrical coordinates, the complex amplitude distribution of a LG beam propagating along the z-axis is given by where w(z) = w 0 [(z 2 + z 2 R )/z 2 R ] 1/2 is the radius of the beam, w 0 is the waist radius, z R is the Rayleigh range, k is the wave number, L | | p (x) is the associated Laguerre polynomial and (2p + | | + 1) tan -1 (z/z R ) is the Gouy phase. It can be seen from ( The complex amplitude distribution of Bessel beams, another special OAM wave described by their radial intensity distributions, is where J (k r r) is the -order Bessel function of the first kind, k r and k z are radial and axial wave numbers, respectively. OAM beams have many attractive properties but probably the most important one is the orthogonality between modes. Considering two OAM waves with topological charges 1 and 2 , it can be shown that the two OAM modes are orthogonal through the inner product Thanks to the inherent orthogonality between OAM modes, OAM waves with different can be used as a separate set of data transmission channels adding a new dimension independent of time, frequency, and polarization. Accordingly, this new multiplexing dimension can be combined with other existing multiplexing strategies to improve system capacity. Moreover, OAM has certain application potential in particle manipulation and imaging. Due to the presence of the "dark" core, the pattern of OAM beams has a specific doughnut shape. This particular shape allows OAM beams to capture particles or drive the particles to rotate around the beam axis, with great potential in biological and medical applications. Besides, this ring beam with helical phase structure is expected to obtain resolutions beyond the Rayleigh limit for imaging systems, and provide new instruments for accurate radar targets imaging. In optics, a vortex beam can either be obtained as the direct output of a laser cavity, or can be generated by feeding a Gaussian beam into a converter, such as a cylindrical lens, a spiral phase plate, a phase hologram, a metamaterial or a q-plate. Even before Allen showed that the vortex beam carries OAM, research has been focused on vortex beams and on how to generate them. In In The spiral phase plate (SPP) is another way to implement the vortex beam Instead of producing a complex refractive optical element to generate a vortex wave, one can employ a computergenerated hologram to design a diffractive optical element whose transmittance function is related to the helical phase exp(i θ). Holographic gratings, such as Fresnel spiral diffraction gratings and -fold forked diffraction gratings Transformation optics is a recently developed discipline that employs complex artificial materials, called metamaterials, to make transformations in optical space. Generation of optical OAM is one of the fields where the findings of transformation optics can be applied: the metamaterials are planar ultra-thin optical components, usually composed of subwavelength constitutional units, such as V-shaped antennas The q-plate Table In optical OAM communication systems, SLMs loaded with phase holograms are widely used to generate OAM, and SPPs are second only to SLMs. In general, cylindrical lenses require a special incident field that limits their application. At the same time, low conversion efficiency makes the application of holographic gratings much less practical than SLMs and SPPs. Metamaterials are low cost, small size and high efficiency, so they are more suitable for small integrated vortex beam generators. The q-plate is a spin-orbital angular momentum conversion device and as such is not recommended yet for OAM communications because of the low value of the maximum topological charge and is more suitable for particle manipulation. OAM is a fundamental characteristic of electromagnetic waves at all frequencies. It is not limited to the optical band and can be generated also in the radio band In analogy with the generation of optical OAM, SPPs, whose thickness increases with the increase of the azimuth angle, have been the first method used to generate OAM To create OAM, the stepped spiral surface can be also built as a reflector illuminated by a conventional antenna Nevertheless, a uniform circular antenna array (UCAA), as shown in Fig. phase of the excitation signals, UCAAs have the potential to generate multiplexed radio OAM. In practice, UCAAs can be used in different forms of antennas, such as dipole antennas Similar to the generation method at optical frequencies, metamaterials, which can be classified as reflective metamaterials In addition to metamaterials, also q-plates, made by carving a series of concentric rings on a dielectric plate, can be used to generate a vortex wave at radio frequencies Table OAM has found applications in audio bands as well In analogy with antenna arrays in radio OAM, transducer arrays especially uniform circular transducer arrays (UCTAs) are also widely used to generate acoustic vortices carrying OAM. A simple four-panel transducer has first been proposed to produce acoustic vortices Another method for generating acoustic vortices is to employ sub-wavelength spiral diffraction gratings depicted on rigid materials, which, due to the diffraction effect, can generate acoustic vortices in the paraxial region. Higher mode acoustic OAM can be produced by increasing the number of arms of spiral gratings. Using a grating with m arms, an acoustic vortex with the topological charge of = mn is obtained at the nth diffraction order. Spiral gratings can be designed as Archimedes spiral type In addition to optical OAM and radio OAM, metamaterial can also be used to generate acoustic OAM Table III compares the generation methods of acoustic OAM. Due to the dimension of the structure, SPPs are more suitable for high frequency sound fields and UCTAs are more suitable for low frequency sound fields. Because of their flexibility, UCTAs are more common in acoustic communications and particle manipulation. Both spiral diffraction gratings and metamaterials are characterized by subwavelength dimensions. However, passive diffraction gratings have low efficiency because a large amount of incident sound field energy is blocked and lost, and active diffraction gratings are more expensive. Therefore, metamaterials with small size, low cost, and high efficiency have attracted a lot of attention recently. Table The methods of generating optical, radio, and acoustic OAM have been compared in their respective subsections. In general, SLMs are relatively optimal in optical OAM generation. SPPs and UCAAs have also proven to be good at generating radio OAM in practice. For acoustic OAM generation, UCTAs are flexible in both air and water. However, the inherent size of the transducer makes UCTAs not suitable for many miniaturized applications. The metamaterials with small size proposed so far can only generate OAM in the air. Nevertheless, underwater acoustic communication is a research area of great interest and so, finding a new material or structure with low cost, small size and high efficiency to generate a stable acoustic vortex field underwater is an important research direction. In addition, the capacity of focusing the beam for long distance transmissions is essential. How to generate convergent OAM beams is a challenging topic in optical, radio and acoustic research. In this section, we discuss the various methods for detecting OAM waves. At the receiver of a communication system, the different OAM modes can be separated easily by exploiting the orthogonality of the helical phase fronts. A variety of methods for detecting OAM have been proposed for light and radio waves. In the acoustic frequency range, OAM detection Holographic gratings Inner product operation Being the detection of optical OAM the inverse process of generating OAM, OAM modes can be detected by using an inverse SPP designed for the specific mode to be detected A vortex wave with the topological charge of can interfere with a plane wave to obtain spiral stripes or -fold forked stripes. As such, there are many methods for detecting optical OAM using interference, like the Young's double-slit interference OAM mode odd-and even-separation at the single photon level. As shown in After passing through a lens, a plane wave converges into a point, whose lateral position on the focal plane depends on the lateral phase gradient of the plane wave. Note that the two plane waves need at least a phase difference of 2π to make the distance between the two focal points larger than the Rayleigh resolution limit. Using this idea, Thus, a ring beam with a helical phase front on the input plane is mapped to a rectangular beam with a tilted wavefront on the output plane. The rectangular beams with different lateral phase gradients are focused by the lens on different lateral positions on the focal plane, effectively separating the different OAM modes. In In addition to the above methods, there are other techniques for separating OAM modes. In Four common methods for detecting optical OAM are compared in Table V. As mentioned above, also in this case each method has its own advantages and disadvantages. From the perspective of conversion efficiency, the Dove prism interferometer is the best method, but it is bad in terms of flexibility and system complexity, so that it is a not suitable technology for detecting a large number of OAM modes. Inverse SPPs and mode sorters perform better in both respects. A drawback of inverse SPPs is that they can only detect a specific OAM mode, and it is necessary to combine beam splitters and multiple inverse SPPs to achieve composite mode detection. Mode sorters enable composite mode sort, but they can not effectively separate two adjacent OAM modes. The holographic grating has a low conversion efficiency, but it can be easily loaded onto a SLM. In current optical OAM experimental systems, the holographic grating loaded on a SLM is a relatively common method. In addition, inverse phase holograms are also frequently used in practice. Some novel phase holograms have also been tried to detect optical OAM with high efficiency. As in optics, the detection of OAM at radio frequencies can be achieved by employing carefully designed inverse SPPs In In 2010, Mohammadi et al. proposed two methods to estimate far-field OAM modes in radio beams, the singlepoint estimation method and the phase gradient method Fig. UCAAs are used not only for radio OAM generation but also for OAM detection Although the PASR has certain limitations, it can greatly simplify the scale of the receiving end and is robust to nonideal OAM beams. Table VI compares the common detection methods for radio OAM. Unlike the case of optical OAM detection, these methods often require a heavy computational load so that also computational complexity is one of the parameters evaluated in Table As mentioned above, research on OAM detection at acoustic frequencies is still in an early stage. Due to the orthogonality between the OAM eigenstates, Shi et al. use the inner product operation to separate the multiplexed OAM modes received by a transducer array Table VII summarizes the most common methods employed for the detection of OAM modes. As seen from the table, for optical OAM and radio OAM, many detection methods have been proposed, while further research, investigation and testing is needed for developing effective acoustic OAM detection. In general, using the inverse SPP is the easiest way to detect optical OAM and radio OAM. In optical OAM communications, holographic gratings or phase holograms loaded on SLMs, which can detect multiple OAM modes simultaneously, are used in most cases. In radio OAM communications, in addition to SPPs, UCAAs have the potential to demultiplex composite OAM modes. However, OAM beam divergence increases the aperture of the receiving UCAA. Reducing the aperture and scale of the far field receiving array is extremely challenging. The PASR and the phase gradient method are promising solutions to reduce the scale of the receiver. But TABLE VII: Summary of OAM Detection Methods. Holographic gratings with exp(-i θ) phase factor can convert vortex beams into plane beams, and Daman gratings can realize parallel detection of multiple OAM modes. Simple and fast; low conversion efficiency, no higher than 1/N , where N is the total number of detected modes. By adjusting the rotation angle of the Dove prism, the odd-even sort of OAM modes can be achieved on a single photon level. High conversion efficiency, close to 100%; any number of OAM modes can be detected by cascading multiple interferometers, while increasing the complexity of the device. The geometric transformation is used to map the Cartesian coordinate to the log-polar coordinate, and ring beams with helical wavefronts are mapped to rectangular beams with tilted wavefronts, which are focused by lens in different lateral positions. High conversion efficiency; adjacent OAM mode cannot be effectively separated. SPPs with the topological charge of -. Simple structure; single mode detection; composite mode detection can be realized by combining multiple inverse SPPs and beam splitters. The phase shift cable is used to compensate the phase difference between the receiving antennas, so that the specific OAM mode has high intensity and the other modes have low intensity. Intuitive; the receiving device is very complicated when detecting multimodal OAM. It uses an approximation for OAM in the far-field to estimate the OAM from the measurements at a single point of the vertical and the transverse components of the electric field. It is efficient for the detection of OAM with low mode numbers. Estimate the OAM mode by computing the phase difference of the electric field components at two test points separated by an angle β, i.e. = (φ1 -φ2)/β. Low complexity; small scale; the angle β between the test points should satisfy β < π/(| |). A receiving circular array C with = can extract the information carried by the beam with = from the multiplexed OAM beam. The detection process needs to receive information of the entire wavefront. Demultiplexing is implemented by utilizing partial wavefront information and the orthogonality between OAM modes. Small scale; any two OAM modes n1 and n2 must satisfy mod (| n1 -n2|, P ) = 0 and mod (| n1 -n2|, M P ) = 0. M metamaterials with = -1 can convert the component with the mode number = m into a plane wave. Realtime; high conversion efficiency; low flexibility; specific working frequency; it is not suitable for detection of high-mode OAM. Acoustic OAM how to apply them to OAM mode demultiplexing requires further research in the coming years. This section focuses on the applications of OAM in communications. Since OAM modes with different values of are mutually orthogonal, vortex beams carrying different OAM modes can provide independent communication channels for efficient information transmission. As shown in Fig. OAM-DM as a mode-division multiplexing (MDM) is a subset of space-division multiplexing (SDM) and can be compatible with different modulation formats, such as M -ary amplitude-shift keying (M -ASK), M -ary phase-shift keying (M -PSK) and M -ary quadrature amplitude modulation (M -QAM), as well as other multiplexing techniques such as frequency-division/wavelength-division multiplexing (FDM/WDM) and polarization-division multiplexing (PDM), thereby further improving the communication system capacity from another dimension. In the OAM-DM system, N OAM waves carrying information are multiplexed, and the obtained field can be expressed as where S p (t) is the modulated data signal on the pth OAM mode and A p (r) is the complex electric field amplitude of the pth OAM mode. Then, at the receiving end, the multiplexed OAM wave is multiplied by an anti-helical phase factor exp(-i q θ), which is achieved by using an inverse SPP or an antenna array. The OAM wave with = q is converted into a plane wave and can be easily separated from other vortex waves with = pq , thus achieving demultiplexing. Eventually, the data information carried by the OAM wave with = q can be obtained. OAM communications still face many challenges and technical issues, such as misalignment and OAM beam divergence. OAM waves are required to be transmitted and received coaxially in OAM-DM system, so that precise alignment is required between the transmitter and receiver, i.e. the center of the receiver coincides with the center of the transmitted beam and the receiver is perpendicular to the line connecting the centers. Moreover, since optical components usually have a limited aperture size, OAM beam divergence during propagation can result in received power loss in the far field, limiting the link achievable distance. The atmospheric turbulence, mode coupling and multipath effects should to be considered in free-space optical links, fiber links and radio communication links, respectively. For acoustic OAM communications, it is clear that underwater creatures and turbulence have a great impact on links, although there is currently no research to discuss them. A taxonomy diagram of the applications discussed in this section, together with main challenges and solutions for each application, is shown in Fig. In 2004, Gibson et al. If an OAM-SK system with L different topological charges can transmit up to log 2 (L) bits per beam, an OAM-DM system that multiplexes L modes can transmit up to L bits per beam. For example, consider the case with L = { 0 , 1 }, i.e., L = 2. With OAM-SK it is possible to transmit one bit per beam (0 if = 0 and 1 if = 1 ). With OAM-DM, the on and off states of each OAM mode can represent either a "1" or a "0", so that the two-bit set of {00, 01, 10, 11} can be mapped on the multiplexed modes {00, 0 1 , 0 0, 0 1 }. Using this idea, Acoustic OAM communications OAM beam divergence and misalignment Digital signal processing (DSP) algorithm Novel fibers OAM beam divergence and misalignment Beam steering In order to meet the ever-increasing demands for higher data rates, OAM multiplexing can be combined with different modulation formats and different multiplexing techniques to achieve high-speed communication in multiple dimension. A data link multiplexing the signal in three dimensions is shown in Fig. Due to the unique wavefront of OAM beams, there some challenges in designing an OAM-based communication link in free space, such as beam divergence and misalignement. Based on diffraction theory, it is known that divergence occurs when a collimated OAM beam propagates in free space. Divergence increases as OAM mode number increases. Fig. For a free-space optical OAM link another critical challenge is atmospheric turbulence, caused by changes of the atmosphere refractive index due to temperature and pressure nonuniformities. Atmospheric turbulence can destroy the helical phase front of vortex beams. Fig. approaches for mitigating the turbulence effects have been proposed and are divided into two main categories: adaptive optics (AO) compensation and signal processingbased mitigation torted OAM wavefronts in the optical domain, and signal processing-based mitigation utilizes digital signal processing (DSP) algorithms, such as MIMO equalization, to reduce the signal degradation in the electrical domain. AO compensation systems usually work in a closed-loop configuration. A typical working iteration is to first sense the wavefront of the distorted OAM beam and then, on the base of the received feedback, generate an error correction pattern and apply it to the beam to undo the distortion. Based on whether there is a wavefront sensor (WFS) to measure the distorted OAM wavefront, AO compensation can be further divided into WFS-based and non-WFS types. The main challenge for the WFS-based AO compensation is the difficulty to correctly measure the wavefront of the helical phase front of OAM beams. Recently, a modified AO system that employs a Gaussian probe beam has been proposed to overcome this problem In addition to WFS sensing, the distortion wavefronts can also be retrieved from measured intensity profiles by using phase retrieval algorithms, such as the Gerchberg-Saxton (GS) algorithm Signal processing-based algorithms at the receiver can also help mitigate atmospheric turbulence effects and partially shift the complexity of the optical subsystem to the electrical domain, providing a complementary approach to AO compensation systems. A 4 × 4 adaptive MIMO equalization system has been implemented in a 4-channel OAM multiplexed free-space optical link to reduce crosstalk caused by weak turbulence As mentioned above, OAM free-space optical communication links are greatly affected by beam divergence and atmospheric turbulence. In recent years, research has focused on OAM-based optical fiber communications, which do not need to take these effects into account. Conventional optical fiber communications utilize SDM by using multicore fibers (MCFs) Using a vortex fiber with a characteristic high-index ring around the fiber core, Bozinovic et al. have performed experiments of OAM mode transmission in fibers 20 m and 900 m long At present, research on OAM-based optical fiber communications mainly focuses on the design of fibers that supports stable transmission of multiple OAM modes. In 2012, Birnbaum et al. designed a ring fiber with 0.05 up-doping to support up to 10 OAM modes, while maintaining radial single-mode conditions Recently, some studies have explored the potential of the conversion between LP modes and OAM modes in fibers. This can be used as a complement to the OAM generation method, and it is easier to couple than the methods mentioned above. In The application of OAM to radio communications is expected to be a possible solution to the problem of spectrum scarcity and it has, accordingly, received widespread attention. The first OAM-based wireless communication experiment that successfully separated two radio signals at the same frequency was presented in It is well known that MIMO is a key technology that can greatly increase the capacity of wireless communication systems by using multiple transmitting and receiving antennas. The relationship between MIMO SDM and OAM multiplexing has caused a heated debate in the academia. It has been pointed out that radio OAM systems based on UCAA are a subset of MIMO systems and do not really provide additional capacity gain As it happens for optical OAM, radio OAM communication systems are affected by beam divergence and misalignment between the transmitter and the receiver. Since wavelengths at radio frequencies are much larger than at light frequencies, the effects of atmospheric turbulence on radio OAM decrease and can be usually neglected. Unfortunately, for the same reason the problem of beam divergence becomes more important and represents a bigger challenge in wireless communication systems than in free-space optical communication systems, limiting the achievable distance of OAM radio links. Like in free-space optical communications, radio OAM communication systems also require perfect alignment between the transmitter and the receiver It is well known that multipath effects caused by beam spreading and reflections of surrounding objects must be considered in wireless communication systems. In OAM-based wireless communications, the multipath effects caused by specular reflection from a plane parallel to the propagation path have been discussed in In the field of acoustics, OAM-based communication technology is still in its infancy. In 2017, Shi et al. Since microwaves and mid-and far-infrared radiations are strongly absorbed underwater, and light is easily obstructed and scattered by small particles in the oceans, sound waves are the only information carrier for underwater long-distance (more than 200 meters) communications. Accordingly, OAM can be applied to underwater acoustic communications to further increase system capacity and spectrum efficiency. In addressing link design for underwater acoustic communications, Fig. underwater creatures and turbulence effects should also be considered in addition to the inherent OAM beam divergence and misalignment problems. However, very little research and experimental data are available in current scientific literature. Nevertheless, considered the potential capacity gains of OAM, theoretical analysis and experimental verification are expected to be developed in the near future. OAM has shown great potential in the communications community due to the inherent orthogonality between modes. Integrating OAM into existing communication systems is expected to further improve spectral efficiency and meet everincreasing data rate demands. Moreover, the typical circular symmetry of OAM waves makes them very easy to be included in many communication system components. However, OAM integration presents some challenges and technical issues, such as beam divergence, misalignment, and atmospheric turbulence effects in free-space optical links, mode coupling in fiber links, and multipath effects in radio communication links. These technical issues and their solutions must be considered when building an OAM-based communication system. Analyzing OAM implementation on the basis of the frequency bands used, we can summarize the most important characteristics of OAM systems: and misalignment between the transmitter and receiver will greatly limit link achievable distance and degrade system performance. OAM beam convergence and system misalignment compensation schemes are required for long-distance transmission. Acoustic OAM communication system is still in an initial stage and the feasibility of acoustic OAM communications, especially underwater, need further experimental verification. The impact of the underwater environment on OAM links also needs further research. After considering all possible challenges and technical issues, we are at a stage where experiments and research on OAM systems should be more oriented to practice testing than to develop proof of concept. At present, most OAM experiments are performed in the controlled environments of laboratories. Testing beyond laboratory distances and practical deployment of OAM systems should be the focus of future research activities. Another important issue is that, since all communication systems keep moving towards low costs, small sizes and high data rates, all OAM system components must achieve a reduction in cost and size in the near future. OAM has found applications also outside the field of optical, radio and acoustic communications. Thanks to the work of Nobel laureate Arthur Ashkin, light has since long been used to trap small particles in what we call optical tweezers. Optical tweezers use a single tightly-focused beam with a large enough gradient force around the focus to overcome the linear momentum of the light, attracting the particles toward the center When interacting with the absorbing particles, OAM carried by acoustic vortices can also be transferred to the particles, exerting a torque on them. This mechanical effect can be applied in the form of acoustic tweezers and acoustic spanners. Acoustic vortices can manipulate larger size particles than optical vortices due to larger wavelength, and have great application prospects in the field of ultrasonic medicine. Courtney et al. implemented acoustic tweezers using first-order and superimposed high-order Bessel acoustic vortices From the perspective of simplicity and flexibility, optical OAM for particle manipulation is usually generated using SPPs and SLMs, while acoustic OAM for particle manipulation are generated using UCTAs. OAM applied to an optical or radar imaging system can break the limits of resolution or sensitivity. The stimulated emission depletion (STED) microscope uses a ring beam with a helical phase distribution to suppress the fluorescence of particles around the scanning point, achieving a resolution beyond the diffraction limit Inserting a spiral phase mask into the Fourier plane of an optical imaging system can effectively convert the point spread function of the system into an annular intensity cross section with an exp(i θ) phase distribution In 2013, where k = 2πf /c is the wave number, J (ka sin θ) is the Bessel function of the first kind, and a is the radius of the UCAA. As can be seen from ( OAM-based radar detection provides a new set of ideas and solutions for the development of accurate target imaging. Due to its helical phase structure, a vortex electromagnetic wave carrying OAM can be regarded as a traditional plane wave illuminating a target from multiple consecutive angles, which is equivalent to realizing continuous sampling in a twodimensional space in a short time, obtaining a good degree of spatial diversity. Therefore, applying multimodal OAM to radar imaging enables azimuthal imaging without relative motion Recently, research on OAM-based radar imaging has mainly focused on azimuth imaging algorithms. Due to the existence of the Rayleigh limit, traditional radar imaging algorithms can only provide limited azimuth resolution. Some efficient algorithms have been proposed for OAM-based super-resolution radar imaging, such as UCAA-based autoregressive models and power spectral density (PSD) estimation algorithm UCAA-based echo models and multiple signal classification (MUSIC) algorithm There are also many challenges in OAM-based radar imaging. Because the center of vortex electromagnetic beams is null and the angular direction of the main lobe varies with the OAM modes, it is difficult to simultaneously illuminate the target with vortex electromagnetic beams of different modes, which results in limited echo energy. The difference of echo intensity will lead to amplitude modulation of the echo signal, resulting in a deterioration of the imaging capability. These effects can be mitigated by carefully designing the radius and excitation of the UCAA to adjust the main lobes of the vortex electromagnetic waves with different modes Optical OAM beams for imaging is generated using SPPs and SLMs, while radio OAM beams for radar imaging are generated using UCAAs. OAM beam divergence and beam steering must be considered in order to make OAM waves with multiple modes illuminate the same target. More in-depth research on topics such as high-precision azimuth imaging and dynamic target detection are the object of future research. In recent years, OAM has been extensively studied in many fields of application, especially in the field of communications. A large number of studies have shown that it is possible to multiplex a set of orthogonal OAM modes on the same frequency channel so to achieve a high spectral efficiency. In this paper, we provide a comprehensive overview of the generation and detection methods of optical, radio, and acoustic OAM, together with their applications in communications, particle manipulation and imaging. Particular attention has been devoted to the issues that still obstruct or limit the application of OAM in practice. OAM technology is on the brink of been deployed in many communication systems but there are still some problems that need to be solved. For example, many of the experiments related to OAM multiplexing still use bulky and expensive components, which are not suitable for practical implementation and large-scale use. How to generate and detect highorder and multi-mode OAM beams with a finite-size aperture is challenging. Future success of OAM heavily relies on the development of system components such as transmitters, multiplexers, demultiplexers and receivers. These components are required to provide reductions in cost and size and to be compatible with existing technologies. Moreover, the state of the propagation channel has a large impact on OAM-based links and the problems arising in some complex and severe channel conditions need to be addressed and solved. In spite of the many challenges in applying OAM to communication systems, on the base of the research progress surveyed in this paper, we remain optimistic that these challenges will be gradually resolved in the future and that OAM will help to make breakthroughs in future communications and radar target detection systems. The reflection surfaces are divided into N discrete regions and can generate OAM with = 2μ0(N + 1)/(λN ). Simple structure; beam convergence effect; it is difficult to determine topological charge values; specific working frequency. • For free-space optical communication systems, SLMs loaded with phase holograms are recommended in transmitters and receivers to flexibly multiplex and demultiplex OAM beams. The effects of atmospheric turbulence on free- • The most common methods for generating and detecting optical, radio and acoustic OAM waves are introduced and compared from multiple perspectives.