We report a ferroelectric order at ∼ 98 K for NiFe2O4, which carries an inverse spinel structure with a centrosymmetric F d3m structure at room temperature. The value of spontaneous electric polarization is considerably high as ∼ 0.29 μC/cm 2 for 5 kV/cm poling field. The electric polarization decreases considerably (∼ 17 %) around liquid nitrogen temperature upon application of 50 kOe field, proposing a significant magnetoelectric coupling. The synchrotron diffraction studies confirm a structural transition at ∼ 98 K to a noncentrosymmetric structure of P 4122 space group. The occurrence of polar order is associated with an ordered occupancy of Ni and Fe atoms at the octahedral sites of the P 4122 structure, instead of random occupancies at the octahedral site of the inverse spinel structure. The results propose that NiFe2O4 is a new type-II multiferroic material. Nickel ferrite with the chemical formula NiFe 2 O 4 (NFO) attracts special attention for the similar significant physical properties with magnetite. Magnetite has been recognized as an oldest known and the most studied magnet in science with diverse applications in many areas such as rechargeable batteries, 1,2 magnetic recording, Magnetite crystallizes in the inverse spinel structure (F d3m) at room temperature. The formal chemical formula of Fe 3 O 4 can be represented as Fe Herein, we report the synchrotron diffraction studies over a wide temperature range of 10-300 K and the analysis of the diffraction data using Rietveld refinement confirms a structural transition to a noncentrosymmetric structure (P 4 1 22) at ∼ 98 K. The results further suggest that the random occupancies at the octahedral site of inverse spinel structure no longer exist below ∼ 98 K. Instead, an ordered occupancy of Ni and Fe is proposed. Intriguingly, the structural transition to a noncentrosymmetric structure is associated with the occurrence of a spontaneous ferroelectric (FE) order with the FE T C close to 98 K. The value of electric polarization (P ) is considerably high as ∼ 0.29 μC/cm 2 for a 5 kV/cm poling field, which is comparable to those values of promising type-II multiferroics. Nickel ferrite with formula NiFe 2 O 4 is prepared using solid state reaction. The XPS measurements are carried out in order to detect possible existence of Fe 2+ attributed to the oxygen non-stoichiometry, In order to observe possible occurrence of ferroelectric order in NFO, we first measure DC-bias current (I DC ) using the bias electric field (BE) method, as recently proposed to identify genuine occurrence of ferroelectricity. We further note that another peak is observed close to T pole , as depicted in the inset of the figure for T pole below ∼ 98 K. This peak does not engage with the phase transition at 98 K, in accordance with the previous reports. Figure Magnetization (M ) recorded in ZFC mode and dielectric permittivity (ǫ) at H=0 are measured with T . The values of M and real component (ǫ ′ ) of ǫ with T are depicted around FE T C in Fig. The α, α ′ , and γ in the above equation are the constants and functions of temperature. The linear dependence between squared magnetization and magnetodielectric response in the low field regime indicate that the magnetodielectric coupling term γP 2 M 2 of the Ginzburg-Landau theory is significant. Here, linear plot of M 2 with [1-ǫ ′ (H)/ǫ ′ (H = 0)] × 100 is observed below ∼ 0.9 kOe, as indicated by an arrow in Fig. Till date, the low temperature structural studies have not been attempted for NFO. Recently, first principles calculations proposed possible symmetry lowering to either noncentrosymmetric P 4 1 22 or centrosymmetric Imma space group at low temperature for NFO. A significant structural distortion is noted at the structural transition. In order to understand these distortions microscopically, the bond lengths around Fe and Ni atoms are estimated further. As given in Table The oxygen atoms involving the bond length along crystallographic c axis are designated as the apex oxygen atoms and the rest four are the basal oxygen atoms in the octahedral structure. Thermal variations of the Fe-O bond lengths involving basal and apex oxygen atoms are depicted in Fig. The discover of Verwey transition 7 in magnetite opened up many unexplored issues. In conclusion, a FE order is observed for NFO at ∼ 98 K with a reasonably large value of the electric polarization of ∼ 0.29 μC/cm 2 for a 5 kV/cm poling field. A considerable magnetoelectric coupling is confirmed by a 17 % change of the electric polarization upon application of 50 kOe magnetic field around 77 K, pointing a promising member of the type-II multiferroics. The FE transition is associated with a structural transition to a noncentrosymmetric P 4 1 22 structure from the inverse spinel structure, as confirmed by the analysis of the syn-chrotron diffraction studies. The polar order is found to be associated with an ordered occupancy of the Ni and Fe atoms at the octahedral sites of the P 4 1 22 structure.