When exposed to air, metallic yttrium dihydride YH2 films turn into insulating and transparent yttrium oxy-hydride (YHO). The incorporation of oxygen causes the lattice expansion of YH2 and the emergence of photochromic properties. However, the oxidation of YH2 is not completely irreversible: under illumination some oxygen atoms move towards the YHO surface, leaving behind an oxygen-deficient bulk (responsible for the photochromic darkening and observed lattice contraction). Under illumination, and according to experimental evidence, some oxygen atoms can effectively leave the film, being replaced by other oxygen atoms once the illumination has stopped, i.e., YHO 'breathes' when subjected to illumination/darkness cycling. Based on this 'breathing', YHO films become more hydrophobic under illumination conditions than when kept in darkness. Ab-initio calculations point to the light-induced weakening of the Y-O bond as the possible mechanism for explaining these experimental observations. Yttrium hydride and other rare-earth hydrides are extremely reducing agents, a feature that complicates considerably their study. For their adequate handling in air, rare-earth hydride thin films are usually protected against oxidation by, for example, Pd capping layers Oxygen containing yttrium hydride thin films were prepared onto glass substrates following a two-step deposition process consisting on the fabrication by magnetron sputtering of YH 2 metallic films (in a Leybold Optics A550V7 sputter unit) followed by a post-deposition oxidation process in air. Further details on the synthesis process of photochromic YHO can be found elsewhere The calculations were performed with the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) code YHO thin films exhibit photochromic properties, that is, YHO films undergo a reversible decrease of their optical transmittance when illuminated with light of adequate energy and intensity Non-illuminated (clear) YHO thin films show hydrophobicity with equilibrium contact angle (θ e ) values of 95 • for water (see Table Under illumination, a decrease of the hydrophobicity, caused by the creation of electron-hole pairs, would be expected, as observed in other metal oxides In order to study the compositional changes of the YHO surface, XPS measurements were performed before and after illumination and the results presented for C1s, O1s and Y3d in Figure The O1s signal is composed by two contributions at 529.0 eV and 531.2 eV; the former can be attributed to O atoms bound to Y atoms, whereas the latter can be assigned to physisorbed O The obtained results for Y3d correspond very well to the Y 2 O 3 stoichiometry, i.e., at the top surface consist of Y 2 O 3 , in agreement with our previous studies Surface energy calculations, performed using the Oss-Chaudhury-Good method As described above, photochromic yttrium oxyhydride can be obtained by the oxidation in air of reactively sputtered metallic YH 2 thin films. The incorporation of oxygen in the YH 2 lattice causes the increase of the lattice constant from ∼ 5.20 to ∼ 5.34 Å 04-002-6938 (*) 04-002-7545 (x) being able to recover fully. After 4 weeks of continuous cycling within glove box, the luminous transmittance T lum of the samples decreased from 78.5 % in the nonilluminated state, to 26.7%. This heavily photodarkened films were allowed to bleach in total darkness, both in air and in N 2 atmosphere (glove box); the evolution of T lum is presented in Figure Considering the low electronegativity of Y, the idea of oxygen being pushed out of the YHO lattice by illumination may look counterintuitive at first. However, it is important to consider that for achieving a noticeable darkening only very small amounts of oxygen are required to leave the film. Indeed, a ff of just 2 % of oxygen-deficient YHO is known to cause a drop of the visible transmittance larger than 30% Experimental evidence, presented above, points to light-induced oxygen exchange between the film and the atmosphere. In the present section, this question is addressed by DFT modelling (ab initio calculations using the software VASP). It is known that photochromic YHO coatings are obtained experimentally by the partial oxidation of YH 2 films in air. As discussed before, the incorporation of oxygen into YH 2 results in the expan- The experimental XPS data and the calculated total density of states of YHO (216) are in good agreement, as shown in Figure The projected DOS for YHO (216) revealed that both O and H atoms strongly contribute to the topmost valence band states. However, they are not hybridized because both H and O atoms are connected to the Y atoms independently from each other. On the other hand, the bottommost conduction band, which in the case of an ideal lattice is three times degenerate, and it is formed mostly by Y d -states, in particular t 2g states, Figure When exposed to air the YH 2 lattice expands from 5.20 to 5.34 Å due to the incorporation of oxygen. Beyond the lattice expansion, YH 2 turns into YHO which is transparent and photochromic. However, the incorporation of oxygen can be, at least partially, reverted by illumination. According to theoretical calculations, the pseudo Jan-Teller effect may cause the weakening of the Y-O bond by the action of light of adequate wavelength (UV and blue); as a result, some oxygen atoms can be released leaving behind an oxygen deficient structure responsible for the photochromic darkening of the YHO films. Released oxygen atoms move towards the film surface, causing an enhancement of the hydrophobic properties, being some O atoms able to leave the film. For this reason, the adequate bleaching of the photodarkened films has to take place in an oxygen rich atmosphere. In summary, YHO "breathes" as a consequence of illumination: the YHO lattice contraction/expansion under illumination/darkness is accompanied by oxygen release/intake which causes the observed change in the optical properties. . Equilibrium contact angle values (θe) for water, ethylene glycol (EG) and methylene iodine (MeI) as well as the measured total surface energy (γ total ) and its components: Liftshitz-van del Waals interactions term (γ LW ) and acid-base interaction term (γ AB )-calculated from the Lewis acid and base parameters (γ + and γ -respectively)-. All data given for the clear and photo-darkened state.