Functional manipulation of graphene is an important topic in view of both fundamental researches and practical applications. In this study, we show that intercalation of 5d transition metals in epitaxial graphene on SiC is a promising approach to realize topologically nontrivial phases with a finite band gap in graphene. Using first-principles calculations based on density functional theory, we show that the Re-and Ta-intercalated graphene become two-dimensional topological insulators which exhibit linear Dirac cones and quadratic bands with topological band gaps, respectively. The appearance of the topological states is attributed to the strong spin-orbit coupling strength of the intercalants. We find that topological edge states exist within the finite bulk band gap in accordance with the bulk-boundary correspondence. We also discuss the spin splitting of the band structure due to the inversion symmetry breaking and the spin-orbit coupling. Our results demonstrate that intercalation of graphene is an effective and viable method to manipulate the band gap and the topological character of graphene. Such intercalated graphene systems are potentially useful for spintronics and quantum computing applications. Low-dimensional material has been a primary theoretical and experimental interest in condensed matter physics, chemistry, and materials science since the first synthesis of graphene Since the gapless band structure sets fundamental limitation in the application of graphene in comparison with other conventional semiconductors with finite gaps, the enhancement of the SOC strength is important for the utility of graphene as well as the realization of the novel topological phase. In this study, we consider the intercalation of 5d transition metal atoms that has significant SOC strength to enhance the topological band gap of graphene. Given that the intercalation can give rise to qualitatively different Dirac cones with significant contributions from intercalant orbital states The electronic band structures were calculated using a first-principles method based on density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in VASP package The intercalation induces decoupling of the graphene layer from the SiC substrate. In the epitaxial graphene on SiC substrate, the first carbon layer (called buffer layer or 0th layer) makes strong chemical bonds with the outermost Si atoms. Due to the strong hybridization, this buffer layer does not possess Dirac cones unlike pristine graphene We find that the electronic band structure of the Re-intercalated epitaxial graphene has Dirac cones with a sizable SOC-induced band gap. Figure To examine the topological feature of the intercalated epitaxial graphene, we calculate the Z 2 topological invariant that characterizes the band topology of a 2D gapped system The topological number is defined as where A, F , and B 1/2 represent the Berry connection, the Berry curvature, and the half of the BZ, respectively. In practice, this integral formula is computed on a discretized k-mesh in DFT calculations and the corresponding topological number becomes a sum of an integer field n( k) as ν = k i ∈B 1/2 n( k i ) mod 2 Another notable effect of the SOC is spin degeneracy lift in the electronic band structure. In pristine graphene, the band structure is spin-degenerate at each k-point of the BZ due to the simultaneous presence of the spatial inversion symmetry and the time reversal symmetry as dictated by the relation E k↑ = E -k↑ = E k↓ , where the first and the second equality is given by the inversion and the time-reversal symmetry, respectively. If the inversion symmetry is broken, the spin degeneracy will be lifted by the SOC in general. In the intercalated epitaxial graphene, the inversion symmetry is broken due to the presence of SiC substrate and the intercalation layer. Thus we have the spin splitting upon including the SOC. The size of the spin splitting in the valence band maximum (VBM) at K is calculated to be 18 meV (Fig. We note that the monolayer MoS 2 has a direct gap at K with larger VBM spin splitting of 0.148 meV The Ta-intercalated epitaxial graphene also shows a 2D topological insulator phase. The main difference in comparison with the Re intercalation is that the electronic band dispersion is quadratic (as opposed to linear) in the absence of the SOC (Fig. where γ and σ denote the direction of the inversion symmetry breaking field (that is perpendicular to the graphene plane in our case) and Pauli matrices, respectively. According to our DFT band structure, the magnitude of the Rashba parameter α R in the valence band is estimated to be 0.21 eV Å. The existence of the topological boundary states is an important feature of a topological system. In general, topological boundary states are supposed to appear at a boundary between a topologically nontrivial system and a trivial one as far as the related symmetry (in our case the time-reversal symmetry) is not broken. The topological edge states are guaranteed to appear in the bulk energy gap in such a way that they cross the Fermi level at an odd number of points in half the BZ, connecting the bulk conduction and valence bands. They are robust conducting channel since the back-scattering is forbidden as far as the time-reversal symmetry is kept In conclusion, we showed that 5d transition metal intercalation induces the topological band gap in the epitaxial graphene on the SiC substrate. It was found that the Reintercalated graphene has linear Dirac cones with the sizable SOC-induced gap and the topological character of the occupied bands was verified by the nontrivial Z 2 invariant. In the Ta-intercalated graphene, we found the quadratic bands with the topological band gap. The broken inversion symmetry and the SOC induced the notable spin-splitting in both systems. Experimentally, the electronic band structures of the intercalated epitaxial graphene could be measured by ARPES 