The electronic nematic phase, wherein electronic degrees of freedom lower the crystal rotational symmetry, is a common motif across a number of high-temperature superconductors. However, understanding the role and influence of nematicity and nematic fluctuations in Cooper pairing is often complicated by the coexistence of other orders, particularly long-range magnetic order. Here we report the enhancement of superconductivity in a model electronic nematic system absent of magnetism, and show that the enhancement is directly born out of strong nematic fluctuations emanating from a tuned quantum phase transition. We use elastoresistance measurements of the Ba1-xSrxNi2As2 substitution series to show that strontium substitution promotes an electronically driven B1g nematic order in this system, and that the complete suppression of that order to absolute zero temperature evokes a dramatic enhancement of the pairing strength, as evidenced by a sixfold increase in the superconducting transition temperature. The direct relation between enhanced pairing and nematic fluctuations in this model system, as well as the interplay with a unidirectional charge density wave order comparable to that found in the cuprates, offers a means to elucidate the role of nematicity in boosting superconductivity. High-temperature superconductivity in both cuprate Theoretical analyses have shown that fluctuations associated with such an electronic nematic phase, particularly near a putative quantum critical point, can significantly enhance superconductivity Here we present the discovery of electronic nematicity and evidence for nematic-fluctuation enhanced superconductivity in Ba 1-x Sr x Ni 2 As 2 , a seemingly conventional nickel-based superconductor series that is readily tunable by chemical substitution and is void of magnetic order. BaNi 2 As 2 , the nickel-based analog of the iron-based parent compound BaFe 2 As 2 , is a metallic compound that exhibits a strongly first-order structural transition from tetragonal to triclinic crystal structure at T S = 135 K on cooling. While magnetic order has not been found in BaNi 2 As 2 to date x = 0 . 7 1 x = 0 . 8 0 x = 0 . 8 6 Enhancement of superconducting transition temperature. Heat capacity measurements in slightly over-substituted Ba1-xSrxNi2As2 single crystals with x = 0.71, 0.80, and 0.86 depict dramatic enhancement of Tc. This contrasts with the very small changes in Sr concentrations, Debye temperatures (as determined by the T 3 phonon contribution shown by the dashed lines), and density of states (as determined by Sommerfeld coefficients, given by the extrapolation of the dashed lines to T = 0) across these samples. (inset) The superconducting transition in the same x = 0.71 single-crystal specimen, measured by magnetization (upper panel), electronic heat capacity (center panel), and transport (lower panel) are consistent with a strongly enhanced Tc of 3.5 K, far above the values at either series end member. The dashed line in (c) indicates the predicted electronic heat capacity anomaly for a single band, s-wave superconductor, with a BCS gap We begin by presenting the global phase diagram of the Ba 1-x Sr x Ni 2 As 2 system in Fig. In parallel, superconductivity in Ba 1-x Sr x Ni 2 As 2 single crystals evolves dramatically across the phase diagram [Fig. Consistent with prior studies Having ruled out the usual sources of a T c increase expected for a conventional phonon-mediated superconductor (density of states and Debye frequency), we propose that this enhancement is driven by the presence of nematic fluctuations. Indeed, the existence of a tetragonalto-triclinic transition shows that rotational symmetry is broken in this system. To investigate whether this transition is driven by electronic, rather than lattice degrees of freedom, we perform elastoresistance measurements. The elastoresistance tensor m ij,kl corresponds to the rate of change of the normalized resistivity (∆ρ/ρ) ij upon application of external strain kl , i.e. m ij,kl = . As discussed in gate field to the nematic order parameter ψ μ , the corresponding elastoresistance m Γμ becomes proportional to the electronic contribution to the nematic susceptibility, i.e. the bare nematic susceptibility without renormalization by the lattice degrees of freedom: The key point is that, if m Γμ shows a diverging behavior above the rotational symmetry breaking transition, it implies that the latter is nematic, i.e. driven by electronic degrees of freedom. If m Γμ shows instead a weak temperature dependence, it implies that the transition is a standard lattice-driven structural transition. In the case of tetragonal Ba 1-x Sr x Ni 2 As 2 , there are three symmetry-distinct channels of rotational symmetry breaking, corresponding to the three irreducible representations B 1g , B 2g , and E g of the point group D 4h . In terms of charge degrees of freedom, they correspond to quadrupolar charge order with form factors x 2 -y 2 , xy, and (xz, yz), respectively. In terms of lattice degrees of freedom, the first two correspond to orthorhombic distortions ε B1g and ε B2g , and the third, to a monoclinic distortion ε 1 Eg , ε 2 of the tetragonal lattice. Importantly, in the triclinic phase of Ba 1-x Sr x Ni 2 As 2 , all four lattice distortions are present. This indicates the potential that one or more of the three nematic susceptibilities χ B1g nem , χ B2g nem , and χ Eg nem may be diverging above T S . To measure the nematic susceptibilities, we use the piezoelectric elastoresistance technique of Refs. The evolution of the elastoresistivity in the B 1g channel in doped Ba 1-x Sr x Ni 2 As 2 crystals is presented in Fig. While the B 1g nematic susceptibility diverges, the B 2g susceptibility is only very weakly temperature dependent in samples with x = 0 and x = 0.63 (See SI). Unfortunately, our sample geometry does not allow for measurements of the E g nematic susceptibility. The absence of a diverging B 2g susceptibility indicates that the strengthening of the electronic nematic fluctuations is limited to the B 1g symmetry channel. This contrasts with the structurally related Fe-based superconductors, where ubiquitous signatures of nematicity in the B 2g channel are reported The diverging B 1g susceptibility persists in the x = 0.75 samples, which feature no discernible phase transition in thermal, magnetic, transport, or diffraction measurements down to the lowest temperatures. Despite the absence of any evident phase transition, m 12 -m 11 data for Ba 0.25 Sr 0.75 Ni 2 As 2 exhibit a clear peak and subsequent downturn at 25 K. Such a nematic susceptibility peak, in the absence of any apparent order (see SI), is unprecedented in its observation. In analogy to more familiar magnetic systems, it may be an indication of a freezing nematic glass, or possibly an artifact of quenched disorder subverting long-range nematic correlations. Returning to the overall phase diagram of Ba 1-x Sr x Ni 2 As 2 , the amplitude of the B 1g nematic susceptibility is overlaid with the triclinc and CDW phase boundaries in Fig. The origin of nematic order cannot be inferred solely from elastoresistance measurements. In the structurally and chemically similar BaFe 2 As 2 compounds, the B 2g electronic nematic order is proposed to be driven by magnetic degrees of freedom, since the stripe magnetic ground state breaks the tetragonal symmetry in the same channel The likely relationship between nematic and CDW order evokes comparison to the cuprate superconductors, wherein short range, unidirectional, incommensurate CDW stripe order and electronic anisotropies have been reported in the pseudogap phase Ba 1-x Sr x Ni 2 As 2 single crystals were synthesized using prereacted NiAs self flux combined with Ba and Sr pieces in a 4:1 -x:x ratio as previously reported Transport and heat capacity data were taken using both a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System and a Quantum Design DynaCool. Heat capacity data were generally collected via a relaxation method. To observe the first order phase transition upon both warming and cooling, select heat capacity measurements were modified to be sensitive to both transitions. Within these modified measurements, an extended heat pulse was applied and heat capacity was extracted using a local derivative approach. Dc-magnetization measurements were taken using a SQUID-VSM option in a Quantum Design MPMS3 system. A homemade coil 250 K structural data were collected on single crystals in a Bruker APEX-II CCD system equipped with a graphite monochromator and a MoK α sealed tube (λ = 0.71073 Å), and were refined using the Bruker SHELXTL Software Package. Temperature dependent diffraction measurements were carried out using a Xenocs GeniX 3D MoK α microspot x-ray source with multilayer focusing optics and a Mar345 image plate detector. Single crystal samples were cooled with a closed-cycle cyrostat and mounted to a Huber four-circle diffractometer. As a measure of the thermodynamic nematic susceptibility, elastoresistive measurements were taken across the Ba 1-x Sr x Ni 2 As 2 phase diagram. Within the D 4h point group, elastoresistive coefficient m 12 -m 11 are directly proportional to χ B1g nem while m 66 is directly proportional to χ B2g nem Supplemental Information: Sixfold enhancement of superconductivity in a tunable electronic nematic system To model the nematic and triclinic phase transitions in Ba 1-x Sr x Ni 2 As 2 , we use a phenomenological Landau freeenergy expansion. We first focus on the elastic contribution to the free energy. Since BaNi 2 As 2 has a tetragonal crystal structure at high temperatures, the harmonic part of the elastic free energy is written, in the compactified Voigt notation, as Here, the strain fields ε i are ) where u i are the components of the displacement vector and C ij is a matrix containing the elastic moduli. Here we shall focus on the modes that lead to some form of rotational symmetry breaking, which correspond to ε 3 , ε 4 , ε 5 , and ε 6 . ε 1 and ε 2 correspond to structural deformations that do not break the tetragonal symmetry. In the language of irreducible representations (irreps) of the tetragonal group, ε 3 transforms as B 1g , ε 6 as B 2g and ε 4 and ε 5 constitute the two components of an E g irrep. The condensation of either μ 3 or μ 6 leads to orthorhombic crystal structures, while ε 4 and/or ε 5 result in a monoclinic structure. On the other hand, a triclinic structure only occurs if all four order parameters, ε 3 , ε 4 , ε 5 , and ε 6 , are non-zero. Focusing on these terms and going beyond the harmonic approximation, the elastic free energy becomes: where we have neglected quartic terms that will not be important for the analysis below. Note that the cubic terms imply that the condensation of ε 4 and/or ε 5 necessarily leads to a non-zero ε 3 and/or ε 6 , since ε 6 ∼ ε 4 ε 5 and . Among the quartic terms, g 3 > 0 favors condensation of either ε 4 or ε 5 , whereas g 3 < 0 favors the simultaneous condensation of both ε 4 and ε 5 . Because in the triclinic phase ε 3 , ε 4 , ε 5 , ε 6 = 0, a direct tetragonalto-triclinic transition can only be first-order. As explained in the main text, our data on undoped and underdoped Ba 1-x Sr x Ni 2 As 2 suggests symmetry breaking in the B 1g channel (i.e. ε 3 = 0) before the onset of a triclinic phase. Thus, the transition from tetragonal to triclinic seems to happen via an intermediate orthorhombic phase, at least for sufficiently underdoped compositions. To understand this sequence of transitions, consider the condensation of a finite ε 3 = 0 (either due to the softening of the C 11 -C 12 elastic constant or as a consequence of an electronic nematic transition) and integrate out the ε 6 degrees of freedom. The elastic free energy becomes: A triclinic phase transition can then take place when both C 44 and C 66 are soft enough. Indeed, when the elastic constant C 44 is small enough such that C 44 < λ 3 | ε 3 |, either μ 4 or μ 5 will condense depending on the signs of ε 3 FIG. and λ 3 . When C 66 is also soft enough, such that C 66 < λ 2 2 /2g 3 , or if g 3 is itself negative, the quartic term favors the simultaneous appearance of both ε 4 and ε 5 , which in turn generates ε 6 . This is one possible scenario for the transition from tetragonal to triclinic. Whether it occurs via an intermediate orthorhombic (i.e. ε 3 = 0) phase taking place at a temperature T N above the onset of the triclinic order at T S depends on the character of the orthorhombic transition itself. If the latter is second order, one certainly expects the intermediate phase to appear. However, if the transition is first-order, it can trigger a triclinic phase immediately, resulting in a first-order tetragonal-to-triclinic transition. The latter seems to be the case for compositions closer to the overdoped regime. The remaining question left in this scenario is whether ε 3 condenses as the result of a lattice instability or as an indirect consequence of the onset of the electronic nematic order parameter ψ that transforms as the B 1g irrep. The observation of CDW peaks at the (incommensurate) ordering vector Q 1 = (q 0 0) suggest a possible charge-driven electronic nematic phase. Indeed, denoting by ∆ 1 the CDW order parameter with ordering vector Q 1 and by ∆ 2 the CDW with ordering vector Q 2 = (0 q 0), CDW fluctuations can lead to a nematic order parameter ψ ∝ ∆ 2 1 -∆ 2 2 . For our phenomenological analysis, however, the microscopic origin of the nematic order parameter ψ is not important. The free energy expansion including the electronic nematic degrees of freedom is given by: The last term is the symmetry allowed bilinear coupling between the nematic order parameter and the orthorhombic distortion. Here, the coefficient a s = C 11 -C 12 , whereas the coefficient a n is proportional to the inverse of the bare nematic susceptibility, χ -1 nem . As usual, we write a n = c n (T -T n,0 ) and a s = c s (T -T s,0 ), with T n,0 the bare nematic transition temperature and T s,0 , the bare structural transition temperature. Hereafter, we set c s = c n = 1 for simplicity. A state with non-zero ε 3 and ψ can be the result of a vanishing a s (lattice-driven) or of a vanishing a n (electronicdriven). To model the crossover from a lattice-driven transition (T s,0 < T n,0 ) to an electronic-driven transition (T n,0 < T s,0 ), we define T n,0 ≡ T 0 (1 + δ) and T s,0 ≡ T 0 (1 -δ). Of course, T 0 and δ in principle depend on the doping composition x. For our purposes, however, which is to contrast the behavior of the elastoresistance in the lattice-driven and electronic-driven regimes, we consider them independent variables and fix T 0 while varying δ. The resulting (δ, T ) phase diagram is shown in Fig. Nematic susceptibility in both structurally-driven (δ < 0) and electronically-driven (δ > 0) regimes. Here δ ranges from δ = -0.20 to δ = 0.20. A sharp peak is evident in the electronically driven case. The parameters used were λ1 = 0.1, un = 1.0, and us = 1.0. In Fig. In contrast, in the region of the phase diagram where the transition is electronically-driven, ∂ψ ∂ε3 displays a clear peak at the transition temperature T N and, within mean-field, a Curier-Weiss temperature dependence. This behavior is reminiscent of that of m 12 -m 11 , in the disordered phase, for underdoped and near optimally-doped Ba 1-x Sr x Ni 2 As 2 . A. X-Ray Diffraction and Charge Order Figure Structural parameters of Ba 1-x Sr x Ni 2 As 2 single crystals collected from single crystal x-ray diffraction experiments at 250 K exhibit a subtle feature in the a-axis lattice parameter and tetrahedral bond angles near x c = 0.7 (Fig. That T c enhancement in undersubstituted samples is filamentary in nature is observed clearly in resistivity, heat Additionally, heat capacity measurements in Ba 1-x Sr x Ni 2 As 2 crystals show a clear discontinuity in Debye temperature when crossing the zero temperature structural phase boundary [Fig. 