Magnetism of the S = 1 Heisenberg antiferromagnets on the spatially anisotropic square lattice has been scarcely explored. Here we report a study of the magnetism, specific heat, and thermal conductivity on Ni[SC(NH2)2]6Br2 (DHN) single crystals. Ni 2+ ions feature an S = 1 rectangular lattice in the bc plane, which can be viewed as an unfrustrated spatially anisotropic square lattice. A long-range antiferromagnetic order is developed at TN = 2.23 K. Below TN, an upturn is observed in the b-axis magnetic susceptibility and the resultant minimum might be an indication for the XY anisotropy in the ordered state. A gapped spin-wave dispersion is confirmed from the temperature dependence of the magnetic specific heat. Anisotropic temperature-field phase diagrams are mapped out and possible magnetic structures are proposed. Two-dimensional (2D) square lattice Heisenberg antiferromagnets (HAFMs) have become a fertile field for condensed matter physics because of the prominent progress of high-temperature superconductors. In a square lattice, if the interaction along the diagonal J 2 becomes as significant as the one along the side of the square J 1 , the competition between them frustrates the lattice and results in a rich phase diagram. In S = 1/2 systems, three types of ordered ground states appear depending on the J 2 /J 1 ratio In this work, we grow single crystals of an S = 1 rectangular lattice HAFM, Ni[SC(NH 2 ) 2 ] 6 Br 2 (dibromohexakis thiourea-nickel(II), abbreviated as DHN), whose magnetic properties have not been reported yet. With careful structural analysis, the crystal structure is found to have highly spatial anisotropy. The magnetic exchange interaction is propagated through the -Ni-S• • • S-Ni-pathway along the side of the rectangular lattice, which is absent along the diagonal direction. As a result, DHN can be considered as an unfrustrated spatially anisotropic S = 1 square lattice antiferromagnet. A long-range AFM order is developed at T N = 2.23 K determined by the magnetic susceptibility and specific heat measurements. Below T N , an upturn is observed in the b-axis magnetic susceptibility, and the resultant minimum is likely an indication for the XY anisotropy in the ordered state. A gapped spin-wave dispersion is confirmed from the temperature dependence of the magnetic specific heat. Based on all experimental results, the anisotropic temperaturefield phase diagrams are constructed and the possible magnetic structures are proposed. DHN single crystals were synthesized by evaporation method in a solution of water. 40 mmol thiourea was first dissolved in 30 ml deionized water, and then 10 mmol nickel bromide hydrate was added. Continuously stir the dark red solution until the solvents were dissolved completely. The solution was kept in water bath at 60 • C for one hour, and then kept at 40 • C to evaporate slowly. The crystals were harvested after about three weeks. The as-grown single crystals are dark green and opaque with irregular rectangle shape. The typical size of the crystal is (10-15) mm × (3-5) mm × (1.5-2) mm, as shown in the inset to Fig. Crystal structure was analyzed by four-circle x-ray diffraction at room temperature. Magnetic susceptibility and magnetization were measured at 1.8-300 K by using a SQUID-VSM (Quantum Design) and at 0.5-2 K by using a SQUID equipped with a 3 He refrigerator (Quantum Design). Pulsed-field magnetization at 1.4 K was measured using an induction method at Wuhan National High Magnetic Field Center (China). Specific heat was measured by a relaxation method in the temperature range from 0.4 to 30 K using a PPMS (Quantum Design). Thermal conductivity was measured using a "one heater, two thermometers" technique in a 3 He refrigerator and a 14 T magnet at temperature regime of 0.3-8 K and using a Chromel-Constantan thermocouple in a 4 He pulse-tube refrigerator in 0 T above 4 K A. Crystal structure DHN belongs to M (tu) 6 X 2 family, in which M is a transition metal, tu is shorted for thiourea SC(NH 2 ) 2 , and X is a halogen or NO - 3 In DHN, the Ni(tu) 6 octahedra are isolated from each other, and the neighbouring Ni 2+ ions interact with each other through the -Ni-S• • • S-Ni-two-sulfur exchange pathway. It has been demonstrated that in most copper complexes with two-halide exchange the predominant coupling is dependent on the interhalide distance instead of the intercopper distance The crystal structure of DHN is reminiscent of NiCl 2 -4SC(NH 2 ) 2 (DTN), a famous compound exhibiting a magnon Bose-Einstein condensation The structure-property relation between these two compounds is worthy of addressing. DTN is a member of M (tu) 4 X 2 , which has the similar chemical composition to DHN except for the replacement of Cl by Br. In DTN, equivalent Ni 2+ ion is surrounded by two Cl -and four thiourea molecules forming a NiCl In the bc plane, DHN features a rectangular lattice of Ni 2+ ions due to the inequivalent nearest-neighboring (NN) interactions. The frustration as well as the coupling J 2 along the diagonal direction should be very weak for two reasons. First, since the S• • • S distance along the diagonal is 7.90 Å, it is likely too long for an efficient orbital overlap between the thiourea groups. Second, no bridging ligands are present to establish J 2 . In the frustrated vanadium and molybdenum oxides, both J 1 and J 2 are formed through the corner-shared PO 4 The inset to Fig. Figure As further cooling, a weak slope change is observed in both χ c and χ ⊥ at 2.2 K, which is clearly seen from the differential of χ c as shown in the inset to Fig. For 2D HAFMs, the effective exchange interaction can be roughly estimated by using the following high temperature series expansion (HTSE) for arbitrary S in any lattice here S = 1, x = J/k B T , k B is the Boltzmann constant, N is the Avogadro's constant, g is the Landé factor, μ B is the Bohr magneton, and a n is the free parameter. This relation has been successfully applied to AMoOPO 4 Cl, and the fitting is as good as the J 1 -J 2 model Below T N , χ c and χ ⊥ are decreased continuously while an upturn is emerged in χ b . The presence of the minimum is likely an indication for the XY anisotropy as observed in several S = 1/2 square lattice compounds The anisotropic magnetization is displayed in Fig. (B b). As the field is increased, M c exhibits a quick enhancement around 2.5 T. The extrapolation from the high fields goes across the origin, suggesting a spin-flop transition without a generated net moment. It is known that when the magnetic field is applied along the easy axis, a spin-flop transition can occur above a critical field B SF with all spins re-orientate to the perpendicular direction. After that, spins will gradually point to the field direction and reach the saturation at B c . In the molecular field model, both the critical fields are related to the exchange field B E and the anisotropic field B A as below To obtain B E and B A , pulsed-field magnetization is performed to determine B SF and B c . As seen in Fig. It is in agreement with the magnetic susceptibility, in which the drop of χ a is less significant than χ c , as shown in Fig. In contrast to M c , M b shows a step-like increase at 5 T, above which the magnetization increases linearly up to 7 T, suggesting a strong AFM correlation. The extrapolation to zero field is positive, revealing a weak ferro- The inset to Fig. where β 3 , β 5 , and β 7 are the temperature-independent parameters ( As shown in Fig. When applying magnetic field along different directions, the specific heat changes in different ways for B c and B b, as shown in Fig. Figure Figure Based on the above experimental results, the B -T phase diagrams for B c and B b are mapped out respectively, as shown in Fig. The nonmonotonic field dependence of the ordering temperature has been reported in many quasi-2D magnets The possible spin structures projected in the bc and ac planes with different magnetic field directions are proposed and illustrated in Fig. In this work, we performed detailed structural and magnetism characterizations on DHN single crystals. In this compound, Ni 2+ ions feature an S = 1 rectangular lattice, which can be regarded as a frustration-free spatially anisotropic square lattice. Due to the inevitable interlayer interaction, a long-range AFM order occurs at T N = 2.23 K. Below T N , a minimum is observed in χ b which is likely an indication for the XY anisotropy in the AFM state. The temperature dependence of the magnetic specific heat evidences a gapped spin wave dispersion, which is also likely originated from the XY anisotropy. DHN is therefore of great interest since there are few S = 1 examples on the unfrustrated square lattice and the XY anisotropy has been rarely studied in S = 1 2D lattices. Theoretical model and numerical calculation on S = 1 square lattice are in urgent need to explain the novel properties of DHN in near future. 