Atomic Fermi gases provide an ideal platform for studying the pairing and superfluid physics, using a Feshbach resonance between closed channel molecular states and open channel scattering states. Of particular interest is the strongly interacting regime. We show that the closed-channel fraction Zcc provides an effective probe for the important many-body interacting effects, especially through its density dependence, which is absent from two-body theoretical predictions. Here we measure Zcc as a function of interaction strength and the Fermi temperature TF in a trapped 6 Li superfluid throughout the entire BCS-BEC crossover, in quantitative agreement with theory when important thermal contributions outside the superfluid core are taken into account. Away from the deep BEC regime, the fraction Zcc is sensitive to TF. In particular, our data show Zcc ∝ T α F with α = 1/2 at unitarity, in quantitative agreement with calculations of a two-channel pairing fluctuation theory, and α increases rapidly into the BCS regime, reflecting many-body interaction effects as predicted. Using a Feshbach resonance (FR), atomic Fermi gases 1 -ZΨ open , where Z reflects the closed-channel fraction within the "dressed molecules". While the superposition reflects two-body physics, the underlying dressing reflects important many-body physics. Indeed, many important physical quantities, such as the superfluid excitation gap Experimentally This experiment has been addressed to various degrees by many-body based two-channel models F ∝ N α/3 with α = 1/2 at unitarity and α > 1/2 in the BCS regime, resulting in a power-law decay of atom number as a function of laser probe time. Importantly, in the N → 0 limit, Z cc vanishes both at unitarity and in the BCS regime, consistent with the two-body result. In this paper, we report on precision measurements of the closed-channel fraction Z cc as a function of magnetic field and Fermi temperature T F in 6 Li superfluid at low T with optical molecular spectroscopy, and provide unambiguous evidence that Z cc is governed by many-body physics. We emphasize that a concrete relation between Z cc and the density can be used to extract other physical properties and to test various theories, and is thus much more important than simply knowing Z cc = 0 in the BCS regime. Due to the smallness of Z cc The experimental procedure for producing 6 Li superfluid has been described in our previous works where a resonant laser transition is used to pump the closedchannel molecules into an excited singlet molecular state. Here, the transition is where Ω m is the Rabi frequency of the transition and γ m is the linewidth of the excited molecular state. We mention that the Γ expression is valid provided 1, which is easily satisfied in our experiment, and has been further verified by varying the probe laser intensity. Therefore, by recording the remaining atom number versus probing time, the fraction Z cc can be extracted with given Previously, Ω 2 m /γ m is directly calculated based on the theoretical knowledge of molecular optical transition and the measured laser beam parameters. This method relies on precise measurement of laser power P and beam waist ω 0 at the position of the atoms, which is very difficult to achieve in practice After preparing the 6 Li superfluid at 832 G, the field is linearly ramped to the desired value in 100 ms and held for another 100 ms for equilibration before the molecular probing. The probe laser (laser power 20 μW) is frequency-locked to an ultra-stable Fabry-Perot cavity with its power stabilized. The achieved long-term stability of frequency and power are 500 kHz and 0.1%, respectively, which greatly suppress the systematic errors. The measurements in the BEC regime are performed at 670, 696, 722, and 748 G, respectively. Note that the 1/e depletion time of milliseconds is far shorter than the molecule lifetime of more than 10 s, thus the background molecule loss is negligible. As an example, the inset of Fig. m /γ m . This leads to a power-law decay, where α = 3/c , β = c/ρ α/3 . Then, the parameters η and α can be acquired by fitting the experimental data with Eq. ( With the same procedure, we probe Z cc on the BCS side for B = 850 ∼ 1000 G. In these measurements, to eliminate the potential non-equilibrium effects caused by magnetic field ramping, the Fermi gas is evaporatively cooled at the same field B for molecular probing. At unitarity, the system temperature can be determined by fitting the in situ density distribution with the known equation of state (EoS) Presented in the inset of Fig. Finally, we point out that, in a two-channel model, the density (or equivalently T F ) provides an extra dimension to the system. More specifically, two Fermi gases with different T F are no longer mathematically equivalent, even if they share the same 1/k F a and T /T F . This will inevitably lead to violation, albeit small, of the universality hypothesis of a unitary Fermi gas Note that we do not extract the (trap averaged) Tan's contact In summary, we have measured Z cc of interacting Fermi gases of 6 Li in a trap as a function of T F and B. Away from the deep BEC regime, the fraction Z cc exhibits clear dependence on Fermi temperature T F , unraveling important manybody interaction effect. In particular, we obtain Z cc = η √ T F at unitarity, with η = 0.074(12) K -1/2 , in quantitative agreement with theory. It would be interesting to perform precision test of the universality hypothesis, investigate the temperature evolution of the condensed and noncondensed part of the closed-channel fraction, and test against different BCS-BEC crossover theories in the future.