A striking characteristic of superconducting circuits is that their eigenspectra and intermode coupling strengths are well predicted by simple Hamiltonians representing combinations of quantum circuit elements. Of particular interest is the Cooper-pair-box Hamiltonian used to describe the eigenspectra of transmon qubits, which can depend strongly on the offset-charge difference across the Josephson element. Notably, this offset-charge dependence can also be observed in the dispersive coupling between an ancillary readout mode and a transmon fabricated in the offset-charge-sensitive (OCS) regime. We utilize this effect to achieve direct, high-fidelity dispersive readout of the joint plasmon and charge-parity state of an OCS transmon, which enables efficient detection of charge fluctuations and nonequilibrium-quasiparticle dynamics. Specifically, we show that additional highfrequency filtering can extend the charge-parity lifetime of our device by two orders of magnitude, resulting in a significantly improved energy relaxation time T1 ∼ 200 μs. The basic building blocks of quantum circuits-e.g. capacitors, inductors, and nonlinear elements such as Josephson junctions Devices fabricated in the OCS regime are particularly useful for investigations of interesting mesoscopic phenomena. For example, these devices can be used to probe deviations from the typical sinusoidal Josephson currentphase relation, which will change the offset-charge dependence of circuit eigenenergies and transition matrix elements In this article, we present a new, efficient method to monitor the charge parity of an OCS transmon. This method takes advantage of significant hybridization between the higher-excited plasmon states in an OCS transmon and an ancillary readout mode, resulting in a chargeparity-dependent shift of that readout-mode frequency, even when the transmon is in its ground plasmon state. We leverage this effect to perform direct, high-fidelity dispersive readout of the joint plasmon and charge-parity state of an OCS transmon over a wide range of offsetcharge configurations. This is in contrast to previous experiments that monitored the charge parity of OCS transmons by relying on state transitions induced by coherent pulses Finally, we apply this technique to quantify the effect of high-frequency filtering on quasiparticle dynamics in transmons. Measuring the exact same device as in Ref. Transmons are constructed by shunting a Josephson junction with a large capacitance to achieve a charging energy E C that is much smaller than the Josephson coupling energy E J , such that the transition frequency between the ground and first-excited state (ω 01 ) is greater than that between the first-and secondexcited states (ω 12 ). Fig. The Hamiltonian ĤCPB contains two operators: φ is the superconducting phase difference across the junction and n is the number of Cooper pairs that have traversed the junction. The discrete parameter P = ±1 is the charge parity of the circuit (the parity of the total number of electrons that have traversed the junction). We choose the convention that if no electrons have tunneled, there is zero contribution of the parity term to the Hamiltonian, and thus "even" ("odd") corresponds to P = +1 (P = -1). Tunneling of a single QP will switch P , which affects the energy spectrum as if n g was shifted by 1/2, creating two manifolds of energy eigenstates indexed by P [Fig. number and p denotes the charge parity. For readability, we will indicate i numerically (0,1,2...) and p with label "e" or "o," for "even" and "odd" charge parity, respectively. The eigenenergies i,p (n g ) corresponding to our device with E J /E C = 17 are shown in Fig. The strength of the OCS transmon-readout mode coupling will vary with n g . An OCS transmon coupled to a Theoretically calculated OCS transmon-resonator spectrum as a function of ng. Plasmon transition frequencies out of the ground state (a) and first-excited state (b) of an OCS transmon with EJ /EC = 17 with odd charge parity. In this parameter regime, the detuning between ω03,o and the resonator frequency ωr varies by a factor of ≈ 8 as a function of the parameter ng. Additionally, ω14,o crosses ωr near ng = 0.1. Matrix elements of the transmon charge operator for transitions out of the ground (c) and first excited (d) states with "odd" charge parity. These matrix elements are finite and relevant for calculating the transmonresonator dispersive shifts in our devices. In the transmon limit of large EJ /EC , matrix elements between non-nearestneighbor states will be suppressed. single linear readout mode is described by the Hamiltonian Here, ω r is the bare readout mode frequency, g is the capacitive coupling rate between the OCS transmon and the readout mode, and â is the bosonic annihilation operator for excitations in the bare readout mode. In the dispersive regime, the coupling term gn(â + â † ) produces a transmon-state-dependent shift χ i,p of the readout mode frequency relative to ω r . Such dispersive shifts are the basis for qubit readout in cQED. Up to second order in perturbation theory, χ i,p can be written which is valid for g | j, p|n|i, p | (ω ij,p -ω r ). Here, ω ij,p is the transition frequency between transmon states |i, p and |j, p . For a harmonic oscillator, only the charge matrix elements j, p|n|i, p coupling nearest-neighbor i and j are nonzero. In a traditional weakly anharmonic transmon, χ i,p is well approximated by including only nearest-neighbor terms, except in the rare case where a transmon transition is nearly resonant with the readout mode. In the more anharmonic OCS regime, charge dispersion of the transmon levels [Fig. The parameters chosen for Figs. 1 and 2 reflect the experimental device that will be discussed in the next sections: E J /h = 6.14 GHz, E C /h = 356 MHz, and ω r /2π ≈ 9.202 GHz. Notice that, in this parameter regime, ω 03,o (n g ) comes close to the bare readout frequency at n g = 0, and that ω 14,o (n g ) crosses the resonator mode frequency near n g = 0.1. These lead to substantial changes of the dispersive shifts of the readout resonator as a function of n g . Given a readout mode frequency in the typical range of cQED systems, only modest tuning of E J and E C is required to observe the dispersive effects discussed above, as long as the ratio E J /E C is sufficiently low. The experiments presented here were performed on the exact same device as in Ref. To recapitulate, an OCS transmon is coupled to a Al 3D waveguide cavity V. RESULTS 3-5 describe the main experimental result of this article: the direct-dispersive measurement of the joint plasmon and charge-parity state of an OCS transmon. Due to the charge dispersion of the OCS transmon energy levels, the dispersive shift of the readout mode will vary in time as n g drifts. At values of n g away from the degeneracy point n g (mod 1/2) = 1/4, the dispersive shifts corresponding to even-and odd-charge-parity will be distinguishable. With the aid of a quantum-limited Josephson parametric converter 1. A Ramsey interference experiment was performed to determine the instantaneous n g . Specifically, we measured δω 01 (n g ) = δω 01 (0) cos(2πn g ) 2. We acquired 2 × 10 4 high-fidelity dispersivemeasurement shots which determine the state of the transmon at a repetition rate of 5 kHz. 3. We repeated step 2, but with each shot preceded by a microwave pulse with carrier frequency ω 01 to "scramble" the transmon state, transferring some population from |0, p to |1, p . This protocol was repeated 500 times, once every 40 s. Pulses addressing the transmon had a Gaussian envelope with a carrier frequency ω 01 , which was equally detuned from ω 01,o and ω 01,e at all values of n g so as to be chargeparity insensitive. The width of this Gaussian envelope was chosen to be 20 ns to avoid driving the 1-2 transition. We refer to these as "scrambling" pulses because they produced inefficient rotation of the qubit due to the large charge dispersion δω 01 (n g ). We note that due to symmetry of the transition spectrum about n g = 0 and the degeneracy point n g = 0.25, the Ramsey measurement maps all values of n g into the "half-Brillouin zone" [0, 1/4] ⊂ R. Thus, we will restrict our discussion of n g to that range. Below we will describe the outcome of this three-step experiment, emphasizing three separate but related results. A. Single-Shot Readout of Charge Parity Fig. Here, S i,p 11 (ω) is the frequency-dependent reflection coefficient [Appendix B], and the measured phase is given by Arg[S i,p 11 (ω ro )]. For our calculation, we fixed ω r /2π = 9.1979 GHz to match the cavity frequency measured at high probe power (≈ 1 nW at the input of the cavity), beyond the point at which the transmon and readout modes have decoupled The charge matrix elements and transition frequencies ω ij,p were obtained from numerical simulation [Fig. Our use of second-order perturbation theory [Eq. 3] is justified by numerical simulations, which show that the perturbation of the OCS-transmon eigenstates due to the coupling to the readout mode is small over the majority of the n g range when the number of photons in the readout mode is 10. The wavefunction overlap between the coupled and uncoupled transmon is > 95%, except in the range 0.125 ≤ n g ≤ 0.126 for the ground state, and when 0.032 ≤ n g ≤ 0.034 or 0.091 ≤ n g ≤ 0.109 for the excited state. For example, this approximation breaks down when ω 14,o crosses the bare readout frequency and a more sophisticated theory would need to be employed In contrast to previous works studying QP dynamics that required coherent operations to map the charge parity of an OCS transmon onto its plasmon eigenstate Having measured the charge parity P (t) of the transmon as a function of time and assuming stationarity and ergodicity, we can compute by a sliding average the charge-parity autocorrelation function P (0)P (τ ) = F 2 e -2τ /T P . ( For consistency with previous literature, we have defined the charge-parity lifetime T P as the characteristic time between charge-parity switches. This is a factor of two larger than the timescale for the decay of charge-parity correlations, which is due to equal even-odd and oddeven switching rates. In this instance where n g = 0.11, the fidelity of the charge-parity measurement F ≈ 0.99, though this varies with n g as the two measurement distributions become indistinguishable when n g approaches the degeneracy point n g = 0.25. An exponential fit of P (0)P (τ ) [Fig. We attribute this improvement of T P to additional high-frequency filtering on the input/output line connected to our OCS transmon-cavity system. The added filter is a 1 cm-long coaxial line filled with Eccosorb CR-110 high-frequency absorber The three step experiment was repeated 500 times, the results of which are summarized in Fig. Nonequilibrium QP tunneling will result in a T P proportional to 1/x QP . Comparing to the results in Ref. As a further characterization of the sample, we performed standard T 1 measurements by applying a scrambling pulse to the qubit and measuring the time it takes for the qubit to thermalize to its equilibrium population distribution in free decay [Fig. These results support those in Ref. We have demonstrated a powerful application of OCStransmon devices through dispersive monitoring of the dynamics of nonequilibrium QPs, which can impair the performance of superconducting quantum circuits. This technique can be used to extract the rates of all QP-induced qubit transitions as in Refs. The observed charge-parity-dependent dispersive shifts of our readout resonator agree well with our simple application of quantum circuit theory Additionally, since there is a one-to-one correspondence between the reflected phase indicating |0, o and n g , one could use an OCS transmon and the techniques described above as a fast charge sensor with the charge-parity lifetime acting as an upper bound on integration time. We find the unoptimized charge sensitivity of our OCS-transmon device near n g = 0.11 to be ≈ 4.4 × 10 -4 e/ √ Hz, which does not change appreciably over the majority of the n g range. While the rf-SET has better sensitivity to charge fluctuations In conclusion, we have achieved direct, dispersive readout of the joint plasmon and charge-parity states of an OCS transmon, i.e. without performing any coherent operations on the qubit. We have demonstrated that, with improved rf filtering, the charge-parity lifetime of typical 3D transmons can be extended to many milliseconds. This has also extended the T 1 of our OCS transmon to ≈ 210 μs. Having reduced the effect of nonequilibrium QPs on qubit performance to a negligible level, this provides a clear experimental foundation for further attempts to mitigate other mechanisms of dissipation in superconducting qubits, such as surface dielectric loss We performed microwave reflectometry of the singleport readout resonator in the overcoupled regime, in which energy loss through the input/output port is stronger than loss to internal degrees of freedom. In this regime, the reflection coefficient is characterized by a full 2π phase roll as a function of frequency with no amplitude response [Eqn. 4]. We resolve this in Fig. The OCS transmon was fabricated on a c-plane sapphire wafer. The wafer was initially cleaned by sonication in 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), acetone, and then methanol. We then spin coated a bilayer of Microchem 950PMMA A4 on MMA (8.5) MAA EL13 electron-beam-sensitive resists, baking at ∼ 180 • C after each layer. After spinning, we sputtered a Au anticharging layer (∼ 10 nm thick) on the surface. The transmon pattern was written in a single step with a Raith/Vistec EBPG-5000 100kV electron beam pattern generator. After etching away the Au anticharging layer in aqueous KI/I, the pattern was developed in a bath of 3:1 IPA:DI water at 6 • C. Prior to deposition of Al, an in situ Ar/O 2 ion-beam cleaning was performed in the loadlock of a Plassys UMS-300 evaporation system. After a 4 min Ti evaporation (without deposition) to improve the vacuum to ≈ 5 × 10 -9 Torr, Al junction electrodes (20 and 30 nm thick Al) were deposited at angles of ±20 • in a dedicated evaporation chamber. Between the Al evaporations, the sample was transferred to a third chamber for thermal oxidation of the first electrode to form the junction barrier. This was performed at ambient tempera-ture in a 17:3 Ar:O 2 mixture at a pressure of 30 Torr for 10 min. To passivate the surface before exposure to air, another thermal oxidation step was performed following the second Al evaporation at 50 Torr for 5 min. Following the deposition process, the remaining resist and extra Al was removed by a hot NMP liftoff process for one hour with a 30 s sonication step at the end. A protective layer of Microposit SC-1827 photoresist was spun and baked at ∼ 80 • C to protect the devices during dicing. This protective resist was stripped prior to mounting in the Al 3D readout cavity by sequential rinsing with NMP, acetone, and methanol.