We developed a high-throughput screening scheme to acquire candidate coating materials for hybrid perovskites. From more than 1.8 million entries of an inorganic compound database, we collected 93 binary and ternary materials with promising properties for protectively coating halideperovskite photoabsorbers in perovskite solar cells. These candidates fulfill a series of criteria, including wide band gaps, abundant and non-toxic elements, water-insoluble, and small lattice mismatch with surface models of halide perovskites. Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) Despite the excellent PSC-performance in the laboratory, stability problems limit the development and commercialization of this promising materials class. Hybrid perovskites degrade quickly in heat, oxygen and moisture We here present a database-driven high-throughput study that explores a wide range of possible candi-dates to find inorganic materials that have the potential to protectively coat perovskites in PSCs. We take the inorganic materials from the "Automatic Flow for Materials Discovery" (aflow) database As substrates, we chose 12 ABX 3 perovskites (A = Cs/MA, B = Sn/Pb, and X = Cl/Br/I) that are commonly used in halide-perovskite-based devices. We optimized the structure of the tetragonal P4/mbm phase of CsBX 3 and the tetragonal (quasi) I4/mcm phase of MABX 3 using PBE m is the integer that minimizes |γ|. We set the criterion γ ∈ (-5, +5)% as shown in Fig. With the high-throughput screening scheme in Fig. From Figs. As a first consistency check, we compared the material candidates in Figs. Aside from the commonly known metal oxides used in PSCs, we discovered some surprising binary candidates (MoF 3 , GaN, BiF 3 , Si 3 N 4 and BN) that have properties suitable to coat the photovoltaic-active halide perovskites (Fig. We also found insulators such as ZrO 2 , Si 3 N 4 , and BeO (Table Lastly, we briefly comment on realistic coating interfaces. The actual phase of the coating material and the structure of the interface depend on many factors such as the perovskite surface structure and properties, the deposition method, the deposition conditions, as well as the coating thickness. These factors are not included in our database study. An atomistic description of coatingperovskite interfaces requires further computational (e.g., DFT) and experimental work. Results from such future work, such as the stability of the coating materials, could then be incorporated as additional criteria in our screening procedure. In summary, we have developed a systematic and efficient screening scheme for perovskite coating materials. Our scheme reduces the ∼1.8 million materials entries in Aflow to 93 possible coating candidates for a series of perovskite photoabsorbers in PSCs. We have identified inexpensive HTMs (NiO and PbO) that can replace the inefficient and expensive Spiro-OMeTAD, as well as several efficient ETMs (e.g., ZnO) for PSCs. Our results feature new materials beyond metal oxides that will not only enhance the stability of PSCs but also serve as a starting point in the search of novel device materials for emergent PSC technologies. We gratefully thank M. Todorović and G.-X. Zhang for insightful discussions. We acknowledge the computing resources by the CSC-IT Center for Science and the Aalto Science-IT project. An award of computer time was provided by the Innovative and Novel Computational Impact on Theory and Experiment (INCITE) program. This research used resources of the Argonne Lead- * : =