Figure 1. Schematic of common reconfigurable structures in photonic integrated circuits for optical processing: (a) Lattice filter of unbalanced Mach-Zehnder Interferometers (MZIs), [4] (b) Coupled Resonator Optical Waveguides (CROWs), [3], (c) side-coupled integrated spaced sequence of resonators (SCISSOR) with two bus waveguides, (d) Coupled CROW and SCISSORs, Single-bus SCISSORs, (e) tunable delay line, (f) Cavity-loaded cascade of MZIs, (g) Processing cells combining interferometric structures and SOAs. Since the first integration of photonic circuits, scientists and commercial partners have tried to increase the versatility of their components. This is commonly achieved by locally changing the effective index properties of the waveguides through the application of different electrooptical, thermo-optical, electro-mechanical or electromagnetic effects. The controlled alteration of the phase and absorption of light has led to the design of integrated modulators, tunable filters, tunable splitters, optical switches and flexible beamforming networks, to cite a few examples. The notion of reconfigurable photonic components has evolved to more complex photonic integrated circuits (PICs), where the versatility is conferred to the whole system. By software programming each subsystem after fabrication, multiple functionalities are targeted with a single hardware platform, Programmable Integrated Photonics can be divided into: Multipurpose devices and reconfigurable subsystems. While the latter can be reconfigured to increase and vary the performance of a certain application (e.g., filter tunability/ reconfigurability, programmable delays), the former spans on a wider range of applications. Here, we will provide an analysis and overview of the state of the art of programmable integrated photonics field. A reconfigurable photonic integrated circuit is typically built up by combining passive structures that allow light propagation, splitting and/or recombination together with structures that allow the modification of the phase of the optical signal based on an externally-driven actuator. In practice, most of the reconfigurable photonic circuits proposed in the literature are either based on the cascade of finite (i.e., Mach-Zehnder interferometers) or infinite (i.e., ring cavity) impulse response cells or a combination of both. Some examples are illustrated in Fig. The great promise of versatile integrated optics lies in integrating the optimum number of components to perform the greatest number of functionalities with a common/shared hardware, elements) and a reconfigurable optical core. These processing architectures allow multiple photonic processing functionalities as well as microwave / millimeter wave operations. A very versatile optical processing engine is required to implement the core of these architectures. The purpose of this element is two-fold. It needs, first, to provide a reconfigurable/dynamic interconnection scheme between all the subsystems. Secondly, it should provide the synthesis of the main optical signal processing operations. These tasks can be achieved by means of waveguide mesh arrangements Depending on the optical node topology employed for the interconnection of the TBUs, the physical circuit will result in different waveguide mesh configurations. These topologies have been analyzed, highlighting the performance of the hexagonal waveguide interconnection topology as the most versatile and flexible, among other characteristics related to the integration itself, The first three experimental examples of this arrangement provide a powerful proof of concept of a new generation of programmable photonic integrated circuits. They are based on two square cells in silicon nitride Despite the simplicity of the layouts, even a 7-cell hexagonal structure is capable of implementing over 100 different circuits for optical filtering applications (basic MZI, finite impulse response transversal filters, basic tunable ring cavities and infinite impulse response filters, as well as compound structures such as CROWs and SCISSORs), true time delay lines and optical coherent interferometry, Once chosen a certain topology, the versatility of waveguide arrangements is proportional to the number TBUs. The example of Fig. If we compare the characteristics of classical reconfigurable PICs against the new generation based on massively coupled TBUs, we find that the versatility and the flexibility come at the cost of several limitations. It is clear that the ideal behaviour of the TBU leads to the perfect performance of the reconfigurable optical engine. However, in practice, several sources of degradation must be taken into account: imperfect splitting ratios, phase control, parasitic back-reflections, loss imbalances, fabrication errors (gradients through the circuit in thickness or temperature), and drift in time, Internal reflections: The use of imperfect 3-dB couplers and/or possible fabrication errors that change the losses in the upper/lower arm of each TBU introduce optical crosstalk. Due to the cascade arrangement of TBUs, and the potential light recirculation of the mesh topologies, large optical crosstalk or a drift in each TBU configured state leads to signal leaking through the mesh. In The TBU insertion losses are one of the most limiting issues in optical mesh networks. Losses limit the maximum number of TBUs to define the programmed circuit and thus, the versatility and scalability of the overall mesh. In the same sense, a minimum TBU performance improvement leads to a high improvement in the overall mesh behaviour. State-of-the-art MZI-based TBUs insertion losses are below 0.25 dB in silicon photonics Finally, waveguide mesh arrangements face similar extended issues to the ones handled by the integrated optical switching matrices research field. Thermal stability, tuning-based crosstalk, power consumption, integration density and packaging involving a large count of electrical and optical i/o ports. However, the integration of less than 100 TBUs provides a considerable number of circuit topologies to be designed and limited, in principle, by accumulated IL in the largest circuit synthesis. The integration in silicon of more than 450 thermally tuned TBUs in optical switch networks has been recently demonstrated The current research in the field is focused on alternative tuning mechanisms to reduce the overall power consumption and footprints, TBU geometries and loss optimization, as well as the development of software to drive and control the reconfigurable subsystems. All in all, the arising of general-purpose programmable PICs is a promising candidate to enable cost-effective devices by a reduction of non-recurring engineering costs, shorter times to production and to market, as well as multifunctional and multitask operation.