Diffraction of high-energy X-rays produced at synchrotron sources can provide rapid strain measurements, with high spatial resolution, and good penetrating power. With an uncollimated diffracted beam, through thickness averages of strain can be measured using this technique, which poses an associated rich tomography problem. This paper proposes a Gaussian process (GP) model for three-dimensional strain fields satisfying static equilibrium and an accompanying algorithm for tomographic reconstruction of strain fields from high-energy X-ray diffraction. We present numerical evidence that this method can achieve triaxial strain tomography in three-dimensions using only a single axis of rotation. The method builds upon recent work where the GP approach was used to reconstruct two-dimensional strain fields from neutron based measurements. A demonstration is provided from simulated data, showing the method is capable of rejecting realistic levels of Gaussian noise. Diffraction of X-rays and neutrons allow the study of mechanical stress and strain within crystalline solids where d 0 is the lattice spacing in a strain free sample. Both neutron and conventional X-ray diffraction have limitations; lab-based X-rays sample only a shallow surface layer (typically a few microns), while the characteristic low intensities of neutrons gives rise to long acquisition times and spatial resolutions of 1mm or larger. Modern X-ray synchrotron sources can provide very intense narrow beams of highly penetrating X-ray photons A particular feature of high energy X-rays is that the scattering angle is typically small 2θ < 15 • [22]. This has two implications for the study of strain fields: firstly, that the normal component of strain measured is almost perpendicular to the incident beam; at an angle of 90 • -θ; secondly, the gauge volume is elongated in the direction of the incident beam (typically by a factor of 10 or more). The ability to select small beam cross-sections allows strain profiles To overcome these limitations, a different approach is presented in This problem is also studied by Lionheart and Withers This work is extended in Desai and Lionheart In this paper, a Gaussian process based approach to reconstruct the triaxial strain field from these measurements is presented. This approach enforces that the reconstruction to satisfies the static equilibrium constraints, and is applied to the problem of reconstructing the strain field using single axis tomography with promising results in simulation. Recent work in related fields has demonstrated the use of Gaussian processes (GPs) to model and reconstruct two-dimensional strain fields from time-of-flight neutron transmission measurements This paper makes the following contributions: 1. A Gaussian process model for steady-state, triaxial elastic strain fields in three-dimensions. This is a non-trivial extension of the model presented in Jidling et al 2. A method for applying this model to reconstruct the strain field from high-energy X-ray strain measurements. Results indicate that by assuming equilibrium this approach can reconstruct a triaxial strain field using a single axis of rotation. This could not be achieved using existing methods. This section provides a brief summary of strain measurement using high energy X-ray diffraction. This process is not the primary focus of this work, however the summary provides details pertinent to model the relationship between the measurements and the strain field. A more detailed description can be found in The incident beam with direction n is diffracted within the sample according to Bragg's law at an angle of 2θ forming a shallow cone. The intensity of the diffracted beam is recorded at a detector, with the peak intensity's forming a Debye-Scherrer ring, see Figure For a polychromatic X-ray beam, a diffraction pattern can be fit to a segment of the Debye-Scherrer ring providing a measurement of the average normal strain in the directionκ of the form (1); with a 10 • being suitable for strain measurements where e ∼ N(0, σ 2 n ), (x) is the strain tensor field inside the sample and p is the initial intersection between the beam and the sample. By analysing multiple segments from each Debye-Scherrer ring, each ray provides information about multiple components of strain. For example, assuming that the measurement direction is exactly perpendicular to the beam direction. Then, choosing at least three unique measurement directions, each ray provides information about the strain projected onto the plane perpendicular to the beam. That is, a beam with direction n = [1, 0, 0] T predominantly provides information about yy , yz , and zz . If we make the additional assumption that the measurement directions are perpendicular to the incident beam, then this line of reasoning also leads to the transverse ray transform (TRT) which was proposed by where and I is the identity matrix. Here, Π n Π n is the projection of the strain field onto the plane perpendicular to n. For example, consider that n = [1, 0, 0] T , then Although the TRT represents a more compact measurement model, it requires assuming the measurement directions are perpendicular to the beam direction, which is not quite the case in practice. Hence, (2) has been used as the measurement model in this work. In this work, the strain field is reconstructed using the framework of Bayesian inference. The strain field is modelled as having a probability distribution, this does not mean that the strain field is random, instead it represents our uncertainty in its values. A prior probability distribution is assigned to the strain field, p( ), that represents any knowledge we have before the inclusion of measurements, y. This distribution is then updated by the inclusion of measurements, which are assigned a likelihood p(y| ), using Bayes' rule to give a posterior distribution of the strain: As the strain field must satisfy equilibrium, the prior distribution should incorporate this knowledge. In two dimensions this can be achieved by modelling the Airy's stress function by a Gaussian process (GP) from which the two-dimensional strain field can be defined under an assumption of plane stress or plane strain The following sections present a generalisation of this procedure to three-dimensions and application to reconstructing the strain field from from high energy X-ray diffraction measurements. A brief overview of GPs is provided in Section 3.1. A Gaussian process prior suitable for modelling three-dimensional strain fields is designed in Section 3.2. A likelihood model for high energy X-ray strain measurements is then defined in Section 3.3, allowing the strain field to be reconstructed. For this work, the material should have a randomly distributed polycrystalline structure with no preferred crystal orientation (i.e. no texture) such that the bulk material is isotropic. This section gives a brief description of GPs, for a more detailed description see Rasmussen and Williams where T is the covariance function. The choice of covariance function governs the characteristics of the functions in this distribution-such as their smoothness. Many choices exist for the covariance function and a good summary is available elsewhere A Gaussian process is a generalisation of a multivariate Gaussian in the sense that function values sampled at a finite number of inputs x 1 , . . . , x N are Gaussian distributed; . . . and If a GP prior is used and the measurement likelihood is Gaussian then posterior distribution given by Bayes' rule has a closed form and can be computed using standard Gaussian conditioning. Here, we design a GP prior for strain in threedimensions that intrinsically satisfies static equilibrium. The strain field is defined as the symmetric tensor where x = [x y z] T are the spatial coordinates. This GP will be of the form where ̄ is a vector of the 6 unique components of the strain field. Here, the covariance function for the strain field, K (x, x ) will be designed to ensure that all strain fields belonging to this GP satisfy equilibrium. This is done by specifying a GP prior for a set of potentials known as the Beltrami stress functions. Having done this, a GP prior for the strain field can be derived using the equilibrium equations and Hooke's law. The details of this derivation are as follows. The Beltrami stress functions where and Φ(x, y, z) is the Beltrami stress tensor consisting of six unique scalar potential fields; To improve readability we introduce the following vectorised notation; where the spatial coordinates x, are omitted for brevity. Using this notation we can write Hooke's law which relates the stress and strain fields as where H is the compliance matrix for isotropic materials, ν is Poisson's ratio, and E is Young's modulus. The scaling 1 E can be safely neglected in the methods implementation to provide better numerical scaling. Finally, we can write the mapping from the Beltrami stress functions to the strain field in this vectorised form as where and the superscript is used to denote the set of spatial coordinates on which the operator acts. As this mapping is linear it can be used to define a GP prior on the strain function where the shorthand k i = k i (x, x ) and m i = m i (x) has been used. The mapping (3.2) is applied to give a GP prior for the strain field that will ensure that any estimated strain field satisfies equilibrium; The covariance function for the strain field, K , has correlations between the individual components of strain that ensure any estimated strain field will satisfy equilibrium. Here, without loss of generality Here, we define the likelihood of the X-ray strain measurements p(I | ). In vector form we can write the measurement model as where κ n ), and L x (η) is a considered an operator that maps from the strain function ̄ (x) into the measurements I (η). As this operator is linear, the joint distribution of the strain field at user specified location of interest, ̄ * = ̄ (x * ), and the measurements where K * is the cross covariance between the strains and the measurements and K I is the covariance of the measurements. The cross covariance between the strain ̄ * and a measurement I (η i ) is given by a single application of The posterior distribution of the strain ̄ conditioned on the measurements I is where An analytic solution to the double integral is not known. However, computationally expensive numerical integration can be avoided by using an approximation scheme such as the one described in Section 4.1. It is worth noting that the extension to non-convex geometry is straight forward Two practical aspects need to be considered when implementing the reconstruction algorithm; computational complexity, and hyperparameter selection. The computational complexity of solving Equation (25) is twofold: firstly, the construction of K II requires the evaluation of a double integral for every unique pair of measurements; secondly, the time required to invert K II + σ 2 n I scales with O(N 3 ). X-ray strain tomography problems of the type considered here have a large number of measurements, motivating the use of an approximation scheme. Here, we consider the approximation scheme proposed in where each φ i,k (x) is a basis function and Σ pi,kk is its spectral density; Here, r = x-x , and λ = [λ x j λ y j λ z j ] T . For the squaredexponential covariance function used in Section 5 the spectral density is where σ f , l x , l y , and l z are commonly referred to as hyper-parameters and are discussed in Section 4.2. The parameters L x , L y , L z , and λ are analogous to the frequency and phase of the basis functions. In this work, they were chosen so that the basis functions spanned a region where their spectral densities were greater than a predefined minimum threshold. This helps to ensure numerical stability while capturing the dominant modes of the reconstruction. By concatenating the basis functions we can concisely express the approximation for the covariance function K Φ ; It is now a straight forward application of the mappings (3.2) and This simplifies the problem to the calculation of φ (x * ) and φ I,i (η i ), which are intuitively the basis functions for the strain field and the measurements, respectively, and only require a single application of the mappings. Complete expressions for these basis functions are found in Appendix Appendix A. The posterior mean and covariance are approximated by This avoids forming the covariance matrices, reduces the complexity of the regression to O(Nm 2 ) and also removes the need for numerical derivatives. The covariance functions, assigned to the potential functions, are characterised by their hyperparameters θ. For example, the squared-exponential covariance function has hyperparameters θ = {σ f , l x , l y , l z }; where σ f encodes our prior uncertainty and the length scales l x , l y , and l z provide an assumption of smoothness. The hyperparmaters are selected by maximising the marginal log likelihood, log p(I |{η i }, θ); where K II is a function of θ. For the approximation in Section 4.1 K II is replaced by φ I Σ p φ T I , and expressions for the approximate log likelihood and its derivatives can be found in The method presented is demonstrated on a simulated 3D cantilevered beam example with the strain field given by a superposition of the Saint-Venant approximation to the strain field in the xy-and yz-planes. This is chosen as an appropriate example in the absence of a suitable experimental data set. The strain field is given by where geometry and loading is defined in Figure A convergence study as the number of rotation angles is increased was run and the results are shown in Fig- The results of reconstructing from the measurement sets generated using three and twenty rotation angles are shown in Figure (34) 1 The effective strain is the strain equivalent of von Mises stress sometimes referred to as the Mises effective strain. Numerical simulations were also used to investigate the importance of α on the ability of the method to accurately reconstruct the the strain field. Comparing the accuracy when the strain field was reconstructed from 10 projections with α ranging from 90 to 85 degrees it was found that the specific angle was not important for the proposed method to be able to accurately reconstruct the strain field. For example, using α = 90 • gave a mean relative error of 1.04% compared to 0.99% for α = 85 • . This supports the argument that it is the assumption of equilibrium rather than measurement direction that are not quite perpendicular to the incident beam that allows the proposed method to successfully reconstruct the simulated strain field using single-axis tomography. In addition to the mean value for the reconstructed strain field, Equation 25 also provides a measure of the uncertainty. This can be used to determine where the reconstruction is least certain. For example, the marginal standard deviation of the reconstructed xx component from 20 projections is shown in Figure A Bayesian approach to triaxial strain tomography from high-energy X-ray diffraction measurements has been presented. This approach models the strain field as a Gaussian process such that the resulting reconstruction always satisfies equilibrium. From simulated measurements, this method was found to be capable of accurately reconstructing a full strain field in the presence of realistic levels of measurement noise. These numerical results suggest that it is possible to tomographically reconstruct a full triaxial strain distribution using single axis tomography by assuming equilibrium. While the squared-exponential covariance function proved suitable in this demonstration, other covariance functions, such as the Matérn or rational quadratic, may be more suitable for a particular strain field. The next stage of this work will involve the planning and execution of an experimental demonstration of the technique. The ability to test the algorithm on simulated strain fields will provide guidance in this process. For example, for a given strain field the trade-off between measurement noise, number of projection angles, and spacing of measurements for each projection can be investigated. This work is supported by the Australian Research Council through a Discovery Project Grant (DP170102324). This section provides expressions for the basis functions given in (30) required for the approximation scheme used in Section 4.1. As stated earlier, a set of bases for the strain field is defined by a linear mapping from a set of bases for the Applying the measurement mapping, L(et a i ) to the basis functions for the strain field gives a set of basis functions for the i th measurement; φ I,i (η i ) = L x (η i )φ (p i + ns). (A.4) Which is a linear combination of the line integrals of the partial derivatives of each basis function. Defining 