We investigate subgap quasiparticles of a single level quantum dot coupled to the superconducting and normal leads, whose energy level is periodically driven by external potential. Using the Floquet formalism we determine the quasienergies and analyze redistribution of their spectral weights between individual harmonics upon varying the frequency and amplitude of the driving potential. We also propose feasible spectroscopic methods for probing the in-gap quasiparticles observable in the differential conductance of the charge current averaged over a period of oscillations. Response of a quantum system on some abrupt quench In particular, very interesting effects arise at impurities embedded in superconducting reservoirs, where the bound (Andreev or Yu-Siba-Rusinov) states can appear in the subgap regime. Upon perturbing these impurities by some external periodic field they absorb or emit the field quanta, inducing the higher-order harmonic levels. Such features have been indeed reported experimentally The paper is organized as follows. We start by defining the microscopic model (Sec. II) and next present methodological details to treat the periodic driving (Sec. III). Our main results are presented in Sec. IV. Finally, in Sec. V, we give a summary and brief outlook of open questions. Underlying ideas of the Floquet formalism are outlined in the Appendix. Setup comprising the quantum dot (QD) coupled to the normal (N) and superconducting (SC) reservoirs can be described by the Anderson impurity Hamiltonian The time-dependence enters our setup through where we assume periodic oscillations of the QD energy level ε d (t) = ε d + A cos (ωt). As usually, d σ stands for the creation (annihilation) operator of the QD electrons with spin σ = {↑, ↓}. Oscillations of the energy level ε d (t) are characterized by frequency ω and amplitude A. We assume, that they have no direct influence on electronic states of both external leads which are described by Here c βkσ ) are the creation (annihilation) operators of itinerant electrons with spin σ and momentum k in β = N and SC electrodes. The energy gap of isotropic superconducting reservoir is denoted by ∆. The energies ξ βk = ε βk -μ β are measured with respect to the chemical potentials μ β , which can be detuned μ n -μ s = eV by applying the bias V . The last terms of Hamiltonian (1) stands for hybridization of the QD with external leads In what follows, we shall study the quasiparticle states appearing inside the energy regime |E| ≤ ∆. For simplicity, we assume both hybridizations t β to be constant (momentum-independent). Quantum systems described by the time-periodic Hamiltonians H(t) = H(t + T ), where T = 2π/ω, can be treated within the Floquet formalism. Basic ideas of this procedure are outlined in the Appendix. We extend this treatment onto the present setup, where the proximity induced on-dot pairing mixes the particle with hole degrees of freedom. We shall discuss below how to treat such effects in presence of the periodic driving. The effective spectrum and transport properties of the N-QD-S setup can be obtained using the Keldysh Green's function approach where the upper index ν stands either for the retarded (ν = r), advanced (ν = a) or Keldysh (ν = c) functions. From the Heisenberg equation of motion one obtains where g ν d,d (t, t ′ ) is the (bare) Green's function of isolated QD, whereas G ν βk,dσ (t 1 , t ′ ) denotes the mixed function originating from hybridization of the QD with itinerant electrons of external (β = N , SC) leads. Equation of motion for this mixed Green's function G ν βk,d (t 1 , t ′ ) yields the Dyson relation with the selfenergy matrix The Green's functions and the selfenergies depend on two-time arguments t and t ′ , but such dependence can be substantially simplified owing to the discrete translational invariance f (t, t ′ ) = f (t + nT, t ′ + mT ) [where n, m denote integer numbers] which holds in the steady limit that we are interested in. Time periodicity can be conveniently treated, by transforming t, t ′ to the relative t -t ′ and average time (t + t ′ ) /2 arguments and introducing the Wigner transformation ) with the quasienergy ǫ. Thereby we can recast timeconvolutions appearing in In the next step we diagonalize the bare Green's function g -1 dd (ε) with respect to its Floquet coordinates n, m by the appropriate unitary matrix Λ nl In this basis the retarded/advanced Green's function is simply expressed as where I stands for identity matrix, τ z denotes zcomponent of the Pauli matrix, and iη + is an infinitesimal positive imaginary value. We have chosen the timedependent QD level ε d (t) of a cosine form, therefore the diagonalizing basis defined through Due to completeness of these Bessel functions, we can express the bare Green's function in the following form More detailed derivation of this transformation has been discussed in Refs In the same way we express the selfenergies (9) originating from hybridization of the QD with external leads Since we are mainly interested in the subgap quasiparticles, we make use of the wide-band limit approximation In the Floquet's space both the selfenergies become diagonal. The normal term is simply given as whereas the superconducting contribution is nondiagonal in the Nambu representation In what follows we present some representative numerical results obtained for the periodically oscillating quantum dot, assuming ε d = 0, Γ N = 0.1Γ SC and focusing on the zero temperature limit. Our main interest concerns the subgap quasiparticles and efficiency of the induced on-dot electron pairing. For this reason we start by discussing the superconducting atomic limit ∆ → ∞ when the selfenergy The effective QD spectrum driven by oscillations of the energy level ε d (t) can be characterized by the spectral function (diagonal in the Nambu space) defined as Summation over the diagonal Floquet indices is here equivalent to averaging over the period T . For convenience we shall normalize this function The normal QD (discussed in the Appendix) is characterized by a series of the harmonics ε d + nω (where n stands for positive and negative integer numbers) whose spectral weights vary with the amplitude A. This structure changes qualitatively when the proximity induced on-dot pairing is taken into account. Fig. Such variation of the quasiparticle energies with respect to A is accompanied by considerable redistribution of their spectral weights. We observe that each of the harmonics gain and loose their weights upon varying the amplitude in roughly the same fashion as for the normal quantum dot (see Appendix). Fig. To characterize the induced on-dot pairing we introduce the off-diagonal (in Nambu space) spectral function In Fig. Spectrum of the QD spectrum can be probed experimentally only indirectly, through the transport properties. Let us briefly discuss how to determine the timedependent charge current and its differential conductance. We focus on an adiabatic limit and use the Landauer's technique to describe the current induced in our setup by a small bias V , which detunes the chemical potentials μ N = μ SC + eV . To be specific, we assume the superconducting lead to be grounded μ SC = 0. The charge current flowing from β-th electrode I β (t) = e Ṅβ (t) can be expressed by where factor 2 accounts for contributions from both spins whereas the diagonal elements {11} and {22} correspond to the particle and hole terms, respectively. In the Floquet's space we can recast Eqn. We have computed numerically the time-dependent current 2 ) can be used. In general, we hardly find any relevance of such time-dependent charge currents to effective quasiparticle spectrum of the driven quantum dot. In order to get some correspondence with the effective QD spectrum let us analyze the transport properties averaged over the single period T . The averaged charge current can be obtained from ( We express the lesser Green's function G < d,d (ǫ) by a convolution of the retarded and advanced Green's function, using the selfenergy where μ, ν∈{1, 2}. The lesser selfenergy matrix can be given by where f β (x) = 1/ e (x-μ β )/kB T + 1 is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function for electrons in β-th lead. We have computed the averaged current given by Eqn. Enhancements of the differential conductance perfectly coincide with the energy dependent subgap quasiparticles (presented in Fig. In realistic situations the energy gap ∆ is always finite, usually on the order of a few or fractions of meV. Let us inspect influence of such threshold on the effective quasiparticle spectrum. To be specific, we consider the case ∆ = 0.5ω when the higher-order harmonics are pushed outside the superconducting energy gap window. Fig. We have studied effective spectrum of the single level quantum dot sandwiched between the superconducting and metallic electrodes and periodically driven by an external potential. We have analyzed variation of its quasienergies and spectral weights with respect to the frequency ω and the amplitude A of oscillations. In stark contrast to the normal case (characterized by equidistant quasienergies ε d + lω) we find, that the proximity induced electron pairing gives rise to the splitting of each harmonic level. Magnitude of such splitting is mostly pronounced in the zero-th harmonic state and gradually ceases for the higher harmonics. Distribution of the spectral weight between these split harmonic quasienergies is controlled by the amplitude to frequency ratio, roughly in the same fashion as for the normal case. We have inspected the charge transport properties, establishing that effective quasiparticle spectrum would be accessible via measurements of the Andreev current averaged over a period of driven oscillations. Its differential conductance could verify, both the multi-harmonic quasiparticle energies, their internal splittings, and probe distribution of the spectral weights in each harmonic. We have also predicted unusual (indirect) signatures of the superconducting energy gap ∆ showing up in the quasiparticle spectrum. For sufficiently large amplitude of the oscillations (exceeding the energy gap ∆ threshold) the subgap regime is poisoned by incoherent background states, corresponding to the short-time living quasiparticles. They emerge predominantly near such values of the amplitude to frequency ratio, where the spectral weight of the zero-th harmonic vanishes. This behavior goes hand in hand with suppression of the on-dot pairing, therefore it might be empirically detectable using the Josephson-type tunneling configurations. We hope that verification of our predictions should be feasible with the presently available experimental techniques. Amongst important aspects unresolved in this paper let us point out the role of electron correlations. Interplay between the electron pairing and the local Coulomb repulsion might induce a changeover/transition of the ground state between the BCS-like singlet to the singly occupied doublet configuration. External driving potential might affect such phases in qualitatively different manner. This nontrivial issue, however, is beyond a scope of the present study and shall be addressed separately with use of appropriate many-body methods. Fig. 6 8 10 12Order parameter A/ωΓ SC =1.0ω Γ SC =0.5ω Γ SC =0.4ω Γ SC =0.3ω Γ SC =0.2ω Γ SC =0.1ω