Complex oxide heterointerfaces and van der Waals heterostructures present two versatile but intrinsically different platforms for exploring emergent quantum phenomena and designing new functionalities. The rich opportunity offered by the synergy between these two classes of materials, however, is yet to be charted. Here, we report an unconventional nonlinear optical filtering effect resulting from the interfacial polar alignment between monolayer MoS 2 and a neighboring ferroelectric oxide thin film. The second harmonic generation response at the heterointerface is either substantially enhanced or almost entirely quenched by an underlying ferroelectric domain wall depending on its chirality, and can be further tailored by the polar 2 domains. Unlike the extensively studied coupling mechanisms driven by charge, spin, and lattice, the interfacial tailoring effect is solely mediated by the polar symmetry, as well explained via our density functional theory calculations, pointing to a new material strategy for the functional design of nanoscale reconfigurable optical applications. The heterointerface between two functional materials presents a powerhouse of various emergent quantum phenomena and novel functionalities. Two notable examples are the complex oxide epitaxial interfaces When 2D TMDC is interfaced with a ferroelectric gate, the spontaneous ferroelectric polarization offers the unique opportunity to induce nonvolatile charge modulation in the channel. In this work, we report an unconventional nonlinear optical filtering effect enabled by the polar symmetry of 1L MoS 2 and a neighboring ferroelectric PbZr 0.2 Ti 0.8 O 3 (PZT) thin film. The heterostructure exhibits either strong enhancement or substantial quenching of the reflected second harmonic generation (SHG) response at the ferroelectric domain walls (DWs), which reveals the intricate coupling of the polar axis of MoS 2 with the chiral rotation of the surface dipole at the DWs, as modeled via our density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Unlike the extensively studied interfacial coupling mechanisms driven by charge, spin, and lattice, Characterization of 1L MoS 2 /PZT heterostructures. Figure Figure Reflected SHG response of 1L MoS 2 /PZT heterostructures. We then mapped the SHG response of the 1L MoS 2 /PZT heterostructure. Figure The horizontal DWs, more interestingly, exhibit alternating enhancement and suppression of the SHG signals. At the set of DWs labelled as 1, 3, and 5, the SHG response is about two times of those on the P up and P down domains. At the other set of DWs (labelled as 2, 4, and 6), the SHG response is substantially quenched. In Fig. The alternately enhanced or suppressed SHG signals can be well correlated to the in-plane polarization of the DWs. A clear difference between the odd-and even-numbered DWs is the arrangement of the domains that they separate. The odd DWs are accompanied with top P up and bottom P down domains, opposite to the distribution for the even DWs. To conform to the bulk polarization change, the surface polarization at the vicinities of the odd and even DWs is expected to have opposite chirality (Fig. ) with the in-plane polarization at the PZT DWs (P ⃗ ). Next, we compared the SHG response of 1L MoS 2 interfaced with 20 nm, 30 nm, and 50 nm PZT films (Supplementary Figure Theoretical modeling of interfacial polar coupling. To examine the feasibility of the interfacial polar coupling scenario, we exploited a phenomenological model to estimate the net in-plane polarization at the DW based on the TEM study in Ref. [35], considering a triangleshaped flux-closure domain structure that hosts continuous electric dipole rotations at the surface of a 180 o DW (Fig. Here we assumed the maximum width w and depth h of the triangle domain to be 2.5 nm and 3 nm, respectively, based on the TEM result, We then considered the polar property of 1L H-MoS 2 , which belongs to the D 3h point group. The polar displacement in the unit cell can generate three equal polarizations along those three polar directions, leading to zero net polarization. However, when one of the polar axis is coupled to a neighboring dipole, the rotational symmetry is lifted. Using DFT, we estimated the polarization of MoS 2 along one polar direction to be P 85.5 μC cm (Supplementary Note 4). Using the thickness of 1L MoS 2 of h 3.11 Å, we obtained the dipole moment per unit length for the area above the flux-closure DW in PZT (Fig. which is on the same order of p ∥ estimated for the DW in PZT (Eq. 1). While the precise value of the polarization may vary, this simple model naturally explains the major features of our observation. When one of the polar axes of MoS 2 is aligned with the in-plane polarization of PZT at the DW regions, as for the odd DWs, their excited interfacial SH dipole fields are coherently coupled, To further test the proposed scenario based on the interfacial polar coupling between MoS 2 and the DW, we created square domains on PZT with different stacking angles (θ) with respect to the same MoS 2 top layer. Figure x-direction. As shown in Fig. The net SHG response for each of these DWs can be well modeled using the nonlinear electromagnetic theory, considering the second-order nonlinear optical susceptibility tensors for the MoS 2 /PZT heterointerface. As the thickness of MoS where d d d d . For the tetragonal PZT thin films with 4mm point group symmetry, the d-tensor can be written as: where d d , and d 0.9d . The tensor elements for PZT were obtained by averaging the calculated and experimental values. As the lateral polarization for the flux-closure domain is comparable with the bulk polarization of PZT, we obtained the d-tensors for the four DWs (Top-DW, Bottom-DW, Left-DW, and Right-DW) via a rotation matrix transformation (Supplementary Note 5): 31 The interfacial composite tensors at the DWs can thus be expressed as: Furthermore, we derived the explicit expressions of interfacial SHG tensors at the four DWs as a function of stacking angle θ, which are given in the Supplementary Equation To simplify the calculation, we assumed that the maximum SHG intensities from MoS 2 and fluxclosure domain of PZT are the same, which is reasonable given their closely matched dipole moments. Figure . It clearly illustrates that the signal contrast is either tailored by the uniformly polarized domains or the DWs in these two detection modes. To understand the origin for this ferroelectric polarization-dependent SHG response, we quantitatively compared the signal intensity in 1L MoS 2 /PZT heterostructures with different PZT layer thicknesses for both detection modes (Supplementary Figure In summary, we report an interface-driven nonlinear optical filtering effect in 1L MoS 2 /ferroelectric heterostructures. The tailoring effect for the reflected SHG signal is solely determined by the polar symmetry of MoS 2 and PZT DW. The transmitted SHG signal, in sharp contrast, is sensitively tuned by the out-of-plane ferroelectric polarization rather than the DW, which is attributed to the bulk state of PZT. Our study points to a new material platform for functional design of novel interfacial optical response via ferroelectric domain patterning. This approach can be widely applied to vdW materials and heterostructures with broken inversion symmetry, paving the way for achieving nanoscale electrically programmable optical filtering applications. Preparation and characterization of epitaxial PZT. We deposited 20-50 nm thick epitaxial PZT films on 10 nm La 0.67 Sr 0.33 MnO 3 (LSMO) buffered (001) SrTiO 3 substrates (5 mm×5 mm×0.5 mm) via off-axis radio frequency magnetron sputtering. The LSMO layer was deposited at 650 °C in 120 mTorr process gas composed of Ar and O 2 (ratio 2:1). We then deposited the PZT layer in situ at 490 °C in 150 mTorr process gas (Ar:O 2 = 2:1). The PZT films are c-axis oriented with out-of-plane polar axis (Supplementary Figure Preparation of MoS 2 /PZT heterostructure. Mono-and few-layer MoS 2 flakes were mechanically exfoliated on elastomeric films (Gel-Film ® WF×4 1.5mil from Gel-Pak) from bulk single crystals. Selected flakes were transferred on top of the patterned domain structures using an all-dry transfer technique. The PFM studies were carried out using a Bruker Multimode 8 AFM. The measurements were performed in contact mode using conductive PtIr-coated tips (SCM-PIT, spring constant k of 1-5 Nm -1 , resonant frequency f o of 60-100 kHz). The coercive voltage of the PZT films is about +2 V (-3 V) for the P up (P down ) state (Supplementary Figure Raman and PL measurements. Raman and PL measurements were performed on a micro-Raman system (Renishaw InVia plus, Renishaw) at room temperature. An Ar+ laser of about 200 μW was focused to a 1 μm beam spot on the sample at normal incidence. Both Raman and PL spectra were collected in reflection mode through a 50× objective lens with an accumulation time of 10 s. The experimental setup for SHG imaging is shown in Fig. the PMTs, the excitation laser beam was filtered out by an IR cut filter (OD >4 @ 692-1100 nm). A long working distance (WD) condenser (NA0.8/WD5.7 mm) was used for the transmission signal collection. In the LSM, the transmission and reflection modes share the same focus plane using the same type of objective lens (NA1.05/water immersed/WD2.0 mm, 25×), so both measurements can be performed simultaneously. The focusing to the MoS 2 /PZT interface was performed through the reflected mode. The signal was first collected with no analyzer inserted, and then with an analyzer inserted in different angles with respect to the polarizer orientation. The analyzer is a Thorlab LPVISE100-A with operating wavelength range of 400-700 nm. The band-pass filter used for SHG imaging is a Semrock FF01-390/40 (T avg > 93% @ 370-410 nm, center wavelength of ~ 390 nm, and bandwidth of ~ 40 nm). The diffraction limit of the excitation laser beam (spot size) was estimated to be λ 2NA ⁄ 380 nm. Due to the second order nonlinearity of the SHG light, the spatial resolution was estimated to be ~300 nm. The SHG mapping plots, unless otherwise specified, are the raw data collected by the PMTs without modification. During the SHG measurements, the PMTs in the LSM were set on the photon count mode, so the responses of the PMTs are proportional to the number of actual SHG photons detected by the PMTs, but are not calibrated to the light intensity in units of W/m 2 . The SHG mapping results were expressed in terms of arbitrary units (a.u.), and were proportional to the actual SHG intensity detected by the PMTs. The intensity level can be directly compared if they were taken at the same laser power. Materials and Nanoscience, which are supported by the National Science Foundation under Award ECCS: 1542182, and the Nebraska Research Initiative. 