Water-based inks, containing nanometric NiO and YSZ particles in 66/34 vol. % ratio, are produced by colloidal stabilization of a binary dispersion obtained via continuous hydrothermal synthesis at supercritical conditions, i.e. 280 bar and 400°C. The method yields single-crystal particles with diameter ≤ 10 nm for both phases in a single-step process, achieving a highly mixed composite. Two different approaches are applied to formulate inks printable with piezoelectric printheads, i.e. an electrostatic and an electrosteric stabilization path. The use of the electrosteric dispersant results in colloids with superior stability > 200 days, more uniform thin films and finely nanostructured porous cermet films with thickness below 500 nm, after reducing NiO to Ni. Particles coarsening to 50-150 nm is obtained at 1000°C, accompanied by a shrinkage of ca. 43 % in thickness without the formation of cracks or delamination of the zirconia substrates. The investigation of functional nanometric ceramics for energy related devices is spreading to several technologies such as photovoltaics Several different methods are available nowadays for the direct synthesis of nanomaterials, such as coprecipitation, sol-gel, and solvo/hydro-thermal synthesis An additional peculiarity of the Continuous Hydrothermal Synthesis (CHS) is the possibility to operate at supercritical conditions, i.e. scH2O: T > 374°C, p > 221 bar. Under such parameters, the dielectric constant and viscosity of water drop to 20 and 30 μPa s respectively, resulting in a suitable environment for producing dispersed nanoparticles with a narrow particle size distributions Drop-on-demand (DOD) inkjet printing is based on the digitally controlled deposition of droplets. In a typical DOD printer, hundreds to thousands of droplets ranging from picoliters (10 -12 L) to nanoliters (10 -9 L) are jetted at high frequencies (thousands of Hz) to print features in the tens of microns range. In the last 20 years, this technique has been investigated for the deposition of metals and ceramic materials due to the advances in the formulation of particle-containing inks Consequently, by inkjet printing it is possible to address the deposition of ng of ceramic particles at high spatial resolution However, to achieve such processing performances, it is crucial to control the colloidal properties of the ink, especially in the case of nanocolloids, which are known to show unique rheology In our previous work, the formulation of metal oxide nanocolloids produced by CHS has been shown in the case of Yttria Stabilized Zirconia (YSZ) The continuous hydrothermal reactor at DTU Energy and the synthesis protocol for NiO/YSZ have been described previously The stream of reactants and scH2O was re-heated to 385°C after mixing, with the aid of a re-heater. The products were eventually cooled down to room temperature and the pressure released. After collection, the particles were concentrated by centrifugation and re-dispersed in clean DI water several times. The dispersion obtained after this step will be referred to as starting dispersion and a pH indicator was used to measure a pH of 10 < pH < 11. The X-ray diffraction characterization was carried out with a Bruker D8 (Cu Kα radiation) measuring with a 0.05° / 5 s step size / step time. The as-produced particles were analyzed by TEM microscopy, using a Jeol 3000F microscope. The final phase ratio between NiO and YSZ was determined by EDX using a Zeiss Merlin SEM equipped with a Bruker XFlash 6 EDX detector. A few droplets of the starting dispersion were casted onto a microscopy stub covered with carbon tape and let dry. The dried material was analyzed by acquiring EDX spectra from three different areas. Isopropanol (Sigma Aldrich, analytical grade, IPA), propylene glycol (Sigma, analytical grade, 1,2-PG), 1-propanol (VWR Chemicals, Emsure, ACS Reag. Ph Eur), Dispex A40 (Ciba-BASF, UK), nitric acid (69% VWR Chemicals, Emsure, ACS Reag. Ph Eur) were used as received. For the electrostatic stabilization studies (Ink1), IPA, 1,2-PG and the starting dispersion were mixed in a 1:1:1 volume proportion. Ink1 was mixed for 15 minutes at 35% amplitude in a Sonics Vibra Cell 505 sonicator in the "Cup horn" configuration with 5 s pulses alternated with 5 s at rest. In the case of electrosteric stabilization (Ink2), the dispersion was sonicated with a Hielscher UP200ST sonicator using a tip configuration and applying 120 s bursts at 50% amplitude upon each addition of Dispex A40. The ink bottle was kept immersed in water to avoid overheating. Prior to that, the pH was lowered to 8.5 using HNO3 and the pH was confirmed a pHenomenal pH 1000 L pH-meter. The particle size distribution was measured with dynamic light scattering (DLS) and laser diffraction to cover the whole range of particles and agglomerates. A Malvern Zetasizer was employed for the DLS measurements and the samples were prepared by diluting the starting dispersion to 0.1% wt using the same solvent composition and adjusting the pH to desired values by adding HNO3. The pH values waere measured with a Metrohm 744 pH-meter. Laser diffraction measurements of the particle size distribution (PSD) were carried out with a Beckman Coulter, LS 13320. The viscosities of the inks were measured using a SV-1 A series viscometer (A&D Instruments Limited) and an Anton Paar MCR 302 rheometer in rotational mode, considering the viscosity value at a shear rate of 1000 s -1 . All the measurements were carried out at room temperature. The surface tension was measured with a bubble pressure tensiometer (BP50, KRÜSS) and a drop shape analyzer DSA-30 (Krüss) in pendant droplet geometry. The printability parameter Z was calculated for comparing the properties of the inks, as reported in previous publications Solid loading of the dispersions was measured by DTA/TG performed on the starting dispersion using a STA 409 PG (Netzsch) at a constant rate of 10 K min -1 until a maximum temperature of 500°C under air. Inks were jetted and printed using two printers: a Pixdro LP50 and a Fujifilm Dimatix DMP-2850 both equipped with the same DMC disposable piezoelectric printheads from Dimatix. These printheads have 16 nozzles of 21.5 μm in diameter for jetting droplets with a nominal volume of 10 pL. According to the printhead specification, the best performances are achieved using inks with a viscosity of 10 mPa s and a surface tension of 30 mN m -1 . For Ink1, the waveform actuating the piezoelectric elements responsible for the droplet ejection was optimized starting from a standard trapezoidal pulse. This waveform was characterized by a jetting segment of 4-7 μs, a dwell segment of 10 μs at 40-60V and fall time 5 μs. A jetting frequency of 1000 Hz was used for all the tests. A splat spacing of 63 μm was employed for printing the multi-layered films. For Ink2, a sigmoidal waveform was applied with a total pulse duration of ca. 11 μs and maximum voltage between 13 and 18 V. In this waveform, the jetting pulse is preceded by a filling pulse where the piezo element is moved in the opposite direction with a potential of -10 V. Multi-layers were printed with a 40 μm droplet spacing. All the samples were printed onto in-house produced 8%mol YSZ (TZ-8Y powder from Tosoh) pre-sintered substrates. Before printing, Ink1 was filtered using a 700 nm mesh syringe filter and Ink2 was filtered using a 1.3 μm mesh syringe filter. The droplet radius and eventually their volume was determined by image analysis. The printed layers were sintered in air using the following thermal cycle: RT -600°C at 15°C h -1 ; dwell for 2h; 600°C -800°C, 1000°C or 1295°C at 60°C h -1 ; dwell for 6h; cooling down at 100°C h -1 . The sintered materials were treated overnight at 800°C with a H2/N2 9% vol flow for the reduction of NiO to Ni. The resulting microstructures were analyzed using a Zeiss Merlin SEM and a FEI Teneo SEM. Porosity was estimated by image analysis. The processing of NiO/YSZ began with the binary material synthesis of the two phases by continuous hydrothermal synthesis. Fig. The morphology of the as-produced nanoparticles was analysed by TEM microscopy (fig. The particle size of the NiO/YSZ composite was comprised between 4 and 10 nm, with NiO forming 40% smaller particles in average, compared to YSZ. Particles of the two materials were identified in the micrograph by comparing the measured lattice spacing with the position of the diffraction peaks. Three peaks were chosen: (111) and (220) for YSZ and (200) for NiO, due to their distance from other reflections. By measuring the fringe spacing of the particles in the TEM images, it was possible to associate them to the aforementioned peaks and identify YSZ or NiO particles. In fig. For synthesizing NiO particles with size < 10 nm, KOH needed to be added at the mixing stage, where it acted as mineralizer and reduced the NiO particle diameter Two different stabilization strategies were investigated, as shown in fig. In the electrosteric strategy to reach Ink2, different amounts of Dispex A40, the ammonium salt of a polyacrilic acid, were added directly to the starting dispersion, as it can be seen in fig. The dispersions stabilized by these two strategies were then investigated for their direct use for inkjet printing. Among the colloids stabilized electrostatically, the dispersion at pH 9 was selected as it fulfilled all printing requirements. Viscosity, surface tension and density were measured and the obtained values are reported in table 1. The σ and η values fit the printhead specifications and the printability parameter Z lay in the optimal range between 1 and 10. This ink will be referred to as Ink1. Differently, a surface tension of 60 mN m -1 was measured for the colloid stabilized by the second approach, hence, 30% wt of 1-propanol was added for decreasing σ to 25 mN m -1 . The resulting ink showed a lower viscosity than Ink1, with a Z value of 11, see table Separated splats were printed to define the spatial resolution of the process. A splat diameter of ca. 50 μm was measured for Ink1 (fig. (fig. The continuous films were used to study the material behaviour during the sintering and thermochemical reduction of NiO. Films printed with both inks were sintered in air at 1000°C and SEM analyses were carried out to observe the resulting microstructures (fig. Differently, Ink2 formed crack-free films on a centimetre-size scale after sintering at 1000 ° C, see fig. After comparing the two strategies, samples printed with Ink2 were chosen for their better microstructure to investigate in detail the last processing step, i.e. thermal treatments. In particular, the microstructural analyses were carried out after the reduction of NiO to metallic Ni in order to correlate the sintering temperature to the microstructure of the final cermet. Films produced by printing Ink2 were sintered at three different temperatures, 800, 1000 and 1295°C in air and were subsequently reduced in a N2/H2 atmosphere at 800°C for 18h. Fig. The mass diffusion and particles coarsening led to a shrinkage of the film with a subsequent reduction in thickness to 250 -350 nm (fig. to prevent the diffusion of YSZ. A binary NiO/YSZ composite with volume ratio 66/34 was synthesized in a single step process through CHS. Despite the formation of the two materials took place simultaneously, the final composition of the composite is close to the targeted one, with only 2.5% vol less of NiO than the stoichiometry of the precursor solution. Well-mixed particles were produced with a diameter of 4-10 nm for YSZ, and 3-5 nm for NiO. Printable inks were formulated by stabilizing the synthesis product with two approaches, electrostatic and electrosteric stabilization. The ink produced by electrosteric stabilization resulted in more uniform films and showed an ink stability for > 200 days on the shelf. Therefore, the application of an electrosteric stabilization was more suitable for the deposition of NiO/YSZ nanostructured layers. After sintering at 800°C and reduction of NiO to Ni, films of 450-600 nm thickness were obtained. The material underwent shrinkage of 43% along the cross-section at 1000°C, associated with the coarsening of the particles to a diameter of 50-150 nm. Further increasing the sintering temperature to 1295°C led to the diffusion of the printed YSZ in the substrate. These results highlighted the high mass diffusion of these nanomaterials, and indicated that for keeping a nanostructured material, sintering temperatures as low as 800°C had to be used. 