Si photonics has an immense potential for the development of compact and low-loss opto-electronic oscillators (OEO), with applications in radar and wireless communications. However, current Si OEO have shown a limited performance. Si OEO relying on direct conversion of intensity modulated signals into the microwave domain yield a limited tunability. Wider tunability has been shown by indirect phase-modulation to intensity-modulation conversion, requiring precise control of the phase-modulation. Here, we propose a new approach enabling Si OEOs with wide tunability and direct intensity-modulation to microwave conversion. The microwave signal is created by the beating between an optical source and single sideband modulation signal, selected by an add-drop ring resonator working as an optical bandpass filter. The tunability is achieved by changing the wavelength spacing between the optical source and resonance peak of the resonator. Based on this concept, we experimentally demonstrate microwave signal generation between 6 GHz and 18 GHz, the widest range for a Si-based OEO. Moreover, preliminary results indicate that the proposed Si OEO provides precise refractive index monitoring, with a sensitivity of 94350 GHz/RIU and a potential limit of detection of only 10 8 RIU, opening a new route for the implementation of high-performance Si photonic sensors. The generation of broadband and low noise microwave and millimeter wave signals is important for many applications, including among others, radars, wireless communications, optical signal processing, warfare systems, and modern instrumentation The main idea behind this approach is to control the frequency of the microwave signal by the wavelength spacing between the laser source and the resonance wavelength of the resonator. Since this spacing can be changed either by sweeping the wavelength of the laser or by shifting the resonance peak of the RR, this approach yields a simple tunability mechanism. To demonstrate the proposed operation principle, we used an integrated Si add-drop RR and external intensity modulator, photodetector and microwave circuitry (see Fig. A 450 nm wide strip waveguide was chosen to ensure single-mode operation near 1.54 μm wavelength, with a resonator length L of 1 mm. In the design of the RR, adiabatic bends From the corresponding frequency of the laser and resonance wavelength, we calculated the beating frequency, i.e. f b =|f 0 -f R |. The evolution of the oscillation signal (f osc ) as a function of the beating frequency is shown in Fig. To evaluate the performance of the proposed tunable OEO, its phase noise characteristics have been measured for all the generated signals (see Fig. Since the proposed OEO configuration had an oscillation frequency dependent on the refractive index environment of the RR waveguides, we have tested its characteristics for application in measuring optical index variations The variation in the optical index from the collected optical spectra was estimated as 4n e f f = n e f f .4l /l In summary, we have proposed and experimentally demonstrated a new approach for the implementation of widely tunable Si OEO. Previously reported Si OEO relied on direct conversion of intensity modulation to the microwave domain, with limited tunability, or indirect phase-modulation to intensity modulation conversion. Here, we show a direct conversion scheme providing wide tunability. In the proposed scheme, the microwave signal is created by the beating between a laser light source and a single sideband modulation signal selected by an add-drop ring resonator working as an optical bandpass filter. The microwave frequency is determined by the wavelength separation between the source and the ring resonance, providing simple tunability by sweeping the laser wavelength. Capitalizing on this concept, we demonstrate microwave signal generation between 5.9 GHz and 18.2 GHz, only limited here in the bandwidth of the employed RF amplifier. This is the widest microwave generation span reported for a Si-based OEO. Additionally, a low phase noise level of -110 dBc/Hz at 1 MHz offset frequency is achieved for all microwave frequencies, illustrating the potential of the approach for the generation of stable high oscillation frequency signals. Furthermore, we extended this approach for refractive index sensing application, harnessing high spectral resolution in the microwave domain. We have measured a sensitivity of 94350 GHz/RIU, 40 times better than state-of-the-art Si counterparts microwave photonic silicon refractive index sensor The patterns were lithographically defined in a 100 nm ZEP-520A photoresist by using e-beam lithography. After lithography, the patterns were transferred using ICP etching with SF 6 and C 4 F 8 gases. Following the waveguide fabrication, a 2 μm thick PMMA layer was deposited over the chip surface for protection. For the optical characterization of the ring resonators a tunable laser was coupled to the input waveguide through an input grating coupler with a properly adjusted coupling angle and extracted the same way from an output grating. The grating couplers were optimized for TM polarization, yielding a fiber to fiber optical transmission of -10.5 dB at 1540 nm wavelength. A polarization controller (PC) was used to set a proper polarization at the input of the grating.