Real-time, time-dependent density functional theory (RT-TDDFT) has gained popularity as a first-principles approach to study a variety of excited-state phenomena such as optical excitations and electronic stopping. Within RT-TDDFT simulations, the gauge freedom of the time-dependent electronic orbitals can be exploited for numerical and scientific convenience while the unitary transformation does not alter physical properties calculated from the quantum dynamics of electrons. Exploiting this gauge freedom, we demonstrate propagation of maximally localized Wannier functions within RT-TDDFT. We illustrate its great utility through a number of examples including its application to optical excitation in extended systems using the so-called length gauge, interpreting electronic stopping excitation, and simulating electric field-driven quantized charge transport. We implemented the approach within our plane-wave pseudopotential RT-TDDFT module of the QB@LL code, and performance of the implementation is also discussed. Density functional theory (DFT), based on the Hohenberg-Kohn theorem 1 , is perhaps the most widely used approach to calculate properties of matter from first principles. However, DFT is limited to ground state properties, and many of the physical, chemical, and biological processes of interest in modern science and technology involve excited state dynamics. Such processes include photo-excitation in dye sensitized solar cells Currently, time-dependent density functional theory, based on the Runge-Gross theorem The real-time propagation approach to time-dependent density functional theory (RT-TDDFT) provides an alternative to LR-TDDFT. Since some of the first uses of real-time propagation approaches in the 1990s, RT-TDDFT has gained popularity for a variety of reasons Recently, several RT-TDDFT implementations have exploited the gauge freedom inherent in the timedependent Kohn Sham (TDKS) equations that underly RT-TDDFT calculations. Under arbitrary, unitary, gauge transformations, the physical properties of the electron dynamics are unchanged, but certain gauge transformations allow for reformulations of the TDKS equations that can be advantageous in certain physical and numerical situations Another interesting example of gauge transformations in RT-TDDFT, demonstrated in recent works by Lin and co-workers, is the propagation of electron dynamics in the parallel transport gauge In this work, we exploit gauge freedom in two regards: We represent the KS orbitals in the gauge of maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWFs), and, as it naturally follows, we represent electric fields in the length gauge corresponding to the formulation of finite fields as scalar potentials. The foundational implementation of RT-TDDFT in the QB@LL branch of the Qbox code The Runge-Gross theorem 5 allows us to describe the quantum dynamics of a system evolving from a given initial state through a time-evolving electron probability density. This extension of the Hohenberg-Kohn theorem 1 , formulated in the time domain, gave rise to the widely successful time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT), now frequently used for excited state calculations and simulations. As in ground state DFT, practical TDDFT calculations rely on equations expressed in terms of a system of non-interacting Kohn-Sham (KS) particles in an effective KS potential. The timedependent Kohn-Sham equations (TDKS) are as follows: In Equation (1), T is the kinetic energy operator is the sum of the Hartree (H) potential and the exchange-correlation (XC) potential, which is derived from a universal XC functional E XC [ρ]. The electron density ρ here is expressed as the sum of square amplitudes of the occupied KS orbitals φ i (labeled by the state index i). The total energy at time t can be expressed as This energy functional of the time-dependent density can be shown to obey energy conservation when the so-called adiabatic approximation 66 is adopted, which provides a useful observable for validating numerical implementations and practical simulations While the majority of applications of TDDFT remain within the linear-response formulation of TDDFT (LR-TDDFT), this real-time propagation approach (RT-TDDFT) has become increasingly popular in recent years. In a RT-TDDFT calculation, the work entails solving a set of time-dependent KS equations, which are non-linear partial differential equations, in time, for given initial conditions. The time dependence of the external potential in the TDKS system can arise explicitly and implicitly from a variety of sources, depending on the phenomenon of interest. For example, in applications of RT-TDDFT to study electronic stopping processes In the KS and TDKS equations, a Bloch representation form naturally arises in extended systems, in which periodic boundary conditions are adapted where u nk (r, t) is the periodic part of the TDKS function, n is the eigenstate index, and k is the Brillouin zone vector. By preserving the electron probability density from the KS single-particle orbitals, any unitary transformation of the above Bloch functions gives an equivalent physical description of the system. Thus, one can apply a unitary transformation to the Bloch functions that results in a representation in a set of "Wannier functions" (WFs) where the Wannier functions w nR are indexed with a band-like index n located in the lattice-periodic cell R with a real-space cell volume Ω. There exists a gauge freedom in this procedure due to the fact that one can apply an arbitrary phase transformation e iθn(k) to the Bloch orbitals without changing the physical observables of the system. However, in terms of the resultant WFs, such a transformation to the Bloch orbitals could alter the shapes and spreads of the corresponding WFs. Thus, due to this gauge freedom, in this most general definition, the WFs are not unique In order to address this nonuniqueness issue, a variety of schemes have been proposed, including projec-tion methods Because the transformation between Bloch and MLWF states is unitary, both representations comprise equally valid descriptions of the electronic band subspace where this equation can also be written in terms of Wannier functions as where w l (r, t) is the time-dependent MLWF (TD-MLWF) with a band-like index l, where U M L is the unitary operator that ensures the maximal localization: where the unitary transformation matrix U lm minimizes the spread functional where the quantum mechanical position operator r is defined generally even for extended systems where L = R is the cell dimension. The unitary operator inEquation (7) does not change the quantum dynamics governed by the time-dependent electron density, and therefore it does not affect physical observables. The algorithmic details of the unitary transformation matrix calculation are discussed later in the "Implementation in QB@LL" section. One of the central motivations for carrying out this transformation to MLWFs is that it allows for the calculation of electric polarization in extended periodic systems. While simple formulas exist for the calculation of electric dipoles of molecular systems with localized wavefunctions, these formulas cannot generally be extended to periodic systems in which the Bloch wavefunctions are delocalized in real space. In extended systems, the analog to the electric dipole moment is the electric polarization, defined as the electric dipole moment per unit volume. While the calculation of this quantity for periodic systems may seem intuitive, the arbitrary choice between different valid unit cells can result in contradictory results for the electric polarization. This infamous problem was elegantly solved by Resta MLWFs have been used in the context of groundstate DFT to calculate the adiabatic stationary resonant state of an insulating material in static electric fields While it is relatively straight-forward to perform RT-TDDFT calculations with time-varying external potentials caused by ionic motion, as has been done in RT-TDDFT studies of electronic stopping where E(t)and r are the time-dependent electric field and the quantum-mechanical position operator, respectively. However, the added potential makes the Hamiltonian incompatible with periodic boundary conditions (PBC) as needed for modeling extended systems. Thus, instead of this length gauge formulation, it is common to move to a different gauge in electromagnetism. The electric field can be equivalently represented as the magnetic flux by the vector potential. In literature, RT-TDDFT simulations of periodic systems with homogeneous electric field employ this socalled velocity-gauge formulation In the above velocity gauge, the Hamiltonian associated with Equation ( Including the unitary operator U M L here, as in Equation (7), ensures that the Wannier functions remain maximally localized during the propagation, and this allows us to use the length gauge for applying a homogeneous electric field even when periodic boundary conditions are adapted. In practice, preserving the maximal locality of the Wannier functions enable us to easily calculate the positions of the MLWF centers at each time step via the diagonal elements of the quantum-mechanical position operator matrices (discussed in more detail in the "Maximal Localization Procedure". See Equation ( The properties of insulating crystals in static electric fields can be calculated via the iterative determination of field-dependent WFs through the minimization of a socalled "electric enthalpy" functional Where the dynamic electronic polarization P el (t) is given by the valence-band Berry phase 88,90,96 Where u n,k are the Bloch functions characterized by a band index n. In this time-dependent case, we do not assume that changes in the Hamiltonian are adiabatic. Instead, Equation ( where the dynamic polarization is recast in real space as the vector sum of the charge centers of mass of the ML-WFs (MLWFCs), w i which correspond to the expectation values of the quantum mechanical position operator r for a periodic system. Here, the location of the MLWFC is indeterminate modulus the lattice vector R, and consequently the dynamic Berry-phase polarization P el (t) is also indeterminate mod -2eR Ω . This uncertainty is the so-called "quantum of polarization". Thus, as described in the modern theory of polarization, it is actually the change in polarization that is the physical quantity that needs to be measured. Using MLWFs, one can obtain this physically intuitive definition of the polarization, which is expressed in terms of the geometric centers of charge of the MLWFs (often called "Wannier centers", or WCs). As illustrated by Equation ( The theoretical framework laid out above is general and allows for arbitrarily strong and rapid variations of the homogeneous electric field. Consequently, one can perform RT-TDDFT calculations to study systems (both molecular and extended) under photo irradiation (i.e., photo excitation), ion irradiation (i.e., electronic stopping), and static electric fields on an equal footing. As mentioned earlier, it should be noted that the underlying derivation of the dynamic polarization as a nonadiabatic Berry phase requires that the initial state be "Wannierrepresentable" (WR), as described in Ref. With access to dynamic current, one can obtain the frequency-dependent conductivity and also dielectric function within linear response theory. For a system under a homogeneous perturbing field E(t) in the ν-direction, and for the time-dependent current in the μ-direction, the frequency dependent conductivity is obtained as where E(ω) is the Fourier transform of the applied electric field. For extended periodic systems, the frequency dependent dielectric function is related to the conductivity via where T r[σ(ω)] is the trace of the complex conductivity tensor. For extended systems, the imaginary part of this dielectric function is directly related to the optical absorption, whereas the real part is related to dispersion. For isolated systems, the macroscopic dielectric function is not well-defined, and instead the convention is to describe optical absorption in terms of the dipole strength function: where σ μν (ω) is generally referred to as the frequencydependent polarizability in the case of isolated systems In practice, however, due to the finite integration time step, the field profile is actually that of a "boxcar" function, and its Fourier transform results in a sinc function. An additional complication is that this approach can cause some difficulties in the numerical integration of the TDKS equations In practice, of course, for a finite amount of time T . Consequently, the abrupt end of the oscillations in the polarization at the end of the numerical simulation leads to artificial "wiggles" in the calculated spectrum. The prominence of such numerical artifacts can be lessened to some degree by employing a damping function in the Fourier transform. A simple choice for the damping function, which we employ in this work, is the damping function f (t) = e -γt where γ is a damping constant. For RT-TDDFT simulations converged sufficiently with respect to total simulation time, the application of this damping function results spectra with Lorentzian shaped peaks. In this work, we employ the plane-wave pseudopotential formalism in RT-TDDFT as discussed in Ref. The method employed in this work for computing ML-WFs and time-dependent MLWFs (TD-MLWFs) is an extension of the method developed by Gygi, et al. In seminal work by Resta ing a unitary transformation matrix U that simultaneously maximally diagonalizes the matrices A (k) . This simultaneous diagonalization is achieved via the Cardoso-Souloumiac algorithm 101 . The diagonalization is carried out iteratively until the spread functional σ 2 { A (k) } converges to a minimum within a chosen tolerance. The resultant diagonal elements of the matrices A (k) can be used to determine the positions of the MLWF centers (MLWFCs) and the spreads of the MLWFs. The iterative implementation of the Cardoso-Souloumiac algorithm for the computation of this transformation matrix U is further detailed in the work by Gygi, et al. Because the calculation of this unitary MLWF transformation (i.e., unitary localization operator) is carried out at each RT-TDDFT step (sometimes for thousands of simulation steps), computational performance is of great importance. Like the Jacobi algorithm, the Cardoso-Souloumiac algorithm is inherently parallel. The current implementation makes use of MPI and high-performance linear algebra libraries (ScaLAPACK, BLACS) in conjunction with a processor-data rotation scheme 102 for the efficient parallelized computation of the MLWF transformation. Scaling and performance data for the TD-MLWF implementation compared with the standard TDKS implementation of RT-TDDFT are shown in the next section. The calculation and application of the TD-MLWF unitary transformation during the RT-TDDFT propa- gation adds additional computational cost in the simulations stemming from the calculation of the localization operator. Thus, it is important to examine the performance and accuracy of the RT-TDDFT/TD-MLWF implementation relative to the standard RT-TDDFT/TDKS approach. As test systems, we chose two representative cases: an isolated benzene molecule and crystalline silicon. All of these simulations used the LDA exchange-correlation functional and Hamann-Schluter-Chiang-Vanderbilt (HSCV) norm-conserving pseudopotentials 103 . The adiabatic approximation was used for the time dependence of the exchange correlation functional 104,105 . First, standard DFT calculations were per-formed to acquire the ground state wave functions. Then, in order to create a perturbed non-equilibrium initial condition for the RT-TDDFT simulations, the atoms were translated by +0.01 Bohr in the x-direction at the start of the time-propagation. For each system, we performed two simulations: a control case in which the TDKS equations are propagated with TDKS Bloch orbitals, and a test case involving TD-MLWF propagation. For all TD-MLWF simulations, a convergence tolerance of 10 -8 was used in the joint approximate diagonilization algorithm described in the previous section. The scalability tests for the benzene case were performed using a 30 Rydberg planewave kinetic cutoff en-ergy, a 50 x 50 x 50 Bohr simulation cell, a 0.1 a.u. time step, for 100 simulation steps with the enforced timereversal symmetry (ETRS) integrator 106 . The simulations were performed using MPI on nodes with 44 Intel Xeon processors each. Figure For testing scalability with the silicon crystal, a 512atom supercell was used, with a 60 Rydberg planewave kinetic cutoff energy, a 0.1 a.u. time step, for 100 simulation steps with the ETRS integrator. The simulations were performed using MPI on an IBM BG/Q system with 16 MPI tasks per node. The results, shown inFigure 3, show that in all cases studied the TD-MLWF propagation comes at a greater computational cost than TDKS propagation, as expected. However, scaling up to larger numbers of cores, the performance gap slightly decreases between the two methods: On 256 cores, each TD-MLWF step is 1.88 times the cost, and on 32,768 cores, each TD-MLWF step is 1.88 times the cost. The TD-MLWF propagation simulations in these test simulations used a very strict convergence criteria for the calculation of the localization operator, and with relaxation of this criteria the computational cost of the TD-MLWF propagation could be reduced even further while maintaining good accuracy. The scalability results in this work show that the calculation and propagation of TD-MLWFs incurs an additional computational cost, but that the additional cost does not significantly impede practical simulations. That being said, we have not yet explored the possibilities for TD-MLWFs to be used to actually reduce the cost of RT-TDDFT simulations in certain contexts. To our knowledge, this work represents the first use of MLWF propagation in RT-TDDFT, but the spatially localized characteristics of MLWFs have been exploited in the context of ground-state DFT calculations in insulating systems to achieve order-N calculations of exact exchange 107 as well as order-N first-principles molecular dynamics simulations based on a "divide and conquer" scheme 108 . The efficient calculation of hybrid exchange could allow for RT-TDDFT simulations with hybrid exchangecorrelation functionals. Additionally, the "divide and conquer" method described by Osei-Kuffour, et al. In addition to testing the scalability of our TD-MLWF implementation, we performed simulations to test its accuracy. In principle, when one transforms Bloch orbitals into MLWFs, all physical observables should remain unchanged because the transformation is unitary, preserving the total electron density. However, this assumes that the transformation matrix is exactly unitary. Numerically, however, the joint diagonalization algorithm used to compute the matrix at each time step is approximate and requires us to choose a convergence tolerance for the spread functional (see "Maximal Localization Procedure" section). Thus, it is important to compare the TD-MLWF and standard TDKS (Bloch orbitals) RT-TDDFT simulations to ensure that we can achieve excellent agreement in physical observables such as total electronic energy. Again, we chose two representative systems as test cases: an isolated benzene molecule in a 50 x 50 x 50 Bohr simulation cell as well as a 64-atom crystalline silicon supercell. In order to examine the accuracy of TD-MLWF propagation with different numerical integrators, we performed simulations with both the fourth-order Runge-Kutta (FORK) method The results (see Figure A. Optical Excitation As an example application for the real-time propagation of MLWFs, we have performed RT-TDDFT simulations on a benzene molecule in vacuum to calculate the optical absorption spectrum. The optical properties of gas-phase benzene have been well-studied both in experimental and theoretical work. In particular, the optical absorption spectrum has been calculated via both RT-TDDFT 110,111 and the Liouville-Lanczos approach to linear response TDDFT (LR-TDDFT) In our RT-TDDFT approach, a static polarized state electronic structure was first obtained adiabatically via a DFT calculation with an electric field of magnitude 0.001 a.u. present using the MLWF/length-gauge formulation described in the Theoretical and Computational Methods section. This electric field magnitude is sufficiently small to ensure a linear response, and to ensure oscillations of the electronic dipole that are large enough compared to any numerical noise. The LDA exchange-correlation (XC) functional was used in all simulations. The basis was expanded in planewaves up to a kinetic cutoff energy of 30 Ryd. A large cubic simulation cell of 100 x 100 x 100 Bohr was used, with the benzene ring lying in the xy plane. Such a large simulation cell was used in order to avoid interactions between periodic images of the system which can lead to extra "ripples" in the absorption spectrum for high-energy excitations where ionization becomes important As can be seen in Figure In addition to calculating the photo-absorption spectrum of benzene, the TD-MLWF approach allows us to decompose the spectrum into contributions from different chemical moieties. For molecular systems, the maximal localization transformation results in Wannier functions that are localized on bonds, and/or lone pairs. Thus, in the case of benzene, the TD-MLWFs and their corresponding centers can easily be associated with either carbon-carbon (CC) or carbon-hydrogen (CH) bonds. By Fourier-transforming the dynamic polarization of just the CC bonds or just the CH bonds, we can acquire the chemically-decomposed spectra shown in Figure Due to the availability of experimental absorption spectrum data over a wide range (~0 eV to ~200 eV), gaseous water is another interesting test case. LR-TDDFT based on Casida's equation 8 is the most widely used approach for computing absorption spectra of materials and molecules. However, Casida's equation is solved iteratively in a basis of (occupied) x (virtual) dimensions The simulation details closely follow those described for the benzene molecule case. A static polarized state electronic structure was first determined adiabatically via a DFT calculation with an electric field of magnitude 0.001 a.u. present. The PBE exchange-correlation functional 115 was used in all simulations. The basis was expanded in planewaves up to a kinetic cutoff energy of 40 Ryd. A cubic simulation cell of 100 x 100 x 100 Bohr was used. The enforced time reversal symmetry (ETRS) 106 was used for the numerical propagation of the TDKS equations. A time step of 0.05 a.u. was used, with a total propagation of 250 a.u. for each simulation. At the initial RT-TDDFT time step, the system is perturbed by suddenly switching off the static homogeneous electric field. This perturbation introduces a phase to the wavefunctions, resulting in continuous oscillations of the FIG. The RT-TDDFT calculated spectrum alongside the experimental spectrum 116 are shown in Figure Similar to the molecular benzene case, the TD-MLWFs allow us to decompose the spectrum for a more detailed chemical understanding of the photoabsorption trends. The spectrum, decomposed in terms of contributions from oxygen-hydrogen (OH) bond TD-MLWFs and lone pair (LP) TD-MLWFs is shown in Figure With the capability to calculated dynamic polarizability in both molecular and condensed matter systems, we can use the TD-MLWF approach to study complex systems such as molecules solvated in liquid water. Known as the solvatochromic effect, the optical absorption spectrum of solute molecules, such as organic dyes, varies depending on the solvent In order to demonstrate this approach, we again chose benzene as a test case. However, in this system, we explicitly solvated the benzene molecule in a cubic simulation cell (25.04 a.u. x 25.04 a.u. x 25.04 a.u.) containing 73 water molecules (614 electrons in total, including benzene). In order to acquire the absorption spectrum for a solvated molecule, one should in principle perform TDDFT calculations on a random ensemble of solvent/solute structures 123 . However, due to the considerable computational cost of performing a RT-TDDFT calculation on even one structure containing over 600 electrons, we restrict ourselves here to two representative configurations known to be important in influencing the electronic structure of benzene 124 , for the purposes of illustrating the TD-MLWF utility. A first-principles molecular dynamics simulation using the CP2K code Figure As an example of the TD-MLWF approach for periodic systems, we have performed RT-TDDFT simulations on crystalline silicon due to the fact that this material has been studied by a range of RT-TDDFT codes, results which provide useful points of comparison. For all simulations, the LDA exchange correlation functional was used. A planewave kinetic energy cutoff of 40 Rydberg was used. Additional calculation parameters are as follows: 0.05 a.u. time step, 250 a.u. total simulation time, 40 Rydberg planewave cutoff energy, 0.001 a.u. electric field impulse strength. For periodic crystalline systems one must take particular care to ensure convergence with respect to finite size effects. Our current TD-MLWF implementation does not yet include capabilities to incorporate multiple k-points, thus, in this work we use only the Γ point and a silicon supercell in order to acquire accurate results for the bulk material. Previous RT-TDDFT calculations on the optical properties of silicon have shown that k-point grids of 16x16x16 can be required to ensure full convergence of the absorption spectrum the system will be identical for impulses in the x, y, and z directions. Thus, the diagonal elements polarizability tensor (Equation ( In Figure Here, we demonstrate the ability for TD-MLWFs, and in particular their centers, to describe quantized charge transport in the semiconducting polymer system of trans polyacetylene. We use a quasi-monochromatic electric field pulse applied along the axis of the polymer chain as a cyclic nonadiabatic driving force for the electronic system. Applying such a pulse to the electronic ground state of the system induces either continuous oscillations of the TD-MLWFCs or tunneling in both the +x and -x directions, depending on the magnitude of the applied electric field. In order to drive quantized charge transport in one direction, we prepare a field-polarized resonant state as the initial condition of the RT-TDDFT simulation by first adiabatically "switching on" a static electric field. This static electric field has the effect of "tilting" the periodic potential well, breaking the energy landscape symmetry in the x-direction. Next, the field-polarized stat is subjected to a quasi-monochromatic pulse, which then drives the quantized charge transport. In this way, we can drive quantized charge transport for a certain resonant frequency. The simulation details for the first-principles charge transport simulations are as follows: A 14-monomer trans-polyacetylene chain was contained in a periodic simulation cell with dimensions of (34.28 x 20.00 x 20.00 Bohr), with the polymer aligned along the x axis. All atoms were represented by HSCV pseudopotentials. A planewave cutoff energy of 20 Ryd. was used. The LDA XC functional was used for all calculations. For the RT-TDDFT simulations, a 0.1 a.u. time step was used with the ETRS integrator. Two initial electronic states for the RT-TDDFT simulations were calculated: 1) the electronic ground state calculated via DFT, and 2) the fieldpolarized state calculated adiabatically via DFT in the presence a static electric field in the +x direction with a magnitude of 2.5 × 10 -3 a.u. For the RT-TDDFT simulations, these systems are then subjected to a quasimonochromatic electric field pulse with a frequency of 2.8 eV (calculated resonant frequency of double-bond TD-MLWFs), a maximum field-strength of 1.0 × 10 -3 a.u., which is enveloped in a gaussian with a full-width at halfmaximum of 1.0 eV. In Figure The spatial x-axis coordinates of the double-bond TD-MLWFCs with respect to time are shown in Figure One physical process that RT-TDDFT has been quite successful in simulating is electronic stopping. Electronic stopping is the phenomenon that occurs when fastmoving charged particles (> ~10 keV) transfer energy to the surrounding electronic system through excitation and ionization. Electronic stopping power is defined as the rate of energy transfer from projectile ion to electrons, is a key quantity in describing this process. In recent years, RT-TDDFT simulations have been quite successful in predicting the electronic stopping power of a range of matter and for a variety of projectile ions In order to demonstrate some of the capabilities of TD-MLWFs for descriptions of electronic stopping processes, we have performed several RT-TDDFT simulations of proton irradiation of an isolated benzene molecule. The simulations were performed with a 0.1 a.u. time step in the ETRS propagator, a 30 Rydberg planewave kinetic cutoff energy, the LDA XC functional, and HSCV pseudopotentials. The setup was as follows: a proton with constant velocity in the +x direction was moved through a 30 x 30 x 50 a.u. simulation cell containing a benzene molecule oriented in the xy plane. Four proton velocities were simulated (v = 0.625, 1.25, 5.00, 10.0 a.u.) at two different impact parameters relative to the plane of the benzene molecule. Once the proton has traversed the length of the simulation cell (50 a.u.), it is removed, at which point the RT-TDDFT simulation and TD-MLWF propagation is continued for 500 a.u. The electronic dipole moment of the excited benzene molecule, calculated via the TD-MLWFCs, then continues to oscillate. Taking the absolute value of the Fourier transform of the electronic dipole moment presents a spectrum of the excitations caused in the proton electronic stopping process. Figure Real-time, time-dependent density functional theory (RT-TDDFT) has gained popularity as a first-principles approach to study a variety of excited-state phenomena such as optical excitations and electronic stopping. Within RT-TDDFT simulations, the gauge freedom of the time-dependent electronic orbitals can be exploited for numerical and scientific convenience while the unitary transformation does not alter physical properties calculated from the quantum dynamics of electrons. Exploiting this gauge freedom, we demonstrated the propagation of maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWFs) in RT-TDDFT within our plane-wave pseudopotential RT-TDDFT branch of the QB@LL code. In recent years, the gauge freedom in RT-TDDFT has been exploited in various ways including using the socalled parallel transport gauge for numerical efficiency We presented a few examples of the great utility of the TD-MLWF gauge representation beyond the linear response regime (e.g. optical absorption spectrum). Using the ability to simulate both static and time-dependent electric fields as scalar potentials in the length gauge, we demonstrated the simulation of quantized charge transport in polyacetylene. Although it is a relative simple test case, similar simulations could be used in the future to carry first-principles investigations into dynamic topological transport phenomena, beyond the adiabatic dynamic description of a topological Thouless pump 129,135 . Finally, we presented TD-MLWF RT-TDDFT simulations of the electronic stopping of a proton impinging on a benzene molecule. Although it is often difficult to make direct comparisons between the excitation behavior of systems under photon and ion irradiation, we have proposed a type of analysis through the calculation of "electronic stopping spectrum" based on the dynamic polarization in the same way optical absorption spectrum is calculated from the dynamics polarization. Using the electronic stopping spectrum, one can identify what parts of the optical absorption spectrum are excited in electronic stopping process as a function of the projectile proton velocity. There are many additional applications of RT-TDDFT where TD-MLWFs could provide advantages over conventional TDKS propagation. In the context of groundstate DFT, the spatial locality of MLWFs have been used to greatly accelerate calculations with hybrid exchangecorrelation (XC) functionals 107 and first principles molecular dynamics simulations 108 . We have demonstrated that, for large systems, the TD-MLWF implementation scales well over tens of thousands of cores without incurring prohibitive computational costs (i.e. only two times more expensive). Thus, the TD-MLWF approach makes it possible to also accelerate hybrid XC calculations in the context of RT-TDDFT for studying large complex condensed matter systems.