Here we have developed a FLEX+DMFT formalism, where the symmetry properties of the system are incorporated by constructing a SO(4) generalization of the conventional fluctuation-exchange approximation (FLEX) coupled self-consistently to the dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT). Along with this line, we emphasize that the SO(4) symmetry is the lowest group-symmetry that enables us to investigate superconductivity and antiferromagnetism on an equal footing. We have imposed this by decomposing the electron operator into auxiliary fermionic and slave-boson constituents that respect SU(2)spin⊗SU( It has been recognized that several high-temperature superconductor families share a universal property of the phase diagram with superconductivity in proximity to magnetic phases Along with the advances of the above-mentioned numer-ical toolboxes, the phenomenologies approaches in terms of competing and/or synergistic order parameters based on generalizations of the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory have been developed for providing insights into various phases. Such approaches introduce the order parameters of the system based on symmetry considerations ⊃ SU(2) s ⊗ U (1), SU(2) s ⊗ SU(2) η ⊃ SU(2) s ⊗ U (1). Here, SO(4) ⊗ U(1) represents the AF order (SO(4)) generated by the total and relative spin operators on even and odd sites, along with U(1) the charge group. SU (2) η is the second SU (2) symmetry inherent in the Hubbard model involving what is called η spin A caution in advance: usual slave-particle works primarily use mean-field approaches. In the present work, by contrast, we use the slave-particles in the impurity solver for the FLEX-DMFT framework as we shall elaborate. Having said that, the slave building blocks so far considered are typically SU (2) slave-rotor However, while the results, obtained using the SU(2) gauge theory or the slave-particle methods, give a satisfactory picture of the various competing phases, these have been obtained within the mean-field treatment, which has to be examined if we are seriously interested in the correlation physics. For instance, one conspicuous feature in the phase diagram for the SU(2) doublon-less slave-boson is the superconducting Tc dome that is entirely covered by the pseudogap regime Specifically, inspired by the phenomenological SU(4) theory of superconductivity We call the formalism a "bipartite full-SU(2) slave-boson", which enables us to investigate AF and d-wave SC in the Hubbard model on an equal footing. Our approach substantially improves a previous mean-field work The one-band Hubbard Hamiltonian on the square lattice is given by where c † iσ creates an electron with spin σ at site i, and n iσ = c † iσ c iσ . The interaction (U ) describes the on-site Coulomb repulsion between electrons with opposite spins. The density of electrons controlled by the doping is specified by the chemical potential (μ). Electrons hop from site i to j on the lattice with the amplitude v |i-j| , here taken into account up to the third-neighbors. We take the nearest-neighbor v 1 as the unit of energy hereafter. This model has not only the usual SU(2) spin-rotational symmetry, but another SU(2) symmetry. For the latter, we can define a pseudospin (often called η-spin), where i , the bipartite factor, is defined on two (A,B) sublattices as If we rewrite the Hubbard interaction as we can immediately see that, at half-filling (μ = 0), i η i commutes with the Hamiltonian. In order to treat both of antiferromagnetism and d-wave superconductivity, namely, to incorporate the two SU(2) symmetries simultaneously, we then introduce, following Ref. where we express 2 × 2 matrices with tilde hereafter. Then the Hubbard Hamiltonian can be cast into a manifestly SU(2)⊗SU(2) representation as . Red line delineates the cluster which we employ in Eq. 12. We characterize the coordinate (r i ) of the ith cluster by r iA of the A site in the cluster. The lattice has the four-fold rotational symmetry, so that the cluster is equivalent to a bipartite cluster shown in yellow. where we have decomposed the hopping terms into those across different sublattices (the nearest-neighbor hopping) as represented by the first term, and those within the same sublattice (second-and third-neighbor hoppings) represented by the second term. The factor i j , arising from C † i C j in these terms, depends on whether the hopping is inter-or intrasublattice, so that for the former we have inserted τ z to compensate i j = -1 in terms of Pauli matrices τ = (τ x , τ y , τ z ) on the 2 × 2 space in Eq.5. In this representation, η i is the right-generator of the SU(2) η Similar to the SU (2) s symmetry which allows transforming the spin-up electrons into spin-down electrons, SU(2) η symmetry enables doubly occupied states to be converted into empty states. Thus, at finite doping, with more electrons than number of sites, the SU(2) η symmetry will be lowered to the U (1) charge symmetry. However, to enable our formalism to treat all doping regimes, including the half-filling, we incorporate the SU(2) η symmetry in our formalism. Even when we express the Hamiltonian in terms of C operators, the formalism does not enforce the symmetry and can describe the case of broken SU(2) η symmetry away from half-filling. The usual spin-rotational SU(2) s , on the other hand, is the left-generator as Thus Eq. 6, at half-filling, enjoys a symmetry where Z 2 is the sublattice symmetry. In order to introduce a numerical formalism that treats AF and SC phases on an equal footing, we now formulate the FLEX+DMFT method where we again incorporate the bipartite factor i . This representation puts the two Nambu doublets together, namely with which Eq. 10 is expressed as As the superconducting gap function in the high-Tc cuprates is known to be singlet 2 , we represent Eq. 10 in such a way that the singlet pairing correlation is included in the two-point propagator (see Eq. 17 below). Since antiferromagnetism and d-wave pairing both involve neighboring sites, which we call i and i + x (and i + ŷ) where x(ŷ) is the nearest-neighbor vector along x(y) axis, we can cast, for treating them on an equal footing, the C Ni defined in Eq.( where c iAσ denotes electron at sublattice A on cluster site i with spin σ. To incorporate the rotational symmetry of our square lattice, we take c iBσ ≡ (c i+xAσ + c i+ŷAσ )/2, where the factor 2 imposes having only two sites per unit cell, and B ≡ ( i+x + i+ŷ )/2. Note that the coordinate of cluster i (r i ) is the same as its A sublattice (r iA ), see also Fig. with momentum k ≡ (k x , k y ) and N being the total number of lattice sites, we obtain Here we have used B = e iQ•riB with Q = (π, π) being the AF (Brillouin-zone corner) wave vector, and r iB being the coordinate of the sublattice B on bipartite site i. To calculate Green's function, we use the the Heisenberg representation of electrons, c(τ ) = e τ H ce -τ H , where H is given by Eq. 1, and τ is the Matsubara time. In the present four-component Nambu representation, the Green's function is a 4 × 4 matrix, G 4×4 , which is given in terms of the normal component defined as along with the anomalous component for treating SC phases, Here τ = ττ , α and β denote sublattice indices, T τ is the time-ordering operator, and σ = -σ. In the momentum space the 4 × 4 Green's function is concisely expressed as with τ ≡ ττ , for which the matrix elements are explicitly given as Equivalently one can transform the imaginary-time Green's function into Matsubara-frequency space as with β = 1/T , where the fermionic Matsubara frequencies are given by ω n = β(2n -1)/π. The lattice Green's function in Eq. 18 satisfies the Nambu-Dyson equation, where k ≡ (k, iω n ), and I 4×4 denotes the identity matrix. In the above, ε 4×4 (k) is the dispersion due to the hopping terms in Eq. 1, with where v 1 , v 2 , v 3 are first, second, and third neighbor hopping amplitudes, respectively. Another term, Σ eff 4×4 (k), in Eq. 19 is the self-energy, and in FLEX+DMFT formalism which we adopt here, this comprises a combination of the self-energies in DMFT and FLEX, where we have defined the non-local part of the FLEX selfenergy as where we subtract the local part of the FLEX contribution, Σ FLEX,local , to avoid double counting of local Feynman diagrams. The local Green's function has a matrix representation, where G ABσσ , and F ABσσ are defined as Here c A(B)σ ) denotes the annihilation operator of an electron with spin σ residing on sublattice A (B) of the impurity site. The FLEX+DMFT self-consistency iteration is described in detail in the following sections, where the outline, see Fig. 1. Initialize Σ nl 4×4 , and obtain the lattice Green's function (G 4×4 ) without the impurity self-energy. pute a new Σ FLEX , which is then plugged in the DMFT iteration for computing the hybridization function. 3. With the hybridization function, solve the impurity problem to evaluate the impurity self-energy. 4. The effective lattice self-energy is then determined by summing the impurity and nonlocal FLEX selfenergies. 5. With Σ eff , Eq. 22, we solve the Dyson equation, Eq. 19, to update the lattice Green's function. 6. Repeat the above double (FLEX+DMFT) selfconsistency loops until the convergence is attained. A difference from the FLEX+DMFT in Ref. A. DMFT with the bipartite full-SU(2) slave-boson solver In the usual DMFT, the many-body problem is mapped onto an impurity problem which is embedded in a self-consistent medium (bath). In this procedure, we have thus a mean-field treatment in real space, while we do retain temporal (dynamical) quantum fluctuations, which enables the method to treat Mott transitions. Thus the approach is a computationally less demanding algorithm. We shall later improve the method by combining with the FLEX framework to incorporate spatial fluctuations. An implementation of DMFT requires to solve the impurity model and compute the Green's function. Several impurity solvers have been implemented, each with its own advantages and disadvantages. Numerically exact approaches including continuous-time Quantum Monte Carlo, exact diagonalization and Numerical Renormalization Group provide numerically accurate results at least for single-site DMFT To allow our DMFT framework to treat AF and SC on an equal footing, we should consider a two-site impurity cluster (inset of Fig. The impurity action for the Hamiltonian (1) is given by where, in this section, the electron annihilation (c) and number (n) operators refer to the impurity cluster, and the mathfrac site index i refers to A and B sublattice sites in the impurity cluster. The impurity Hamiltonian reads G and F appearing in Eq.( where G(F) appear in the diagonal (off-diagonal) blocks. In the FLEX+DMFT iteration we determine this matrix through where " * " denotes the convolution integral on the Matsubara frequency, and we have employed Eq.( we can then impose that in the DMFT scheme. To solve the impurity problem, we shall introduce in the next section the bipartite full-SU(2) slaveboson impurity solver. Within the slave-particle formalism, we decompose the electron operator into fermionic and bosonic particles such that the associated matrix elements of physical states be equal to their counterparts in the auxiliary slave-particle Hilbert space. Within this prescription, the fermion statistics for the physical particle may or may not be satisfied depending on what kind of slave-particles we adopt. The doublon-less SU(2) slave-boson, in particular, represents the electron operator as a composite of charge-less fermions (spinons) with up and down spins, and two-flavored spin-less bosons (holons) with flavor indices (1, 2). The two species of holons are required to maintain the SU(2) s symmetry of the system. The doublon-less SU(2) slave-boson representation is actually introduced to examine the limit of the large repulsive interaction, where we eliminate double occupancies by applying the Gutzwiller projection where we have introduced the spinon operator (f ) that satisfies the fermionic commutation relation, along with the holon operators (b 1 , b 2 ) and doublon operators (d 1 , d 2 ) that respectively satisfy the bosonic commutation relation. In the above we have maintained the bipartite formalism, where the index in mathfrac (i ∈ {A, B}) refers to impurity sites, and σ ≡ -σ. Then the fermionic commutation relation for the original electron operator is preserved. This decomposition thus realizes our perception of the real-spin SU(2) symmetry described by spinons along with the charge (η) SU( The bipartite full-SU(2) slave-boson representation has a Hilbert space that is larger than the physical one, so we need to eliminate the unphysical states by a constraint, which can be obtained as follows We can show that this equation has a solution in a vector form, where the three components have explicit forms of The noninteracting states (| 's) of the system on a bipartite unit cell can also be translated in the SU(2) slave-boson decomposition as where i ∈ {A, B}, and the vacuum of the bipartite impurity site is defined as Here the slave-boson vacuum is decomposed as where |vac f i(bi,di) is the associated vacuum of the spinons (bosons) at impurity site i. One should note that the bipartite SU(2) impurity solver, with the bipartite factor i inserted, results in a sublattice dependence of the projected states in Eq. (42). In addition, one should note that the transformed states of the SU(2) slave-boson can be occupied by more than one slave-particles. Obviously, removing d-bosons from our slave-boson picture would exclude the doubly-occupied sites, which is precisely the distinction between the present formalism and the conventional doublonless SU(2) slave-boson Similarly, the double occupancy is expressed as The impurity Hamiltonian (29) can be expressed up to a constant as where H hop is the hopping term in Eq. 29 translated into the slave-boson language, see Supplementary material, while ) are Lagrange multipliers introduced to impose the SU(2) constraints in Eqs. 41 on each sublattice. Now we can express the action in Eq. 28 in the slave-boson language as Employing this action we can derive the equations of motion for the spinon, holon, and doublon operators, respectively, for details see Supplementary material. If Lagrange multipliers are correctly determined, the obtained results should satisfy K i = 0 in terms of expectation values, which approximately satisfy Eq. 40. Alternatively, the auxiliary equations of motion can be iteratively solved by a new set (λ A/B ) until constraints are satisfied. With the final slave-particle Green's functions, we can update the electron's Green's functions (G loc 4×4 ), see again Supplementary material. Finally, the DMFT self-energy is obtained as B. Fluctuation-exchange approximation (FLEX) The fluctuation-exchange approximation provides a selfenergy of an interacting system by summing over bubble and ladder diagrams. The self-energy in this formalism can be obtained from close-linked diagrams known as the Luttinger-Ward functional Φ, so that the scheme is a conserving approximation In the following, we shall propose an extended SO(4) FLEX self-energy, which treats the superconducting pairing and spin fluctuations on an equal footing. Hence not only the fluctuations in the electron pairs having momenta k and -k, as treated in Ref. 65, but also the pairing between k and -(k + Q), known as η-pairing Here k + Q ≡ (k + Q, iω n ), the Hartree self-energy (Σ H ) is a diagonal matrix with momentum-independent elements as which is just equal to U n 4×4 with n 4×4 being the diagonal elements of G 4×4 in Eq. 17 at τ = β. The normal self-energy, and the anomalous self-energy, are obtained from the functional derivative of the Luttinger-Ward functional Φ, for which the expansion up to the forth-order in U is displayed in Fig. Here, N is the total number of lattice sites, and which comes from the structure of Eqs (17,48) and we have to make an appropriate choice depending on which matrix element in Eq(48) is considered, and q ≡ (q, iν n ) with ν n = 2πn/β being the Matsubara frequency for bosons. Since the Luttinger-Ward functional here incorporates the anomalous part with the anomalous self-energy given in Eq. 51, we should consider the local correction to the anomalous self-energy our interest here is the anisotropic, d-wave pairing instability in the repulsive model, for which we can ignore the local correction to the anomalous self-energy Σ F loc which does not depend on momentum. The remaining term, Σ F FLEX = δΦ FLEX [G, F † , F ]/δF † , is the same as the right-hand side of the linearized Eliashberg equation (III B below) if we linearize the anomalous part. Then our formalism treats the normal and anomalous self-energies consistently, as functional derivatives of the same Luttinger-Ward functional Φ FLEX+DMFT 10,66 . The particle-hole (ph), and superconducting pairing (scp) vertex functions are computed as Γ scp kk ,σσ (q) = 3 2 There, the spin (s) and charge (c) susceptibilities are given by with χ G kk ,σσ (q) = - χ F kk ,σσ (q) = - In order to obtain the transition temperature for the converged Green's functions, we solve the linearized Eliashberg equation, where λ EL denotes the largest eigenvalue of the linearized Eliashberg equation, ∆ σσ is the the gap function, and q = kk with choices of k and k depending on the involved normal (G) matrix elements of the Green's function G 4×4 in Eq. III B. The effective singlet-pairing interaction V eff is The superconducting transition occurs when the maximum eigenvalue of the diagonalized Eliashberg equation reaches λ EL = 1. In conclusion, we have proposed a novel formalism to explore correlated systems as exemplified by the one-band repulsive Hubbard model. We have presented the SO(4) generalization of the FLEX+DMFT method so that both antiferromagnetism and superconductivity can be treated on an equal footing. Namely, in the FLEX+DMFT formalism, we solve the bipartite impurity problem in the SO(4) DMFT by introducing a novel "full-SU(2)" slave-boson impurity solver. This impurity solver respects the group-symmetry properties of the Hubbard model, namely spin SU(2) and pseudospin SU(2) symmetries. We have introduced bosonic and fermionic auxiliary particles to convey all the charge-and spin-related information in our impurity solver. This approach is particularly suitable to study the interplay between AFM and d-wave SC treating the two phases on equal footing, while previous calculations based on cluster extension of DMFT Extending our formalism to address multi-band physics where (λ z , λ + , λ -) are Lagrange multipliers for enforcing the SU(2) vector constraints in Eq. ( where density operators read This impurity Hamiltonian is associated with the action in the slave-boson language, Here electron operators are defined in Eq.( Using Eq. (S4), we derive the equations of motion for all of spinon, holon, and doublon flavors. Here we employ the generic notation for the auxiliary Green's functions, where a and a ∈ {f, b, d} label the auxiliary particles, α is the flavor of the particular slave-particle which is {↑, ↓} for spinons and {1, 2} for bosonic operators, and i, j denote sublattice indices. When Green's functions consist only one species of the auxiliary particle, namely both a and a are spinon, holon, or doublon, we refrain from repeating these labels for the Green's functions as G aa (F aa ), with a shorthand G aa ≡ G a , F aa ≡ F a when a = a . The self-energy diagrams for these auxiliary Green's function, denoted generically as G aux , are exemplified in Figs. A. Equation of motion for f A↑ particles + . . . . The self-energy diagrams for the f ↑ particles. G aux stands for G aa and F aa . Green (red) arrows denotes hybridization functions (spinon Green's functions), while blue wiggly lines are the holon/doublon Green's functions. C. Equation of motion for f B↑ particles E. Equation of motion for bA1 particles F. Equation of motion for b2A particles G. Equation of motion for b1B particles + . . . . G aux stands for G aa and F aa . Green (red) arrows denotes hybridization functions (spinon Green's functions), while blue wiggly lines are the holon/doublon Green's functions. H. Equation of motion for b2B particles J. Equation of motion for d2A particles K. Equation of motion for d1B particles L. Equation of motion for d2B particles Figure 