The discovery of quadrupole topology opens a new horizon in the study of topological phenomena. However, the existing experimental realizations of quadrupole topological insulators in symmorphic lattices with π-fluxes often break the protective mirror symmetry. Here, we present a theory for anomalous quadrupole topological insulators in nonsymmorphic crystals without flux, using 2D sonic crystals with p4gm and p2gg symmetry groups as concrete examples. We reveal that the anomalous quadrupole topology is protected by two orthogonal glide symmetries in square or rectangular lattices. The distinctive features of the anomalous quadrupole topological insulators include: (i) minimal four bands below the topological band gap, (ii) nondegenerate, gapped Wannier bands and special Wannier sectors with gapped composite Wannier bands, (iii) quantized Wannier band polarizations in these Wannier sectors. Remarkably, the protective glide symmetries are well-preserved in the sonic-crystal realizations where higher-order topological transitions can be triggered by symmetry or geometry engineering. Topological insulators are unconventional materials which host robust edge states and quantized transport or electromagnetic properties as dictated by the topological invariants of the occupied bulk bands Recently, topological band theory was generalized from conventional (dipole) topology to quadrupole and octopole band topology In this work, we present a theory of anomalous QTI (AQTI) in nonsymmorphic crystals without gauge flux. Using 2D square-lattice sonic crystals (SCs) as material realizations, we find that the AQTI is a topological state protected by two orthogonal glide symmetries. Due to these glide symmetries, the AQTI phase has several features that are distinct from the QTI model proposed in Refs. SCs.-We start with the AQTI phase in the p4gm SCs [see Fig. The acoustic band structure, as obtained from COM-SOL Multiphysics, is shown in Fig. where I n (Γ) and I n (X) are the parity eigenvalues of the n th -band (n = 1, 2, 3, 4) at the Γ and X points, respectively. From the parity eigenvalues in Fig. The glide symmetries lead to the double degeneracy for all Bloch states on the XM and YM lines. This double degeneracy can be understood by constructing the antiunitary operators Θ j = G j * T (j = x, y) where T is the time-reversal operator (i.e., complex conjugation). It is straightforward to obtain that Θ 2 y ψ n, k = e ikxa ψ n, k . Therefore, Θ 2 y ψ n, k = -ψ n, k at the XM line, i.e., k x = π a . As an analog to the Kramers theorem for fermions, such a relation results in the double degeneracy for all Bloch states on the XM line Obviously, the two glide operators do not commute. Besides, we find that the double degeneracy at the X point consists of Bloch states with opposite parities, since Θ y I = -IΘ y . This property constraints the parity-inversion between the Γ and X points and hence the dipole polarization. In this way, the quadrupole topology, since it requires a vanishing dipole polarization, emerge in our system when there are four bands below the band gap. Wannier bands and nested Wannier bands.-The quadrupole topology is characterized by two features: (i) gapped Wannier bands for both ν x and ν y The Wannier bands are calculated from the Wilsonloop approach Here, u n ( k) is the periodic part of the Bloch wavefunction, and T P is the path ordering operator. The results in Fig. The symmetry constraints on the Wannier bands are (see Supplemental Material for detailed derivations), Here, n = n are Wannier band indices. We notice that I transforms the first (second) Wannier band to the fourth (third) Wannier band. Besides, G x transforms the first (third) Wannier band into the second (fourth) Wannier band, while G y transforms the first (second) Wannier band to the third (fourth) Wannier band. Thus, the four Wannier bands are intrinsically connected to each other. Following Refs. For Wannier sectors I and II, the Wannier band polarizations are calculated as P νx,I Symmetry considerations.-The above results, in particular, the quantization of the bulk quadrupole moment q xy is determined by the glide symmetries, G x and G y . Therefore, these results are also applicable to p2gg SCs (p2gg is similar to p4gm but without the C 4 rotation symmetry), as shown in next section. We now consider possible emergence of the AQTI phase in square/rectangular groups within the 17 wallpaper groups. Fig. Edge and corner states.-The nontrivial quadrupole topology leads to gapped edge states and in-gap corner states. To demonstrate these topological boundary states, we study a finite SC with 8 × 8 unit-cells cladded by hard-wall boundaries. A finite-width (0.28a) air channel is introduced between the hard-wall boundaries and the SC to tune the edge band gap to the middle of the bulk band gap. Such a narrow air channel cannot introduce waveguide modes in the bulk band gap, since the waveguide modes can appear only at much higher frequencies (> 30 kHz). In accordance with our theory, the calculated spectrum [see Fig. Symmetry engineering.-Starting from the p4gm SC, one can keep the C 4 symmetry and gradually transform into the p4mm SC, by reducing the geometry parameter h. We study a continuous transformation process with first (i) h going from 0.25a to 0, and then (ii) l going from 0.5a to 0.35a, and lastly (iii) w going from 0.05a to 0.25a. The phase diagram for the corner, edge and bulk spectra are shown in Fig. Such a topological transition is also manifested in the Wannier bands. As shown in Fig. Finally, we remark that the acoustic topological band gaps studied here do not have the chiral symmetry. Consequently, the corner states are not fixed at the mid-gap frequency. However, as shown in Ref. Note added: At the final stage of this work, we became aware of recent works on boundary obstructed topological phases 