The centuries-old idea of a lighter-than-air vacuum balloon has not materialized yet as such structure needs to be both light enough to float in the air and strong enough to withstand atmospheric pressure. We propose a design of a rigid spherical sandwich shell and demonstrate that it can satisfy these stringent conditions with commercially available materials, such as boron carbide ceramic and aluminum alloy honeycomb. A finite element analysis was employed to demonstrate that buckling can be prevented in the proposed structure. Also discussed are other modes of failure and approach to manufacturing. HE idea of a lighter-than-air vacuum balloon is centuries old. In 1670, F. Lana di Terzi proposed a design of an airship where buoyancy was to be created by evacuated copper spheres (Ref. where RR is the radius of the shell, h is the shell thickness, ρρ aa and ρρ ss are the densities of air and of the shell material, respectively (we use an approximation for a thin shell). Let us then consider the condition of equilibrium for half of the shell (see Fig. where σσ is the compressive stress in the shell and pp aa = 101 kkkkkk is the atmospheric pressure at 0°C (we used a condition of equilibrium for a hemisphere of air in the atmosphere to calculate the right-hand side). We obtain: If ρρ ss = 2700kkkk • mm -3 (the density of aluminum), ρρ aa = 1.29kkkk A.F. Zahm notes that, while the results of stress calculation are quite problematic, buckling is an even more dangerous mode of failure for such a structure. Let us perform a simple buckling analysis for this structure (Ref. where EE and μμ are the modulus of elasticity and the Poisson's ratio of the material of the shell, respectively. If pp cccc = pp aa and, e.g., μμ = 0.3, then ( Even if we use diamond as the shell material (EE = 1.2 • 10 12 kkkk and ρρ ss = 3500kkkk • mm 3 ), we obtain In other words, even the maximally optimized homogeneous diamond shell of ideally spherical shape would inevitably fail already at ~0.2pp aa . Thus, one-layer shells made of any solid material in existence either cannot float in the air or have no chance of withstanding the atmospheric pressure. (It should be noted that we only considered the spherical shape in our analysis, as this shape is certainly the optimal one.) Problems of this kind are quite common in aircraft design, and typical solutions are multi-layer shells with light core or stiffened shells. In our patent application (Ref. More recently, other work addressing the issue of buckling for vacuum balloons was published (see, e.g., Refs. As our design (Ref. As an example, let us consider a three-layer spherical shell with face skins of equal thickness h 1 = h 2 and a core of aluminum alloy honeycomb of thickness h 3 (see Fig. If RR is the radius of the shell, we assume that RR ≫ h 3 ≫ h 1 . To assess the design feasibility, we also anticipate that the shell allows a small payload fraction qq = 0.1 (the ratio of the mass of the payload at zero buoyancy and the mass of the displaced air). Then, the condition of zero buoyancy has the following form: or where The buckling stability condition that we used is described by the following semi-empirical formula for critical pressure obtained for three-layer domes (Ref. In this case, EE ff is the modulus of elasticity of the face skin material, and pp cccc is the maximum pressure at which the three-layer shell is stable. The requirements for core rigidity are discussed below, but let us first find the values of h 1 ′ and h 3 ′ that maximize pp cccc . Using Eq. ( The value of pp cccc is maximal for In that case the optimal values of h 1 ′ and pp cccc are: This is a good indication that the design is feasible. However, we need to assess the buckling stability more accurately and consider other modes of failure. We cannot rely on the results of the above analytical approach as it hinges on the semi-empirical formula Eq. ( The results of the FEA analysis confirmed that the analytical approach provides reasonable estimates and a good starting point for optimization in our case. However, we base the conclusions of this article on the results of the FEA analysis, not on the results of the analytical approach. For the FEA analysis, a 2D axisymmetric model in the spherical system of coordinates, with due regard for corresponding boundary conditions at the edges, was found sufficient and adequate (Fig. 2D high-order 8-node elements, which are well suited for curved boundaries, were used for the finite element mesh in axisymmetric mode. The mesh was heavily refined, and the elements' aspect ratios were appropriately adjusted. In the FEA, the anisotropic material properties of the honeycomb were treated in accordance with recommendations of a honeycomb manufacturer (Ref. [17], p, 20). For the sake of simplicity, we assume that the honeycomb is a transversally isotropic material, so the lesser of the two values of shear modulus from Ref. [15] was used (which makes the results more conservative). Thus, we used the following values: the out-of-plane component of the modulus -670 MMkkkk; the in-plane components of the modulus -67 kkkk; out-of-plane components of the shear modulus -140 MMkkkk; the in-plane component of the shear modulus -14 kkkk; the Poisson's ratio -10 -5 (very small values of the Poisson's ratio and the in-plane components of the modulus and the shear modulus were used to avoid singularities, in accordance with Ref. [17], p, 20). Thus, the ANSYS eigenvalue buckling analysis input includes the loads. The output of the analysis is the eigenvalues (buckling load multipliers), which are the safety factors for buckling modes (for the input loads). The minimum eigenvalue λλ mmmmmm obtained in the eigenvalue buckling analysis determines the critical buckling load. As we load our structure with atmospheric pressure pp aa , we have the following relation between the minimum eigenvalue λλ mmmmmm and the critical buckling pressure: The optimized parameters of the analytical approach were used as initial values for optimization through the FEA. The eigenvalue λλ mmmmmm , regarded as a function of h 3 ′ , has a rather sharp maximum of λλ mmmmmm ≈ 2.65 (see Fig. Only homogeneous spherical shells are discussed in Refs. Taking into account the imperfections in the finite-element analysis is beyond the scope of this work as the imperfections depend on the specific technologies. Now let us verify that other modes of failure are not problematic for the design. We used standard unity checks from Refs. Let us first check that the compressive stress σσ ff in the face skins does not exceed the compressive strength of the face skin material. Instead of Eq. ( which is much less than the compressive strength of boron carbide (3.2 GGkkkk). The following formula is used to check the design for shear crimping (Ref. where NN kkaaaa is the allowable force per unit length of a sandwich plate in some direction and GG 3 = 20 kksskk ≈ 138 MMkkkk is the honeycomb shear modulus. The actual force per unit length is much less: The design was checked for face skin wrinkling using the following formula (Ref. , where σσ wwcc is the allowable uniaxial wrinkling stress, kk 2 = 0.82 is a theoretically derived coefficient for honeycomb cores, EE ff = 460 GGkkkk is the face skin modulus, EE 3 = 97 ksi ≈ 0.69 GPa is the honeycomb modulus. We obtain: σσ wwcc ≈ 1.58 GGkkkk. However, we have biaxial stress, so we should check that (Ref. where σσ xx and σσ yy are stresses in two orthogonal directions (σσ xx = σσ yy = σσ ff ≈ 600 MMkkkk), ττ xxyy is the shear stress (ττ xxyy = 0), KK = 0.95. The left side of Eq. ( The design is scalable with respect to all of the above modes of failure: an equally successful design can be obtained by multiplying all linear dimensions by the same factor. However, this is not true for another mode of failure -so called intracell buckling (also known as dimpling). We use the following formula (Ref. where σσ ddpp is the critical stress for intracell buckling and μμ ff = 0.17 is the Poisson's ratio of the face skins, and SS = Manufacturing of the boron carbide face skins seems to be the most challenging part of the design, as they may be very thin, and their density needs to be close to the theoretical boron carbide density, otherwise the elasticity modulus can be insufficient. For large prototypes (RR ≥ 25 mm), the face skin thickness exceeds 1 mmmm, and parts of the face skins can be produced using traditional methods, such as uniaxial pressing with subsequent sintering (Refs. For smaller prototypes, the thickness of the face skins is 0.1 mmmm by order of magnitude. Producing such parts is technologically challenging, and the parts may be too fragile. Detailed treatment of these issues is beyond the scope of this article, but a preliminary discussion is clearly necessary. The face skins can be produced either by deposition on a sacrificial substrate (this can be time-consuming if the process is to yield high elasticity modulus) or using gelcasting, which can provide "fine features down to 100 μμmm scale" (Ref. To circumvent the issue of fragility, one can first bond the face skins to the honeycomb and then remove the face skin supports (the substrates or parts of the molds). To fabricate the entire vacuum balloon, one will need to join several sandwich panels using some standard approach, such as bonded butt joints using H sections (Ref. According to Ref. The exterior and the interior of the structure can be connected with a valve at a modest weight penalty for initial evacuation of the structure or for altitude control. The buoyant force reduction due to the shell compression by atmospheric pressure was calculated to be less than 0.4%. Point loading of the structure should be avoided. For example, it is relatively easy to provide distributed support with larger contact area for the structure on the ground. We did not discuss issues related to adhesives here (mass requirements, modes of failure, etc.), but these issues are less significant for shells of larger radius, as the adhesive mass scales as RR 2 , and the mass of the entire structure scales as RR 3 . Neither did we discuss potential use of more exotic materials (such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD) diamond for the face skins or architected cellular materials (Ref. We showed that a lighter-than-air rigid vacuum balloon can theoretically be built using commercially available materials. The design of this article is an evacuated spherical sandwich shell of outer radius RR > 2.11 mm containing two boron carbide face skins of thickness 4.23 • 10 -5 • RR each that are reliably bonded to an aluminum honeycomb core of thickness 3.52 • 10 -3 • RR. The structure is lighter than air (it allows a payload fraction of 0.1) and can withstand the atmospheric pressure. For example, if RR = 2.5 mm, the face skin thickness is 106 μμmm, the honeycomb thickness is 8.8 mmmm, the mass of the shell is 75.7 kkkk, the payload capacity for zero buoyancy is 8.7 kkkk. A prototype vacuum balloon would also become the first ever lighter-than-air solid (for example, aerogels are actually not lighter than air due to the air inside). Manufacturing a prototype vacuum balloon will be a major breakthrough. It will require detailed engineering to resolve numerous relatively minor issues, but the results of this article suggest that we can finally bring to fruition the ancient dream of a vacuum balloon. It took mathematicians 357 years to prove Fermat's Last Theorem. Will it take us more to build the first vacuum balloon? where