Superconductivity in the type-II Weyl semimetal candidate MoTe2 has attracted much attention due to the possible realization of topological superconductivity. Under applied pressure, the superconducting transition temperature is significantly enhanced, while the structural transition from the high-temperature 1T phase to the low-temperature T d phase is suppressed. Hence, applying pressure allows us to investigate the dimensionality of superconductivity in 1T -MoTe2. We have performed a detailed study of the magnetotransport properties and upper critical field Hc2 of MoTe2 under pressure. The magnetoresistance (MR) and Hall coefficient of MoTe2 are found to be decreasing with increasing pressure. In addition, the Kohler's scalings for the MR data above ∼11 kbar show a change of exponent whereas the data at lower pressure can be well scaled with a single exponent. These results are suggestive of a Fermi surface reconstruction when the structure changes from the T d to 1T phase. The Hc2-temperature phase diagram constructed at 15 kbar, with H ab and H ⊥ ab, can be satisfactorily described by the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg model with the Maki parameters α ∼ 0.77 and 0.45, respectively. The relatively large α may stem from a small Fermi surface and a large effective mass of semimetallic MoTe2. The angular dependence of Hc2 at 15 kbar can be well fitted by the Tinkham model, suggesting the two-dimensional nature of superconductivity in the high-pressure 1T phase. Transition metal dichalcogenides WTe 2 and MoTe 2 have recently been intensively studied owing to their intriguing physical properties Both WTe 2 and MoTe 2 consist of weakly bonded (W/Mo)-Te layers stacked along the c-axis. While WTe 2 crystallizes in a noncentrosymmetric orthorhombic T d phase (space goup: P mn2 1 ) at ambient pressure, MoTe 2 undergoes a first-order structural transition from a centrosymmetric monoclinic 1T phase (space group: P 2 1 /m) to the T d phase at T s ∼ 250 K. At low temperature, a superconducting phase transition can additionally be observed at T c ∼ 0.1 K An interesting interplay between structural and superconducting transitions in MoTe 2 is revealed upon the application of hydrostatic pressure: T s can be suppressed to zero at ∼ 10 kbar, i.e. at high pressure, the T d phase can be completely removed and the 1T phase takes over. Meanwhile, T c is rapidly enhanced, leading to a 30-fold increase in T c (∼4 K) at ∼15 kbar Previous high pressure studies reported the intrinsic superconductivity in many topological materials, including Cd 3 As 2 Single crystals of MoTe 2 were synthesized by the NaCl-flux method as described elsewhere 3 . Temperature dependent electrical transport measurements were performed by a standard four-probe technique in a Bluefors dilution fridge. Hydrostatic pressure dependence was studied by using a piston-cylinder clamp cell with glycerin as the pressure transmitting medium. The pressure value inside the clamp cell was measured by the zerofield superconducting transition of a piece of Pb placed near the sample. Magnetic field dependent transport properties were measured with the aid of a superconducting magnet. Transverse resistivity (Hall resistivity) was obtained by symmetrizing (anti-symmetrizing) the field dependent transport data recorded in both positive and negative field directions. For the measurements of the angular dependence of H c2 at 15 kbar, a miniature moissanite anvil cell was used in conjunction with a vector magnet with a maximum horizontal field of 3 T and a maximum vertical field of 5 T. The pressure achieved in the anvil cell was determined by ruby fluorescence spectroscopy at room temperature, and glycerin was also used as the pressure transmitting medium. The single crystals used (S1-S4) are from the same growth batch. Figure Figures In the established temperature-pressure phase diagram, we are able to track the pressure evolution of the electronic structure via magnetotransport. Figures The initial slope (dH c2 /dT ) T =Tc is -0.26 T/K and -0.12 T/K for H ab and H ⊥ ab, respectively. Thus, H orb c2 (0) are estimated as 0.65 T and 0.29 T, respectively, which are larger than the experimental data at the 0 K limit (H c2 (0)). The suppression of H c2 (0) is more pronounced with H ab. To account for this suppression, we include the Maki parameter α. The WHH formula with a finite α is used to fit H c2 (T ), as displayed in Fig. The Maki parameter α can be written as: where H P (0) and ∆(0) are the Pauli-limiting upper critical field and the magnitude of the superconducting gap at the zero temperature limit, respectively, and E F is the Fermi energy. Thus, α describes the relative strength of the orbital and spin-paramagnetic (Zeeman) effects. For a conventional metal, E F is ∼1 eV while ∆(0) is ∼1 meV, α is usually much smaller than 1. Therefore, the value of α = 0.77 is unexpected, indicating a non-negligible spin-paramagnetic contribution to the pair breaking. As stipulated in Equation In summary, we have constructed the temperaturepressure phase diagram of MoTe 2 and investigated the anisotropy of superconductivity of the high-pressure 1T phase at 15 kbar. The first-order structural phase transition temperature T s (from the high-temperature 1T phase to the low-temperature T d phase) is suppressed with applied pressure and vanishes at ∼11 kbar, while the superconducting transition temperature T c is significantly enhanced. With the application of pressure, the magnetoresistance (MR) and Hall coefficient decrease and saturate to low values at >11 kbar. The Kohler scaling can well describe the MR data at all pressures. Meanwhile, a change of exponent is observed at high pressure, suggestive of a Fermi surface reconstruction. Thus, the temperature-pressure phase diagram, together with the magnetotransport measurements, support that the superconductivity at >11 kbar is in the 1T phase. Using the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg model with the inclusion of the Maki parameter α, the temperature dependence of upper critical field H c2 at 15 kbar, obtained at H ab and H ⊥ ab, can be nicely described with α = 0.77 for H ab and α = 0.45 for H ⊥ ab. These surprisingly large α indicate the presence of spin-paramagnetic effect. This behaviour may be related to the low Fermi energy in the semimetallic 1T -MoTe 2 , and the large effective mass due to the non-negligible electron-electron correlation. Finally, the angular dependence of H c2 can be described by the Tinkham model over a wide temperature range, indicating that the dimensionality of the superconducting state in the high-pressure 1T phase is two-dimensional in nature.