The protected electron states at the boundaries or on the surfaces of topological insulators (TIs) have been the subject of intense theoretical and experimental investigations. Such states are enforced by very strong spin-orbit interaction in solids composed of heavy elements. Here, we study the composite particles -chiral excitons -formed by the Coulomb attraction between electrons and holes residing on the surface of an archetypical three-dimensional topological insulator (TI), Bi2Se3. Photoluminescence (PL) emission arising due to recombination of excitons in conventional semiconductors is usually unpolarized because of scattering by phonons and other degrees of freedom during exciton thermalization. On the contrary, we observe almost perfectly polarization-preserving PL emission from chiral excitons. We demonstrate that the chiral excitons can be optically oriented with circularly polarized light in a broad range of excitation energies, even when the latter deviate from the (apparent) optical band gap by hundreds of meVs, and that the orientation remains preserved even at room temperature. Based on the dependences of the PL spectra on the energy and polarization of incident photons, we propose that chiral excitons are made from massive holes and massless (Dirac) electrons, both with chiral spin textures enforced by strong spin-orbit coupling. A theoretical model based on such proposal describes quantitatively the experimental observations. The optical orientation of composite particles, the chiral excitons, emerges as a general result of strong spin-orbit coupling in a 2D electron system. Our findings can potentially expand applications of TIs in photonics and optoelectronics. Spin orbit coupling (SOC) plays a central role in spintronic and optoelectronic applications by allowing optical control of spin excitations and detection with circularly polarized light, in the absence of an external magnetic field In this paper, we discuss a new class of excitons which produce helicity preserving PL. We use polarization-resolved PL spectroscopy to study the secondary emission from a 2D electronic system of significant current interest: the surface state of a three-dimensional (3D) topological insulator (TI), Bi 2 Se 3 . We note that excitons are not usually observed in semimetals and doped semiconductors, with the Fermi level crossing the conduction band, because the exciton state is likely to be hybridized with the conduction band states. Even if the exciton level remains within the gap, the optically produced electron-hole pairs would relax rapidly to the Fermi energy in a non-radiative way. In our case, RSS and SS2 are gapped from the Fermi level, and thus the electron-hole bound state can decay radiatively, resulting in observed PL. To further elucidate the nature of polarized PL in Bi 2 Se 3 , we compare the spectra measured in different polarization geometries. The results are reproducible in the "time-reversed" geometry, i.e., the polarized PL signals with right-[Fig. In Fig. Low temperature PL intensity is plotted against photon energy for 6 different excitations (shown by arrows in each panel): ω0 =2.33, 2.38, 2.57, 2.60, 2.65 and 2.77 eV. The light and dark colored lines denotes IRL(ω, T ) and IRR(ω, T ), respectively. The smooth background f (ω, T ) is plotted by black lines. Such a high degree of circular polarization for PL cannot originate from the bulk bands, which are spin degenerate Besides the overall intensity, the difference between I RL (ω, T ) and I RR (ω, T ), depicted in Fig. versus the excitation energy ω 0 . The polarized PL peak is observed only for excitation energies between 2.6 and 3.0 eV. Comparing the excitation profile with the known band structure of Bi 2 Se 3 [See SI Appendix, Sec. S2], we conclude that the only possible interband transition is from RSS to SS2 bands. To analyze polarization-preserving PL quantitatively, we decompose I RR (ω, T ) and I RL (ω, T ) into two spectral contributions [Fig. In Fig. Assuming that the depolarization process occurs mostly during the energy relaxation of the electron and hole within the corresponding bands, we expect r(T ) → 0 as ω 0 approaches the direct surface band gap. Figure Now we turn to the interpretation of the experimental results. In general, polarization-preserving PL is only possible if the spin degeneracy of electron states is lifted by breaking either time-reversal or inversion symmetries. Since a bulk Bi 2 Se 3 crystal is non-magnetic and centrosymmetric, we argue that observed polarized PL must be entirely due to surface bands. In the following, we build a minimal model that explains all the key aspects of the experimental observations, by considering optically excited electrons and holes in SS2 and RSS bands, respectively. Based on the first-principle calculation of the electronic band structure [Fig. to describe the massless Dirac electrons near the SS2 touching point An interacting electron-hole pair is described by a 4×4 two-body Hamiltonian where r = r e -r h is the relative position of the electron and hole, V (r) describes the Coulomb interaction, p = -i∇ r and k is the momentum conjugate to (1/2) (r e + r h ). For k = 0, the eigenvalues of H eh (p, k) have a W-shaped dispersion resembling a multi-layer Mexican hat [cf. Figs. 1(d) and S2 in SI Appendix ]. If both electron and hole bands were massless, a bound state would not be possible. However, the two-body bands originating from H eh (p, 0) are bounded from below for any values of v and α by the p 2 term in the RSS band. Therefore, the Coulomb attraction between electrons and holes lead to excitonic bound states. In what follows, we focus on the case of zero total momentum (k = 0) appropriate for direct optical transitions studied in this Report. If V (r) is axially symmetric, the z component of the angular momentum of an electron-hole pair is a good quantum number although neither the orbital angular momentum nor spin are good quantum numbers on their own. (Here, φ is the azimuthal angle of p.) Therefore, the eigenstates of Eq. ( where p ≡ |p|. To understand the general properties of the resulting discrete states and, in particular, their spin structure, it is instructive to replace the interaction potential by a model short-range attraction V (r) = -λδ(r), which provides a reasonable approximation for Coulomb interaction screened by free carriers. In this case, algebraic equations for amplitudes ψ 1 (p), . . . , ψ 4 (p) have non-trivial solutions for an infinitesimally small λ, but only for states with J z = 0 and J z = ±1 [SI Appendix, Sec. S1A]. The bound states with J z = ±1, labeled as |J z = ±1 in Fig. The theoretical model described above allows one to extract quantitative characteristics of the exciton spectra. The exciton energies for a short-range interaction as functions of the dimensionless coupling constant u = m h λ/2π 2 are shown in Fig. FIG. sumed to be weak), the binding energy can be estimated as ±1 -E ±1 g = -4Ry * ln 2 2m h (α + v)a B /e 2 We used polarization-resolved photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy to study the secondary emission from the surface states of an archetypical topological insulator Bi 2 Se 3 . When the crystal is excited with 2.5-2.8 eV circularly polarized light, we detect emission of the same polarization at 2.3 eV. Polarization of emitted light is preserved even if the excitation energy is hundreds of meVs above the emission threshold energy. We assign such emission as resulting from recombination of exciton states: chiral excitons. We propose that chiral excitons are made of (topologically protected) massless electrons and massive holes, both residing on the surface of Bi 2 Se 3 and characterized by chiral spin textures. The exciton states can be characterized by the eigenvalues of the outof-plane total angular momentum, J z . Based on the results of our theoretical model, we identify the doublet of degenerate states with J z = ±1 as being responsible for observed polarization-preserving PL. The most surprising finding is that polarization of chiral exciton PL is preserved up to room temperature and robust with respect to chemical substitution, which we attribute to the weakness of spin-flip scattering between surface states with opposite helicity. In this way, chiral excitons are fundamentally different from other known excitons that also preserve helicity We are grateful for technical support from B.S. Dennis and A. Rustagi, and discussions with L.S. Levitov, Z. Lu, E.I. Rashba, Z.X. Shen, D. Smirnov, J.A. All data presented in the main text are collected from bulk single crystals grown by modified Bridgman method. Mixtures of high-purity bismuth (99.999%) and selenium (99.999%) with the mole ratio Bi : Se = 2 : 3 were heated up to 870 • C in sealed vacuum quartz tubes for 10 hours, and then slowly cooled to 200 • C with rate 3 • C/h, followed by furnace cooling to room temperature. The crystals were cleaved prior to cool down in a glove bag filled with nitrogen gas, and were transferred into a continuous flow liquid helium optical cryostat without exposure to atmosphere. A solid state laser was used for 2.33 eV (532 nm) excitation, a diode laser was used for 2.77 eV (447 nm) excitation, and a Kr + ion laser was used for all other excitations, with laser spot size roughly 50 × 50 μm 2 . The power density on the sample is kept below 0.7 kW/cm 2 , and all temperatures shown were corrected for laser heating with 1 K/mW. The polarized secondary emission was analyzed and collected by a custom triplegrating spectrometer with a liquid nitrogen cooled CCD detector. The intensity I μν (ω, T ), was corrected for the laser power and spectral response of the spectrometer and CCD, where μ (ν) denotes the direction of incident (collected) photon polarization, ω is energy and T is temperature. The scattering geometries used in this experiment are denoted as μν =RR, RL, XX and YX. R = X + iY and L = X -iY denotes the right-and left-circular polarizations, respectively, where X (Y) denotes linear polarization parallel (orthogonal) to the plane of incidence. Here, we follow the "spectroscopy convention" for the "handedness" of circularly polarized light. That is, the right and left polarization refers to the angular momentum measured in the lab frame, rather than the helicity of photon. With right circularly polarized excitation, the measured PL intensities can be decomposed into two parts: Where L R (ω, T ) and L L (ω, T ) denotes right and left circularly polarized PL, respectively, and f (ω, T ) denotes the featureless unpolarized broad background. We assume an energy independent depolarization ratio r(T ) = L L (ω,T ) L R (ω,T ) . Inserting r(T ) into the above expression of I RL (ω, T ), we can write the unpolarized emission as: Then, r(T ) is determined by minimizing sharp features in f (ω, T ) around the 2.3 eV PL peak. The circularly polarized PL can be calculated knowing r(T ), For ξ = 0, the term sinh(tvp) sinh(tαp) in Eq. (S4) is absent. Evaluating the integral over t, we obtain the angle-averaged quantity 1 For ξ = +1 we replace the term ((σ e × p) • ẑ) ⊗ ((σ h × p) • ẑ) by unity and find 1 Similarly, for ξ = -1 we obtain 1 The treatment above is based on solving an effective two-body problem. Alternatively, one can start with a manybody formulation, in which electrons in the conduction (SS2) and valence (RSS) bands are treated on the same footing, except for the dispersions in the valence bands are of the opposite sign to that in the conduction ones. The original interaction is this formulation is a repulsive density-density interaction between electrons. The Hamiltonian of the many-body problem is written as where H SS2 (p) and H RSS (p) are the single-particle Hamiltonians given in Eq. ( The interaction vertex corresponding to the Hamiltonian (S9) satisfies the integral equation represented graphically in Fig. Here, G e,h (p, iω) are the (Matsubara) Greens functions for electrons and holes, respectively, given by where μ > 0 is the chemical potential and e ηe , h η h are the eigenvalues of the corresponding single-particle Hamiltonians: with η e , η h = ±1. Equation (S10) is solved by expanding Γ αβ,γδ over the tensor products of spin spaces where it is understood that σ e 0 = 1 σe and σ h 0 = 1 σ h . Substituting Eq. (S14) into Eq. (S10) and projecting out the Pauli matrices, we find for the matrix form of Γ Here, matrix Ξ is given in Eq. (S5), and is the convolution of the Green's functions forming the "rungs" in the ladder series. (Up to an overall sign, Π ηeη h is the polarization bubble formed by electrons from bands η e and η h .) Summing over ω m in Eq. (S17) and performing analytic continuation iε n → + i0 + , we obtain at T = 0 where Λ is the ultraviolet cutoff imposed to regularize the logarithmically divergent integral. Poles of Γ give the bound states energies. From Eq. (S15) we see that the poles of Γ are determined by three equations Thus, Eq. (S19) reads The three equations above are equivalent to Eqs. (S6), (S7) and (S8) obtained within the T -matrix approach [also, cf. Sec. 1B]. Also, because σ 3 e ⊗ σ 3 h commutes with Ξ, the eigenvalues of Γ can be parameterized by those of Ξ. The effective attraction, which is necessary for forming a bound state, arises because the combinations of Π ij in Eq. (S20a-S23c) are negative and real is certain energy intervals; therefore, equations have solutions for λ > 0. This a familiar effect of nesting: the original repulsive interaction is replaced with an effective attraction between electron and hole states. In Sec. 1B, it will be shown that the bound state corresponding to ξ = 0 is a doubly degenerate one with projections of the total angular momentum on the z-axis equal to J z = ±1, while the bound states corresponding to ξ = ±1 are two non-degenerate states with J z = 0. Getting somewhat ahead, we will adopt the notations for the bound states based on the values of J z rather than of ξ. Continuing with the T -matrix approach, we write the T -matrix as The imaginary parts of the T -matrix in the different symmetry channels are given by where Indeed, in matrix form we have , where ψi ≡ dp p (2π) 2 ψ i (p). It can be readily seen that the φ-dependent terms cancel out leaving a set of of integral equations for ψ 1 (p) . . . ψ 4 (p). Writing a formal solution of Eq. (S28) as we close the system by integrating the equation above over p. This yields a set of linear equations for amplitudes of the wave function averaged over the momentum In a matrix form, the equation above reads where M and N are the same as in Eq. (S16). Hence, the m = 0, -2 states are degenerate with eigenvalue equation N = 0, while the two m = -1 states have the eigenvalue equations N ± 2M = 0. These eigenvalue equations match exactly the ones given in Eq. (S19), obtained in the scattering-matrix formalism. Since the operator of the total angular momentum Ĵz = 1 σe ⊗ 1 σ h (-i∂ φ ) + 1 2 1 σe ⊗ (σ h ) z + 1 2 (σ e ) z ⊗ 1 σ h commutes with the Hamiltonian, the eigenstates of the latter can be classified by the eigenvalues of Ĵz . A simple calculation shows that J z = m + 1 for our spinor. Hence, J z = 1, 0, -1 for m = 0, -1, -2, respectively. This confirms the classification of the eigenstates adopted in MT and the previous section of SI. The 1D nature of the Rashba spectrum also helps to generalize the results presented above for the case of Coulomb interaction, which is a more realistic model than a delta-function one. Since the effective Hamiltonian of the two-body problem, Eq. ( 2 m/2, where U (x) is potential of attractive perturbation where Ry * = m h e 4 /2ε 2 eff is the effective Rydberg energy, a B = 2 ε eff /m h e 2 is the effective Bohr radius, and e = 2.718 . . . is the base of the natural logarithm. A ln 2 enhancement of the bound state energy is similar to that for a hydrogen atom in the strong magnetic field The determined r(T ) depend strongly on excitation, as shown in Fig. 