Faraday effect . . . . . . Magneto-optical imaging is a powerful technique for studying qualitative features of magnetic flux distributions in superconductors and other magnetic samples. Such distributions can have highly nontrivial features and are of interest for physicists, materials scientists and engineers. However, magneto-optical imaging does not automatically return two-dimensional maps with the actual values of the magnetic field, due to the non-linear response functions of magneto-optical indicator films and in practice also non-uniform illumination in optical setups. A quantitative treatment is needed in order to achieve such a calibration. After calibration of a magneto-optical image has been done, one can proceed to deduce the corresponding two-dimensional maps of the current density distribution from inversion of the Biot-Savart law. Some applications of quantitative magneto-optics are precise measurements of flux distributions, flux avalanches and currents in superconductors. These notes are organized as follows: Basic aspects of magnetic flux penetration in superconductors including the Bean model are reviewed briefly in chapter 1. The rest of the notes does not strictly depend upon this chapter, however it introduces the coordinate system used and provides an useful context for some of the later discussion. In chapter 2, the method of magneto-optical imaging using the Faraday effect is introduced, together with practical aspects of magneto-optical experiments at low temperatures and the semi-qualitative technique of RGB addition for checking the reproducibility of flux patterns. The physics of magneto-optical indicator films and calibration of magneto-optical images into maps of magnetic field values are discussed in chapter 3. Next, in chapter 4 the Biot-Savart law and fast Fourier transformations are discussed before proceeding to inversion of magnetic field maps into current density maps. Finally, magnetometry with Faraday magneto-optical imaging is treated. Several MATLAB programs with practical implementation of the theoretical concepts discussed are available at the Github repository https://github.com/atlejq/Magneto-optics. While there has been published a large amount of work on quantitative magneto-optical imaging, the material is scattered and notation differs significantly between different authors. These notes originate from parts of the Ph. D. thesis of the author and other work done at the University of Oslo The author wishes to thank Jørn Inge Vestgården for very useful comments and proofreading during the preparation of the manuscript. Additional errata found can be reported to atlejq@gmail.com. Chapter 1 Superconductors are commonly categorized by their thermodynamic and magnetic properties into two types, type-I and type-II, both of which lose their electrical resistance under a critical temperature T c . In a type-I superconductor, superconductivity is destroyed above the critical field H c , but for samples with a non-zero demagnetization factor N , an intermediate state of normal domains containing magnetic flux mixed with superconducting domains will occur between (1 -N )H c and H c . An example of this is shown in the magneto-optical image series in Fig. In a type-II superconductor, magnetic flux enter in the form of vortices between two critical fields H c1 and H c2 , each carrying one flux quantum φ 0 = h/2e ≈ 2.07 • 10 -15 Tm 2 . Apart from in a thin surface layer, superconductivity is destroyed above H c2 , while below H c1 the field is expelled. Vortices in a type-II superconductor would in the absence of external forces arrange themselves into a hexagonal flux line lattice where j is the current density and B is the magnetic flux density, both to be regarded as macroscopic, coarse-grained quantities. For low transport currents and temperatures, one can neglect thermal fluctuations and the force balance on a moving vortex is given by Here Hall forces have also been neglected, justifiable at low temperatures, and it has been assumed that vortices are massless. F v is the viscous force density, a parameterization of various dissipative processes affecting vortex motion and F p is the pinning force density, generally a function of B. The pinning force on a vortex lattice is not in general equal to the sum of the pinning forces on the vortices, as the vortex lattice has internal stiffness and will have to be deformed in order to conform to the actual pinning sites. Any moving vortex or collection of vortices will induce an electric field In the extreme limit where the vortices are pinned so strongly that they hardly move, no viscous forces are at work and Eq. 1.2 is simplified to Such a situation is denoted as the critical state. By considering Eqs. 1.1 and 1.4 and assuming a B-independent pinning force, a current corresponding to the maximum pinning force density can be defined as The internal current that characterizes this situation is called the critical current j c . In a model by Bean For the slab geometry, infinite extent in the z-direction is also assumed. B x vanishes then by symmetry and Eq. 1.6 is simplified to Starting from the virgin state with B = 0 everywhere, Eq. 1.7 is trivial to integrate with j y = j c and B z = B a as boundary condition, where B a is the applied field Thus, the magnetic flux density falls off with a constant gradient inside the sample, with slope μ 0 j c . For B s = μ 0 j c w the slab is fully penetrated, defining a characteristic applied field for a the slab geometry, and the current density has reached j c in the entire sample. More formally, the current densities and magnetic field profiles inside a slab with edges at x = ±w can be written as where a flux-free region of width 2a is present in the center of the sample with a = w(1 -B a /B s ). In Fig. where 2a is again the width of the field-free region in the middle of the thin film, but now with In contrast to the slab solution, a is now a non-linear function of B a . The quantity B f = μ 0 j c d/π defines a characteristic field for the thin film geometry, and in Fig. No pinned vortex lattice is completely static at temperatures different from the absolute zero, and including thermal activation will cause flux creep. Thermal effects also cannot be neglected unless j << j c . Additionally, the analysis above is not applicable for non-static situations and a slow, quasistatic application of B a is assumed. Alternating currents will not flow without resistance even if their magnitude is less than j c due to viscous forces. In practice, there is also some electrical resistance below j c . The relation between electric field and current in the superconductor is often parameterized in the form This power law E-j relation is one of several material laws of the superconductor. It reduces to Ohm's law if n = 1 and to the Bean model if n = ∞. The Bean-and other critical state models can also be extended to handle samples with anisotropic j c . In this case, different currents will flow in the x-and y-directions of the sample. Current conservation inside the sample is expressed as the current having zero divergence and for a rectangular sample, this requires that the current turns around at an angle j c,x and j c,y are the critical currents in the x-and y-directions, respectively. Fig. In this chapter, a brief description of the experimental method of magneto-optical imaging using the Faraday effect is given. Afterwards, practical considerations when doing low-temperature magnetooptical experiments using cryostats are discussed. Several techniques can be used to visualize magnetic field distributions. Magneto-optical imaging based upon the Faraday effect has several advantages such as locality, extremely good time resolution (subnanosecond) and good spatial resolution (typically a few μm). In addition, the technique is nondestructive to the sample in contrast to methods such as Bitter decoration. The Faraday effect is the rotation of the polarization vector of light in a transparent medium when a magnetic field is applied along the wave vector of the light, as seen in Fig. It is possible to construct a polarization microscope utilizing the Faraday effect, as sketched in Fig. If the angle between the polarizer and the analyzer is 90 • , a configuration called crossed polarizers, no light that has not undergone a Faraday rotation in the indicator film will in theory get through the analyzer. Dark areas in the image will then correspond to no Faraday rotation and thus no magnetic field parallel to the optical path toward the analyzer and the camera, while brighter areas correspond to Faraday rotation due to magnetic field in the area. However, as will be discussed in the chapter about quantitative magneto-optics, this configuration has the lowest sensitivity. For higher sensitivity one can instead operate the setup at a nonzero angle between the polarizer and the analyzer. The microscope will usually include a cryostat and a magnetic solenoid around the sample, so that samples can be investigated at low temperatures and various magnetic fields. A comprehensive review of magneto-optical imaging utilizing the Faraday effect is given in ref. In order to investigate superconducting or magnetic samples at low temperatures, one has to mount and cool them in a cryostat. Two types of cryostats are discussed in this text: Helium flow cryostats, where the cooling is implemented through the evaporation of a helium flow and closed-cycle cryostats that are essentially a refrigerator using helium. The latter are becoming popular due to helium shortages. Before mounting the sample in a cryostat, samples and indicator films should be inspected under an ordinary stereomicroscope with a few times magnification. One will then easily see dust, grease or other kinds of dirt. If the sample is dirty, it should be cleaned in toluene and wiped clean with soft, lint-free wipes. It is very important to note that even small scratches on superconducting samples often render them useless, as the flux distributions below T c can be severely disturbed. It is also easy to damage the mirror deposited on indicator films. Samples should be kept in an exicator with silica gel to absorb moisture to avoid degradation and oxidation. One can additionally evacuate the exicator for air to further reduce the chance of degradation, the only exception is maybe perovskite HTS materials like YBCO, where the oxygen stoichiometry can possibly be disturbed by outgassing into the vacuum. Samples are mounted on a cold finger. Vacuum grease will fix the sample physically and ensure a good thermal contact between the cold finger and the sample. Too much grease will act as a thermal insulator. The magneto-optical indicator film is placed directly on top of the sample, and it is important that it is not tilted relative to it, as partial blurring of the image will result. Blurring will also occur if the sample is not flat. The sample must be restrained to not slip away from the sample as a result of vibrations. 4 L-shaped pieces of aluminum tape will ensure this, as shown in Fig. A radiation shield of aluminum is attached around the cold finger before it is placed in the cryostat. This shield and all other metal surfaces should be free of fingerprints and grease, as these are opaque and radiate in the infrared range. It is very important to avoid getting vacuum grease between the indicator film and the sample. At low temperatures, the vacuum grease will solidify and stress the indicator film. This causes stripe domains to appear and ruins the image. Also, the grease should be One can generally get very good images with 20x magnification. 50x magnification is attainable, but these images may be dark and suffer from depolarization effects. The higher the magnification, the worse are vibration effects and vibration insulation becomes more and more important. Even a person walking in a lab will disturb the image at 20x. For closed-cycle cryostats with exchange gas, the vibration insulation is very good and the small vibrations seen are mostly coming from the vacuum pump. Flow cryostats are somewhat more plagued by vibrations coming from both the vacuum pump and the helium pump. In order to transfer helium gas from a Dewar tank to a flow cryostat, a transfer tube is used. It must be slowly inserted into the Dewar tank to let the helium replace the air inside (obviously the valve on top of the transfer tube must be open). Otherwise a blockage of frozen air will result. If this happens either during insertion or the experiment, the tube must be taken out and dried, preferably with a heat gun. One must also run air through it to dry up any moisture inside of it. Flow cryostats should not be cooled faster than 10 • C per minute, as excessive thermal stress can degrade the materials in the setup in the long run. Such concerns are minimal for closed-cycle cryostats, as they are not able to cool nearly that fast. When heating any cryostat up again, air must not be allowed to enter the vacuum inside it before the temperature has reached room temperature. Otherwise, internal condensation will result, possibly causing degradation of the setup. Air cooled magnet coils must not be allowed to overheat. As a rule of thumb, they should not become hotter than what is comfortable to touch (50 • C). This is a general problem for any experiment using a high magnetic field for extended periods of time. Water cooling may be implemented, but will make the entire setup more bulky and impractical. Light sources in the form of lamps should be switched on and off as little as possible, as this shortens their lifespan. Lamps running of the AC mains will induce a spurious flickering in the images. Although this effect is only about a few percent, it would be preferable to use DC powered green high-intensity LEDs. A green laser can also be used, but will require more safety precautions and introduce interference 2.3 RGB addition of images noise. Optical components must be carefully selected to not induce large depolarization effects, and those in contact with magnetic fields such as objective lenses must also have small Verdet constants. From additive color mixing we know that the sum of the colors red (R), green (G) and blue (B) is white. This enables us to check the reproducibility of flux patterns and flux avalanches by adding up three series of either ordinary or differential magneto-optical images, respectively, obtained under identical experimental conditions (same cooling procedure, T and B a ). Differential images are made by capturing an image, ramping up the applied magnetic field B a by an amount ∆B, capturing a second image and then subtracting the first image from the second in order to observe changes in the flux pattern. Examples of RGB addition are shown for ordinary images in Fig. MATLAB codes for RGB addition of ordinary and differential images are included in RGBord.m and RGBdiff.m, respectively. Qualitative magneto-optical imaging of superconductors can locally and in real-time reveal features of the flux penetration pattern, like penetration depths, defects, anisotropic penetration and also dynamic features like flux creep and flux avalanches. However, for actually measuring magnetic field values with magneto-optical imaging, a quantitative treatment is required, which is a much more complicated task. It involves calibrating the measured light intensity from the indicator as a function of local magnetic field. This chapter starts with a discussion of the physics of magneto-optical indicator films and proceeds to calibration of magneto-optical images. In this work the focus is on magneto-optical indicator films made of ferrite garnets with in-plane magnetization, which in use shows a characteristic and sometimes problematic sawtooth-pattern of magnetic domains. Their advantages include a high and rather constant Faraday rotation in a temperature range from the lowest attainable temperatures in a Helium-4 cryostat to above the T c of HTS materials. The spontaneous in-plane fields B A of these garnets is typically at least 100 mT, but if a too large field is applied, the rotation saturates. Unfortunately, the in-plane magnetized garnets are also sensitive to the in-plane field components B x and B y , which will cause a non-locally reduced Faraday rotation and thus underestimation of the local B z In order to discuss the physics of Faraday-rotating indicator films, we first define a coordinate system where the indicator film is lying in the horizontal plane, see Fig. which can be expanded as where M s is the spontaneous magnetization vector, related to the anisotropy energy and spontaneous in-plane field as 2E A ≡ B A M s . As seen in Fig. The Faraday rotation is generally given by where V is the Verdet constant of the film, t is the thickness and the product V tM s ≡ θ sat . The rotation is clearly proportional to the applied field inside a range defined by ±B A , outside of which the rotation saturates to θ sat . The rotation as a function of the magnetic field is plotted in Fig. As the derivative of the squared sine function is at a minimum at an argument of 0 • and at a maximum at 45 • , the configuration with a crossed polarizer and analyzer has the lowest sensitivity. Combining Eqs. (3.5) and which can be solved for This approximation is applicable for B B A . A more general expression for the light intensity in the case of general θ is giving a corresponding equation for the magnetic field The most general case with a significant B is in theory also analytically solvable, but requires the solution of a quartic equation. With an EuSe indicator film, one would get a similar functional dependency, but in this case the Faraday rotation angle is just the product of the Verdet constant and the thickness, so the coefficient in front of the parenthesis in Eq. 3.10 would instead be 1/V t. As a light source often does not have a uniform beam and the intensity of the Faraday rotated light is not a linear function of the local magnetic field, the raw images must be calibrated if the local values of the magnetic fields and current densities are to be deduced. The light intensity for crossed polarizers is an sigmoid function of B a , as seen in Fig. It is here assumed that the light response of the indicator film is approximately independent of the temperature at temperatures at and below the T c of the material in question. After calibrating a magneto-optical image or image series, one should check that the magnetic field values far outside the sample converge to B a . An example of such a consistency check is shown in Fig. MATLAB codes for calibration with a sigmoid function and a quadratic function are included in sigmacal.m and powercal.m, respectively. A calibrated magneto-optical image can be used to deduce the corresponding current distribution by inversion of the Biot-Savart law, as it is a local relation in Fourier space. In order to proceed with this problem, the mathematics of the Biot-Savart law and Fourier transforms will first have to be discussed. The Biot-Savart law reads in full generality The three components of the magnetic flux density generated by a three-dimensional current distribution can thus be written The "forward" calculation of the magnetic field from a three-dimensional current distribution is always possible. An example is shown below: In a series of MgB 2 samples with half of the rim covered with a gold layer, magneto-optical images suggest a higher critical current density j c,1 in the gold-covered area as opposed to the j c,2 in the sample area without gold, probably due to sample degradation in the uncovered area. A representative example of this behavior is shown in Fig. In contrast, the inverse problem does not in general have a unique solution. For samples with d < 2λ, it is a good approximation to consider the in-plane current density to be constant in the z-direction As shown by Roth has an analytical Fourier transform Using this transform, the two-dimensional Fourier transforms of Eq. 4.5, Eq. 4.6 and Eq. 4.7 can be written where k = k 2 x + k 2 y and the integration over dz has been carried out through a simple multiplication with the film thickness d. The equation Eq. 4.12 is simplified when considering the magnetization scalar field g(r), which relates to the sheet current as As the divergence of the curl of a scalar field always is zero, this form ensures that the current density has no divergence, which again is required by current conservation inside a superconductor with no external current sources ∇ In components Eq. 4.13 can be written j x (x, y) = ∂g(x, y)/∂y and j y (x, y) = -∂g(x, y)/∂x. In Fourier space, these partial derivatives are performed by multiplying g(k) by -ik y and -ik x , respectively. This enables us to rewrite Eq. 4.12 as which can be simplified to Bz (k x , k y , h) = μ 0 kd 2 g(k)e -hk (4.16) Thus, the magnetic field can then be calculated from the magnetization, and this is especially simple in Fourier space, where one can see that the Biot-Savart law for B z is a local relation between B z and g. For the case d << λ, Jooss For the Bean model, the magnetization functions are straight planes with slope j c . One should also note the product of the height above the sample and the wave number in the exponential in Eq. 4.16. This tells us that B z is a low-pass filtered g. Proximity of the indicator film to the current sheet is thus important to avoid blurring of the image of B z . If one wants to go the other way, i.e. obtain the currents from a measurement of B z , one solves Eq. 4.16 for g(k) and then the currents are found from j x (x, y) = ∂g(x, y)/∂y and j y (x, y) = -∂g(x, y)/∂x. The absolute value of the current density is then found by |j| = j 2 x + j 2 y . This inversion can be done for experimentally obtained magneto-optical images after they have been calibrated into two-dimensional maps of B z (x, y). In order to implement these calculations numerically, a quick detour to Fourier transformations is needed. The Fourier transformation and its inverse are defined by The Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) is the numerical discretization of the Fourier transform and its inverse. On a grid of size L with N points, they are defined by gn = N -1 j=0 g j e -i 2πjn N (4.20) where the continuous integration variables are replaced with discrete counterparts: x → x n = Ln/N and k → k j = 2πj/L. As a consequence of the Nyquist-Shannon theorem, the Brillouin zones will have to be rearranged to yield correct results, so in practice The convolution theorem states that the Fourier transform of a convolution of functions is the product of Fourier transforms point by point which in a discrete form reads gn hn e i 2πjn N (4.24) A DFT requires O(N 2 ) operations for each dimension. The Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) is any fast algorithm to compute the DFT of a function. The two-dimensional FFT requires N x N y (1+2log(N x N y )) operations where N x and N y are the dimensions of the grid. This is obviously a huge improvement over the DFT, which would require O((N x N y ) 2 ) operations for a two dimensional grid. A DFT is periodic, and if one tries to sample a function that is not periodic, this will introduce an error. As a consequence, one should ensure periodic boundary conditions when sampling magnetooptical images by for example including the indicator film around it. The finite size of an image also introduces artifacts in the form of a superlattice of spurious current distributions. The imaged area should be at least a factor of two larger than the sample to reduce this effect. It is also possible to invert the Biot-Savart law with matrix inversion. This approach requires O((N x N y ) 3 ) operations. The Toeplitz symmetry of the integral kernel of the Biot-Savart law has been utilized by Having discussed the physics of in-plane magnetized ferrite garnet indicator films, calibration and the mathematics of FFTs, it is now time to proceed to numerical inversion of the Biot-Savart law. In theory, it should be simple to extract current density distributions from the calibrated magneto-optical images by applying the inverse Biot-Savart law in Fourier space and calculating the magnetization g and differentiating it to get j x and j y . In practice, there are several problems. Defects in the superconducting film and in the magnetooptical indicator perturb the magnetic field and the current pattern is sensitive to even small perturbations of this kind. Even worse are sawtooth-shaped magnetic domain boundaries in the indicator film, but they can be removed, or at least moved by application of a small in-plane field. As mentioned, the indicator film is also sensitive to the in-plane components B x and B y , which non-locally reduces Faraday rotation and causes an underestimation of B z . This problem is most pronounced for strong induced currents resulting from a high B a . It manifests itself as an unphysical current outside the sample and sharp, unphysical peaks in the current density close to the sample edge. At low B a , a "naïve" inversion, disregarding the in-plane component, will give a good approximation to the actual current density distribution. In Figs Experiments have shown that it is possible to use the naïve inversion at higher magnetic fields by use of an iterative algorithm From Eq. 1.13, one can calculate j c from the applied field B a , sample thickness d, sample width 2w and penetration depth L for the case of the image in Fig. As an illustration, shown in Fig As the magnetization g is derived from B z by a Fourier transformation and Eq. 4.17, it should be of little surprise that it is possible to do magnetometry with Faraday magneto-optical imaging To be a little more pedantic, there are actually two different kinds of d-lines, both visible in Fig.1.5. The dark, internal lines where the current j changes direction, but |j| is constant, are denoted d + lines. In contrast, the bright lines at the three visible edges of the sample are denoted d -lines. d -lines appear where |j| abruptly changes