Electron-electron interactions play an important role in graphene and related systems and can induce exotic quantum states, especially in a stacked bilayer with a small twist angle. Twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) with a small twist angle θ exhibits a significantly reconstructed band structure. In this work, we report the successful control of the electronic phases in TDBG by vertical displacement fields. In a specific range of displacement fields, we observe correlated insulating states corresponding to the half-filled conduction band. Moreover, under parallel magnetic fields, we found that the correlated gap for the half-filled band increases, suggesting a spinpolarized ordering. Fig. We tested many dual-gated devices with θ varying from 0.98° to 1.33° to reveal the transport behavior in TDBG (Extended Data Fig. Under an intermediate D, we can see an obvious resistive state at n=n s /2 where a moiré unit cell is filled with 2 electrons (Fig. The induced gap at half filling is widely observed within the regime of |D|/ε 0 = 0.2V/nm ~ 0.6V/nm (Fig. In TBG, the flat band intrinsically derives from strong interlayer coupling. Under an external displacement field, electrons can be drawn towards positive gate, and repelled away from the negative one, thus inducing an asymmetric distribution of carriers between top and bottom graphene layers and destroying the expected correlated states, as observed in dual-gated TBG. The half-filling correlated insulating state is further signified by a sign change of transverse Hall resistance at n=n s /2 (Fig. The new Fermi surface originated from half-filling correlated states can also be identified by a new set of magneto oscillations which typically serves as a tool to obtain information about Fermi surface and degeneracy associated with electronic degrees of freedom. The LL filling factors of v=3 and v=5 is beyond our expectations considering that broken symmetry induces halved filling factors with even numbers for the LLs resulted from halffilling correlated insulating state in TBG. The half-filling correlated state at D/ε 0 =-0.45V/nm persists up to B⊥≈7T according to the Hall coefficient R H behavior shown in Fig. In order to isolate spin effects from the orbital motion, we thus exerted parallel magnetic fields and probed the field dependence of resistances. Fig. Note that we also observed quarter-filling correlated state formed and enhanced by B || in the 1.31°-device, which is much more sensitive to displacement field (Extended Data Fig. Our work demonstrates electrically tunable correlated states in TDBG. The hypothesized spin-polarized ground state at half-filling, different from that in TBG, reveals an important role played by layer numbers of the original constituent 2D materials in twist system. Novel electronic states like electrically tunable ferromagnetic Mott insulator, Note added: during the revising of our manuscript, we have been aware of two related studies of ref. 32 Twisted double bilayer graphene (TDBG) devices were fabricated following a typical "tear and stack" technique. Transport measurements were performed in cryostat with a base temperature of 1.5K. We applied standard lock-in techniques with 31Hz excitation frequency and 1nA alternating excitation current or less than 200μV alternating excitation bias voltage which was achieved by a 1/1000 voltage divider to measure the resistance. All the transport data were acquired by four-terminal measurements. A large range of twist angle was achieved in our TDBG devices. Note that the encapsulated structure prevents traditional probe-characterizing methods to detect twist angle θ. We have to extract θ from transport data acquired at cryogenic temperature. Before loaded in cryostat, devices are first picked out at room temperature. The flat band present in magic-angle twisted graphene superlattice, greatly lowers down the carrier mobility, thus causes charge neutral point (CNP) unrecognized in R-V g or G-V g curves, i.e. "U" rather than "V" shape appears at room temperature. For a small θ, the calculation of θ follows the formula: where A is moiré unit cell area, λ is moiré wave length, a=0.246nm is the lattice constant of graphene and n s is the carrier density at which the flat conduction band is fulfilled. Generally, in TDBG, we still persist the view that four electrons or holes in a moiré unit cell fulfill the first conduction or valence band for four-fold spin and valley degeneracy, yielding single-particle superlattice gaps. In most of cases, estimating θ through n s shows some degree of errors, since superlattice gaps are usually present over a range of n s . Instead, we tend to determine it through the carrier density n s /2 for half-filling correlated insulating state. In devices with welldeveloped quantum oscillations, an additional alternative is to get moiré unit cell area directly through Landau level crossing at magnetic flux φ=B⊥A=φ 0 /q. where B⊥ is perpendicular magnetic field, q is an integer and φ 0 =h/e is the non-superconductivity magnetic flux. The half-filling correlated state has been observed in our devices with θ varied from 0.98° to 1.33° (Extended Data Fig. While in strong in-plane magnetic fields, these two devices can develop insulating behavior at half-filling above T=1.6K (Fig. In the 0.98°-device, we measured single-particle gaps with respect to displacement fields D at n=0 (Δ CNP ), n=±n s (Δ ns and Δ -ns ) and n=±3n s (Δ 3ns and Δ -3ns ). All single-particle superlattice gaps reach their highest values at D/ε 0 =0 and then decrease in displacement fields. In the regime of |D|/ε 0 =0.3V/nm~0.5V/nm, which is rightly the interval where the half-filling insulating states can be observed in devices with θ=1.2°~1.3°, Δ ns and Δ -ns drop down to zero or nearly zero, preventing the isolation of the first conduction and valence bands. The coexistence of Δ ns and Δ CNP just happens at a narrow range of D, and within this range, both Δ ns and Δ CNP are with low value. Small neighbor single-particle gaps for such an angle θ=0.98°, make thermalactivated interband hopping considerable at our base temperature, and finally contribute to the absence of insulating behavior for the half-filled conduction band. These data acquired in the 0.98°-device, reveal the importance of neighbor single-particle gaps for correlated insulator. In addition, Δ -ns appears again at |D|/ε 0 >0.5V/nm, providing the possibility of well-isolated flat valence band formation at high D. We use the extended tight-binding model to calculate the band structures of twisted double bilayer graphene. Extended Data Fig. In our calculations, atomic positions of TDBG are full relaxed with the classical force-field approach implemented in the LAMMPS package. We repeatedly observed the magnetoresistance (SdH) oscillations near half-filling in the 1.33°device. Extended Data Fig. The Landau level structure is affected by displacement field D. In a weaker field D, LLs from CNP show four-fold degeneracy on hole branch and dominated v=12 on electron branch (Extended Data Fig. The in-plane magnetic field strengthens half-filling insulator, also induces quarter-filling correlated insulating state as shown in Extended Data Fig. ) versus carrier density n in various perpendicular magnetic fields in the 1.28°-device. A sign change at half-filling persists to B⊥=6T and disappears at B⊥=8T. ii≠ii