Machine learning imitates the basic features of biological neural networks to efficiently perform tasks such as pattern recognition Machine learning has experienced an unprecedented growth in recent years, often referred to as an "artificial intelligence revolution" 1,2 . Its fundamental approach is inspired by biological systems: using neural networks to classify large amounts of data into sorting categories. Classic examples are speech and image recognition 1,2 . Neural networks are composed of two basic elements: neurons and synapses. Current machine learning schemes implement these elements at a software level: neurons and synapses are simulated on standard computers based on a von Neumann architecture 1,2 . This approach is inefficient in terms of computation speed and energy consumption, motivating a great effort towards developing hardware-based neuromorphic systems A solution to this problem might be found in "neuromorphic materials", whose intrinsic properties mimic those of neurons and synapses A neuristor must feature the most basic functionalities of real neurons: i) activity (outputting a current), ii) leaky integrate-and-fire, iii) volatility (resetting after a firing), and iv) rate coding of the external stimuli. Several groups have explored the possibility of a RS-based neuristor. Pickett et al. Performing leaky integrate-and-fire is one of the key functionalities of a neuristor. It must integrate all the stimuli coming from previous neurons and fire when the excitation is above a certain threshold Instead of electrical currents, we propose using heat flow to perform computing tasks, an approach known as caloritronics. Temperature substitutes charge as the integrating variable, as depicted in Figure We fabricated and tested a proof-of-concept neuristor that performs all basic neuronal functionalities. It consists of a VO2 thin film on top of which two layers of electrodes are patterned (detailed fabrication process in methods section and Extended Data Figure Figure Leaky integrate-and-fire (LIF) dynamics are governed by the characteristic thermal times of our device, given by its specific heat and thermal resistance to the substrate. Figure Another basic feature of biological neurons is rate coding: the frequency at which a neuron spikes depends on the amplitude of its stimulus. Strong stimulus will produce high frequency spiking, while weak stimulus will yield slower patterns Many of the relevant parameters of the proposed neuristor depend on the particular device design, as well as on the intrinsic properties of the chosen materials. This gives plenty of room to explore and improve its functionalities. Different substrates, insulating spacers or geometric designs will strongly change the device properties. For instance, a less thermally conductive substrate would reduce heat leakage to the environment, allowing for the use of lower input currents. A similar effect could be achieved by further reducing sizes. A larger ON/OFF ratio between insulator and metal would result in higher output currents when the IMT is triggered. With proper optimization, the output current could become larger than the input current, resulting in signal amplification. This could allow to use the neuristor as a completely independent device, without the need of a dedicated amplification stage. Caloritronics and resistive switching can be combined to create scalable and autonomous neuristors. We demonstrated four basic neural functionalities: activity, volatility, leaky integrate-and-fire dynamics and rate coding using simple devices that can be downscaled well below the m scale. Combined with the fast advances in memristor technology, this could pave the way to develope dense neuromorphic hardware, allowing for deeper and more complex neural networks. Our approach could be generalized to other physical phenomena. Other systems at the edge of a phase transition very sensitive to external stimuli might show similar behaviour. On a broader scope shows that, although often regarded as an undesirable consequence, power dissipation might actually enable new ways of computing, taking advantage of the rich phenomenology of correlated systems. Sample preparation. A 70 nm VO2 film was grown by reactive sputtering on top of an R-cut Al2O3 substrate. A 4 mtorr Argon/Oxygen mix (8% O2) was used during deposition. The substrate temperature was kept at 520C, and cooled down after sputtering at a rate of 12C/min. X-ray diffraction shows textured orientation along 100 for VO2. Transport measurements show a four orders of magnitude IMT, confirming the high quality of the film. The device was fabricated in two lithographic steps (layers). In the first layer, ebeam lithography end e-beam evaporation was used to pattern two Ti (20 nm)/Au (30 nm) electrodes. A small gap (⁓50 nm) was left between both electrodes, so large electric fields could be generated by applying a few volts. The second layer consists on a Al2O3 (70 nm)/Ti (20 nm)/Au (30 nm) nanowire, patterned on top of the gap and running perpendicular to the first layer electrodes. E-beam lithography and e-beam evaporation was used for this purpose. Several of such devices are patterned in a single sapphire substrate. Optical lithography and reactive ion etching was used to remove the VO2 outside of the gap area and isolate the different devices from each other. More information on the device fabrication process can be found in Extended Data Figure Fast transport measurements. Measurements were carried out in a TTPX Lakeshore cryogenic probe station. The station is equipped with high-speed (20 GHz) probes, with ground/line/ground geometry and 50  characteristic impedance. In order to avoid reflections (the insulating resistance of the device is in the 10 4 range) a 50  termination to ground was installed before the sample. A 240 MHz Tektronix function generator was used to create the voltage pulses and a 50  terminated Tektronix broadband oscilloscope (20 GHZ) was used to monitor the current. The electrical circuit set up ensured a rise time around 5 ns. 