Interaction of the fluxon with the finite size dipole impurity in the long Josephson junction is investigated. The impurity has polarity and will be referred to as a dipole impurity because it also has a direction and, consequently, changes its sign under the space inversion transform x → -x. Such a model is used to describe the inductively coupled to the Josephson transmission line qubit and the misaligned Abrikosov vortex that penetrates into the long Josephson junction. We derive the approximate equations of motion for the fluxon center of mass and its velocity. With the help of these equations we demonstrate that pinning and scattering of the fluxon on the impurity differs significantly from the case of the point impurity which is modelled by the derivative of the Dirac's δ-function. Long Josephson junctions (LJJs) are of great interest for the fundamental and applied physics The idea of the LJJ fluxon reading out the state of the JJ qubit was first developed by Averin Another group of problems discussed in the literature is the fluxon scattering on the Abrikosov vortex. First papers It should also be mentioned that the extensive research of the Schrödinger equation with δ ′ (x) as a potential has revealed The aim of this paper can be easily formulated from the above mentioned arguments. The question of how the dipole impurity size influences the fluxonimpurity interaction in the LJJ has not been studied yet and, consequently, will be addressed in this paper. The paper is organized as follows. In the next Section the model is described. Section 3 is devoted to the appoximate equations of motion for the fluxon parameters. In Sec. 4 the threshold pinning current is computed as a function of the model parameters. Delay time between pinning on the impurities with negative and positive polarities is investigated in Sec. 5. Discussion and conclusions are given in the last Section. In this article the LJJ with the dipole-like impurity is considered. It is described by the perturbed sine-Gordon (SG) equation This equation is written in the dimensionless form, where the space variable is normalized to the Josephson length λ J and the time is normalized to the inverse Josephson plasma frequency ω -1 J . The function φ(x, t) is the Josephson phase, which is the difference of the wave function phases of the superconducting electrodes that constitute the junction. The dimensionless parameters are: α is the dissipation parameter, γ is the external bias current. The function f i (x) models the dipole-like impurity The parameter μ will be referred to as the impurity amplitude and its sign σ = ±1 as its polarity. Usually the Dirac's δ-function and its derivatives are used as an approximation of the spatial inhomogeneities due to its simplicity. However, the inhomogeneities always have a finite size. Sometimes they are quite narrow and the approximation with the δ ′ (x) function is valid, but often the size dependence is important. Therefore, the following approximation will be used where θ(x) is the Heaviside step function. Here we assume that the total impurity length is ρ + 2l and it has an empty core with the length ρ. In the limit l, ρ → 0 and h = 1/l 2 → ∞ one obtains ∆ ′ l (x) → δ ′ (x). We apply the standard McLaughlin-Scott (MS) perturbation theory Thus, the perturbed SG equation transforms into the system of two nonlinear ODEs for the fluxon center of mass X and its velocity v: Here the dot corresponds to the time differentiation. After substituting Eq. (3) into Eqs. ( The auxiliary functions Ξ(X, v), Ψ(X, v) and Λ(z) are introduced for the sake of brevity and are given by the following expressions: where Li 2 (x) is the polylogarithm function this equation at which the fluxon can be found at rest ( Ẋ = 0, v = 0): where the inequality |X -| < |X + | is always satisfied. If the bias is small enough and/or the impurity amplitude μ is large enough, these two roots are real. At this point it is hard to figure out which is a stable equilibrium and which is unstable one and we will do it in the non-relativistic limit v 2 ≪ 1. It is easy to get the point impurity case if ρ = 0, l → 0, h → 1/l 2 . Then the already known result of Now we can find the potential created by the impurity (3). We assume that the fluxon is in the non-relativistic regime (v 2 ≪ 1). In that case the system (6)-( The exact shape of the potential U 0 (X) for the arbitrary barrier width l and the distance between the impurity peaks ρ cannot be obtained explicitly. Therefore we have used numerical integration in Eq. ( For σ = 1 U 0 (X) is the barrier-like potential and for σ = -1 it is a potential well. This figure helps to understand the nature of the fixed points defined by Eq. ( It is easy to see that the extrema of potential U (X) are symmetric with respect to the transform σ → -σ, X max,min → -X min,max . In other words, when the polarity of the impurity changes, the maximum changes sign and becomes the minimum, or vice versa. In the limiting case ρ = 0, l → 0 (h → 1/l 2 ) the expression for the potential can be obtained explicitly: The extrema of the potential The current-voltage characteristic (CVC) for the dc-biased LJJ with an impurity usually has a hysteresis-like shape with two characteristic bias values: the critical γ c current and the threshold current γ thr < γ c Xmax -∞ [. . .]dX and the threshold current should satisfy the following equation where the fluxon kinetic energy E k and its velocity v ∞ at the infinite distance away from the impurity v ∞ (see Ref. The equation ( First we consider the case of positive polarity (σ = 1) for which the dissipative energy loss equals We will consider the limit where γ ≪ μ, α ≪ μ. Then, the kinetic energy of the fluxon will take the form: In the lowest order of approximation the threshold current can be calculated by equating the fluxon kinetic energy to the maximum height of the potential barrier: 4v 2 ∞ = 2μ, γ (0) thr = 2α √ 2μ/π. On the other hand, the fluxon kinetic energy satisfies the following 4 Ẋ2 = 4v 2 ∞ -U (X) (the dissipative effects are neglected at this point). After substituting the potential U (X) from Now, having the explicit form of Ẋ we can compute the energy losses due to dissipation: where X min , X max are the minima and maxima of U (X). In accordance with (19) X min ≃ -ln(2μ/πγ), X max ≃ -πγ/μ. Substituting these expressions into (25) and using the expansions of terms with the inverse hyperbolic functions to the Taylor series will find the approximate expression for the dissipative energy loss: Here we have assumed |X max | ≪ 1 and, consequently, the terms O(X 2 max ) have been dropped. Now we can substitute Eqs. ( If the terms O(α 2 ) are ignored we obtain the expression γ thr = √ 8μα/π which can be derived from purely kinematic approach as in The O(α 2 ) correction, on the contrary, accounts for the potential shape as it is different from the respective correction for the microshort impurity Now consider the opposite case of negative impurity amplitude μ < 0 (σ = -1). For this case the extrema points are: X max ≃ ln(2|μ|/πγ), X min ≃ πγ/|μ|. We seek the approximate solution of Eq. ( where 2 F 1 (a, b, c, d) is the hypergeometric function Finally, after some calculations which are presented in Appendix A we obtain the final formula for the threshold current: where Γ(x) is the gamma-function. This formula has a structure similar to the expression for γ thr for the microresistor When the size parameters of the impurity, l and ρ, are non-zero it is not possible to obtain the threshold current analytically. Thus, we have used numerical integration of the equations of motion Consider first Fig. On the other hand, it is interesting to look at the dependence of threshold current from dissipation parameter which is presented in Fig. Finally, we discuss the dependence of the threshold current on the impurity amplitude μ. The respective dependences are given in Fig. In the negative polarity case σ = -1 we observe the non-physical divergence of the γ thr (|μ|) dependence [see Fig. During its motion along the junction the fluxon meets the impurity and interacts with it, whereupon the fluxon velocity changes. After leaving the impurity the fluxon velocity returns to the equilibrium value v ∞ . As it was shown in the previous sections, the dynamics of the fluxon transmission through the impurity with different σ is quite different. In particular, it takes different amount of time for the fluxon to pass through the σ = 1 and the σ = -1 impurities, respectively. Thus, it is possible to define the delay time ∆t as a difference between the time, necessary for the fluxon to pass some fixed distance over the σ = -1 and σ = +1 impurities with all other parameters (including γ) fixed. In In order to find the delay time we have performed numerical simulations of the fluxon equations of motion ( In Fig. In this paper the fluxon interaction with the dipole-like impurity in the long Josephson junction (LJJ) has been investigated. The problem arises when studying the fluxon-Abrikosov vortex interaction As far as the future research is concerned, we believe that consideration of the two-dimensional JJ is important alongside with the studies of the Josephson plasmon radiation due to fluxon scattering on such a finite-size dipole impurity for both the 1D and 2D Josephson junctions.