Single-layer PtN2 exhibits an intriguing structure consisting of a tessellation pattern called the Cairo tessellation of type 2 pentagons, which belong to one of the existing 15 types of convex pentagons discovered so far that can monohedrally tile a plane. Single-layer PtN2 has also been predicted to show semiconducting behavior with direct band gaps. Full exploration of the structureproperty relationship awaits the successful exfoliation or synthesis of this novel single-layer material, which depends on the structure of its bulk counterpart with the same stoichiometry to some extent. Bulk PtN2 with the pyrite structure is commonly regarded as the most stable structure in the literature. But comparing the energies of single-layer PtN2 and bulk PtN2 leads to a dilemma that a single-layer material is more stable than its bulk counterpart. To solve this dilemma, we propose stacking single-layer PtN2 sheets infinitely to form a new bulk structure of PtN2. The resulting tetrahedral layered structure is energetically more stable than the pyrite structure and single-layer PtN2. We also find that the predicted bulk structure is metallic, in contrast to the semiconducting pyrite structure. In addition to predicting the 3D structure, we explore the possibility of rolling single-layer PtN2 sheets into nanotubes. The required energies are comparable to those needed to form carbon or boron nitride nanotubes from their single-layer sheets, implying the feasibility of obtaining PtN2 nanotubes. We finally study the electronic structures of PtN2 nanotubes and find that the band gaps of PtN2 nanotubes are tunable by changing the number of unit cells N of single-layer PtN2 used to construct the nanotubes. Our work shows that dimension engineering of PtN2 not only leads to a more stable 3D structure but also 1D materials with novel properties. A number of two-dimensional (2D) materials have been predicted and recorded in various databases such as the computational 2D materials database (C2DB) 1 and Materialsweb. Even without in the above context of single-layer PtN 2 , bulk PtN 2 on its own has attracted considerable attention as an example in the family of transition-metal nitrides, which generally possess notable electrical, mechanical, and thermal properties. In addition to 2D materials, 1D nanotubes have sparked wide interest since the discovery of carbon nanotubes (CNTs). All the DFT calculations are performed using the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP, version 5.4.4) We first benchmark our calculations on single-layer PtN 2 with previous theoretical studies. Our calculated in-plane lattice constant (4.81 Å) is consistent with the reported results (4.80, 3 4.81, 5 and 4.83 4 Å). For the electronic structure, Fig. To search for the more stable bulk structure, we begin with studying the energy change by stacking two sheets of single-layer PtN 2 to form bilayer PtN 2 . We account for two types of stacking for bilayer PtN 2 . One is called the AB stacking (see Fig. As can be seen, without using the DFT-D3 method to describe the vdW interactions, the E b values resulting from the interactions between the two PtN 2 layers are negligibly small with the maximum binding energy of -9 meV/atom. Taking into account the vdW interactions, the binding energy is corrected to -69 meV/atom (we obtain the same binding energy using the optB88-vdW functional), which is similar to the binding energy (-31.1 meV/atom) of AA-stacked bilayer graphene calculated using the DFT-D method, and need to be satisfied for cubic and tetragonal PtN 2 , respectively. The computed elastic constants show that both the pyrite and TL structures of bulk PtN 2 are mechanically stable. Hardness is an important property of platinum nitrides for their engineering applications. where the bulk and shear moduli (B VRH and G VRH ) are calculated using the Voigt?-Reuss-?Hill (VRH) approximation: and B V and G V are the upper bounds of bulk and shear moduli written as and respectively. B R and G R are the lower bounds of bulk and shear moduli, i.e., where S ij (i, j = 1-6) are the elastic compliant constants and matrix S is equal to the inverse of matrix C. Table Experiments on bulk PtN 2 with the pyrite structure indicate the importance of stabilizing this bulk phase by external pressure. We compute the energy cost to obtain these nanotubes using the energy of single-layer PtN 2 as a reference. We additionally calculate the energy costs of wrapping single-layer graphene and boron nitride into zigzag (N , 0) and armchair (N , N ) nanotubes for comparison. As can be seen from Fig. In summary, by increasing the dimension of single-layer PtN 2 , we have predicted a more stable structure of bulk PtN 2 with tetragonal AA-stacked layered structure using DFT calculations. This structure is energetically more favorable than the pyrite structure or single-layer PtN 2 , therefore resulting in a physically positive formation energy of the single-layer PtN 2 , which is otherwise negative if using the energy of the pyrite structure as the reference. Owing to the layered structure, our predicted bulk structure provides a promising source for mechanically exfoliated single-layer semiconducting PtN 2 , consisting of a pattern of type 2 pentagons. We also find that applying external pressure can lead to the phase transition between the pyrite and tetragonal layered structures of PtN 2 and the transition pressures are about 20 and 15 GPa determined by the PBE and DFT-D3 methods, respectively. On the other hand, by reducing the dimension, we have predicted PtN 2 nanotubes with tunable band gaps (by varying their sizes) within the visible light spectrum. Furthermore, wrapping single-layer PtN 2 into nanotubes costs a comparable or smaller amount of energy in comparison to wrapping single-layer graphene and boron nitride into CNTs and BNNTs, respectively. The predicted PtN 2 nanotubes may find applications in optoelectronics devices. a c Ref.