A phase field method is used to computationally study conducting channel morphology of resistive switching thin film structures. Our approach successfully predicts the formation of conducting channels in typical dielectric thin film structures, comparable to a range of resistive switches, offering an alternative computational formulation based on metastable states treated at the atomic scale. In contrast to previous resistive switching thin film models, our formulation makes no a priori assumptions on conducting channel morphology and its fundamental transport mechanisms. Physical and chemical properties of dielectric thin films for resistive switching are governed by the dynamical behavior of intrinsic atomic metastable states of thin film materials and the presence of irreversible states endowed by specific preparation processes. Atomic metastable states may arise from various phenomena, such as Mott localization or change in configurational entropy, producing such effects as insulator-metal transition and hysteresis often seen in appropriately prepared dielectric thin films species Various qualitative models have been adopted to study resistive switching behavior of dielectric thin films, largely based on formation of conducting channels composed of clusters of charged species Numerous computational studies have adopted the conducting channel formalism to advance theories on resistive switching that occurs in thin films made of dielectric materials. Xu posed a qualatative conducting channel model based on experimental data suggesting clustering and bifurcation of thread-like conducting channels to explain set and reset processes of bipolar resistive RAM (RRAM) devices 7 . Pan presented a similar study, with empirical evidence supporting formation and rupture of conducting channels corresponding to low-resistance and high-resistance states, respectively, of their ZnO memristor 8 . Ielmini presented a self-consistent electrothermal computational study based on a thermally activated ion migration model demonstrating conducting channel formation and rupture 9 . Using an analytical formulation, the approach correctly resolved set and reset behavior of a generic bipolar RRAM device by dynamic coupling of the channel resistance, charge transport and temperature, providing insight on conducting channel dynamic behavior. Gibson demonstrated steady-state negative differential resistance in niobium oxide selectors using a compact behavioral model self-consistently coupled to an electrothermal network. Their model demonstrated insulator-metal transition is not required for the presence of negative differential resistance, being due instead to Frenkel transport 11 . In contrast, Sevic posed a continuum-based computational study of the dynamical evolution of niobium oxide selector electroforming While the conducting channel formalism qualitatively explains resistive switching behavior of dielectric thin films, in contrast, previous computational studies have largely adopted a continuum transport formulation. Selfconsistent solution of the continuum transport equations dynamically emulates advection and diffusion of thermally-activated charged species, and their interaction with local electric potential and temperature, to model bulk resistive switching phenomena. The continuum formulation, however, depends vitally on an a priori conducting channel transport model and correct identification of diffusion and mobility expressions for each specific transport mechanism, for example Frenkel transport for ionic vacancy conduction A computational formulation that does not a priori impose assumptions on conducting channel morphology, transport phenomena, or interface uniformity, and instead treats resistive switching from its origin at the atomic-scale, may offer significant advantages over existing methods. Such a method might model the dynamical evolution of cluster-like charged aggregates, as illustrated by Figure In this paper, we apply a phase field method to study dynamical evolution of conducting channels that influence resistive switching behavior exhibited by dielectric thin films. With the phase field method, the assumptions of an a priori conducting channel model and the presence of specific transport phenomena to explain resistive switching are abandoned, and our model is instead formulated as a diffuse interface problem subject to a variational principle 26 . Our approach successfully predicts the formation of conducting channels in typical dielectric thin film structures comparable to a range of resistive switches, offering an alternative computational formulation based on metastable states treated at the atomic scale, requiring no assumptions on conducting channel morphology and its fundamental transport mechanisms. Further, our approach applies to both electronic transport and ionic transport, e.g. ionic oxygen vacancies, however the current study focuses exclusively on electronic transport of dielectric thin films and unipolar resistive switching. Charge transport properties of thin films, governed by the dynamical behavior of atomic metastable states, are naturally treated by the phase field method. In contrast to molecular dynamics, which tracks the motion of each charge carrier, the phase field formulation tracks the dynamical evolution of the envelope of clusters of charge carriers whose aggregate boundary, an a priori unknown, forms a conducting channel interface within the non-conducting host, as illustrated by Figure To apply the phase field formulation, consider Figure Interaction of the bulk free-energy and interface energy with electric potential externally applied to the structure of Figure where k is an interfacial gradient energy term that relates to energy stored per unit application of the potential of the gradient of c(r,t) and the integration is over R, the entire thin film structure of Figure The phase field transport equation is found by seeking an energy-minimizing stationary state of the free-energy, identified by finding the first-order variation of freeenergy functional Equation To study the dynamical evolution of conducting channel formation of our thin film structure, a self-consistent solution of Equation 6a and Equation 6b is obtained by the Multiphysics Object-Oriented Simulation Environment (MOOSE) finite-element platform An initial simulation was performed on an ideal abrupt interface to study the impact of interface roughness on the initial growth process of the conducting channel, as illustrated by the initial and final states illustrated by Figures Using the pristine initial conditions specified by Figure The equilibrium interface formed by the conducting state and non-conducting state intrinsically describes the morphology of the conducting channel, represented by an envelope of cluster-like domains composed of many discrete charge carriers. The minimum energy condition imposed by the variation of the free-energy functional Equation 3 reflects local equilibrium between bulk free-energy density, interface energy, and their interaction with the applied electric potential, subject to appropriate boundary conditions and material properties. To explore the influence of film thickness on the formation of conducting channels, an additional simulation was carried out on an otherwise identical thin film structure 50 nm thick, as shown by Figure The thickness-to-width ratio for the structures of Figures 3c and 3e is 0.2 and 1.0, respectively. This suggests an affinity for conducting channel formation for low thicknessto-width ratios, perhaps because of the dominance of the bulk free-energy, as indicated by the free-energy functional Equation A computational phase field study of thin film conducting channel morphology and evolution has been presented. Atomic metastable states of thin films, responsible for resistance switching behavior, produces complex microstructure resulting from interaction of bulk free-energy and interface energy. The phase field formulation naturally avoids the mathematically onerous problem of tracking the dynamical evolution of the interface formed by this microstructure. Our computational results suggest the phase field formulation can model the dynamical evolution of conducting channel formation and growth, illustrating a new method for the study of dielectric thin films for resistive switching. Our results further suggest that only when the initial interface has roughness do conducting channels form. Since interface roughness is expected to exist in any real dielectric thin film interface, we thus expect to observe switching in many films. Furthermore, even though an initial well-prepared interface will exhibit finite roughness, the film thickness needs to be thin enough for a conducting channel to form, consistent with experimental data from thin film structures having a thickness-to-width ratio substantially less than unity. Physically this makes sense insofar as the lateral dimension establishes the number of nucleation sites at which conducting channels start forming, i.e. if the lateral dimension is extremely small, there exists reduced likelihood of conducting channel formation.