We have wound a 157-turn, non-insulated pancake coil with an outer diameter of 85 mm and we cooled it down to 77 K with a combination of conduction and gas cooling. Using high-speed fluorescent thermal imaging in combination with electrical measurements we have investigated the coil under load, including various ramping tests and over-current experiments. We have found found that the coil does not heat up measurably when being ramped to below its critical current. Two over-current experiments are presented, where in one case the coil recovered by itself and in another case a thermal runaway occurred. We have recorded heating in the bulk of the windings due to local defects, however the coil remained cryostable even during some over-critical conditions and heated only to about 82-85 K at certain positions. A thermal runaway was observed at the center, where the highest magnetic field and a resistive joint create a natural defect. The maximum temperature, ∼100 K, was reached only in the few innermost windings around the coil former. Coils wound from second generation high temperature superconductors (HTS) are being researched for use in high field magnets The fluorescent thermal imaging's obvious requirement is that a surface has to be optically visible. This puts significant constraints on both the coil's and the cryostat's design. First, the boiling of a liquid nitrogen bath must be avoided and the coil surface cannot be obstructed by any kind of resin impregnation, current lead or other structural part. In addition, ideally the pancake coil should have a large inner-to-outer diameter distance (winding thickness), in order to allow the observation of any meaningful thermal effect. To solve these problems, a simple conduction plus gas cooled experimental setup was constructed. A coil was wound from 4-mm wide SuperPower SCS4050 AP HTS coated conductor using a tension of ∼2 kg, starting with a soldered In-Ag joint on a 30-mm diameter copper former. A separate, 12-mm wide HTS tape was also soldered to the bottom of this copper cylinder. This tape runs at the bottom of the coil and is used as current lead. A total length of approximately 30 m of HTS tape was used for 157 turns, the outermost two of which were soldered together for providing mechanical stability to the coil. After the soldered outer turns, an extra length of tape of 20 cm was kept for being used as the second current lead. To avoid complex and expensive vacuum and cryocooler setups with optical windows -and since the aim was to test the coil only at 77 K -a simple, 2-component cryostat was constructed, as shown in Figure To observe local heating over the coil's surface, the same droplet coating method was used as in experiments with HTS tapes described in A picture of the coil and the electrical instrumentation is shown in Figure Before testing the coil in the conduction-cooled setup, it was first measured in a liquid nitrogen bath to obtain its critical current using the 0.1 μV/cm and 1 μV/cm cri-teria, which worked out to be 57 A and 67 A, respectively. In the conduction-cooled setup, the coil was ramped using several ramping rates, while being recorded at 50 fps to observe whether the ramping rate caused any heating during ramp-up. The tested ramping rates ranged from 0.5 A/s to 1000 A/s. It was found that virtually no heating took place in the coil during ramping, with the exception of the 12-mm wide HTS current lead. The latter does not sit completely flat on the conduction-cooled surface and hence it does heat up initially. However, being 3 times wider than the tape in the coil, it could easily withstand currents up to 74 A. The absence of any remarkable heating in the test coil even during fast ramps is a consequence of its low critical current, leading to small Joule losses when the current flows across the neighboring coil turns. In our over-current measurements, the coil was first ramped up to previously validated safe current levels and from there, slowly to higher currents. At specific current levels the ramping was stopped and the coil was held steady to observe if its voltage was still stable. This stepwise ramping was then continued until the coil voltage could no longer stabilize and a "natural" runaway appeared. Special care was taken to manually ramp down the coil in case a high voltage arose, in order to permit future experimentation and avoid damages. In different measurements, the transition point was observed at slightly different current levels, which suggests that slight disturbances in cooling, ramping and current levels can influence the thermal stability to some degree. The coil current was first ramped up to 71 A at a rate of 10 A/s and the voltage was monitored, as shown in Figure To conclude, the applicability of fluorescent thermal imaging in applied superconductivity was demonstrated on the example of an HTS-wound NI pancake coil. In two over-current measurements, different thermal and electrical behaviors were observed. In the first experiment, the coil current was ramped up until 72 A where a slow, resistive voltage shift was observed, together with a linear drop in the magnetic field. However, the magnetic field recovered and the voltage dropped abruptly, which was accompanied by a sudden change in heating distribution over the coil. In a successive measurement, the coil current was ramped up to 74 A, where a characteristic superconducting runaway was observed. Here, during the rapid voltage rise, the coil's innermost windings heated up, whereas the remainder of the coil stayed cold. This confirmed that the initial point of the thermal runaway was located at a resistive joint, e.g. the central copper former, coinciding with the highest magnetic field. Another observation was the change in voltage rise during the thermal runaway. Initially, the typical sharp transition signal was observed on the voltage measurement, but soon after, the rise became more linear. The thermal imaging has also shown that current redistribution (e.g. due to local I c variations) does not happen at a single point around a local defect, but rather over larger length scales. This is visible in the thermal images as warmer rings spanning over a few turns.