We report on the thermal and electrical properties of hybrid epoxy composites with graphene and boron nitride fillers. The thicknesses, lateral dimensions, and aspect ratios of each filler material were intentionally selected for geometric similarity to one another, in contrast to prior studies that utilized dissimilar filler geometries to achieve a "synergistic" effect. We demonstrate that the electrically-conductive graphene and electrically-insulating boron nitride fillers allow one to effectively engineer the thermal and electrical conductivities of their resulting composites. By varying the constituent fraction of boron nitride to graphene in a composite with ~44% total filler loading, one can tune the thermal conductivity enhancement from a factor of ×15 to ×35 and increase the electrical conductivity by many orders of magnitude. The obtained results are important for the development of next-generation thermal interface materials with controllable electrical properties necessary for applications requiring either electrical grounding or insulation. Suitably reliable and affordable thermal management technologies remain a major challenge driven by the continuous miniaturization of integrated circuits, increasing functionality of mobile devices, and growing computing density in data centers The unique heat conduction properties of graphene, discovered a decade ago Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) is a natural choice for use as a complementary, electrically insulating, filler with graphene We start by establishing the terminology used in this study. Unlike the strict definition of graphene being a monolayer of hexagonally-bound carbon atoms found in the solid-state physics context, the term graphene in the practical field of thermal composites refers to a mixture of "true" graphene and few-layer graphene flakes Long graphene fillers with dimensions above the average phonon MFP will better preserve the heat conduction properties. However, when the filler length becomes too large it leads to its bending and can start to interfere with the bond line thickness requirements. The intrinsic properties of electrically conductive graphene fillers and electrically insulating h-BN fillers, reported in literature [Table [Figure The polymer base, i.e. matrix material, is a room-temperature curing epoxy composed of a resin (Bisphenol-A; Allied High Tech Products, Inc.) and a hardening agent (Triethylenetetramine; Allied High Tech Products, Inc.). The graphene flakes were sourced from a commercial liquidexfoliated graphene powder (Graphene Supermarket) having a thickness ranging from 0.35 nm, corresponding to specimens of a single atomic plane, to 12 nm and lateral sizes ranging from 2 μm to 8 μm. The h-BN filler were sourced from a similar process (US Research Nanomaterials, Inc.) with a similar range of thicknesses and lateral sizes ranging from 3 μm to 8 μm. The two filler materials were incorporated into the polymer matrix material without extra processing steps such as additional exfoliation or surface functionalization. We intentionally omitted any functionalization to facilitate a more direct comparison of the effects graphene and h-BN fillers have on resulting composites. One should note that functionalization, filler size optimization, and directed orientation lead to further improvements in the overall thermal conductivity of the resulting composites The epoxy composite preparation began with weighing the resin material, pre-calculating, and weighing of requisite filler materials necessary to hit a targeted composite filler loading level. Next, the prescribed amounts of fillers were pre-mixed separate from the resin to achieve homogeneity and then added to the resin. Then, the resin and fillers were mixed together for 2 minutes in a high-speed, bladeless mixer (Flacktek, Inc.) that revolves about a central axis while simultaneously rotating about the sample's own center axis at 2500 RPM. For all samples with greater than 11 vol. % filler loading, a process of mixing and breaking agglomerations was conducted with a custom-designed needle-like tool. These two mixing steps were then repeated four times in total. After, the hardening agent was added and the composite was speed mixed at 3500 RPM for ten seconds, followed by extensive manual needle mixing. Finally, a pressure of approximately 16 bars was applied via a plunger pressed into the rigid mold to break the numerous individual agglomerations and flatten the material. The sample was left to cure for 24 hours. Finally, the composite sample was then removed from the mold, polished to the desired geometry, and baked at 50°C for ten minutes to ensure that any moisture from the polishing process was evaporated and the curing process was complete. A typical final sample geometry is a disk with a diameter of 25.6 mm and a thickness of 2 mm (see Figure Raman spectroscopy experiments were conducted to verify the composition and quality of the composite samples. The spectra were attained using a standard spectrometer (Renishaw InVia) under 633-nm laser excitation in the backscattering configuration. More details of our Raman measurement procedures can be found elsewhere in the study of other material systems Figure [Figure The cross-plane thermal diffusivities of the samples were measured using the transient "laser flash" technique (Netzsch, LFA 467). In this technique, a light pulse impinges on one surface of a sample creating a temperature differential in the sample with a corresponding heat wave and measures the infrared intensity on the opposing surface over time. Details of the "laser flash" measurement procedures have been reported elsewhere Figure [Figure In order to measure the cross-plane electrical conductivity, σ=1/ρ, of the composites, we painted silver electrodes on the top and bottom bases of the sample cylinders, following the procedure described in literature Note that the electrical conductivity can be varied by over eleven orders of magnitude by altering the graphene constituent fraction in an individual total filler loading level. Interestingly, the composites with high loading of pure h-BN fillers, i.e. without any graphene, revealed measurable electrical conductivity. The latter was attributed to the fact that h-BN, as a wide-bandgap III-V semiconductor material with finite electrical conductivity, which leads to electrical conduction via the development of an electrical percolation network in high-loading samples. [Figure In order to put the present results in the general context of graphene-enhanced TIMs, we summarized thermal conductivities of the composites reported in literature in Table The fact that both types of fillers have the same dimensions can simplify the TIM production and cut the associated costs of manufacture. We investigated the thermal and electrical properties of hybrid epoxy composites with graphene and boron nitride fillers. The thicknesses, lateral dimensions, and aspect ratios of both types of fillers were specifically chosen for their similarity. We demonstrated that the electrically conductive graphene and electrically insulating boron nitride fillers allow one to effectively engineer the thermal and electrical conductivities of the resulting composites. By varying the constituent fraction of graphene in a composite of ~44% total filler loading one can tune the thermal conductivity enhancement from a factor of ×15 to ×35 and change the electrical conductivity to an even greater extent --from below 10 -12 S/cm to more than 0.1 S/cm. A thermal conductivity of ~ 8 W/mK was obtained with composites purely filled with graphene and ~6.5 This system is characterized by fillers of the same size and aspect ratio but different material. (f) The same as in (e) but with the larger loading of h-BN then graphene fillers. Note that the composite in (e) is expected to be electrically conducting while the composite in (f) is expected to be electrically insulating. The strategies (a) -(d) have been investigated for many constituent fillers, including graphene and h-BN. The strategies (e) and (f) are proposed in the present work. increase in the thermal conductivity of the composites with increasing fraction of graphene for each total loading. The data suggest an absence of the "synergistic" effect for binary fillers of the same size and aspect ratio. Graphene outperforms h-BN as the thermal filler owing to its higher intrinsic thermal conductivity. The data scatter for a composite with the 25.5% total loading is attributed to the proximity of the loading level to the percolation threshold. vol.%, the electrical conductivity increases strongly with increasing graphene fraction (red circles). For the high total filler loading, the electrical conductivity shows a saturation type behavior for the graphene fraction above 25%. Note that the electrical conductivity can be varied over more than eleven orders of magnitude by changing the graphene fraction in the total filler loading. Thermal and Electrical Properties of Hybrid Composites with Graphene and Boron Nitride Fillers -UCR (2019) Thermal and Electrical Properties of Hybrid Composites with Graphene and Boron Nitride Fillers -UCR (2019) Thermal and Electrical Properties of Hybrid Composites with Graphene and Boron Nitride Fillers -UCR (2019)