Phase change memory (PCM) is an emerging data storage technology, however its programming is thermal in nature and typically not energy-efficient. Here we reduce the switching power of PCM through the combined approaches of filamentary contacts and thermal confinement. The filamentary contact is formed through an oxidized TiN layer on the bottom electrode, and thermal confinement is achieved using a monolayer semiconductor interface, three-atom thick MoS2. The former reduces the switching volume of the phase change material and yields a 70% reduction in reset current versus typical 150 nm diameter mushroom cells. The enhanced thermal confinement achieved with the ultra-thin (~6 Å) MoS2 yields an additional 30% reduction in switching current and power. We also use detailed simulations to show that further tailoring the electrical and thermal interfaces of such PCM cells toward their fundamental limits could lead up to a six-fold benefit in power efficiency. Phase change memory (PCM) is an emerging storage class memory technology, wherein the typical cell consists of a chalcogenide-based phase change material (commonly Ge2Sb2Te5) contacted by top and bottom electrodes (TE and BE, respectively). The metal electrodes are used to apply voltage or current pulses to the phase change material, inducing its (reversible) transformation between amorphous and crystalline phases. We fabricate filamentary BE PCM with a MoS2 interfacial layer [Fig. In samples with oxidized BEs, we must first form a filament before we see memory operation. This is done by applying 1/50/1 ns rise/width/fall pulses of increasing bias until the filament is formed and we observe >200 μA of current during the pulse. In more than 50 measured devices, this occurs between 1.5 to 2 V. To demonstrate the filamentary nature of these oxidized BEs, we measured devices of various BE sizes with and without oxidation. Figure We measure the resistance of all devices with a 50 mV DC bias. For set and reset programming, we use 1/50/2000 ns and 1/50/1 ns rise/width/fall pulses, respectively. The general layout of the measurement system and endurance information can be found in the supplementary material. Next, we compare the reset current of the MoS2 filament-contacted devices with the control devices. To do this we first cycle all measured devices at least 1000 times to ensure consistent and reliable operation. Subsequently, cells are set into the low resistance state. We apply a series of increasing amplitude reset pulses to the device and capture the transient current through an oscilloscope. To obtain the current, we measure the voltage across the 50 Ω input of the oscilloscope. We note that, where a pulse current is given, we refer to the peak current rather than the average. For peak power calculations, we assume nominal applied voltage and peak current. In Fig. Conversely, for the graphene-interfaced PCM, we see a significant increase in the switching current. This is similar to observations in prior work We performed finite-element simulations to examine how much of an impact we can expect by modifying the thermal and electrical interfaces of a typical mushroom cell device. The key is to determine the expected power benefits of adding a 2D material layer and also to understand the "ultimate limits" of a perfect interface material with ideal thermal and electrical properties. We assume a device structure similar to our fabricated design with 100 nm diameter TiN BE and 30 nm thick GST. The top metal stack is identical with 40 nm of TiN and Pt. To simplify the simulation, we chose not to include the filamentary structure, and the 2D material layer is modeled as a simple increase in the electrical and thermal resistance of the interface. We take into account the temperature-dependent electrical contact resistance, ρc(T) = ρ(T)teff, by tying it to an effective GST thickness, teff, where the electrical resistivity of GST, ρ(T), is obtained from Ref. 23. In other words, an effective GST thickness of 10 nm would give an interface that has the same electrical resistance as 10 nm of GST at that temperature. The temperature dependence of the TBR is not taken into account as it is expected to be negligible for MoS2 24 above room temperature. In Fig. For our mushroom cell, it is impractical to reach the quenching limit 25 as heat will dissipate through the TE and bulk GST even if the BE interface is thermally resistive (details can be found in the supplementary information section S3). While a thicker layer could be engineered to have very high thermal resistance, some heat generated in this layer would be trapped further from the phase change region. Therefore, we expect that using layered 2D heterostructures (e.g. a MoS2/WTe2 bilayer) will further increase the TBR while preserving the atomic thinness of the interface. These van der Waals heterostructures have been shown to have highly tunable properties In conclusion, we fabricated a PCM device which combines the area reduction of a metal-oxide filament with the thermal confinement of monolayer MoS2 at the BE-GST interface to reduce the switching current by 70% and 30%, respectively. Finite element simulations illustrate that increasing electrical or thermal boundary resistances individually can improve the power efficiency of typical PCM by more than 2×, and by 6× if both are increased up to near the fundamental limits. However, reaching these enhanced thermal boundary resistances will require novel approaches, such as the use of 2D heterostructures at the interface. after) and FWHM (6.0 cm -1 before, 5.8 cm -1 after). The E′ peak position is also unchanged (384.9 cm -1 before, 385.0 cm -1 after), but the FWHM is broadened (3.5 cm -1 before, 5.2 cm -1 after). Peak center and full width half maximum (FWHM) values are extracted from peak fits. (c) TEM cross-sections of a PCM device fabricated for this work, with the MoS2 interfacial layer. BE diameter is ~150 nm. (d) Zoomed in image of the red boxed area in (c) showing a ~2 nm oxidation layer on the TiN, just below the monolayer of MoS2. E. Yalon, Ö. B. Aslan, K. K. H. Smithe, C. J. McClellan, S. V. Suryavanshi, F. Xiong, A. Sood, C. M. Neumann, X. Xu, K. E. Goodson, T. F. Heinz, and E. Pop, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 9, 43013 (2017).