Quantum phase transitions are intriguing and fundamental cooperative phenomena in physics. Analyzing a superconducting nanowire with spin-dependent non-Hermitian hopping, we discover a topological quantum phase transition driven by infinitesimal cascade instability. The anomalous phase transition is complementary to the universal non-Bloch wave behavior of non-Hermitian systems. We show that an infinite small magnetic field drastically suppresses the non-Hermitian skin effect, inducing a topological phase with Majorana boundary states. Furthermore, by identifying the bulk topological invariant, we establish the non-Hermitian bulk-boundary correspondence that does not have a Hermitian counterpart. We also discuss an experimental realization of the system by using the spin-current injection to a quantum wire. Recently, non-Hermitian Hamiltonians Although the non-Hermitian physics under the periodic boundary condition (PBC) can be investigated by using mathematical tools developed in the Hermitian physics In this Letter, we construct and analyze a simple non-Hermitian lattice model that describes a one-dimensional s-wave superconductor with spin-dependent asymmetric hopping. Although this model is topologically nontrivial under the PBC, the SU(2) imaginary gauge transformation reveals that the system under the OBC does not show any topological boundary modes. Interestingly, however, we find that this mismatching is drastically remedied by an infinitesimal transverse magnetic field in the thermodynamic limit. Performing the numerical diagonalization with a small magnetic field, we find the missing Majorana boundary modes, which are protected by the Z 2 topological invariant. This finding establishes the presence of the non-Hermitian bulk-boundary correspondence that has no analog in the Hermitian physics. Finally we also discuss an experimental realization by FIG. using the spin current injection to a quantum wire. Periodic boundary condition.-In order to grasp a rough idea, we first analyze the infinite lattice system under the PBC, where the momentum-space picture is useful. For Hermitian systems, the Majorana fermions are known to appear on boundaries of a spinless p-wave superconductor Let us consider the following Hamiltonian: where (a † , a) are spin-1/2 fermionic (electron) creation and annihilation operators, and real parameters t, Γ and ∆ describe the kinetic energy, dissipation (loss for particles and gain for holes), and an s-wave gap function where (α, α) are creation and annihilation operators of the Bogoliubov quasi-particles, and are their energy dispersion [Fig. In the real-space picture, Eq. ( where i is the site index, and t ± = t ± Γ/4. Note that the normal part of the Hamiltonian includes the non-Hermitian asymmetric hopping terms whose asymmetry depends on the z-component spin. These hopping terms are regarded as those of a stacked Hatano-Nelson model Open boundary condition.-Thus far, we have introduced the non-Hermitian spin-orbit interaction for the purpose of the realization of Majorana boundary states. This proposal is based on the momentum-space picture, which corresponds to the PBC in real space. In the presence of non-Hermiticity, however, extensive sensitivity of the energy spectrum to boundary conditions obscures the naive bulk-boundary correspondence. Let us impose the OBC on the Hamiltonian (3). To consider the eigenvalues of Eq. (3), we perform the SU(2) imaginary gauge transformation, which generalizes the imaginary gauge transformation where (b † , b) are creation and annihilation operators in the new basis. Under this transformation, the spindependent asymmetric hopping terms are mapped to the spin-independent symmetric ones: while the other terms are invariant. Thus, the Hamiltonian (3) is mapped to a conventional s-wave superconductor, apart from a constant dissipation term. Although this transformation changes the eigenfunctions drastically, it does not change the eigenvalues because it is a similarity transformation. Thus, the Hamiltonian (3) has the same energy spectrum as that of the mapped swave superconductor. This implies that the lattice model ( which does not depend on the band index a = ± [88]. The obtained spectrum is drastically different from Eq. (2) [Fig. Phase transition driven by infinitesimal instability.-In the case of the OBC, asymmetry of the hopping induces the accumulation of eigenstates near boundaries. This non-Bloch wave behavior (non-Hermitian skin effect) stems from the exponentially growing form factor in Eq. ( This term is not invariant under the SU(2) imaginary gauge transformation, and thus our model is no longer equivalent to the trivial s-wave superconductor even when δh is very small. Roughly speaking, this perturbation cannot be ignored if where L is the system size, and α 1 , α 2 > 0 are constants. After taking the thermodynamic limit, the infinitesimally small perturbation drastically changes the energy spectrum from the unperturbed one. In other words, the order-of-limits changes the physics: Similar high sensitivity of eigenvalues to the pertubation is also discussed in mathematics Numerical diagonalization.-We rewrite the Hamiltonian (3) with the small perturbation where ) is the Nambu spinor, and H BdG is the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian matrix (explicit form in SM). Using the Nambu representation, we numerically calculate the energy spectra of the finite lattice system (L = 100) for various transverse magnetic fields and plot them in Fig. In the absence of the magnetic field, the result is well approximated by Eq. ( The Majorana fermions satisfy the non-Hermitian Majorana condition (see SM) [91]: where i = 1, 2 denote the boundaries on which the Majorana fermions localize. The effective theory of the two edges (1 and 2) are given by where ǫ is the complex finite-size coupling, and (α, α) are the fermion operators constructed from the Majorana fermions: In the present numerical calculation, the fermion energy ǫ takes the imaginary number (ǫ = -4 × 10 -5 i). Non-Hermitian topological phase.-In the presence of the non-Hermitian skin effect, it is necessary to define the topological number by using the non-Bloch wave functions Let us consider the BdG Bloch Hamiltonian constructed from Eq. ( where σs and τ s are the Pauli matrices in the spin and particle-hole space, respectively. This Hamiltonian belongs to class D in the the Altland-Zirnbauer Note that the transpose in the charge conjugation is not equivalent to the complex conjugation for the non-Hermitian case where k = 0, π are the time-reversal-invariant points, and the superscript "BdG" is omitted. The topological invariant is well-defined unless detH k = 0 (i.e. |Γ| = |∆|). The competition between ∆ and Γ determines the topological phase; the Z 2 index is trivial for |Γ| < |∆| and nontrivial for |Γ| > |∆| (see SM). Thus, the present strong Γ case, where the boundary modes exist, is topologically non-trivial, while the weak Γ case, where the boundary modes are absent (see SM), is topologically trivial. Although non-Hermitian topological phases whose gap-closing point is defined by det H k = 0 had been understood in the absence of boundaries, their topological nature under the OBC was unclear so far Spintronic application.-We finally discuss an experimental realization of the Hamiltonian (3). The nontrivial task is to implement the spin-dependent asymmetric hopping terms, or equivalently, the non-Hermitian spinorbit interaction. Although the full implementation of the sin k σ z term seems to be difficult, we may introduce the essentially the same effect near the Fermi level, where the superconducting pairing occurs. In order to introduce the spin-momentum locked effect near the Fermi level, we propose to a pure spin current injection to a quantum wire. Under this non-equilibrium circumstance, modes with spin current σ z ∂E/∂k opposed to the injected spin current would have a shorter life time by scatterings. For sufficiently large imbalance of dissipation Γ, we obtain the situation in Fig. In summary, we have constructed and analyzed a simple non-Hermitian lattice model of an s-wave superconductor that realizes a novel topological phase. The topological phase transition is driven by an infinitesimal external magnetic field. We have also discussed an experimental realization in spintronics. The present model provides the first concrete example of the non-Hermitian topological phase that does not have Hermitian counterparts. Nobuyuki Okuma * and Masatoshi Sato Yukawa Institute for Theoretical Physics, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan (Dated: September 2, 2019) For convenience, we here write down the explicit form of the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian in real space. The matrix elements are given by where t ± = t ± Γ/4. We here discuss conditions for the infinitesimal instability against the local perturbation on the basis of the continuum band introduced in Ref. According to Ref. This is a 2lN -order algebraic equation of e iκ with l and N being the hopping range and internal degrees of freedom per unit cell, respectively. Let e iκi (i = 1, ..., 2lN ) with |e iκ1 | ≤ ... ≤ |e iκ 2lN | be solutions of Eq.( holds: Actually, Eq. ( and thus it gives a one-parameter family of E, which is mentioned as the continuum band By using this symmetry, we can rewrite Eq. ( Thus, if e iκ is a solution of the characteristic equation ( which means that the continuum band is identical to the PBC spectrum with the perturbation ǫ, and the non-Hermitian skin effect does not occurs. Since we have already taken the thermodynamic limit to discuss the continuum band, the PBC spectrum in ǫ → 0 limit gives the OBC bulk spectrum in lim ǫ→0 lim L→∞ . This proves that the energy spectrum of our model with the OBC under the infinitesimal perturbation is identical to that with the PBC in thermodynamic limit. Note that the above discussion cannot be applied to the unperturbed Hamiltonian,which can be block-diagonalized. Each sector no longer has the symmetry We here discuss how the creation and annihilation operators of eigenstates are defined in non-Hermitian systems. We consider the general quadratic non-Hermitian Hamiltonian where H is a non-Hermitian Hamiltonian matrix, and (a, a † ) are creation and annihilation operators that satisfy the bosonic or fermionic commutation relations. Suppose that H is diagonalizable. In such a case, physical eigenstates are characterized by the right eigenstates of H. Let us define the following two matrices by using the right and left eigenstates: where the right and left eigenstates of H are defined as By using these matrices, the biorthonomal condition m|n = m|n = δ mn and the completeness condition n |n n| = n |n n| can be summarized in the following simple form: Using these relations, H can be expressed as where Thus, the Hamiltonian ( This is the definition of the creation and annihilation in the new basis. Although α is no longer the Hermitian conjugate of α, (α, α) behave as the creation and annihilation operators that satisfy the bosonic or fermionic commutation relation: where As we noted in the main text, the charge conjugation is defined by using not the complex conjugation but the transpose, and they are inequivalent in non-Hermitian systems. The point-gap topological classification of the non-Hermitian Hamiltonian is mapped to the topological classification of the corresponding Hermitian Hamiltonian The particle-hole symmetry in the mapped Hamiltonian can be written as the conventional antiunitary operation: In addition, the Hamiltonian has a chiral symmetry: Owing to the additional chiral symmetry, the symmetry class is shifted, and the mapped Hamiltonian turns out to be a class DIII Hermitian matrix. In the Hermitian topological classification, the class DIII topological phases in one dimension are characterized by a Z 2 topological invariant. Actually, we can construct the Z 2 topological invariant by making use of the off-diagonal basis in Eq. ( where k = 0, π denote the time-reversal invariant points in momentum space. We have used the fact that τ x H(0) and τ x H(π) are antisymmetric matrices due to Eq. ( Although the analytical expression of the integrand is complicated due to the inverse of the Hamiltonian, we find that the topological invariant for the gapped region (E = 0) is given by Note that the topological phase transition occurs at |∆| = |Γ|, where the point gap of the complex energy band structure of Eq. ( To check the bulk-boundary correspondence, we perform the numerical diagonalization in real space (L = 400, OBC) for several Γs (Fig. We here discuss the Majorana zero mode in non-Hermitian systems. Suppose that the Hamiltonian matrix H has the particle-hole symmetry C = τ x : For convenience, we rewrite the theory in the Majorana basis: In this basis, the particle-hole symmetryC is equal to unity: where we have used the explicit form of U and τ x in the last line. In the following, we use the Majorana basis and omit ′ . In the Majorana basis, the following equation holds: We have used the definition of the left eigenfunction By using Eq. ( Using the property of the Majorana basis a † i = a i and Eq. ( 