In this work, we investigate theoretically and demonstrate experimentally the existence of valley-Hall edge states in the in-plane dynamics of honeycomb lattices with bi-valued strut thickness. We exploit these states to achieve non-trivial waveguiding of optical modes that is immune to backscattering from sharp corners. We also present how different types of interfaces can be combined into multi-branch junctions to form complex waveguide paths and realize a variety of structural logic designs with unconventional wave transport capabilities. We illustrate this potential with two applications. The first is a direction-selective energy-splitting waveguide tree featuring a pronounced asymmetric wave transport behavior. The second is an internal waveguide loop along which the energy can be temporarily trapped and periodically released, effectively working as a signal delayer. The modal complexity of in-plane elasticity has important consequences on the regime of manifestation of the edge states, as the availability of viable total bandgaps is shifted to higher frequencies compared to the out-of-plane counterpart problem. It also poses additional experimental challenges, associated with proper acquisition and deciphering of the in-plane modes, the solution of which requires a systematic use of in-plane laser vibrometry. Acousto-elastic metamaterials and phononic crystals are architected structures that are artificially designed to control and manipulate mechanical wave propagation. Some of their most well known properties are mechanical filtering and wave directionality One of the first quantum phenomena to inspire a mechanical analog was the quantum Hall effect (QHE), which allows one-way, non-reciprocal wave propagation by creating chiral edge states that are robust against defects and disorders In light of these limitations, researchers started exploiting the mechanical analog of the quantum spin Hall effect (QSHE), for which time-reversal symmetry breaking is not required. The QSHE can be realized by manipulating sublattice configurations to create mechanical pseudo-spins and pseudo-spin-dependent effective edges, ultimately achieving topologically protected helical edge modes that are also immune to back-scattering The most recent efforts in this line of developments have been directed towards creating mechanical analogs of the quantum valley Hall effect (QVHE), whose only requirement is the breaking of space-inversion symmetry (SIS), which can be achieved in a relatively agile fashion in many acoustic and mechanical systems. In acoustics, this effect has been demonstrated for sonic crystals obtained from arrays of rod-like scatterers In this work, we shift our attention to the in-plane dynamics of thin lattices in plane-stress conditions. Realizing viable QVHE conditions in in-plane systems features some additional challenges compared to their out-plane counterparts. In out-of-plane problems, a total bandgap can be easily obtained at low frequencies Our structure of choice is a modified hexagonal lattice consisting of beam-like struts with bi-valued thickness. This configuration is characterized by extreme geometric simplicity, which makes it easy to manufacture using conventional cutting or printing techniques. While this structure features multiple bandgaps that are amenable to QVHE, here we focus our attention on the high-frequency regime, where a wide total bandgap is available. Under these conditions, we study numerically and demonstrate experimentally the establishment of non-trivial waveguides and their robustness against back-scattering from sharp corners. Moreover, we leverage this platform to realize complicated paths involving multi-branch junctions and different types of domain walls to achieve a variety of special energy channeling and routing effects. As a first example, we design a directionselective energy-splitting waveguide tree that allows one-way wave propagation at high frequencies. We also design a triangular waveguide loop that works as a signal delayer: here a portion of the energy injected in the system is temporarily trapped in the loop, and then released periodically at an output boundary with programmable delays. Frequency (Hz) Frequency (Hz) Total Band gap To obtain a lattice with a C 3v symmetry after breaking the SIS, we start with a regular hexagonal lattice with a C 6v symmetry made of 2-cm-long struts with a 7.5:1 inplane aspect ratio, Fig. To break the SIS, we modulate the strut thickness so that the aspect ratio of the upper (lower) half of the unit cell is increased (decreased) by 20%, as shown in Fig. We now proceed to consider a lattice consisting of two domains (termed lattice type A and B) separated by an interface. The cells above the interface have thin (thick) struts in the top half of the cell and thick (thin) struts in the bottom half, while those below the interface are mirror symmetric, as shown in Fig. An important feature of a TPES is that it allows waves to propagate along sharp corners with negligible backscattering. Effective rationales for this phenomenon have been proposed in the literature in the context of flexural waves. In Section II of the SM [44], we recall and extend these considerations, providing additional insight in the process that is germane to our specific problem of inplane wave propagation. Here, we focus our attention on verifying this phenomenon, both numerically and experimentally, for inplane phonons in our lattice of choice. To document the robustness against back-scattering, we model a Z-shape thin interface with two 60 • corners, shown in Fig. An alternative strategy to realize a similarly-shaped waveguide is by constructing a trivial interface. This can be done starting from a uniform lattice (say type A) and replacing the cells featuring thickness modulation with regular hexagonal cells along the interface. Let us consider two trivial Z-shaped domain walls with interface widths spanning over one and two cells, as shown in Fig. In conclusion, only the topologically-protected interface guarantees efficient and scattering-free waveguiding. We then move on to perform a series of experiments to confirm the topological attributes of the non-trivial waveguide. To acquire the in-plane wavefields, we scan the lattice with a 3D Scanning Laser Doppler Vibrometer (SLDV, Polytec PSV-400-3D) using one scan point per lattice node. The specimen is a water-jet-cut ABS lattice, comprising 34×20 unit cells with the same dimensions and parameters used in simulations, see Fig. The green-shaded area denotes the Z-shape interface. For convenience of setup, we rotate the lattice by 90 • counterclockwise and frame it using clamps at the two sides, leaving the top and bottom boundaries free. The excitation is prescribed as an in-plane normal point force applied on the boundary at the opening of the topological interface. The force is exerted using an electrodynamic shaker (Bruel & Kjaer Type 4809, powered by a Bruel & Kjaer Type 2718 amplifier) placed at the bottom of the lattice, as shown in Fig. In Section II of the SM [44], we offer a rationale for how waves propagate around 60 • and 120 • corners with or without changes of interface type, and the conclusions align with what has been observed in out-of-plane counterpart problems The objective is to exploit the energy splitting properties of topological junctions to achieve a series of new asymmetric wave transport and energy trapping effects, thus expanding the gallery of technological potentials of valleytronic concepts in mechanical systems. We start by noting that, according to our previous discussion, the lattice types on the two sides of a topologically-protected interface must present a mirror symmetry. Hence, to ensure that all the interfaces converging at a junction are topologically protected, it is necessary that the junction connects an even number of interfaces. Here we illustrate this idea through two examples. The first design is a direction-selective elastic energy splitter intended to allow strongly asymmetric wave transport at high frequencies. The FEA model and experimental specimen are shown in Fig. De facto, the lattice endowed with the internal multipath junction behaves dynamically as a medium with effective asymmetrical wave transport characteristics. It works as an isolator for excitations prescribed at the left edge and as a conductor for excitations prescribed at the right edge. In this respect, it achieves a functionality that is a high-frequency analog of what has been recently shown experimentally for topological Maxwell structural lattices (with ligaments with finite bending stiffness), see Ref. For our second example, we arrange three thin and one thick interfaces as shown in Fig. In this work, we have experimentally demonstrated the in-plane dynamics of topologically-protected interface modes in honeycomb lattices with a bi-valued strut thickness pattern that breaks the space-inversion symmetry. We have documented similarities and differences between topological interfaces formed by connecting thin and thick portions of the unit cell. We have shown the robustness against back-scattering of wave propagation about 60 • corners with identical types of interfaces and about 120 • with mixed interfaces. Exploiting this knowledge, we have designed multi-interface junctions and used them to realize different structural logic circuits and elastic ports featuring unconventional wave manipulation effects at optical frequencies. Our results extend the applicability of valley-Hall effects to in-plane elastic dynamics and enrich the current understanding of these phenomena in mechanical systems by providing a new interpretation angle that blends topological and mechanistic arguments. The presented modular interface design philosophy can provide inspiration for a broad range of applications for energy management, trapping, routing and harvesting. To determine whether a band-crossing at the K point for a lattice with C 6v point group symmetry is a Dirac point, we calculate the Berry phase (or Berry flux) Φ around the K point: where v denotes a close loop around the K point and A = -i ψ(k)|∇ k |ψ(k) is the Berry connection, which can be obtained from the eigenvectors of a phonon band |ψ(k) . For a 2D system that is invariant under timereversal and two-fold rotational (about z) symmetry, the Berry flux is generally quantized to 0 or π (up to mod 2π), with Φ = π being the key signature of a Dirac point. Numerically, an efficient way to compute the Berry phase is via eigenvector overlap. Let us select N wavevector points along a closed loop, labeled i = 1, . . . , N , which encapsulate the point of interest and such that the periodic boundary condition ψ N +1 = ψ 1 is satisfied. The inner product between eigenvectors at two neighboring points can be computed as ψ i |ψ i+1 . When N is large and the wavevector points are densely populated along the loop, this inner product is in general a complex number with an absolute value close to unity. Multiplying the inner products computed between all the available pairs yields a complex number whose phase is the Berry phase: As mentioned above, since our system preserves timereversal and C 6v point group symmetry, Φ is quantized to 0 or π, and thus the product of eigenvectors appearing on the right-hand-side of Eqn. (S2) is a real number. It is then sufficient to look at the sign of this product: if it is positive (negative), the corresponding Berry flux is 0 (π), and thus a negative eigenvector overlap product is smoking-gun evidence for the existence of a Dirac point. Once the space inversion symmetry is broken, the bandgap at the Dirac point is open. To describe the topology of this gap, we calculate the valley Chern number C v : where (k x , k y ) is an arbitrary point in the reciprocal space located in the neighborhood of the valley K point, and B(k x , k y ) is the Berry curvature calculated from the eigenvectors of the upper or lower bands near the band gap, which is expressed as: The mode shapes calculated via finite element analysis (FEA) at the valley K point (k x = 2π/3) on the two emerging bands in the band gap in Fig. One important feature of a topoligically protected edge states (TPES) is that it allows waves to propagate along sharp corners without appreciable back-scattering. Here we attempt to shed further light on the genesis of this phenomenon by providing an intuitive mechanistic explanation. To this end, we need to compute and plot the eigenvector phase rotation for a TPES. Let us note that TPES is, for all intents and purposes, a propagating wave where the complex amplitude term A(r) is the Bloch wave function and k • r is the phase, with r and k being the real space coordinate and the wavevector, respectively. For a TPES, the amplitude function is concentrated along the interface and decreases exponentially as we move away from the interface. The phase pattern of a TPES contains important information which directly dictates the wave propagation behavior at corners or junctions of interface boundaries. In Fig. We can apply the same principle to the TPES. First, we consider a multi-segment interface which switches direction from the horizontal to either R1 or R2. At a corner, a wave packet propagating from left to right along the x-axis has two options: (a) being reflected towards the left or (b) propagation along R1 or R2. The phase pattern is fully preserved (clockwise in this case) for option (b), while in option (a), the phase will have to change its pattern to counter-clockwise, failing to match that of the incoming wave. Therefore, the wave will prefer traveling around the 60 • sharp corner, rather than being scattered back, which explains why a TPES can transmit through such a corner with nearly zero back-scattering. Let us consider now the propagation path that switches from the horizontal interface to R3 or R4, which form a 120 • angle with the horizontal direction, Note that for a 120 corner, the segment of R3 or R4 must involve the other interface type, otherwise the lattice cannot be properly completed. In this case, the landscape of phase rota-tion is reversed. Naively, we could conclude that R3 and R4 are unfavorable directions. However, it is important to note that the TPES along this new interface features a negative group velocity [see the black curve in Fig. 