We study the superfluid behavior of a population imbalanced ultracold atomic Fermi gases with a short range attractive interaction in a one-dimensional (1D) optical lattice, using a pairing fluctuation theory. We show that, besides widespread pseudogap phenomena and intermediate temperature superfluidity, the superfluid phase is readily destroyed except in a limited region of the parameter space. We find a new mechanism for pair hopping, assisted by the excessive majority fermions, in the presence of continuum-lattice mixing, which leads to an unusual constant BEC asymptote for Tc that is independent of pairing strength. In result, on the BEC side of unitarity, superfluidity, when it exists, may be strongly enhanced by population imbalance. Ultracold atomic Fermi gases have been an ideal system for quantum simulation and quantum engineering, due to their multiple tunable parameters Population imbalance p has been widely known to suppress or destroy superfluidity. Indeed, in a 3D homogeneous system, superfluidity is completely destroyed at T = 0 in the unitary and BCS regimes In this Letter, we show that the pairing and superfluid behavior of a Fermi gas, when subject to a short-range attractive interaction (U < 0) in 1DOL with p = 0, is very different due to the lattice-continuum mixing. We find that superfluidity may be readily destroyed by population imbalance, except for a very restricted parameter range (away from small t, large p, and large lattice constant d), where population imbalance gives rise to an extra mechanism for pair hopping. When a BEC superfluid does exist, this leads to an unusual constant BEC asymptote for T c , and then can substantially increase T c on the BEC side of unitarity as compared to the balanced case, in which T c decreases with interaction strength. In addition, not all minority fermions are paired up in the BEC limit. We demonstrate that these unusual behaviors are associated with the mixing of a 2D continuum plane and a discrete lattice dimension, which leads to a constant ratio of ∆ 2 /μ, unlike in a 3D continuum or 3D lattice. This mixing enables enhanced pair hopping processes assisted by excessive fermions. There have seemingly been many theoretical studies on Fermi gases in optical lattices Here we use a previously developed pairing fluctuation theory is the in-plane momentum, and μ σ the chemical potential for spin σ =↑, ↓. This one-band lattice dispersion is justified when the band gap in the z direction is tuned to be much greater than the Fermi energy in the xy plane. The derivation of our selfconsistent equations is otherwise the same, so that we shall present the result directly, with an emphasis on the unusual new findings caused by population imbalance and the latticecontinuum mixing. In the superfluid phase, we define the pseudogap via where where , and f (x) = 1/(e x/T + 1). We have the following gap equation with pair chemical potential μ p = 0 in the superfluid phase, where the interaction U has been replaced by the s-wave scattering length a via U -1 = m/4πak 1/2 k . Here a finite μ p extends this equation into the non-superfluid phase. We caution that the parameter a does not necessarily yield the experimentally measured scattering length, which is better reflected by an effective scattering length a eff such that 1/a eff = √ 2mtd/a. (See Supplementary Secs. I, II and Fig. with b(x) = 1/(e x/T -1) and pair dispersion Ωq = { a 2 0 [1 + 4a 1 (Ω q -μ p )/a 0 ] -a 0 }/2a 1 , which reduces to Ωq = Ω q -μ p when a 1 /a 0 1, e.g., in the BEC regime. Equations ( The asymptotic solution in the BEC limit, μ → -∞, can be obtained analytically fully for p = 0 or partially for p > 0. For p = 0, μ σ = μ. However, for p > 0, we have μ ↑ > 0 at T c throughout the BCS-BEC crossover, and μ ↓ = 2μ -μ ↑ . This is self-consistently justified by the solution that T c ∆ |μ| in the BEC regime. Therefore, in the BEC limit, From the number equations, we obtain dominated by the leading two-body term. The exponential dependence of μ on d/a results from the quasi-two dimensionality since |k z | ≤ π/d. In the t → 0 2D limit, one finds d a ≈ ln |μ| t , which diverges logarithmically. To leading order corrections in powers of 1/μ, we have At T c , ∆ pg = ∆. Note that ∆ 2 /μ approaches a constant in the BEC limit, in contrast to its counterpart in a 3D homogeneous case, where ∆ ∼ |μ| 1/4 so that ∆ 2 /μ → 0. For p = 0, one can easily obtain , and which yields in the BEC regime via the pseudogap equation ( In the BEC regime, T c is controlled by the inverse T -matrix expansion. The coefficients a 0 (and pair density n p ) and a 1 are given by For the inverse pair mass, we have Here A, B, C, D and δB depend on μ ↑ and T only. They can be readily obtained via the inverse T -matrix expansion (see Supplementary Sec. III for concrete expressions). For p = 0, μ ↑ → -∞ so that f (ξ ↑ k ), as well as A, B, C, D and δB all vanish. Then we recover n p = n ↓ = n/2, a 1 ∆ 2 = -n/8μ and Eq. ( Of paramount importance is that population imbalance leads to these extra terms in a 0 ∆ 2 , a 1 ∆ 2 , B and t B , which are associated with the excessive majority fermions via the Fermi functions. Equation ( In the deep BEC regime, Eq. ( Shown in Fig. Shown in Fig. Our calculations reveal that as d increases, the T = 0 pSF phase shrinks quickly. For k F d = 1, the upper pSF phase boundary (blue curve) in Fig. Shown in Fig. Finally, we examine in Fig. In particular, the constant asymptote for t B confirms that the excessive fermion assisted pair hopping dominates in the BEC regime. As shown in Fig. We have studied various situations for a big range of (t, p, d) and found that the superfluidity can be easily destroyed by large d and small t. Reducing t in Figs. To understand the destruction of superfluidity at large d and small t, we note that when d is large, more fermions will occupy the high k states. In addition, a small t may further force the lattice band fully occupied, so that the Fermi surface becomes nearly dispersionless as a function of k z . This makes it extremely hard to accommodate the excessive majority fermions, which will necessarily have to occupy high k states at a high energy cost. Furthermore, since |k z | ≤ π/d, the Pauli blocking effect can no longer be eliminated in the z direction in the BEC regime, so that t B may be quickly suppressed to zero as d and p increase and/or t decreases at low T . The enhancement and destruction of superfluidity are easily testable in future experiments. The enhancement also suggests that a small imbalance is beneficial for achieving superfluidity experimentally. This work is supported by NSF of China (Grants No. 11774309 and No. 11674283), and NSF of Zhejiang Province of China (Grant No. LZ13A040001).