We present a study of the upper critical field, Hc2, of pristine and proton-irradiated RbEuFe4As4 crystals in pulsed magnetic fields of up to 65 T. The data for Hc2 reveal pronounced downwards curvature, particularly for the in-plane field orientation, and a superconducting anisotropy that decreases with decreasing temperature. These features are indicative of Pauli paramagnetic limiting. For the interpretation of these data, we use a model of a clean single-band superconductor with an open Fermi surface in the shape of a warped cylinder, which includes strong paramagnetic limiting. Fits to the data reveal that the in-plane upper critical field is Pauli paramagnetic limited, while the out-of-plane upper critical field is orbitally limited and that the orbital and paramagnetic fields have opposite anisotropies. A consequence of this particular combination is the unusual inversion of the anisotropy, H ab c2 < H c c2 , of the irradiated sample at temperatures below 10 K. The fits also yield an in-plane Maki parameter, α 110 M ≈ 2.6, exceeding the critical value for the formation of the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov state. Nevertheless, the current measurements did not reveal direct evidence for the occurrence of this state. The recent discovery Previous measurements Here, we determine the upper critical field, H c2 , of pristine and proton-irradiated RbEuFe 4 As 4 crystals using high-frequency susceptibility measurements in pulsed magnetic fields of up to 65 T applied parallel and perpendicular to the Fe 2 As 2 layers. The data for H c2 reveal pronounced downwards curvature to values well below extrapolations based on purely orbital Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) theory Several high-quality, plate-like single crystals of RbEuFe 4 As 4 with typical dimensions 500 μm x 500 μm x 80 μm were grown as described in Ref. The magnetic and superconducting transitions of the crystals were characterized with zero-field cooled (ZFC) magnetization measurements. Fig. We also performed a calorimetric characterization on the irradiated sample shown in Fig. [001] for crystal #1 taken during three pulses with different peak fields. The transition into the normal state is seen as a steep decrease of the oscillator frequency. However, hysteresis is apparent between data recorded on the upsweep and the down-sweep of the magnetic field. Most of this is known The field dependence of the superconducting state, the magnetoresistance in the normal state of the sample, and the magnetoresistance of the pick-up coils ). A 9th-order polynomial can be fitted to the overall normal-state behavior above the transition for pulses at multiple temperatures; this is shown dashed in red in Fig. Data shown are characteristic of all 3 pristine samples measured. On decreasing temperature (increasing field) the transitions remain sharp and parallel. This behavior is consistent with the transitions seen in the magnetoresistance of 1144 materials Here we adopt the 'end of transition' (EOT), corresponding approximately to the 90%-criterion, commonly used for resistive transitions, since it yields at high temperatures a phase boundary that is in good agreement with the thermodynamic determination. A similar trend has been observed in magnetoresistance and magnetization data on RbEuFe 4 As 4 Pulsed-field measurements were performed on the irradiated sample #4 in a manner identical to the pristine crystals. Identical background subtraction techniques were applied, resulting in the data shown in Fig. The resulting phase boundaries are shown in Fig. (inset of Fig. In high magnetic fields, the superconducting state of a spin-singlet superconductor is suppressed according to two mechanisms. Orbital pair breaking arises due to the Lorentz force acting on electrons paired with opposite momenta, while paramagnetic pair breaking arises due to the Zeeman energy of the electrons paired with opposite spins. The zero-temperature orbital upper critical field, H orb , of a single-band weak-coupling superconductor with ellipsoidal Fermi surface is given ) for the irradiated crystal. As shown in Figs. B N (0)/2, equals the superconducting condensation energy, N (0)∆ 2 /2, not considering any orbital effects: μ 0 H P = √ 2∆/gμ B . Here, ∆, g, μ B and N (0) are the superconducting gap, the electron g-factor (g = 2 for free electrons), the Bohr magneton and the density of states per spin, respectively. For a weak-coupling superconductor with g = 2, one obtains the well-known result μ 0 H P [T ] = 1.85T c [K] Here, α M = √ 2H orb /H P is the Maki parameter measuring the relative role between orbital and paramagnetic pair breaking. A similar simple relation does not exist for clean superconductors. For most superconducting materials the paramagnetic limit is much larger than the orbital critical field (α M ≪ 1), and the observed phase boundaries are well accounted for using orbital limiting only [110] (filled circles) and H [001] (hollow circles). The dashed lines represent the hightemperature low-field Ginzburg-Landau (GL) slopes obtained from calorimetry versal feature of iron-based superconductors is the geometry of their Fermi surfaces, which comprise several warped cylinders oriented along the c-axis. The warping induces substantial c-axis dispersion and the surprisingly low electronic anisotropy commonly seen in iron-based superconductors In general, the Fermi surface topology may have a strong influence on the orbital limit. For example, for the case of layered superconductors with a very weak interlayer hopping integral, t ⊥ ≪ k B T c , the orbital upper critical field diverges at a certain temperature, i.e., a pure orbital effect does not destroy superconductivity at low temperatures A precise theoretical calculation of the upper critical fields requires detailed quantitative knowledge of the electronic band structure, Cooper-pairing interactions, and g-factors. Such information is currently not available for RbEu1144. For an approximate description of experimental data, we use the model of a singleband s-wave superconductor with a warped cylindrical Fermi surface described by the electronic spectrum x +p where 2 vx vz (CGS units), α y = 8Φ0kB Tcμy Furthermore, vj = v 2 j are the averaged Fermi velocities or, explicitly, vx,y = v F / √ 2 with v F = 2ǫ F /m and vz = √ 2t ⊥ d/ . We emphasize that this equation is approximate and it is not expected to work for very anisotropic materials for which t ⊥ < k B T c . The c-axis upper critical field, H c2,z (T ), is determined by the exact equation with , and The Zeeman parameters α j are related to but not identical with the Maki parameters. The Maki parameters can be computed from the corresponding orbital fields, H orb , which are solutions of the above equations at α j = 0 and t → 0. The fit parameters contained in this model are the ratio t ⊥ /ǫ F < 0.5 determining the warping of the Fermi surface, the orbital field scales, H j0 , and the Zeeman parameters α j for each field direction. The latter two parameters can be converted into the more conventional Df (kHz) /Hc [001] 2 > 1 whereas at 7 K, Γ < 1. orbital critical fields and Maki parameters. As shown in Fig. A common trend emerging from all samples and from all fits is the observation that for the [110] direction the orbital critical field is clearly larger than the paramagnetic limit whereas for the [001] direction the inverse holds: the orbital critical field is smaller. Thus, the upper critical field of RbEuFe 4 As 4 is for the c-axis orbitally limited, while for the ab-plane paramagnetic limiting is significant. Such a scenario has previously been described for highly-anisotropic organic superconductors The Pauli paramagnetic limiting fields obtained from our fits are anisotropic with the c-axis value being clearly larger than the in-plane values, while both orientations significantly exceed the Chandrasekhar-Clogston limit of μ 0 H P [T ] = 1.85T c [K]. Large values of H P have been reported before (see Ref. 62 for a compilation of experimental results). We note that in addition to T c , H P can depend on n , where n = 0.5 or 1 Multiband orbital effects In the limit of strong paramagnetic limiting, the FFLO state can arise at low temperatures and high magnetic fields. This state is characterized by a real-space modulation of the superconducting order parameter either in amplitude or phase We have determined H c2 of pristine and protonirradiated RbEuFe 4 As 4 crystals using high-frequency susceptibility measurements in pulsed magnetic fields up to 65 T for fields applied parallel and perpendicular to the Fe 2 As 2 layers. The H c2 (T ) curves fall well below extrapolations based on GL or WHH theory, particularly for H ab, and reveal a superconducting anisotropy that decreases with decreasing temperatures. Such features suggest Pauli paramagnetic limiting. Fits to the data based on our clean-limit theoretical model which accommodates a warped cylindrical Fermi surface reveal that the in-plane upper critical field is indeed Pauli paramagnetic limited, while the out-of-plane upper critical field is orbitally limited resulting in an uncommon inversion of the anisotropy, H ab c2 < H c c2 , of the irradiated sample at temperatures below 10 K. Our fits also yield a high Maki parameter α 110 M ≈ 2.6 for H ab, which exceeds the theoretical critical value necessary for formation of the FFLO state. However, our current measurements did not yield direct evidence for an FFLO state, and further measurements in higher fields will be necessary to fully probe the low-temperature superconducting state of this unique compound. vx vz , and I 0 (x) is the modified Bessel function of the first kind.