The development of scalable Out-of-Autoclave (OoA) in-situ thermoset curing methods are required to overcome important drawbacks related to the autoclave-based processing methods typically used in industry. The incorporation of graphene, an electrothermal carbon nanomaterial with the ability to transform electric energy into heat through Joule heating, emerges as a promising route to replace the conventional processing methods. In this work the electrical behaviour of both uncured and oven cured GNPs/epoxy composites with loadings of up to 10 wt.% were evaluated and electrical percolation thresholds were established for both. Above the critical loading found for oven cured materials (~ 8.5 wt.%) the electrically conducting networks of GNPs formed in the matrix showed the ability to act as integrated nanoheaters when an electric current was passed through them, successfully curing the composites by Joule heating. Composites prepared by this OoA curing method (as an alternative to the traditional oven based one) at 10 wt.% loading of GNPs were also prepared and compared to the oven cured ones. They showed more compact composite 2 structures, with less microvoids and a preferred orientation of the GNPs in the matrix relative to the oven cured material at identical loading, as revealed by electron microscopy and polarized Raman spectroscopy, respectively. This microstructure and anisotropy induced by the electrically-induced (i.e. OoA) cure led to GNPs/epoxy composites with superior electrical and mechanical properties (revealed by tensile testing). The well-distributed GNP nanoparticles acting as nanoheaters integrated in a thermosetting matrix, in combination with excellent mechanical and electrical performances achieved for the overall graphene/epoxy composites and the simplicity associated to the method, should open the door to novel industrial applications. There is an increasing demand for high-performance polymer matrix composite materials in many industrial sectors such as defense, marine, aerospace and automotive. In these sectors thermosetting polymers are mostly used, that require thermal energy to activate their polymerization. Thus a conventional oven or autoclave is typically employed to cure the thermosetting composite during manufacture. Whilst these manufacturing techniques are effective for high-value, low to medium throughput applications, there are important drawbacks associated to them, including geometry limitation, massive energy consumption, inflexible operation conditions and inability to repair in the field. Thus there is a strong motivation to develop scalable Out-of-Autoclave (OoA) curing methods One promising OoA route is the incorporation of electrothermal materials that transform electric energy into heat through Joule heating of the composite. Joseph and Viney showed that carbon fibre/epoxy composites could be successfully cured by the ohmic heating generated by passing an electrical current through the fibres Although CNTs typically form percolated networks at lower loadings than GNPs, due to their higher surface areas and higher thermal conductivities relative to CNTs An investigation of the electrical behavior of GNPs/epoxy uncured and cured composites and a detailed comparison between the microstructure and properties of the composites fabricated using the conventional oven and the Joule heating curing method, as well as a detailed study of how the electrical conductance develops in graphene/epoxy composites during curing has not yet, however, been performed. We consider this of great importance to develop and control in-situ electrically induced curing protocols for thermosetting systems. In this work the electrical behaviour of both uncured and oven cured GNPs/epoxy composites were evaluated and percolation thresholds were established for the first time. Above the electrical percolation threshold found for the oven cured materials, the efficiency of the electrically conductive well-distributed GNP nanoparticles acting as nanoheaters integrated in a thermoset matrix to in-situ cure thermoset systems by simple Joule heating when an electric current is passed through them was evaluated. How this novel OoA method compares with the traditional oven-based one in terms of microstructure, electrical and mechanical properties of the GNP/epoxy composites at identical loading was investigated. Besides, in contrast to previous works, which are not evaluating or giving any evidence of the effect of the applied electric field on the alignment of the fillers in the epoxy matrix, we are introducing here an evaluation of the alignment induced by the electric current passing through the material during curing, which represents an important novelty with respect to previous works reporting similar OoA curing methods. The potential that this OoA method has to be scaled-up industrially is also discussed. Graphene Nanoplatelets (GNP) M25 from XG Sciences, with lateral dimension and thickness quoted by the manufacturer of ~ 25 μm and ~ 6 nm, respectively, was used in this work as nanofiller. The epoxy resin (Araldite, LY5052) and the hardener (Aradur, HY5052) were purchased from Huntsman. Initially, the percolation threshold was found for both uncured GNP/epoxy mixtures and oven-cured GNP/epoxy composites (the later denoted as 'GNP/epoxy-Oven'). The electrical conductivity was also evaluated at different stages of curing. Oven-cured composites with loadings from 0.3 to 10 wt.% were prepared using a solvent dispersion method, in which the GNP powder was dispersed in acetone (0.5 mg/mL) using a sonication bath for 2.5 h. The epoxy resin was then added to the dispersion in the appropriate ratio and the mixture was sonicated for further 2.5 h. The mixture was left under mechanical stirring at room temperature overnight to remove the acetone. The hardener was then added to the mixture (38 wt.% with respect to the resin), mixed manually for several minutes and degassed under vacuum for 20 min. (Due to increases in viscosities, for loadings above 4 wt.% solvent-assisted sonication and shear mixing were combined to achieve homogeneous GNP/epoxy mixtures). After an initial 24 hour curing step at room temperature, the samples were then post-cured at 100 °C for 4 hours in a conventional oven. This curing protocol was chosen because previous works performed in the group The fracture surface of the epoxy and the composites were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a Zeiss EVO60 VPSEM (15 kV acceleration voltage). Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) was performed using a DSC Q100 analyzer (TA instruments) heating from room temperature to 200 °C at a rate of 10 °C/min. Three samples were tested for each experimental conditions. Raman spectroscopy of the GNPs, as well as Raman mapping of the GNPs/epoxy composites were performed using a low-power 633 nm HeNe laser in a Renishaw 2000 Raman spectrometer. For the Raman mapping analysis 121 Raman spectra were obtained over 20 × 20 μm areas of composite. The orientation of the graphene flakes in the polymer matrix was evaluated by polarized Raman spectroscopy using a backscattering geometry and a VV (vertical/vertical) combination of incident and scattered polarization, in which the directions of the incident and scattered polarization were the same. A rotational stage on the spectrometer optical microscope was used to rotate the specimen with respect to its axes. The change in the intensity of the G band was recorded as a function of the rotation angle To measure the impedance of the uncured GNPs/epoxy composites the liquid mixtures were transferred to an electric pool (details of the measurement are given in the SI), whereas the impedance of cured epoxy and composites were tested on 13 mm x 13 mm x 1 mm solid specimens. All impedances were tested using a PSM 1735 Frequency Response Analyzer from Newtons4th Ltd connected with Impedance Analysis Interface (IAI) at the range of frequencies from 1 to 10 6 Hz. The specific conductivities (σ) of the materials were calculated from the measured impedances using: where Y*(ω) is the complex admittance, Z* is the complex impedance, t and A are the thickness and cross section area of the sample, respectively. Stress-strain curves were obtained from dumbbell specimens (ASTM D 638 international standard) using an Instron 3365 machine equipped with an extensometer. A testing rate of 0.5 mm/min and a load cell of 5 kN were employed. 5 samples were tested for each sample. In order to develop novel resistive heating methods to cure GNP/epoxy composites an initial understanding of the electrical properties of the system was required. Figs. The plot of the conductivities of the uncured and oven-cured composites at a frequency of 1 Hz as a function of the filler content (shown in Figs. where P is filler loading, P c is the percolation threshold, t is conductivity exponent and σ is the electrical conductivity. From the data shown in Figs.1c,d values of P c = 4.5 wt.% and P c = 8.125 wt.% could be assumed to be used in Equation ( Log-log plots of conductivity as a function of P-P c for both systems were then plotted (shown as inserts in Figs. Higher conductivities and lower P c were found for the uncured system relative to the oven cured composites for identical loadings. In order to understand how the conductivity evolved during curing, the electrical properties of the composites were followed throughout the manufacturing process. The conductivity of a 10 wt.%-GNP/epoxy mixture at different stages of curing were determined and the results are shown in Fig. The formation of an electrically conductive GNPs network integrated in the epoxy matrix is essential for the development of a resistive heating OoA curing method. In our experiments, when an electric current was passed through a GNP/epoxy composite at loadings above the percolation threshold, a fast rise in temperature was observed through Joule heating of the graphene nanoparticles as they are close enough to each other. An infrared camera was employed to monitor the increase in the temperature of the material under the electrical field. The thermographs (shown in Fig. DSC analysis was employed to evaluate the degree of curing of GNPs/epoxy composites at 10 wt.% loading of GNPs prepared by the oven-based and OoA curing methods and the results are shown in Fig. The T g , defined here as the midpoint of enthalpy change, was found to be 85 °C and 78 °C for GNP/epoxy-OoA and GNP/epoxy-Oven cured composites, respectively. Both values were considerably lower than the T g of the pure epoxy (~ 100 °C), which we attributed to thermally-induced aggregation of the GNPs happening when the composite materials were heated above their T g during curing. Heating the composite materials above their T g is thought to increase the mobility of the GNPs in the matrix, probably due to a decrease in the viscosity of the materials, which leads to the formation of small agglomerates and microvoids at the interface between GNPs and polymer, and thus to a decrease in the T g of the composite with respect to the polymer. A loading of GNP as high as 10 wt.% must be also hindering the formation of cross-links in the resin Raman mapping analysis were performed on the GNPs/epoxy composites cured in the traditional oven in order to investigate the dispersion of the GNPs in the polymer matrix and the results obtained are shown in Fig. The low intensity of the D band with respect to the G band indicated the presence of small amount of defects. The intensity, position and shape of the 2D band was typical of graphene nanoplatelets with more than 10 layers. The Raman spectrum of a typical oven cured GNP/epoxy composites showed a combination of features from the GNPs and from the epoxy resin, with the ratio of intensities between GNPs bands and the epoxy bands depending on the GNPs loading. The quality of the dispersion of the GNPs in the matrix was determined by evaluating the ratio of intensities between the G band of GNPs and the 1609 cm -1 band of epoxy taken as the reference, i.e. I G /I 1609 . The Raman mapping results for GNP/epoxy composites with 0.3 wt.%, 5 wt.% and 10 wt.% loading of GNPs are shown in Fig. where r i is the ratio of intensities obtained for each single spectrum taken, r a is the average value of the ratio of intensities and N is the total spectra taken for the mapping. The values obtained for D from Raman mapping performed at different loadings of GNPs were found to be 0.1703, 0.3176 and 0.1958 for 0.3 wt.%, 5 wt.% and 10 wt.%, respectively. The small values obtained for D revealed the presence of well distributed GNP in the polymer matrix at the loadings studied here. It is thought, however, that well distributed small agglomerates must be present in the high loaded composites and must contribute positively to the electrical properties of the oven-cured composites. Raman mapping analysis confirmed thus good dispersions of the GNPs in the matrix, with very small levels of aggregation even at high loadings. SEM images of the fracture surface of pure epoxy and the GNP/epoxy composites prepared here are shown in Fig. From the SEM images the presence of GNPs could be easily distinguished from the polymer matrix due to their typical features, such as curved surfaces and folded or blended flakes. Although the density of GNPs observed on the fracture surfaces of the composites was found to increase with loading, good dispersions of the flakes (and/or well dispersed small agglomerates of them) in the matrix were found in all the composites, even at loadings as high as 10 wt.%. A comparison between high-resolution SEM images of oven-cured and OoA-cured composites at 10 wt.% loading of GNPs (Figs. We attribute this induced changes in microstructure to the small separation between the graphene flakes at 10 wt.% loading, as a consequence of which the heat flow results in very fast heating rates and a considerable more uniform curing. Li et al. However, for the OoA-cured composites, although the I G was independent of the angle of rotation in one direction (Φz), I G showed a strong dependency in the perperdicular direction (Φx), with maximum intensities found at 0o and 180o and minimum intensities at 90o. This result evidenced that the application of an electric field promoted an orientation of the GNPs in the matrix in the direction of the applied field, rendering an anisotropic composite. This result gives light to the possibility of tuning the microstructure of GNPs/epoxy composites to meet specific requirements for practical applications, including electrical and mechanical properties. A comparison between the electrical behaviour of GNP/epoxy-Oven and GNP/epoxy-OoA composites at 10 wt.% loading is shown in Fig. However, the OoA samples showed a degree of anisotropy with the conductivity one order of magnitude higher in the direction of the applied curing electric field, which again correlates with the polarized Raman studies. The preferential network formation in the direction of an electric field and the subsequent increase in conductivity has been observed previously by Wu et al. The tensile testing curves of epoxy and oven cured composites at all the loadings studied revealed a glassy behavior, with the GNPs providing reinforcement of stiffness (Fig. where E c is the Young's modulus of the composite, E f , E m are the Young's modulus of the filler and matrix, respectively, and V f and V m are the volume fractions of the filler and the matrix, respectively, within the nanocomposite (with ). The effective graphene modulus E eff could be calculated from E f using: where η 0 is Krenchel orientation factor that depends on the average orientation of the particles It is well known that that the tensile strength in graphene/polymer composites is highly sensitive to the presence of small agglomerates and it has been discussed somewhere else Given the need to be sufficiently above the percolation threshold (~ 8.5 wt.%) to use the OoA method, only a 10 wt.% GNP composite was prepared for mechanical testing by Joule heating. The stress-strain curves and obtained Young's modulus for oven and OoA cured GNPs/epoxy composites at 10 wt.% loading are compared in Figs. The overall mechanical performance found for the GNPs/epoxy systems fabricated here is inferior to those observed for the carbon-fiber/epoxy composites typically employed in the aerospace sector, and they should not be seen as competitors to replace them. In contrast, this work probes that the Joule heating effect can be successfully employed to in-situ cure graphene/epoxy composites, which potentially could have great impact for novel emerging applications in different industrial sectors (including, but not exclusive to, the aerospace one) in which additional functionality (which only graphene materials can provide, such as barrier properties or outstanding EMI shielding performances) might be required, in addition to good mechanical and electrical properties. Besides, the simplicity and low cost of this method could make it potentially attractive to industry. Although there are still many factors to take into account in the calculation of the total cost of these GNPs/epoxy nanocomposites (in addition to the energy cost, S5), the energy saving calculated already represents an important point to take into account and envision this method as potentially industrially viable. Some limitations related to the method still need to be overcome though. For example, further investigation on the mixing method to reduce the amount of solvent and sonication/shear mixing times, as well as on the manipulation of mixtures with high viscosity and other factors that at the moment might represent important limitations to scale it up, is still strongly required, though, in order to further reduce costs before this method can be industrially viable. Similar resistance induced OoA cure protocols have been already successfully applied to fibre reinforced epoxy composites and pre-preg laminated composite materials typically used in aerospace 