Quantum dots are gate-defined within InSb nanowires, in proximity to NbTiN superconducting contacts. As the coupling between the dot and the superconductor is increased, the odd-parity occupations become non-discernible (erased) both above and below the induced superconducting gap. Above the gap, conductance in the odd Coulomb valleys increases until the valleys are lifted. Below the gap, Andreev bound states undergo quantum phase transitions to singlet ground states at odd occupancy. We observe that the apparent erasure of odd-parity regimes coincides at low-bias and at high-bias. This observation is reproduced in numerical renormalization group simulations, and is explained qualitatively by a competition between Kondo temperature and the induced superconducting gap. In the erased odd-parity regime, the quantum dot exhibits transport features similar to a finite-size Majorana nanowire, drawing parallels between even-odd dot occupations and even-odd one-dimensional subband occupations. The prospect of topological quantum computing has motivated recent studies of charge parity, which is an observable that can distinguish the states of a Majorana quantum bit In this paper, we study the transition from the closed to the open regime (i.e., weak hybridization to strong hybridization regime) in a quantum dot defined in a semiconductor nanowire with superconducting contacts. We demonstrate how the transport signatures of odd-parity quantum-dot states are erased in the open dot regime. At high source-drain bias, we observe a transition from welldefined Coulomb diamonds to a conductance modulation pattern in which odd Coulomb valleys rise in conductance faster than the even valleys. We explain this based on Kondo physics playing a role at stronger coupling. At low bias, we observe Andreev bound states (ABS) that cross zero energy at every change in ground state parity from even to odd, while in the open regime the ABS do not cross zero bias. This is the manifestation of a wellstudied QPT upon which the system always stays in a many-body singlet ground state. Interestingly, we notice that the ABS QPT at low bias coincides with the lifting of the odd Coulomb valleys at high bias. We furthermore reproduce this observation qualitatively in the simulation of the Anderson impurity model using the numerical renormalization group (NRG). We argue that this coincidence is expected because both high-bias and low-bias features are determined by the competition between the Kondo temperature and the induced gap. In the same system we furthermore find similarities between the evolution of ABS and the emergence of Majorana bound states (MBS). Specifically, the phase diagram of the ABS QPT in gate voltage and magnetic field is reminiscent of the phase diagram predicted for the topological superconducting phase, if even-odd dot occupations are replaced with even-odd subband occupations. This highlights the persistent need to identify truly unique signatures of MBS and to deeper study the related regime of trivial ABS. InSb nanowires are grown using metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE) and transferred onto metallic gate patterns which are lines with 60-80 nm center-tocenter pitch. The gates are covered by 10 nm of HfO 2 dielectric. NbTiN superconducting contacts are fabricated on top of the nanowire. The device in Fig. At lower biases, a set of horizontal resonances near V bias = 0.4 mV is observed (Figs. The detailed evolution of low-bias superconductivityrelated resonances as a function of V S is shown in Figs. In Fig. To identify the singlet-doublet transition, we plot the bias voltage of the lowest positive resonance in the center of region 'III' which corresponds to the energy difference between the singlet and the doublet states (E s -E d , see diagrams in Fig. where is the quantum-dot level, n σ = d † σ d σ is the dot occupancy, U is the electron-electron repulsion parameter, t k are the tunneling amplitudes between the dot and the superconducting lead. The coupling between the dot and the lead is quantified by the hybridization strength Γ = π|t k | 2 ρ, where ρ is the normal-state density of states in the electrode. The lead is described by a Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) Hamiltonian with the gap ∆. In addition, we take into account that the proximitized gap in the quantum dot is soft. The complete information about the lead is contained in the hybridization function in the Nambu formalism. For a BCS Hamiltonian it takes the form To describe a hard induced gap, one uses the argument z = ω + i0 + . To model a soft-gap situation, one instead uses z = ω+iδ where δ is the finite life-time of Bogoliubov quasiparticles: this smoothens the BCS coherence peaks as well as produces a finite density of states inside the gap. We study the spectral and transport properties of this model using the NRG method To approximate the experimental finite-bias transport current within our model we compute an integral of the quantum dot spectral function in the spirit of the Meir-Wingreen formalism, neglecting any possible nonequilibrium effects, from -2∆ to 2∆. These results are shown in Fig. We now discuss experimental data on the singletdoublet QPT driven by Zeeman splitting, and its relevance to the studies of Majorana bound states (MBS). We position the 'p' and 's' gates in the strong coupled odd regime, where the ground state of the quantum dot is a spin-singlet at zero magnetic field (Fig. , where E Z is the Zeeman energy, μ is the chemical potential that corresponds to a gate voltage In Fig. One key difference between the topological phase of an infinite nanowire and the magnetically-driven singletdoublet QPT is that conductance inside the |D region is low because the ABS resonances have shifted away from zero bias there, as indicated in Fig. 