In this study, we conducted various magnetotransport measurements on Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x single crystals from which excess iron was sufficiently removed. Our results revealed that crossover from the incoherent to the coherent electronic state and opening of the pseudogap occur at high temperatures (≈ 150 K for x = 0.2). This is accompanied by a more substantial pseudogap and the emergence of a phase with a multi-band nature at lower temperatures (below ≈ 50 K for x = 0.2) before superconductivity sets in. A comparison of these results with those of the as-grown (non-superconducting) samples implies that the coherent state accompanied by the pseudogap is needed for the occurrence of superconductivity in this system. Knowledge of the doping(x)-temperature (T ) phase diagram of superconductors with a high superconducting transition temperature, T c , and with strongly correlated electrons, such as the cuprates and Fe-based superconductors, is well recognized to be crucial to understand the mechanism of high-T c superconductivity On the other hand, the evolution from incoherent to coherent electronic states with increasing Se doping, i.e., by increasing x, in this Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x system was observed by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) Here, we address this issue by conducting transport measurements such as determining the Hall coefficient R H and magnetoresistance (MR), as well as the in-plane and out-ofplane resistivities, ρ ab and ρ c , respectively, at zero field, focusing on the sample with low Se concentration x = 0.2. Prior to this study, we developed a new annealing method to remove excess iron (hereafter denoted as "Te-anneal"), in which single crystals are annealed under tellurium vapor Single crystals of Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x (0≤ x ≤0.4) were grown using the Bridgman method The in-plane resistivity ρ ab was measured using the standard DC four-terminal method. The out-of-plane resistivity ρ c was measured using the modified DC four-terminal method, in which voltage contacts were attached to the center of the ab plane, and the current contacts almost covered the entire remaining space Figure Figure Then, R H = ρ yx /μ 0 H for the as-grown, 400 h-annealed, and 600 h-annealed crystals were plotted as a function of temperature and are shown in Fig. tan 2 under magnetic fields We examined what happens at T * * R H or T * R H by analyzing the observed transport coefficients, ρ ab and R H , of samples with the same Se concentrations (x = 0.2). For this purpose, we adopt a simple two-band model with an equal number n of electrons and holes, assuming FeTe 1-x Se x is a compensated semimetal, but permitting n to be temperature dependent. This assumption is justified in two ways. The first is our observation of the field-linear behavior in ρ yx (Fig. Then, the in-plane resistivity and Hall coefficient are described as, ρ ab = 1 ne(μ e +μ h ) and R H = μ h -μ e ne(μ e +μ h ) , respectively, where μ e (μ h ) is the mobility of electrons (holes). First, μ e of the as-grown sample is assumed to be zero, because R H of this sample is always positive and smoothly evolves with temperature (Fig. For the superconducting samples with x ≥ 0.08, the multiband nature always appears before superconductivity sets in. This result is consistent with the scenario where pairing is mediated by AFM fluctuations via Fermi surface nesting between the holes and electron Fermi pockets As noted above, T * * R H and T * ρ ab coincide. This implies that opening of the pseudogap is correlated with the coherent transition. Moreover, T * R H and T * ρ c coincide. Because the participation of electron carriers in charge transport is the cause for T * R H , this would also be expected to be the cause for anomalous T * ρ c . In the annealed samples, ρ ab is metallic but ρ c is semiconducting in the temperature range between T * ρ ab and T * ρ c . This is very similar to the behavior of the cuprates We next discuss the origin of the pseudogap. The observation of the pseudogap has been reported for other Fe-based superconductors such as Ba 0.75 K 0.25 Fe 2 As 2 Next, we consider the origin of the pseudogap at T * R H . Con-sidering the experimental observation (Fig. The validity of this assumption was investigated by elastic constant measurements. The elastic constant C 44 in this compound showed softening at low temperatures, but the amount of softening was small (≈ 5 %), and the λ was small (≈ 0.03 eV/Fe) Another possible explanation for the existence of the pseudogap below T * R H is preformed Cooper pairing. Recently, Fe-based superconductors, especially the "11" system, have been argued to exist deep inside the crossover regime between weak-coupling Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) and strongcoupling Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC). In FeSe, the onset of strong nonlinear diamagnetism, which provides evidence for the prevailing phase fluctuations of superconductivity, has been shown at ≈ 20 K In summary, the x-T phase diagram of Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.4) was studied by performing various transport measurements on samples with and without Te-annealing. In the superconducting samples (Te-annealed samples with 0.08 ≤ x ≤ 0.4), the incoherent to coherent crossover transition, which is accompanied by the opening of the pseudogap, was found to occur in two steps. First, only the in-plane state becomes coherent at higher temperatures below T * * R H (and T * ρ ab ≈ 150 K for x = 0.2). Second, both the in-plane and outof-plane states become coherent with the multi-band nature at lower temperatures below T * R H (and T * ρ c ≈ 50 K for x = 0.2). Based on these results, we established a new x-T phase diagram, which may be inherent to the strongly correlated Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x system. The phase diagram reveals that, not only the emergence of the phase with a multi-band nature but also the coherent transition with the pseudogap, are primarily important for the occurrence of superconductivity.