The optical Kerr effect of material with negative refraction is estimated for the first time. This is done via three-dimensional finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations of disordered bidisperse metasurfaces consisting of high index (GaP) spheres at the wavelength of 532 nm. The metasurfaces comprise spherical particles randomly arranged on plane having two sizes close to the magnetic and electric dipole Mie resonances. The real part of the effective nonlinear refractive index of the metasurfaces is computed in the vicinity of the Mie resonances where the metasurface possesses the negative index of refraction. The optical Kerr nonlinearity has a peak under the condition for the negative refraction. Intensity-dependent refractive index of the bidisperse metasurfaces is studied through concentration transition to the negative refraction state. It is shown that the nonlinear Kerr coefficient of the monolayer metasurface has maximum when the effective linear refractive index is close to zero. In recent years, nonlinear optical properties of all-dielectric high index metasurfaces have attracted a significant interest of researchers Transparent conductive oxide thin films display enhanced nonlinear optical properties at epsilon-near-zero region In this work, the optical Kerr nonlinearity of random metasurfaces having the negative effective refractive index is investigated using three-dimensional FDTD sim- * Electronic mail: andrej.panov@gmail.com ulations. The second-order nonlinear refractive index is also calculated for bidisperse mixtures with various sizes or concentrations of GaP spheres in proximity to the negative refraction regime. The procedure of computation of the real part of the effective nonlinear refractive index of the monolayer nanocomposites is described in depth in Ref. where n 0 is the linear refractive index, n 2 is the secondorder nonlinear refractive index, and I is the intensity of the wave. This specimen may be inhomogeneous, for example, consisting of nanoparticles. Further, the phase change on the axis of the transmitted beam is computed in several points at far distance from the specimen. The linear fit of the phase change versus the intensity of the Gaussian beam gives the real part of the effective secondorder index of refraction n 2 . The computation of the nonlinear refractive index in several points allows one to estimate the average and standard deviation of n 2 . Here, the effective nonlinear refractive index represents the ensemble-averaged optical properties of the specimen. Sometimes, it is designated by the term "equivalent refractive index" which is used for composite materials with inclusion sizes being a few tenths of a wavelength. The simulation parameters in the present study were same as given in Ref. (3) in ≈ 2 × 10 -10 esu was utilized in the present work. Each point in all subsequent plots refers to a separate configuration of nanoparticles on a plane. As shown in Ref. where n in is the refractive index inside the spheres, j = 1, 2, . . ., c 0 = π, c 1 = 4.493. The computations in Ref. At first, it is interesting to estimate the effective second-order nonlinear refractive index of the metasurface with negative refraction index. The evaluation of the effective second-order nonlinear n 2 eff refractive index for the bidisperse monolayer of the spheres with f = 25.7 %, r 1 = 77 and r 2 = 101 nm is (6.5 ± 0.8) × 10 -15 m 2 /W which is two orders of magnitude larger than that of the bulk gallium phosphide. For purposes of comparison, the bidisperse monolayer consisting of spheres of artificial material with n 0 of GaP and n 2 of gallium phosphide with negative sign was modeled: the resulting value of n 2 eff = -(6.5 ± 0.7) × 10 -17 m 2 /W, that is the negative index metasurface does not show the inversion of n 2 eff sign. It is appropriate at this point to recall that in Ref. Next, the effective nonlinear refractive index of the bidisperse disordered metasurface was studied in proximity to the negative refraction condition. This was done as follows: the size of one half of the particles was fixed with r 1 and the sphere radius of another half r 2 was varied. Figs. 1, 2 depict the results of the FDTD simulations of the metasurfaces with the sizes of the particles in the vicinity of the negative refraction state. The behavior of n 0 eff (r 2 ) for r 1 = 101 nm is in close agreement with that obtained in Ref. The dependence of n 2 eff (r 2 ) for r 1 = 101 nm (Fig. The next step will be to investigate the optical nonlinearity of the bidisperse metasurface during the concentration transition to the negative refraction state. The behavior of n 0 eff through the transition to negative values was studied in Ref. is depicted in Fig. eff is larger than that of n 2 eff as the uncertainty of n 0 eff is involved. This dependence on f does not display a peak in the region of n 0 eff close to zero. The similar maximum of n 2 was observed in Refs. At volume fraction above 30%, the spheres in the eff of the disordered bidisperse metasurface consisting of equal numbers of GaP spheres with radii r1 = 77 nm and r2 = 101 nm as a function of volume concentration f . The upper abscissa axis displays the net number of the particles on 4 × 4 μm area. The fit for effective linear refractive index n 0 eff was taken from Ref. monolayer are densely packed and partially overlap. As a result, the resonance sizes are shifted in strongly interacting arrays of particles leading to decrease in the effective second-order nonlinear refractive index. By this means, the disordered monolayer bidisperse metasurface has highest magnitudes of n 2 eff under the conditions of zero index medium. Fig. (3) eff is calculated using Eq. 1. For the thicknesses close to a monolayer, the metasurface possesses the condition of negative refraction. The secondorder nonlinear refractive index exhibits the largest values having the positive sign. For larger thicknesses, the nanocomposite does not fulfill the condition of double negative medium and the sign of n 2 eff becomes negative. The nanocomposite is believed to be the single negative medium which displays the inversion of the n 2 eff sign In conclusion, the nonlinear optical Kerr effect of bidisperse disordered monolayer nanocomposites of GaP spheres is studied numerically. It is displayed that this nanostructure possesses the maximum value of the second-order refractive index when the metasurface represents the mixture of nanoparticles with sizes just above the electric and magnetic dipole Mie resonances which results in the negative effective refractive index. The effective Kerr coefficient of the negative index all-dielectric metasurface has the same sign as that of the nanoparticle material. The bidisperse monolayer metasurfaces with different values of GaP sphere concentration exhibit a peak of the nonlinear optical Kerr effect when the effective linear index of refraction is close to zero. The monolayer metasurface shows the highest magnitudes of the second-order nonlinear refractive index as compared to that of thicker bidisperse nanocomposites. The results were obtained with the use of IACP FEB RAS Shared Resource Center "Far Eastern Computing Resource" equipment (https://www.cc.dvo.ru). 