Sensing vector magnetic fields is critical to many applications in fundamental physics, bioimaging, and material science. Magnetic-field sensors exploiting nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers are particularly compelling as they offer high sensitivity and spatial resolution even at nanoscale. Achieving vector magnetometry has, however, often required applying microwaves sequentially or simultaneously, limiting the sensors' applications under cryogenic temperature. Here we propose and demonstrate a microwave-free vector magnetometer that simultaneously measures all Cartesian components of a magnetic field using NV ensembles in diamond. In particular, the present magnetometer leverages the level anticrossing in the triplet ground state at 102.4 mT, allowing the measurement of both longitudinal and transverse fields with a wide bandwidth from zero to megahertz range. Full vector sensing capability is proffered by modulating fields along the preferential NV axis and in the transverse plane and subsequent demodulation of the signal. This sensor exhibits a root mean square noise floor of ≈ 300 pT / √ Hz in all directions. The present technique is broadly applicable to both ensemble sensors and potentially also single-NV sensors, extending the vector capability to nanoscale measurement under ambient temperatures. Sensitive vector magnetometers are exploited in applications including magnetic navigation To date, diamond-based vector magnetometers have been realized by interrogating ensembles of NV centers along multiple crystallographic axes We propose and demonstrate a protocol that enables vectorial measurement of magnetic fields by interrogating an ensemble of NV centers aligned along only a single crystallographic axis (we do not use a preferentialorientation NV-diamond sample) at the ground-state level anticrossing (GSLAC). By applying two orthogonal alternating fields, along and perpendicular to the chosen axis, our technique offers direct and simultaneous readout of all three magnetic components, free from systematic errors during reconstruction. In contrast to existing methods, our approach does not employ microwave fields. Thus it is possible to extend NV-based vector magnetic sensing techniques to cryogenic temperatures, representing an important advance in magnetometry. The method can be potentially extended to single-NV probes. This will facilitate extraction of complete vector information of the magnetic field to be measured with nanoscale spatial resolution under ambient temperatures. A nanoscale vector magnetometer would bring a wealth of additional information and is motivated by numerous applications, e.g., noninvasive tracking of particle motion in intracellular medium This microwave-free technique for magnetic sensing is based on detecting changes in NV-photoluminescence (PL) under optical pumping near the GSLAC. It was proposed and demonstrated for sensing the longitudinal component of a magnetic field in Wickenbrock et al. In the following, we address the challenges of measuring all Cartesian components simultaneously and precisely. The NV center is an atomic-scale defect consisting of a substitutional nitrogen adjacent to a vacancy in the diamond lattice. It has a spin-triplet ground state (S=1), which can be optically polarized to |m s = 0 and read out due to a spin-dependent intersystem crossing into an intermediate singlet state. Without magnetic field the |m s = ±1 states are (nearly) degenerate; however, owing to spin-spin interaction, these states lie higher in energy than the |m s = 0 state. This is the so-called zero-field splitting D between the magnetic sublevels corresponding to a frequency difference of 2.87 GHz. Brought to degeneracy via the Zeeman effect, a subset of NV centers' magnetic sublevels experience a complex GSLAC at an axial field B z ≈ 102.4 mT Figure In order to describe the vector sensing mechanism, we first analyze the Hamiltonian of the triplet ground state around the GSLAC. The system can be modelled by only considering |m s = 0 and |m s = -1 . The |m s = +1 is ignored in the following because it is at a much higher energy than the |m s = 0 state which is preferentially populated under optical excitation where B ⊥ is the transverse magnetic field x + B 2 y ), φ is the angle defined by tan φ = B y /B x , and γ e is the electron gyromagnetic ratio. In the absence of transverse fields, the |0, +1 state does not mix with any other states [see Fig. The ground-state energy level scheme of the NV center as a function of the applied axial field. The energy levels either cross or do not cross depending on the mixing between them, depicted in detail in the inset. (b) The PL signal as a function of the applied axial magnetic field, normalized to their respective signals at 80 mT. The inset shows a detailed view around the GSLAC trace. Features at around 51 mT, due to cross relaxations the exact value of the longitudinal magnetic field. However, in the presence of the spin bath producing randomly fluctuating magnetic fields, there arises an effective coupling between the eigenstates resulting in depolarization of the NV center and a corresponding drop in PL near the level crossings. We introduce the axial field difference from the crossing, |B ⊥ |, far from the avoided crossing region, the PL is insensitive to the transverse field. Conversely, if |B ⊥ | |δB z |, the signal becomes insensitive to small changes in the longitudinal field. In other words, near the GSLAC, the PL can be used to determine the transverse and longitudinal components of the magnetic field to be measured. This magnetic-vector sensing protocol can be extended to single-NV probes, and therefore, nanoscale sensing volume, since it just relies on intrinsic properties of the NV center and the presence of a spin bath. Based on the Hamiltonian (Eq. 1) and the assumption of an isotropic spin bath, we expect that the effect of a transverse magnetic field on the intensity of PL should not depend on the direction of the transverse field. In fact, we observe this experimentally, see Fig. A typical method to adapt a scalar magnetometer for vector measurement is to apply mutually orthogonal fields modulated at different frequencies. Thus it is possible to determine the components along each direction by individually demodulating the signal In addition to the longitudinal magnetic field measurement The experimental apparatus includes a custom-built electromagnet and three pairs of orthogonal Helmholtz coils wound on a 3-D printed mount. The electromagnet can be moved with a computer-controlled 3-D translation stage (Thorlabs PT3-Z8) and a rotation stage (Thorlabs NR360S, x-axis). The NV-diamond sensor is placed in the center of both the magnetic bore and three pairs of integrated orthogonal Helmholtz coils. The diamond can be rotated around the z-axis. This provides all degrees of the necessary freedom for placing the diamond in the center of the magnet and aligning the NV axis parallel to the magnetic field. A two-channel function generator (Tektronix AFG 3022A) provides sinusoidal signals for field modulations in the longitudinal and transverse directions and references for the demodulation by two LIAs. The signal from one of the channels is split in two with one of them passing through a phase shifter. These two signals with the same frequency but 90-degree-shifted relative phase are applied to two pairs of the Helmholtz coils (along the x and y axes). All three signals are amplified via a homemade 3-channel current amplifier before reaching the Helmholtz coils. The light source is a solid-state laser emitting at a wavelength λ = 532 nm (laser Quantum Gem 532). The PL emitted by the diamond sample is collected with a parabolic lens and detected with a photodetector (Thorlabs PDA 36A). The sensor is a 99.97% 12 C, (111)-cut diamond single crystal, with dimensions 0.71 mm × 0.69 mm and a thickness 0.43 mm. It was laser-cut from a 12 C-enriched diamond single crystal grown by the temperature gradient method at high pressure (6.1 GPa) and high temperature (1430 o C). A metal solvent containing a nitrogen-getter and carbon powder prepared by pylolysis of 99.97% 12 Cenriched methane as a carbon source were used The Helmholtz coil pairs for the field modulation can also be used to calibrate the response to AC and DC magnetic fields B = (B x , B y , B z ). The applied fields, in the range of ±4 μT along each direction, are calibrated by flux gate magnetometers and consistent with a priori calculations from the known coil geometry and the applied currents. The single-frequency-modulation 2-D vector magnetometry method is demonstrated by mapping the amplitudes and phase of the LIA output as a function of the applied fields in the x-y plane, see Fig. The measurement in the z-axis is carried out by applying an additional modulated field along z, modulated with a different frequency (than the one in the transverse direction) and the corresponding demodulation of the PL signal. A matrix of 2-D vector magnetic fields in the x-z plane was measured to demonstrate this method. The angle of the field can be calculated as arctan(B z /B x ) from the applied currents and calibration factors of the two coils. Figure Before full vector-sensing protocol is demonstrated, the sensitivity along both the longitudinal and transverse di- rections (z and x) as well as possible cross-talk effects were evaluated. Derivatives of the fluorescence signals in Fig. As a demonstration of full-vector sensing capacity, a set of static magnetic field vectors, the trajectory of which was designed along a 3-D a spiral curve on a sphere, was applied and measured. The applied field value curve is shown in Fig. With the basic protocol established, this simultaneous vector magnetometry method should be extendable to single-NV probes. Single NV centers in diamond have been exploited to detect fluctuating magnetic fields (used as scalar relaxometry magnetometers) without microwaves In summary, we have proposed and demonstrated a sensing method allowing simultaneous recording of all three Cartesian components of a vector magnetic field using a solid-state spin sensor. The method operates at the GSLAC of NV centers, and does not employ microwaves in the measurement. Further optimization of The blue line indicates the noise in the magnetically sensitive configuration at a magnetic field of 102.4 mT, the red line indicates a noise in the magnetically insensitive configuration (average noise between 1-500 Hz is 300 pT/ √ Hz), and the amber line illustrates the electronic noise (average noise between 1-500 Hz is 100 pT/ √ Hz). The decrease in signal for frequencies above 1 kHz is due to the filtering of the LIA. Photon shot noise is estimated as 65 pT/ √ Hz. (e) Transverse magnetic field noise spectrum (x-axis). The blue line indicates the noise in the magnetically sensitive configuration measured at zero transverse field, the red line indicates the noise in the magnetically insensitive configuration at a transverse magnetic field of 0.2 mT (average noise between 1-500 Hz is 300 pT/ √ Hz), and amber line shows the electronic noise spectrum (average noise between 1-500 Hz is 100 pT/ √ Hz). Photon shot noise is estimated as 60 pT/ √ Hz. the apparatus will allow a compact vector magnetometer well suited for geophysical field measurement or biophysical imaging. The present method can be applied to the anticrossings in other color-center systems. The GSLAC-based vector magnetometer using NV centers along a single axis exhibits a root mean square noise floor of ≈ 300 pT in a transverse and the longitudinal direction. While the technique was demonstrated without monitoring the intensity of the pump laser power, future experiments will utilize differential detection schemes and suppress laser-related noise. In addition, combination with infrared-absorption-based readout This technique should be extendable to single NV sensors, in this case, it can be expected to advance nanoscale real-time magnetic sensing and imaging applications, such as single molecule imaging. With the ability to sense vector magnetic fields, this method could potentially enable real-time imaging of magnetic dipoles with arbitrary orientations. 