Nanowire photodetectors are investigated because of their compatibility with flexible electronics, or for the implementation of on-chip optical interconnects. Such devices are characterized by ultrahigh photocurrent gain, but their photoresponse scales sublinearly with the optical power. Here, we present a study of single-nanowire photodetectors displaying a linear response to ultraviolet illumination. Their structure consists of a GaN nanowire incorporating an AlN/GaN/AlN heterostructure, which generates an internal electric field. The activity of the heterostructure is confirmed by the rectifying behavior of the current-voltage characteristics in the dark, as well as by the asymmetry of the photoresponse in magnitude and Nanowire photodetectors Nanowire photoconductors are characterized by high photocurrent gains, which can reach 10 6 , and strong spectral contrast above and below the bandgap. A general feature in nanowire photoconductors is the fact that the photocurrent scales sublinearly with the impinging laser power, which has been shown for single GaN nanowires regardless of the presence of heterostructures ZnO Indeed, the large surface to volume ratio in nanowires makes them very sensitive to surface effects (presence of charge traps or Fermi level pinning, which can be modified by adsorbed species). In the case of undoped GaN nanowires, Sanford et al. reported an improvement of the linearity in nanowires with small diameter (≈ 100 nm), which they attributed to the total depletion of the nanowires associated with the axial electric field generated by asymmetric Schottky-like contacts In this paper, we systematically investigate GaN nanowire photodetectors with an embedded AlN/GaN/AlN heterostructure, which is responsible for creating an axial electric field within the nanowire. We demonstrate that for reverse-biased (negative bias on the GaN cap segment) nanowires with diameters < 80 nm, the response to ultraviolet illumination is in fact linear, which is consistent with the total depletion of the nanowire stem due to the Fermi level pinning at the sidewalls. Using theoretical calculations, we show that in these thin wires illumination does not have any significant effect on the lateral electric field. On the contrary, in large nanowires (diameter > 80 nm), which are only partially depleted, illumination results in a variation of the lateral electric field and a nonlinear increase of the conducting section in the center of the wires. Therefore, we show here that the depletion of the nanowire due to surface effects can be beneficial for the photodetector performance since it allows the fabrication of linear devices if the nanowire heterostructure is properly designed. The samples under study are GaN nanowires incorporating an AlN/GaN/AlN heterostructure to enhance the responsivity at low bias, as a consequence to the internal electric field generated by the large difference in spontaneous and piezoelectric polarization between GaN and AlN. A schematic description of the structure is presented in figure The presence of the GaN/AlN heterojunction favors the collection of photogenerated electrons, but it is an obstacle for hole transport. The field-emission transport through such a barrier should be negligible. However, transport through relatively large AlN barriers has been experimentally observed In our case, where two barriers are involved, the states in the intermediate GaN section should play a role as intermediate states in the transport process. Note that the thickness of the layers in the AlN/GaN/AlN heterostructure is not critical, within certain limits. Increasing the size of the AlN barriers would have the positive impact of decreasing the dark current, but it would lead to problems for the collection of photogenerated holes. Therefore, if a larger heterostructure were desired, it should be implemented as an AlN/GaN multi-quantum-well structure. However, if several periods were added, the heterostructure would start showing its own contribution to the spectral response, particularly when positive bias is applied to the cap. On the other hand, a thinner heterostructure would result in a reduction of the electric field in the stem. This would decrease the extension of the depletion region where the charge carrier separation takes place. These GaN nanowires were synthesized by plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy (PAMBE) on Si(111) substrates. The growth rate of the GaN nanowires was ≈ 0.11 nm/s and the substrate temperature was TS = 810°C. Prior to the growth of the nanowires, an AlN buffer layer was deposited using the 2-step growth procedure described in ref. The as-grown nanowire ensemble is sonicated in isopropanol and dispersed on sets of Si3N4 membranes fabricated on Si(100). The aim of the membranes is to provide an electrontransparent support to enable scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) studies of the nanowires after their optoelectronic characterization. Such SiNx grids are fabricated using a 400-μm-thick n ++ Si(100) wafer with layers of 200 nm SiO2 and 40 nm of stoichiometric Si3N4 on both sides. Using laser lithography, membrane windows are defined on one side of the wafer and subsequently etched through the nitride and oxide layers using reactive ion etching. Then, a KOH bath etches through the Si and the oxide on the other side of the wafer, leaving only the 40-nm-thick layer of SiN, which then constitutes the 200 μm × 200 μm membrane. In a further step, contact pads and markers are defined by laser lithography and electron beam deposition of Ti/Au (10 nm/35 nm). The nanowires dispersed on such membranes are either bundles [figure The current-voltage (I-V) characteristics in the dark exhibit a strongly rectifying behavior, as illustrated in figure Following the interpretation for the case of a single AlN insertion However, there is a correlation between the dark current and the nanowire diameter, as illustrated in the inset of figure Moving to measurements under illumination, the variation of the photocurrent as a function of the ultraviolet irradiance was studied at 325 nm. Figures Under 100 mV bias, nanowires in groups A and B exhibit different behaviors. Note that, for this linearity measurements, the range of bias voltage applied to the nanowires was chosen to keep the maximum photocurrent lower than 10 μA, to prevent device failure. This implies that the maximum applied voltage was in the range of 1 V (lower for some of the specimens). In the devices where a linear behavior is observed (group A), the linearity improves with bias, without any indication of degradation at higher bias. To verify that the photocurrent induced by ultraviolet illumination stems from the GaN nanowires, we have recorded the spectral response for both sets of devices. The results are presented in figure If we approximate the exposed photodetector area by the in-plane cross-section of the contacted nanowire (on average, 1.5 μm × nm), we can estimate that the typical responsivity (geometric mean) for an irradiance of 10 mW/cm is around 0.3 A/W at zero bias. (Regarding the calculation of the responsivity, see section 1 of the Supporting Information). At a bias of 100 mV, the typical responsivity, measured under the same conditions and calculated in the same manner, increases to around 20 A/W for nanowires in group A, and up to around 700 A/W for nanowires in group B. The increase of the responsivity with the nanowire diameter is consistent with previous reports on GaN nanowire photodetectors To confirm the role of the heterostructure in the responsivity of the nanowires, we have compared the photocurrent under forward and reverse bias. Under reverse bias, the response is expected to be dominated by the presence of the space charge region, which separates photogenerated electrons and holes. The response is hence expected to resemble that of a Schottky diode (low dark current and linear response with the optical power) Finally, we have assessed the effect of the limited response time of the photodetectors on our measurements. The measurements reported above were recorded using a synchronous detection setup (see Methods for details) where the light is chopped at a frequency of 33 Hz. In the case of planar structures, it is known that the chopping frequency has dramatic effects on the linearity and spectral response of photoconductors The drastic reduction of the dark current in nanowires with a diameter below ≈ 80 nm has been observed previously in GaN nanowires The results of the simulations are summarized in figure This explains also the enhancement of the responsivity with the nanowire diameter. The responsivity is linked to the total number of photogenerated carriers, i.e. it should increase with the square of the nanowire radius. To this dependence, we have to add the variation of the conductivity due to the change in the diameter of the central conducting channel in the stem. Both phenomena are relatively independent. In small, fully depleted nanowires, the variation of the responsivity with the diameter will be given by the change in the total amount of photogenerated carriers. In large, partially-depleted wires, it is the modulation of the conductive section that dominates, which can lead to huge photocurrent gains. A theoretical analysis of both contributions can be found in ref. In summary, these different behaviors of the radial potential profiles explain the observed differences in linearity (β) as a function of the nanowire diameter. In this manuscript, linearity is observed for nanowires with a diameter smaller than ≈ 80 nm. For larger nanowires, there are two approaches to improve the linearity, namely obtaining a full depletion of the nanowires or rendering the band bending at the sidewalls insensitive to light. Full depletion of larger nanowires can be achieved by reducing the doping level. Reducing the sensitivity of the band bending to light is more challenging. The use of a thicker AlN shell might help, but there is a risk of generating structural defects due to the lattice mismatch between m-plane AlN and GaN. Alternatively, the use of dielectrics as passivation layer should be explored. We have demonstrated single-nanowire ultraviolet photodetectors consisting of a GaN nanowire with an embedded AlN/GaN/AlN heterostructure, which generates an electric field along the nanowire axis as a result of the difference in polarization between III-nitride compounds with wurtzite crystal structure. The influence of the heterostructure is confirmed by the rectifying behavior of the current-voltage characteristics in the dark, and by the asymmetry of the photoresponse in magnitude and linearity. Under reverse bias (negative bias on the cap segment), the detectors behave linearly with the impinging optical power when the nanowire diameter remains below a certain threshold (≈ 80 nm). This is explained by the linearity of the photogeneration process, the separation of photogenerated carriers induced by the axial electric field, and the fact that illumination does not have a significant effect on the radial electric field. In the case of nanowires that are not fully depleted (diameter > 80 nm), the light-induced change in the Fermi level at the sidewalls results in a variation of the diameter of the central conducting channel in the stem, which leads to an overall nonlinear photoresponse. The structural properties of the nanowires were probed both by high angle annular dark field (HAADF) scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and TEM using a probe corrected FEI TITAN Themis working at 200 kV and a CM 300 working at 300 kV. We used a DENSSolutions 6 contact double tilt holder. Current voltage (I-V) characteristics have been investigated with the nanowires connected to an Agilent 4155C semiconductor parameter analyzer. Forward bias corresponds to higher voltage in the cap segment than in the stem. Photocurrent measurements as a function of optical power have been carried out using an unfocused continuous-wave HeCd laser (wavelength = 325 nm, spot diameter on the sample ≈ 1 mm), chopped at 33 Hz (unless indicated). The nanowire is biased and connected in series with a ×10 6 V/A transimpedance amplifier, which is read out by a Stanford Research Systems SR830 lock-in amplifier. The spectral response has been measured using the same read-out configuration, but exciting with light from a 450 W xenon lamp passed through a Gemini 180 Jobin-Yvon monochromator. In general, the bias was chosen to keep the maximum photocurrent lower than 10 μA to prevent device failure. All measurements were carried out at room temperature. Theoretical calculations of the band diagram were performed using the commercial 8×8 k•p band Schrödinger-Poisson equation solver nextnano 3 . The nanowire was modeled as a hexahedral prism consisting of a 150 nm long n-type GaN segment followed by 130 nm of undoped GaN, an AlN/GaN/AlN (10 nm/2.3 nm/10 nm) heterostructure, 130 nm of undoped GaN, and 50 nm of n-type GaN. The n-type doping density and residual doping were fixed to 8×10 17 cm -3 and 1×10 17 cm -3 , respectively. The structure was defined on a GaN substrate to provide a reference in-plane lattice parameter, and was embedded in a rectangular prism of air to include elastic strain relaxation. In a first stage, the three-dimensional strain distribution was calculated by minimization of the elastic energy assuming zero stress at the nanowire surface. Then, for the calculation of the band profiles, the piezoelectric fields resulting from the strain distribution were taken into account. Diameters of 50, 60, 80 and 120 nm were considered. Regarding the treatment of the surface, it is generally accepted that in GaN nanowires the Fermi level at the m-plane sidewalls is located around 0.6 eV below the conduction band edge 