Cooper-pair formation in a system of imbalanced fermions leads to the well-studied Fulde-Ferrell or Larkin-Ovchinnikov superfluid state. In the former case the system forms spontaneous phase gradients while in the latter case it forms a stripelike or a crystal-like density gradient. We show that in multicomponent imbalanced mixtures, the superfluid states can be very different from the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov states. The system generates gradients in both densities and phases by forming three-dimensional vortex-antivortex lattices or lattices of linked vortex loops. The solutions share some properties with the ostensibly unrelated Skyrme model of densely packed baryons and can be viewed as synthetic realization of nuclear Skyrme matter. One of the most important examples of translation symmetry breaking in condensed matter states is formation of a crystal of topological defects. In the simplest superconductors and superfluids, the topological defects originate from the fact that they are described by a complex field Ψ = |Ψ|e iθ , where the 2π-periodic field θ is called superfluid phase. As a consequence superfluid and superconducting vortices are characterized by one of the simplest topological indexes: the integer phase winding N . It quantifies how many times the phase changes from 0 to 2π when one circumvents a vortex core. It is given by the line integral N = 1 2π ∇θ • dl. One of the state-defining properties of superfluids is that it forms vortex lattices under rotation While two-dimensional lattices of topological defects are ubiquitous, the situation is very different in three dimensions. The most celebrated example where threedimensional crystals of topological solitons were sought is the Skyrme model of nuclear matter The nuclear Skyrme model was originally defined in terms of a SU (2) valued chiral field. Hence solutions can be characterized by a pair of complex fields Φ 1 , Φ 2 constrained by Nuclear skyrmion solutions of this model are isolated particle-like states characterized by an integer topological charge (or index) Q, which is interpreted as a baryon number and is defined as the integral over the topological density where . If one associates vorticity to a complex field component, then the internal structure of the skyrmion can be interprerted as a bundle of linked closed vortex loops and the linking number corresponds to the value of the topological charge. Skyrmions with different topological charges belong to different homotopy classes and therefore cannot mutually transform into each other as a result of any perturbations. Particles with charges of the opposite sign attract each other and annihilate, while those with the same sign form highly-charged skyrmions with a morphology resembling Platonic solids In this paper we consider mixtures of two species of fermionic ultracold atoms. We considered the case where both spin populations are imbalanced. We show that, by contrast, in a two-component system entirely different states arise. The system forms textures in the form of three-dimensional lattice of nuclear skyrmions. This represents synthetic realization of the putative Skyrme nuclear matter. The Ginzburg-Landau functional for free energy density of a single-component FFLO superfluid in BCS limit of weak coupling was derived microscopically in where Microscopic derivation of parameters in single component case In cases where a different value was used, we give the corresponding number. The dimensionless unit of length corresponds to v F (δμ)c2 , where v F is Fermi velocity and (δμ) c2 is critical value for the chemical potential difference δμ = |μ ↑ -μ ↓ |. In two-component case one necessarily has to include additional parameter γ that controls the strength of bi-quadratic coupling. In what follows we set it γ = 0.5 so that the system is substantially far away from a phase separation regime. The key feature of systems with FFLO-type instability is that for sufficiently large fermionic imbalance, the coefficient K for the gradient terms becomes negative. Therefore the system forms gradients of the field in the ground state and those should be balanced by retaining positive terms arising at the next order with more spatial derivatives. Note, that a regime is also possible where the coefficient in front of fourth order potential term becomes negative and one should retain sixthorder potential term. While in the recent microscopic Ginzburg-Landau derivation We investigate numerically stable states of the model (2) (for details see Appendix). We find that these are three-dimensional crystals with the field configurations Ψ 1,2 (r) analogous to that for pair Φ 1,2 (r) in nuclear skyrmion crystals. Thus, the ultra-cold atomic multicomponent mixtures can exhibit the physical realization of a crystal of synthetic nuclear skyrmions. Remarkably, at the same time the state is an example of novel behavior of vortex matter being a crystal of linked closed vortex loops (see Fig. In the solutions that we find the energy density is nonuniform and it breaks translation symmetry down to a three-dimensional crystal-like lattice. A typical unit cell of size λ x,y,z for the solutions we found is shown in Figure Thereby, the integral over the density (1) in both models gives the same index Q, also known as skyrmion number. Hence, we use the terms skyrmion, antiskyrmion, half-skyrmion and quarter-skyrmion to de- note cases when Q is 1, -1, 1/2 and 1/4 correspondingly. Obviously, in contrast to the mathematically idealised nuclear Skyrme model, in the model under consideration the total index Q is not an absolute invariant. The remarkable fact about the states of multicomponent imbalanced mixture that we find is that Q does not change, unless perturbations are sufficiently strong. Hence it provides the important quantitative characteristic revealing the relationship with the nuclear skyrmions. The total skyrmion number Q for the unit cell presented in Figure Note, that the unit cell has an internal symmetry and in fact consists of eight smaller rectangular cells which are identical in their energy density F(r) and topological index density ρ Q (r) distributions, but have different order parameter configuration. We will call these F-cells. One of the vortex cores in the first component (Ψ 1 = 0) is depicted by dashed loop. Note, that cores of the second and first components (dashed curves) are also linked, since vertical line for the second component may be viewed as a part of a closed loop of infinite size. Hence found phase can be considered as a collection of linked loops. But there is a subtlety: vertical vortex lines are passing through every hole in knackebrod -white and black. It reflects the fact that in the vicinity of points of linking we do not find compact skyrmions with Q = 1, but rather pairs of half-skyrmions. In other words, two adjacent holes of different color constitute one fractionalized Q = 1 skyrmion. This is an observation common for all solutions in the two-component fermionic model: the two complex fields form lattices consisting of skyrmions fractionalized in half-skyrmions and even quarter-skyrmions. In the limit when the coupling between the components is negligible, or in single-component case, naturally there are no linkings. To highlight the difference with the twocomponent case, such a solution is presented in Figure The Figure Generalization of the ST solution appears when the system makes connections between vertical vortex lines of the second component. The stable solutions have these connections in the space between the knackebrod layers. Such solutions include twice as many layers in elementary cell. The BCT crystal shown on Fig. A very different stable state that the system forms can be viewed as twisted ST skyrmion lattice. This phase corresponds to DNA-like configuration of vortices spanning the system shown on Fig. The system can form a crystal with more complicated fractionalization: composed of quarter-skyrmions. In such a crystal there are reconnections that occur between layers of the Knakebrod phase in BCT lattice. This gives chains of adjacent vortex loops, see Fig. The synthetic nuclear Skyrme crystals presented above can be seen as spontaneous formation of lattices of skyrmion fractions with same Q. However, we found solutions for which the signs of skyrmion number alternate. An example of a stable state with total skyrmion number Q = 0 is shown on Fig. The formation of crystal of topological excitations: vortex lattice, is considered a hallmark of superfluidity. A different kind of a lattice of topological solitons was explored in the nuclear Skyrme model The nuclear Skyrme crystals that we find in context of cold atoms can form in unconventional superconductors where multicomponent models are ubiquitous. becomes: with ζ = 0.61, K = -1.21, α = 0.75 ln( 9h 4hc2 ), β = 0.375 and ξ = 0.915. Note, that α can be positive or negative, depending on the ratio h/h c2 . Two-component model necessarily has more parameters. We include the bi-quadratic coupling term γ|Ψ 1 | 2 |Ψ 2 | 2 . Apart from that, when rescaling space x → λx and energy density F → hF, we have to multiply by the same scaling factor for both components. It means that the model will depend on ratios of these factors for different components. Namely, space scaling factor for first component will be proportional to , where indexes correspond to first and second components. Similarly for energy scaling we obtain factor In the mixtures of two species of fermionic ultracold atoms characteristics like densities will be different. It means that in general we have The disparity in these parameters leads to a tendency to improve stability of the various crystal solutions. Hence we set all parameters to be equal in our computations to assess the system in a regime that is less favorable for crystal formation. We take all coefficients to be of order unity and set K 1 = K 2 -1, α 1 = α 2 = -1, γ = 0.5 and other parameters equal to unity. We numerically minimized averaged energy density F of the cuboidal unit cell of full three-dimensional model (see eq. ( First of all, found solutions provide minimum of the energy for single unit cell of fixed size, i.e. E 0 = λx 0 λy 0 λz 0 F(r)dxdydz → min. Next, the periods λ x,y,z are in equilibrium, i.e. they are variables in the problem and were found such that simultaneously provide minimum for the average energy density, F(r) = E 0 /(λ x λ y λ z ) → min. Similar approach, based on minimization of average energy density, was used to study one-dimensional helicoidal ordering in magnets without an inversion center Because the system has many states representing local minima, to obtain a regular crystal one needs a suitable initial guess. As the initial guess for the numerical energy minimization we used first few terms of the Fourier series subjected to corresponding symmetry. Similar expressions were used in the search for nuclear Skyrme crystals For example, for ST we used (for brevity we assume λ i = 2π) : 