We present the first demonstration of an integrated photonic phase-change memory using Ge2Sb2Te5 on siliconon-insulator and demonstrate reliable multilevel operation with a single programming pulse. We also compare our results on silicon with previous demonstrations on silicon nitride. Crucially, achieving this on silicon enables tighter integration of traditional electronics with photonic memories in future, making phase-change photonic memory a viable and integrable technology. Recently fully integrated photonic memory devices have been demonstrated on silicon nitride To fabricate the waveguides, we use an SOI substrate with a 220 nm device layer and 3 μm buried oxide. Our device is illustrated in Fig. Fig In order to understand the difference between the optical response of GST on silicon versus silicon nitride waveguides, we performed thermal and optical multi-physics simulations using FDTD and FEM analysis. Fig. We can directly measure the thermal response of our devices experimentally by monitoring the transmission of a low-power optical probe while sending WRITE pulses to the device. Because GST has a strong thermo-optic response In Fig. By cycling the device multiple times with the same programming sequence, we plot the error between the expected transmission level and the actual level measured using an optical READ signal. The resulting histogram of the device is shown in Fig. In order to improve the efficiency of our devices, we investigated a single pulse method for fully recrystallizing the GST cell from any arbitrary amorphous state (see Fig. In a final demonstration, we use our double-step ERASE pulse to reach arbitrary transmission states regardless of the previous state of the material (Fig. We have demonstrated silicon photonic phase-change memory using a single pulse programming method. This decreased the device footprint compared with silicon nitride photonics and reduced both the energy and time required for reaching arbitrary memory levels. We have characterized the reliability of this approach and outlined a comparison with other state-of-the-art programming methods. Our results are a significant step toward viable and integrable photonic phasechange memory devices on-chip. 