Majorana zero-modes (MZMs) are spatially-localized zero-energy fractional quasiparticles with non-Abelian braiding statistics that hold a great promise for topological quantum computing. Due to its particle-antiparticle equivalence, an MZM exhibits robust resonant Andreev reflection and 2e 2 /h quantized conductance at low temperature. By utilizing variable-tunnel-coupled scanning tunneling spectroscopy, we study tunneling conductance of vortex bound states on FeTe0.55Se0.45 superconductors. We report observations of conductance plateaus as a function of tunnel coupling for zero-energy vortex bound states with values close to or even reaching the 2e 2 /h quantum conductance. In contrast, no such plateau behaviors were observed on either finite energy Carolide Genne-Matricon bound states or in the continuum of electronic states outside the superconducting gap. This unique behavior of the zero-mode conductance reaching a plateau strongly supports the existence of MZMs in this iron-based superconductor, which serves as a promising single-material platform for Majorana braiding at a relatively high temperature. Majorana zero-modes (MZMs) obey non-Abelian statistics and have potential applications in topological quantum computation (1, 2). In the past two decades, MZMs have been predicted in p-wave superconductors (3, 4) and spin-orbit-coupled materials proximitized by s-wave superconductors (5-8). Experimental evidence for MZMs has been observed in various systems, ranging from semiconductorsuperconductor nanowires (9, 10), topological insulator-superconductor heterostructures (11), atomic chains on superconducting substrate (12, 13). Recently, fully gapped bulk iron-based superconductors have emerged as a new single-material platform for MZMs A hallmark of an MZM is its 2e 2 /h-quantized conductance plateau In order to examine the particle-hole-symmetric nature of the MZMs, we compare and contrast conductance behavior of zero-energy MZMs and finite-energy Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon bound states (CBSs). As demonstrated previously, there are two distinct types of vortices, i.e. topological (ordinary) vortices with (without) MZM, differing by a half-integer level shift of vortex bound states The plateau behavior of the zero-bias conductance provides evidence for the Majorana-induced resonant Andreev reflection The plateau behavior of ZBCPs has been observed repeatedly in many topological vortices [31 plateau features out of 60 measurements (40)]. We perform a statistical analysis of the observed plateau values Gp and find that most values of Gp are located around 40% -60% of G0 = 2e 2 /h (Fig. We also check the reversibility of the process of varying tunneling coupling in STM, and find that both the topography and the conductance plateau can be reproduced during two repeated sequences of varying tunneling coupling [Fig. Note added: We noticed that about two months after the submission of this work, a related result in (Li0.84Fe0.16)OHFeSe was submitted and published There is no plateau behavior on 0 T which indicates that our measurements are free of quantum ballistic transport. (G) A schematic plot of resonant tunneling through a symmetric double barrier system. The wavefunction evolution of a tunneled electron is shown. kt is penetration constant, which is defined as kt = t √ 2m(V -E q )/h , t being the barrier width, V the barrier potential, and Eq the energy of the quasistationary state. At Eq, the reflected electrons from the inside of double barrier interfere destructively with the incident electrons, realizing a perfect transmission regardless of strength of tunnel barriers as long as the same kt for the two barriers. (H) The double-barrier view of the MZM-induced resonant Andreev reflection. The blue and red colors indicate the electron and hole process, respectively. An MZM has equivalence of particle and hole components which ensures the same tunnel coupling on electron and hole barrier (e = h). Thus, as an analogue of (E), a resonant Andreev reflection will happen on the particle-hole Hilbert space mediated by the MZM. (I) The double-barrier view of Andreev reflection mediated by a CBS. The arbitrary mixing of particle-hole components in CBS breaks the resonance condition. where β = (kBTeff) -1 and Vmod is the zero-to-peak amplitude of lock-in modulation voltage. The spectra on Al were measured using the modulation voltage Vmod = 0.005 meV. The superconducting spectrum of Al was shown in Fig. In a tunnel-coupling dependent measurement, the tunneling conductance changes about three orders of magnitude (from 1 × 10 -3 G0 to 0.9 G0 in the case of Fig. The fluctuation range of peaks is much smaller than the energy resolution, according to the calibration in part (I). Therefore, we calibrate the peaks back to zero-bias by shifting the x-axis without interpolation. The raw data without any processing are shown in Fig. In addition to the plot of ZBCP peak height as a function of GN in Fig. We changed the instrumental broadening (r) by varying the lock-in modulation voltage, which contributes as the lock-in voltage broadening (rlock-in). The lock-in voltage broadening can be present by b(V) (see part I). We estimate the total broadening by where rtemperature is thermal broadening, which is calculated by the effective electron temperature. The modulation voltage dependent measurements are shown in Figs. As shown in Figs. We also checked the conductance plateau feature using STM #2. Two sets of data are shown in Fig. We define the formula of an MZM peak using the g(V) described in part I, by adopting a Lorentzian for the sample density of state ρ(E). The peak is considered as the convolution of a Lorentz function (intrinsic property), a derivative Fermi function (thermal broadening effect), and a semi-circle function (modulation broadening). The full width of half maximum (FWHM) was extracted directly from the fitting curve of the MZM peak. VII. Reversibility of tunnel coupling dependent measurements. The STM tips are made to be stable enough before a tunnel coupling dependent measurement that the tip state does not change during the tip-approaching process. That gives us an opportunity to reproduce the plateau feature by a second measurement at the same condition. A set of reversibility data of tunnel coupling dependent measurements is shown in Fig. 