Understanding the nature and behavior of vacancy-like defects in epitaxial germanium-tin (GeSn) metastable alloys is crucial to elucidate the structural and optoelectronic properties of these emerging semiconductors. The formation of vacancies and their complexes is expected to be promoted by the relatively low substrate temperature required for the epitaxial growth of GeSn layers with Sn contents significantly above the equilibrium solubility of 1 at.%. These defects can impact both the microstructure and charge carrier lifetime. Herein, to identify the vacancy-related complexes and probe their evolution as a function of Sn content, depth-profiled pulsed low-energy positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy and Doppler broadening spectroscopy were combined to investigate GeSn epitaxial layers with Sn content in the 6.5-13.0 at.% range. The investigated samples were grown by chemical vapor deposition method at temperatures between 300 and 330 °C. Regardless of the Sn content, all GeSn samples showed the same depth-dependent increase in the positron annihilation line broadening parameters, relative to that of epitaxial Ge reference layers. These observations confirmed the presence of open volume defects in as-grown layers. The measured average positron lifetimes were found to be the highest (380-395 ps) in the region near the surface and monotonically decrease across the analyzed thickness, but remain above 350 ps. All GeSn layers exhibit lifetimes that are 85 to 110 ps higher than those recorded for Ge reference layers. Surprisingly, these lifetimes were found to decrease as Sn content increases in GeSn layers. These measurements indicate that divacancies are the dominant defect in the as-grown GeSn layers. However, their corresponding lifetime was found to be shorter than in epitaxial Ge thus suggesting that the presence of Sn may alter the structure of divacancies. Additionally, GeSn layers were found to also contain a small fraction of vacancy clusters, which become less important as Sn concentration increases. The interaction and possible pairing between Sn and vacancies have been proposed to explain the reduced formation of larger vacancy clusters in GeSn with higher Sn content. Developing chip-scale lasers, detectors and other active optoelectronic devices on silicon provides a viable path for monolithic manufacturing of photonic integrated circuits with significant cost reduction and new functionalities for a wide range of applications. Moreover, unlike the indirect band gap Si and Ge, a direct fundamental band gap can be obtained in (Si)GeSn which is promising for efficient emission and detection of light. The investigated samples were grown on a 4-inch Si (100) wafers in a low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (CVD) reactor using ultra-pure H2 carrier gas, and 10 % monogermane (GeH4) and tintetrachloride (SnCl4) precursors, following a recently developed growth protocol. Herein, the highest Sn content is obtained at the lowest growth temperature and vice versa. Note that a ~60 nm-thick GeSn buffer layer grown at 320 °C was used for the subsequent growth of the 310 °C and 300 °C samples. The residual (compressive) in-plane strain in the GeSn layers being lower than -0.3 % allows for a direct comparison in the 2θ-ω scans around the (004) XRD order in Fig. The trapping of positrons at open-volume defects is detected as an increase in S parameter and a decrease in W parameter (not shown here). Using positron energies in the range of 0.03-35 keV the samples are analyzed up to a mean penetration depth of ∼2 μm below the surface to ensure that the entire thickness of GeSn layers (700 nm) is probed. Positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy (PALS) measurements were performed using the mono-energetic positron source (MePS) at the superconducting electron linear accelerator ELBE (electron LINAC with high brilliance and low emittance) located at the Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf. The working principles of this facility are detailed in Ref. 21. The lifetime measurements were done at room temperature. 10 7 counts were accumulated in each positron lifetime spectrum. The lifetime spectra were decomposed in two components, nn(tt) = (II 1 /ττ 1 )ee -tt/ττ 1 + (II 2 /ττ 2 )ee -tt/ττ 2 , convoluted with the Gaussian resolution function of the spectrometer using the lifetime program LT9. The evolution of the S-parameter as a function of the positron energy in each GeSn layer is shown in Figure The S-parameter is larger than in the case of the Ge-VS up to 10 keV (zmean~310 nm), followed by a progressive decrease reaching the Si value at 30 keV (zmean~2000 nm). We note that despite the use of higher energies, the interaction of the positron beam with the GeSn layers induced by the broadening of the Makhov profile, The positron lifetime measurements as a function of depth are exhibited in Fig. It is noticeable that the incorporation of Sn is always associated with an increase in the average lifetime as compared to Ge-VS, but with a less pronounced decrease as a function of depth. The effect of composition is summarized in Fig. To investigate the nature of the detected open volume defects, the lifetime spectra were fitted with two lifetime components. Let us now examine the effect of the Sn content. Representative sets of intensities and lifetimes recorded as a function of Sn composition at a fixed mean depth of 215 nm are plotted in Fig. However, it is important to point out that that the change in growth temperature from 300 to 330 0C is too small to significantly impact the dynamics of vacancy complexes and their interactions. For instance, the migration of a divacancy in Ge involves activation energies above 1eV regardless of the chosen pathways (direct migration of divacancies or migration after split to form the highly mobile single vacancies). As mentioned above, τ1 does not depend on the Sn composition in the investigated range and is always more than 85 ps higher than the 250-225 ps recorded for the Ge-VS. This may suggest that the divacancy structure is perhaps altered by the presence of Sn and the associated lattice stress. In general, it is reasonable to believe that because Sn atom is larger than Ge atom the pairing of Sn with vacancies would be a viable path to locally minimize the stress associated with Sn incorporation. It is currently well established that Sn occupies substitutional sites in GeSn lattice and is randomly distributed 8 with no sign of any short-range ordering. Our lifetime measurements agree at least qualitatively with the aforementioned observations. Indeed, the results point out to a possible effect of Sn that can locally freeze vacancies thus limiting their clustering in the grown layers. Indeed, the observed drop in the intensity of vacancy clusters I2 as Sn content increases underscores a certain role of Sn in reducing vacancy migration and interaction to form clusters. This effect yields a decrease in τAV as the long-lived τ2 component becomes less important at higher Sn incorporation. Finally, it is important to emphasize that the dislocations in the proximity of the GeSn-Ge interface Vacancy-related complexes were investigated in GeSn semiconductors with Sn content in the 6.5-13.0 at.% range using depth-profiled pulsed low-energy positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy and Doppler broadening spectroscopy. Regardless of the Sn content, an increase in the broadening parameter, relative to that of epitaxial Ge reference layers, with increased probed depth was observed in all samples. This indicates the presence of open volume defects in the epitaxially-grown layers. A monotonic decrease in the measured lifetime from 380-395 ps (close to the sample surface) down to 350 ps (in the proximity of the Ge-VS) was recorded across the GeSn thickness. When compared to the Ge-VS reference layers, the measured average lifetimes in GeSn were found to be 20 to 140 ps higher. In addition, the average lifetime was also found to be inversely proportional to Sn content in the GeSn layers. These results show that divacancies are the dominant defects in the as-grown GeSn layers, while only a small fraction of vacancy clusters is present in the alloy, with a further reduced amount as the Sn content of the alloy increases. A possible attractive interaction between Sn and vacancies has been suggested to explain the reduced clustering of vacancies in GeSn as Sn content increases. 