The degeneracy of Landau levels flanking charge neutrality in twisted bilayer graphene is known to change from eight-fold to four-fold when the twist angle is reduced to values near the magic angle of ≈ 1.05 • . This degeneracy lifting has been reproduced in experiments by multiple groups, and is known to occur even in devices which do not harbor the correlated insulators and superconductors. We propose C3 symmetry breaking as an explanation of such robust degeneracy lifting, and support our proposal by numerical results on the Landau level spectrum in near-magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene. Motivated by recent experiments, we further consider the effect of C2 symmetry breaking on the Landau levels. The discovery In spite of the experimental progress, theoretically there is very little understanding of the many-body physics of these systems. In this paper, we address one aspect of the phenomenology of the normal metallic state of near-magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene that has resisted explanation so far. Specifically, we will focus on understanding the Landau level degeneracy near charge neutrality. As we discuss below, the same pattern of Landau fan is consistently observed across samples with varying twist angles and in a reasonably wide range of densities and temperatures. This robust experimental observation, however, has resisted a clear theoretical explanation so far. More specifically, it is well known that the band structure of twisted bilayer graphene features two Dirac points at charge neutrality within each microscopic valley. This band touching is protected by a C 2 T symmetry 11 . We will refer to these as mini-Dirac points. With two mini-Dirac points per valley and per spin, we have a total of eight Dirac points, which is double of that in monolayer graphene. Upon doping away from neutrality, Landau levels will form out of the mini-Dirac cones. The corresponding Landau fan sequence will then be expected to be double of that of monolayer graphene, namely, ±4, ±12, ±20, . . . . Indeed, precisely this degeneracy pattern is seen in experiments on devices with relatively large twist angle of 1.8 In the vicinity of the magic angle, however, there is a surprise. The Landau fan emerging from neutrality has the Hall conductance sequence ±4, ±8, ±12, . . . . In other words, the eight-fold Landau-level degeneracy is reduced to four-fold. Experimentally, this degeneracy lifting is always seen in samples showcasing the correlated insulators and superconductivity. However, the converse is not true, i.e., the same sequence is observed even in some devices which do not show the other correlated phenomena Here, we show that the experimentally observed Landau fan can be reproduced within a free-fermion model of twisted bilayer graphene, for various angles close to the magic angle. Our main result is that the sequence is stabilized by a weak breaking of C 3 symmetry. As is well-known, C 3 symmetry breaking splits the Van Hove singularity (VHs) in the density of states We trace the origin of this effect to the large susceptibility of near-magic-angle TBG to such a C 3 breaking perturbation, which leads to a significant modification to the electronic spectrum even when the "bare" C 3 breaking is weak. Such symmetry breaking may arise due to strain effects (known to be generally present in TBG), or due to spontaneous symmetry breaking driven by interactions. While we leave open the physical origin of the C 3 breaking, we remark that the smallness of symmetry breaking required suggests that the presence of strain in the sample is a plausible explanation. In some devices of twisted bilayer graphene, for example in Ref. 5, it is known that there is very likely also a breaking of C 2 symmetry. For the device in Ref. 5, this is due to the near alignment with a h-BN substrate. Such C 2 breaking gaps out the Dirac points and results in an insulator at charge neutrality. In the device studied in Ref. 4, it is observed that the system is insulating at neutrality. A possible explanation is that C 2 is broken in this system as well, although it is unclear if the symmetry breaking is again due to alignment with h-BN, or is interaction driven In light of these experimental results, we also study the expected Landau levle degeneracy in devices with C 2 symmetry breaking, both with and without an additional C 3 breaking. We remark that multiple theoretical attempts have already been made to address the neutrality Landau fan in small-angle TBG Alternatively, Ref. 17 proposed a VHs-induced Landau level splitting mechanism that is essentially the same as the one we discuss below. As emphasized above, we find that this picture is valid only if C 3 symmetry breaking is invoked. This is consistent with the more microscopic calculation presented in Ref. 18, which did not observe the experimental sequence for the parameter range suggested in Ref. 17 when all the emergent symmetries are kept. Finally, we also note that Ref. 15 suggested that layer-dependent strain could lead to the observed Landau level sequence near neutrality, although they did not perform an explicit calculation on this point. The mechanism they considered, however, is different from the one discussed in the present work. In particular, in our model the C 3 symmetry does not differentiate the two layers. Very recently Ref. 21 studied the effects of such strain on the pairing structure of the superconductor in TBG but that work did not address the Landau fans which are our interest here. Our starting point is the single-valley continuum model for twisted bilayer graphene where and b j = q j -q 1 are reciprocal lattice vectors for the moiré potential. We use v = 10 6 m/s, t M = 110 meV A perpendicular magnetic field can be incorporated by substituting -i∇ → -i∇ -eA/ , with the vector potential A = -By x in the Landau gauge. As in Ref. 16, the spectrum for non-zero B can be solved by first going into a Landau level basis for two decoupled layers, and then re-expressing the inter-layer potential T (r) in this basis (more details can be found in Appendix A). In practice, in the numerical calculations we keep only finite Landau levels (typically several hundreds) close to the charge neutrality. Note that in the limit B → 0 an infinite number of Landau levels should to be kept, and so we only consider fields B > 1.2 T. Eq. ( which corresponds to a staggered chemical potential that would be present if the coupling to the hBN substrate is significant. We focus on small twist angles θ > 1.1 • , slightly away from the true magic angle of θ ≈ 1.05 •25 , for the following reasons: (1) In the experiment, the four-fold degeneracy is observed in a large range of angles, including in devices where the correlated insulators and superconductors are not observed. For instance, the sequence ±4, ±8, ±12, . . . has been seen in the device at 1.27 • in Ref. 3 under ambient pressure. This suggests that the key physics leading to the four-fold degeneracy should be in effect over a relative broad range of angles. (2) Due to the very small bandwidth exactly at the magic angle, the Landau level is not well-formed within our free-electron treatment, which complicates the analysis. First, we show the results for the fully symmetric model, which retains the C 3 and C 2 symmetries. We will show that the Landau fan close to charge neutrality should have eight-fold degeneracy, in agreement with the experiments at twist angle θ = 1.8 • but in disagreement with the results near the magic angle 1,3 . The spectrum is shown in Fig. Importantly, each Landau level emanating from charge neutrality is eight-fold degenerate. This degeneracy can be explained by noting the doubling due to spin, valley and layer degrees of freedom. We remark that the layer index is not generally a good quantum number; however, as these low-lying Landau levels can be understood as coming from the mini Dirac points, there is still a twofold degeneracy arising from the mini-valley degeneracy. In contrast, in the experiments the Landau fan is only four-fold degenerate at such small twist angles. In this section, we consider the effect of C 3 symmetry breaking by introducing an anisotropy β such that (1β)T 1 = T 2 = T 3 . We will not specify the physical origin of this anisotropy in this work. Our main purpose is to demonstrate that C 3 breaking can qualitatively change the Landau fan sequence, and so long as a mean-field description remains valid, we expect our conclusions to hold even if the C 3 breaking is interaction-driven. The Landau fan spectrum at β = 0.07 is shown in Fig. Here we try to give a simple, qualitative explanation of the splitting of the eight-fold degenerate Landau level based on a semi-classical picture derived from the band structure at zero magnetic field. With C 2 symmetry preserved, the four-fold degeneracy from spin and valley is robust. In our numerics, we have explicitly checked that the splitting happens within each fixed spin-valley sector, and so for the discussion here we can focus on a fixed sector. In the fully symmetric case (i.e., for β = 0), there are two Dirac cones at the K and K points of the mini Brillouin zone (MBZ). At doping slightly above charge neutrality, the Fermi surface consists of independent elec-tron pockets, each enclosing one of the Dirac points (Fig. As a complementary point of view, one can consider the Landau levels associated with the mini Dirac cones, which have energies E n = v eff √ 2e nB for n ≥ 0. In this picture, the lifting of the mini-valley degeneracy originates from the hybridization between the two set of mini-Dirac Landau levels. Qualitatively, such hybridization is expected to become significant when E n E c Recent experiments have seen signatures of C 2 breaking 4,5 . A typical C 2 breaking term is the staggered potential: where M t , M b is the staggered potential strength for top and bottom layer. σ denotes Pauli matrices in the A, B sublattice subspace. If the sample is well-aligned with only the top h-BN substrate, one expects M t = 0, M b ≈ 0 Next, we turn to the higher Landau levels. For |n| ≥ 1 the valley splitting is quite small, as shown in Fig. In the above, we just assume the order parameters without asking about their origins. The simplest source to get M t = M and M b = 0 is just alignment with the top h-BN substrate. For spontaneous symmetry breaking, the most natural ansatz of spontaneous symmetry breaking in Hartree Fock calculation is actually M t = M b 28 and cannot reproduce the ν = ±2 sequence. It remains a question whether the C 2 , mirror reflection and C 3 breakings needed to match the Landau fan in Ref. 4 are from external sources or from correlation effects. Since the first experiment on near magic angle twisted bilayer graphene, the Landau fan near neutrality have been a mystery. The observed 4-fold Landau fan is in striking contrast with the naive theoretical expectation of an 8-fold degeneracy which is also what is seen at larger twist angles. The 4-fold degeneracy is seen in devices that approach but need not be too close to magic angle. In this paper we have shown how to understand these observations through explicit calculations of the Landau fan within the continuum model of the band structure. While there exist previous such calculations with mixed success in explaining the experiments, we find that a key ingredient is to include C 3 symmetry breaking into the continuum Hamiltonian. Upon approaching the magic angle the decreasing bandwidth (and the concomitant increase in density of states) leads to an amplified response of the electronic structure to a weak C 3 breaking anisotropy. This makes it easier for the equal energy contours near the mini-Dirac points to touch and reconstruct. Beyond a low energy scale the equal energy contours then enclose both mini-Dirac points thereby reducing the Landau fan degeneracy from 8 to 4. We also consider the effect of C 2 breaking. With this understanding let us now revisit the experimental results on various devices. The samples in Ref. 1-3 behave as a semimetal at neutrality, suggesting a good C 2 T symmetry. To explain the four fold degeneracy of Landau fan, we require the existence of C 3 breaking, either from strain or from interaction driven symmetry breaking. Such C 3 breaking has been seen in STM experiments The sample in Ref. 5 is aligned with the h-BN substrate on one side. This leads to an explicit breaking of both C 2 and the effective mirror (a 180 0 rotation in 3d about an axis that is parallel to and bisects the 2 layers) symmetries. The C 2 breaking leads to to a gap at neutrality, consistent with the high resistivity observed at neutrality compared to the devices in Ref. 1-3. Extensive Landau fan data is not available in Ref. 5 though the reported Landau levels ±2, ±4 are reproduced by our analysis that takes into account both C 2 and mirror breaking. In the recent study of Ref. In contrast to positive β, there is no splitting of the Landau levels and the Landau fan is eight fold degenerate. Let us suppress the spin index. For the Dirac cone at K (or K ) of valley a = ±, we can write a 2 × 2 effective model: where ψ(k) is a two component spinor. Note that the pseudospin basis of ψ(k) is a mixture of the sublattice and layer. When M t = M b , mirror reflection guarantees Let us make M t = M b = 0 first. Now we add magnetic field and get four zeroth Landau levels formed by (±, K/K ) for each spin sector. In total the zeroth Landau level has eight fold degeneracy. Next we treat M t and M b as small perturbation and add them on this eight fold degenerate n = 0 Landau level subspace. For the zeroth Landau level, it is well known that the pseudospin is polarized and locked to the valley. The +, K and +, K eighenstate only contains ψ 1 component while the -K and -K eigenstate only contains the component ψ 2 . Because of this special property, M K and M K (resulting from M t and M b ) just shift the energy of the zeroth Landau level from (±, K) ((±, K )) by a constant energy ±M K (±M K ). The final result is that we have four groups of n = 0 Landau levels: two groups from valleyat energy -M K and -M K , two groups from valley + at energy M K and M K . This is clearly shown in Fig. For higher Landau levels, Ref. 4 observe four fold degeneracy. Here we try to give an explanation with C 2 breaking ansatz. With C 2 breaking, the only exact degeneracy at finite magnetic field is the two fold spin degeneracy (we ignore the small spin Zeeman coupling). However, for n ≥ 1, the valley splitting is quite weak, as shown in Fig. 