A transducer capable of converting quantum information stored as microwaves into telecom-wavelength signals is a critical piece of future quantum technology as it promises to enable the networking of quantum processors. Cavity optomechanical devices that are simultaneously coupled to microwave fields and optical resonances are being pursued in this regard. Yet even in the classical regime, developing optical modulators based on cavity optomechanics could provide lower power or higher bandwidth alternatives to current technology. Here we demonstrate a magnetically-mediated wavelength conversion technique, based on mixing high frequency tones with an optomechanical torsional resonator. This process can act either as an optical phase or amplitude modulator depending on the experimental configuration, and the carrier modulation is always coherent with the input tone. Such coherence allows classical information transduction and transmission via the technique of phase-shift keying. We demonstrate that we can encode up to eight bins of information, corresponding to three bits, simultaneously and demonstrate the transmission of an 52,500 pixel image over 6 km of optical fiber with just 0.67% error. Furthermore, we show that magneto-optomechanical transduction can be described in a fully quantum manner, implying that this is a viable approach to signal transduction at the single quantum level. The ability to reliably convert microwave photons to telecom-wavelength photons promises to enable long-distance entanglement of superconducting qubits over telecom fiber networks, a major advance towards developing a quantum internet We have recently developed another option, using a magnetic component affixed to a telecom-wavelength optomechanical resonator At the heart of our conversion technique is the realization that magnetic materials can be harnessed to interface with microwaves as they couple to magnetic fields Here we use a Ni 80 Fe 20 (permalloy) disk, which is patterned onto the mechanical resonator during nanofabrication. In such a magnetic material the spin excitations have resonances at f res with susceptibility which can be driven by an alternating magnetic field in the plane of the device (x) with strength H x and frequency f x . a) Scanning electron micrograph of the magnetooptomechanical device. Electron-beam lithography was used to pattern the device in 250-nm-thick single-crystal-silicon on silicon dioxide. A second electron-beam-lithography step was used to deposit a 910 nm diameter, 60 nm thick, Ni80Fe20 disk onto the sample pad of the torsional resonator. Scale bar is 200 nm. (b) Spin resonances in the Ni80Fe20 disk can be driven by modulating a magnetic field along the x-axis. This results in an alternating in-plane magnetic moment in the disk, which -in the presence of a second magnetic field along the z-axis -produces a torque along the torsion axis of the device (yaxis) as described in the text. The frequencies of the spin resonance and torsional resonance set the frequencies that can be used for the phase modulation presented below. The origin of the doublet in the spin resonance is not currently understood and beyond the scope of the current work. Here ∆f is the spin-resonance linewidth and χ 0 is the offresonant susceptibility where V is the volume of magnetic material and we consider the magnetic susceptibility to be driven on resonance. To take advantage of the quality-factor enhancement of the resonator, the two alternating magnetic fields should be separated in frequency by the mechanical resonance frequency, i.e. . In this scenario, the out-of-plane field can be considered the tone one wishes to coherently convert to telecom wavelengths, with the in-plane field as a fixed pump. As the frequency of the collective spin modes can be controlled by the geometry High-frequency magnetic fields are applied by driving single-loop coils patterned on a printed circuit board (PCB) To investigate the signal transduction in our magnetooptomechanical architecture, we begin by considering the canonical optomechanical Hamiltonian describing coherent evolution of the system Here, a † (a) is the creation (annihilation) operator for the optical cavity mode, ω c is the resonance frequency of the optical cavity, x and p are the mechanical resonator position and momentum operators, Ω m = 2πf m is the mechanical resonance frequency, m is the effective mass of the mechanical element, and g is the optomechanical coupling constant defined as g = dω c /dx. From the Hamiltonian we can derive the quantum Langevin equations and Specifically, δF tor = τ y /l eff is the force applied via the torque mixing process, l eff is the effective length of the lever arm Linearizing the equations of motion around the steady state optical amplitude ā, and solving them in the Fourier domain (see Appendix A), the final equations of motion are given by x[ω] ≈ χ m [ω] δF th + δF tor In these equations is the optical cavity susceptibility, ∆ l is the laser detuning from the optical cavity resonance, and we have ignored effects from dynamical backaction Next, we consider the effect this driving force has on the detected optical quadrature operators (see Appendix B for definition). Let us first consider optical homodyne detection of the phase quadrature. In this situation the laser is tuned directly on cavity resonance (i.e., ∆ l = 0) to maximize the optical signal. Solving for the output phase-quadrature we find, In contrast, for direct detection the laser is tuned to the highest slope of the optical resonance (i.e., ∆ l = κ/2). Direct detection is analogous to a measurement of the output amplitudequadrature; therefore, solving for the amplitude operator we find, Comparing Eqns. ( This theoretical framework can be interpreted in the quantum regime by considering the driving magnetic field H z (f z ) to consist of single photons. In this limit, the transduced field would be dominated by thermal fluctuations at room temperature; however, by performing these experiments in a cryogenic environment the thermal force term can be eliminated To test the coherent response of the wavelength conversion, we first use a homodyne optical detection system sensitive to shifts in the phase of the optical field within the silicon microdisk. The microdisk lies in one arm of the homodyne system For the purposes of transmitting information from a microwave source via a telecom carrier, one is naturally con- FIG. For networking applications it is impractical to imagine running two fiber optics for each information channel so that homodyne detection can be performed on a balanced photodetector. Instead, we turn to the direct detection method described in Section III. In this approach the amplitude of the optical signal is modulated coherently, but the phase of the mechanics is demodulated using the digital lock-in amplifier exactly as in the homodyne case. In this configuration we can transmit the information encoded in the phase of the mi-crowave tone over long distances in a single fiber optic cable, as shown for 6 km of fiber in Fig. We have demonstrated that magneto-optomechanics enables coherent signal transduction from UHF tones to telecom wavelengths. We have used this coherence to demonstrate (classical) optomechanical information transduction via phase-shift keying, using both binary and eight-bin phaseshift keying. Future improvements in signal-to-noise, for example by using lower spin-damping materials such as yttriumiron-garnet To facilitate this, it may be possible to construct optomechanical crystal torque sensors 