Multi-pass transmission electron microscopy (MPTEM) has been proposed as a way to reduce damage to radiation-sensitive materials. For the field of cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM), this would significantly reduce the number of projections needed to create a 3D model and would allow the imaging of lower-contrast, more heterogeneous samples. We have designed a 10 keV proof-of-concept MPTEM. The column features fast-switching gated electron mirrors which cause each electron to interrogate the sample multiple times. A linear approximation for the multi-pass contrast transfer function (CTF) is developed to explain how the resolution depends on the number of passes through the sample. Cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) can produce near-atomic-resolution reconstructions of biological molecules by reducing (radiolysis) damage to the sample and computationally combining a large number (> 10 4 ) of low-resolution projections Even anticipating future advances in hardware (better detectors, reliable phase plates, improved sample preparation) and analysis methods, it seems unlikely conventional Cryo-EM will achieve atomic or nearatomic resolution of individual particles In order to move beyond these limitations, it will be necessary to improve the dose-limited resolution (DLR) The single-pass shot noise limit can be surpassed by repeatedly interrogating the sample with each probe particle In a MPTEM, each electron passes through the sample m times, thereby experiencing an m-fold enhanced phase shift and also causing an m-fold increase in the expected damage. Assuming the single-pass phase shifts are small, this increases the scattered amplitude by a factor of m and the scattered intensity by a factor of m 2 . Thus, for dark field imaging, the signal is increased by m 2 . Assuming that the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is limited by electron counting statistics (shot-noise), the noise is increased by m. For phase contrast and amplitude contrast (bright field) imaging, the signal is increased by m and the noise is unchanged. For any of these imaging modalities, the damage at constant SNR decreases by a factor of m. We can also describe the improvement in terms of the SNR at constant damage, which increases by a factor of √ m. For large but realistically achievable m, this technique can enter an interaction-free regime where there is a significant chance of measuring the phase thickness of a region in the sample without causing any damage at all This paper describes a proof-of-concept design for a 10 keV microscope. Our design is based on a linear, temporally gated cavity which achieves 4-6 nm resolution for m = 10 passes. In the next sections, we will describe each subsystem of the microscope, starting with an overview of the column and the imaging cycle. An analysis of multi-pass aberrations is presented in section 7. In section 8, we describe simulations of the transient fields in the gated mirror. Finally, in section 9, we simulate performance of the microscope imaging a graphene target. Figure Electron emission must be synchronized with the voltage pulses on the gated mirrors. Electrons which arrive early at the gated mirrors will loose energy to the gating pulse, while those that arrive late will gain energy. The gun timing requirements depend on the profile of the voltage pulse used to open the gated mirrors. With a Gaussian gating pulse, the gun timing jitter must be less than 100 ps to prevent significant broadening of the energy spread of the beam beyond the 0.5 eV thermal spread of the source. A laser-triggered Schottky electron gun will be used to generate short (∼1 ns) electron distributions. Femtosecond timing resolution The illumination optics focus the beam through the (open) GM1 and into the back focal plane of the upper objective lens. With the prism array off, the location of the cross-over between the GL and CL controls the magnification of the illumination system, which determines the size of the illuminated area on the sample. Figure The illumination magnification can be varied by a factor of 50. This allows the field of view to be adjusted between 26 μm and 0.5 μm without losing beam current to an aperture. At these upper and lower bounds, the spot size in BFP1 is limited by spherical aberration and the magnified size of the source, respectively. The ideal field of view for high resolution imaging is around 2 microns, where the convergence angle of the illumination will be less than 0.1 mrad (full width at half maximum). When using the monochromator, the gun lens establishes a crossover at the knife edge and the field of view is fixed at ∼1.5 μm. The multi-pass optics consist of two objective lenses (OL1, OL2), two field lenses (FL1, FL2), and two gated mirrors arranged symmetrically around the sample (see figure Two focusing conditions must be enforced by these optics. Rays leaving the sample must return to the same point on the sample (the sample must be re-imaged) and they must return at the correct angle (after passing through an even number of cross-overs, the angles will be reflected across the optical axis). The first focusing condition is enforced by adjusting the focal length of the gated mirrors. The field lenses control the second condition by focusing the field rays into the backfocal plane of each objective lens. Since they are placed at image planes, they only weakly affect image rays. This gives them nearly independent control of the second focusing condition. In practice, the coupling of the field lens potentials to the locations of the image planes is strong enough that precise focusing is an iterative process which involves alternately adjusting the mirror focus and field lens. The focusing can also be accomplished using a two-lens system between each mirror and objective lens (FL and M7 in figure When both focusing conditions are satisfied, the image (and diffraction) planes for electrons traveling in each direction in the multi-pass optics will coincide. This guarantees that there will either be an image plane or a diffraction plane at the two turning points. With image planes at the turning points, the beam passes through an even number of cross-overs between interactions with the sample, returning each time with the correct orientation. In this configuration the mirrors can be tuned to correct chromatic aberration but not spherical aberration. With a 3 mrad numerical aperture, the image returned to the sample is blurred by 3 nm (the blur from diffraction alone is 2.2 nm, see section 7). With diffraction planes at the turning points, the mirrors can correct both the spherical and chromatic aberrations of the objective lens, significantly decreasing the round-trip aberrations. In this configuration, the beam passes through an odd number of cross-overs between interactions with the sample, so the image returns inverted. There are a few possible solutions to this problem. In this case, the sample needs to be confined to one side of the field of view so that the reverse propagating (inverted) image does not interact with the sample. A magnetic dipole field could also be used to cause the inverted image to circumvent the sample. Alternatively, magnetic lenses could be dded to future columns to create a rotation of 180 degrees in each half of the cavity. The gated mirrors contain 7 electrodes, M1-M7, with 6 electrostatic degrees of freedom (see figure During the last round-trip in the multi-pass optics, either GM1 or GM2 is pulsed open. The upper branch of the projection optics is limited to lower resolution imaging and will mainly be used for alignment. If the electron is out-coupled upward, the combined effect of GM1 and the condenser lens causes 90× magnification. The prism then deflects the electron through a projection lens which adds 2-3× magnification. If the electron is out-coupled downward, it picks up 9x magnification while passing through GM2. The lower projection system applies 10-1000x magnification in two stages and focuses the image onto a YAG scintillator. Since each imaging cycle uses a single electron, detection efficiency is extremely important. At high magnification a 1.3 nm region in the sample is projected onto a 12 micron region at the screen, and a microchannel plate can be used to increase detection sensitivity. When the field of view is 1 μm, the blur from out-coupling (mostly spherical aberrations from OL2 and open GM2) is 2.5 nm at the corner of the image. For a 10 μm field of view, the out-coupling blur increases to 6 nm. Electron mirrors are typically used as aberration correctors, in particular in low energy electron microscopes (LEEMs) While the primary purpose of the gated mirrors is to re-image the sample, they can also be used to correct the chromatic and spherical aberrations of the objective lens each pass. Round-trip aberrations were minimized using Munro's Electron Beam Software (MEBS). Chromatic aberration can be fully corrected, leaving the spherical aberration of the objective lenses (C s ∼ 80 mm) as the dominant source of image blur. Fifth order geometric aberrations and fourth and fifth rank chromatic aberrations are negligible. Calculating the resolution of the full multi-pass imaging process is difficult due to the non-linearity of the multi-pass contrast transfer function (CTF). Rather than develop a full treatment of the multi-pass CTF in this paper, we will motivate a linear approximation from which we will infer how resolution scales with m. In the analysis which follows, we assume the single pass scattering probability α 2 is small enough that a linear approximation can be used. For plane wave illumination, we can write the 1-pass exit wavefunction as where q is the spatial frequency, δ( q) un-scattered (plane) wave, ψ s ( q) is the normalized scattered wave, and P is the pupil function P (ψ( q)) = A( q)e iχ( q) ψ( q) where A( q) is the aperture function and χ( q) = πλ∆f | q| 2 + 1 2 πλ 3 C s | q| 4 is the phase shift from spherical aberration (with coefficient C s ) and defocus (∆f ) with electron wavelength λ. After m passes, the exit wavefunction is The second term can be interpreted as the sum of the waves which scatter once (at pass m -n + 1) and then interact only with the optical aberrations and the aperture for the remaining passes. The excluded higher order terms can be written as the sum of convolutions of P n (ψ s ). The intensity at the detector is where * denotes convolution and φ( q) is a phase shift added in the projection optics to produce phase contrast. When using a phase plate, φ( q) = π 2 δ( q). For defocus contrast, φ( q) = πλ∆f p | q| 2 . The terms in this series are each of the once-scattered waves interfering with the un-scattered wave. The interference among once-scattered waves is O(α 2 ), the same order as the first non-linear terms (twice-scattered waves interfering with the un-scattered wave). We will use a hard aperture: A( q) = 0 for q < q max and A( q) = 1 otherwise. Then weak-scattering multi-pass CTF, normalized to the one-pass CTF, is ∆f (m) ∆f In this linear approximation, the MPCTF is the sum of 1-pass CTFs from the waves scattered from each pass. A more complete study of the MPCTF would include the effect of spatial and temporal coherence envelopes, which are important for calculating contrast at high spatial frequencies. However, multi-pass contrast is significantly diminished for spatial frequencies higher than the point resolution, as the scattered waves from each pass no longer add constructively. We will leave multi-pass envelope functions for a future analysis and focus on understanding the point resolution. From equation 5 we see that when χ( q) is equal to the m th root of unity, the contrast transfer function will be zero regardless of the choice of φ( q). As a result, adding defocus to the projection optics alone will not be an effective way to increase the point resolution. Point resolution can be increased by adding defocus to the multi-pass optics. In particular, we can define a muli-pass Scherzer defocus Regardless of the defocus setting, the point resolution scales like m -1/4 . This is the expected result, since aberrations of sequential elements are additive (if C s is the spherical aberration of one element, then mC s is the spherical aberration of m identical elements at constant magnification) and point resolution scales like C -1/4 s In order for the gated mirrors to have stable optical properties, they must behave like electrostatic elements while interacting with the beam. If the 100 V pulse needed to temporarily switch their behavior is mis-timed or causes ringing in the electrodes, the beam could be mis-focused, deflected, aberrated, or could gain or lose energy from/to the transient fields A Gaussian pulse would be simple to generate and would have minimal high frequency content. In order to keep the in-coupling-induced energy spread of the beam below the source spread (0.5 eV), the timing between the source and the voltage pulse must be better than 100 ps. A flat-top pulse would relax the timing requirements, but would have more power in high frequency components. Figure We used ANSYS high frequency simulation suite (HFSS) to simulate the transient response of the gated mirror structure to a fast voltage pulse and built a prototype electrode structure to validate the modelling. The results, shown in figure An ideal reference sample for proving the MPTEM concept should be as thin as possible to minimize inelastic loss, yet durable enough to survive multiple measurements. Single-layer graphene is a natural choice. Figure We have designed a 10 keV MPTEM column to demonstrate multi-pass electron microscopy. The enabling components are two fast-switching gated mirrors which capture the electron beam in a re-imaging cavity so it can interrogate the sample many times before being transferred to the projection optics. The gated mirror structure was designed to limit electron interactions with the switching fields, but the best performance will be achieved by timing the electrons using a laser-triggered source. The gated mirrors also partially correct aberrations from the objective lenses. The resolution of the microscope is limited by spherical aberration and decreases slowly with the number of passes: the blur from a single pass is about 4 nm and the blur from 10 passes is less than 7 nm. 