The dry release transfer of two-dimensional (2D) materials such as graphene, hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) is a versatile method for fabricating high-quality van der Waals heterostructures. Up until now, polydimethylpolysiloxane (PDMS) sheets have been widely used for the dry release transfer of TMD materials. However, this method has been known to have limitations that make it difficult to transfer few-layer-thick graphene and h-BN because of the difficulty to fabricate these materials on PDMS. As an alternative method, we demonstrate the dry release transfer of single-and bi-layer graphene and few-layer h-BN in this study by utilizing poly(propylene) carbonate (PPC) films. Because of the strong adhesion between PPC and 2D materials around room temperature, we demonstrate that single-to few-layer graphene, as well as few-layer h-BN, can be fabricated on a spin-coated PPC film/290-nm-thick SiO2/Si substrate via the mechanical exfoliation method. In addition, we show that these few-layer crystals are clearly distinguishable using an optical microscope with the help of optical interference. Because of the thermoplastic properties of PPC film, the adhesion force between the 2D materials and PPC significantly decreases at about 70 °C. Therefore, we demonstrate that single-to few-layer graphene, as well as fewlayer h-BN flakes, on PPC can be easily dry-transferred onto another h-BN substrate. This method enables a multilayer van der Waals heterostructure to be constructed with a minimum amount of polymer contamination. We demonstrate the fabrication of encapsulated h-BN/graphene/h-BN devices and graphene/few-layer h-BN/graphene vertical-tunnel-junction devices using this method. Since devices fabricated by this method do not require an edge-contact scheme, our finding provide a simples method for constructing high-quality graphene and h-BN-based van der Waals heterostructures. Up until now, various kinds of van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures composed of graphene, hexagonal boron nitridee (h-BN), and other two-dimensional (2D) materials have been fabricated for the purposes of fundamental research and applications (3) stamping methods First, we show the numerical calculation of optical contrast for graphene and h-BN on different substrates, and the results are presented in Fig. ) . The results are plotted as a function of the incident light wavelength and PPC thickness, as shown in Fig. We also calculated the contrast for the h-BN/PPC/290-nm-thick SiO2/Si structure, as illustrated in Fig. Here, we show a method to demonstrate the dry transfer of single-layer graphene on a h-BN substrate. As the thin graphene and h-BN are visible on the PPC film, we used this 2D material/PPC stack for the dry transfer of 2D materials onto another substrate. The detailed transfer procedure for fabricating the graphene/h-BN structure is illustrated in the schematic in Fig. Prior to spin coating, the substrate was cleaned by acetone and IPA with ultrasonic agitation. Then, the PPC-coated substrate was baked on a hot plate at 70 °C for 5 min. The PPC/SiO2/Si substrate was taken away from the hot plate and graphene or h-BN was then deposited on the substrate by the mechanical exfoliation method at RT, as shown in Fig. . As PPC is known to exhibit a strong adhesion to 2D materials at around RT both few-layer graphene and thick graphite or h-BN with a reasonably large size can be easily fabricated. Separately, a piece of PDMS sheet with a size of approximately 3 mm (width) × 3 mm (length) × 0.4 mm (depth) was placed on a glass slide. To ensure a strong adhesion between the PDMS and the glass slide, the backside of the PDMS was treated with air plasma for a few minutes. On the PDMS sheet, graphene flakes on the PPC film were transferred from the SiO2/Si substrate by the following procedure, as depicted in Figs. When the substrate stage temperature was stable at 70 °C, the substrate and PPC film were slowly separated by moving either the substrate stage or the glass slide stage (Fig. We found that at temperatures equal to or higher than about 70 °C, the adhesion between graphene and PPC significantly weakens such that graphene can be released from the PPC film and transferred onto h-BN. Thus, the graphene/h-BN structure can be fabricated. Similarly, thick or thin h-BN can be transferred onto the h-BN or graphene. The dry transfer operates within the temperature range of 70-100 °C, depending on the adhesion between PPC and PDMS. The PPC film tends to detach from PDMS during transfer when the substrate temperature is higher than 100 °C. The process does not require graphene (or h-BN) to be exposed to organic solvents; thus, this can be regarded as a dry release transfer. To completely remove the PPC residue from the graphene surface, the sample was annealed at 350 °C in an Ar/3% H2 atmosphere for 1 h; this temperature is above the decomposition temperature of PPC of about 280 °C Here, we discuss the mechanism of the PPC-based dry transfer. PPC is known as a thermoplastic material such that it becomes very soft at higher temperatures, whereas it hardens at RT. To compare this to PDMS, we plot the storage modulus of these materials taken from the literature in Fig. In Figs. 4(e-h) were measured and the results are presented in Figs. Finally, we show the transport properties of graphene and h-BN devices fabricated with our proposed dry transfer method. By repeating the PPC-based dry transfer, encapsulated h-BN/graphene/h-BN and h-BN/graphene/few-layer hBN/graphene/h-BN structures were fabricated. By opting to use a top h-BN layer with a size smaller than the graphene layer, we allow the edge of the graphene to be not fully covered by the top h-BN layer. This enables us to construct a vdW heterostructure without using a one-dimensional edge-contact scheme We fabricated both top-contact (Fig. V. The extracted junction resistance-area product RA is about 1×10 12 W×μm 2 ; this RA is comparable to that of the h-BN barrier with a similar thickness We demonstrate the dry transfer fabrication of graphene as well as h-BN using the PPC-based method. The main advantages of this method are summarized in the following three points: 1) Because of the strong adhesion of PPC to graphene and h-BN at RT, appropriately large flakes of thin graphene and h-BN can be obtained via the mechanical exfoliation method. 2) Single-layer graphene, as well as thin h-BN, fabricated on a PPC/SiO2/Si structure is visible under an optical microscope. 3) As the adhesion between the PPC and flakes significantly decreases at high temperatures, we are able to demonstrate the dry release transfer of graphene and h-BN on a h-BN/SiO2/Si substrate at about 70 °C. Furthermore, we show that the fabricated graphene/h-BN devices exhibit excellent properties. So far, the PDMS-based dry transfer method has been widely used for fabricating TMD-and black phosphorus-based vdW heterostructures PPC (Sigma-Aldrich, CAS 25511-85-7) was dissolved into an anisole with a mass fraction of 15%. The PPC film was prepared by spin-coating the PPC solution onto a 290nm-thick SiO2/highly-doped Si substrate. The same substrate was used for the mechanical exfoliation of graphene and h-BN. A commercially available PDMS sheet (Gel-Pak PF-X4-17 mil.) was used. Graphene was mechanically exfoliated from a graphite crystal (NGS Naturgraphit GmbH) using adhesive tape (Nitto Denko, 32B) and was deposited on a PPCcoated SiO2/Si substrate or SiO2/Si substrate. Using the same method, thin h-BN flakes were exfoliated from its bulk crystal, which was synthesized by the high-pressure and hightemperature method and deposited onto the substrate. We chose thick h-BN with thicknesses in the range of 30-50 nm for the substrate and encapsulation for the graphene and thin h-BN. A commercial optical microscope (Keyence, VHX-5000) was used to observe fabricated flakes with a halogen lamp as a light source. To improve the adhesion of the PDMS, a plasma cleaner was operated with air as the plasma source (Harrick Plasma, PDC-32G). The thickness of the flakes was measured with an atomic force microscope (Hitachi High Technologies, SPM400). The device was spin-coated with a PMMA resist, and using electron beam (EB) lithography, electrode patterns were prepared. Au (~100 nm)/Cr (5 nm) contact electrodes were deposited by EB evaporation. For the edge-contact device, graphene and h-BN were etched using reactive ion etching with a CF4-based gas. Immediately after plasma etching, the sample was loaded into the EB evaporation system and the electrodes were deposited. Transport properties were measured in a variabletemperature cryostat equipped with a superconducting magnet that can apply a magnetic field in the out-of-plane direction. After each dry transfer process, the vdW stacks were annealed in a tube furnace under the flow of Ar/3% H2 gas. 