It is well known that long Josephson tunnel junctions (JTJs) act as active transmission lines for the slow-mode propagation of magnetic flux-quanta (in the form of solitary waves) that is at the base of many superconducting circuits. At the same time, they support the propagation of quasi-TEM dispersive waves with which the magnetic flux non-linearly interact. In this work, we study the properties of the electromagnetic resonances, under different conditions of practical interest, in annular JTJs (AJTJs), in which the wavelengths are limited to the length of the circumference divided by an integer. Our analysis is based on perturbed sine-Gordon equations the (1+1)-dimensional space with periodic boundary conditions. We discuss the discrete modes of the travelling EM waves in circular annular JTJs in the presence of an in-plane magnetic field, as well as in the recently introduced confocal annular JTJs (in the absence of magnetic field). In both cases, a variable-separation method leads to quantitatively different Mathieu equations characterized by even and odd spatially periodic solutions with different eigenfrequencies. It implicates that a single mode circulating wave is given by the superposition of two standing waves with the same wavelengths but different frequencies, and so has a periodically inverting direction of propagation. The control parameters of this frequency splitting are the in-plane magnetic field amplitude for the circular AJTJ and the aspect ratio for the confocal AJTJs. In the appropriate limits, the previously known solutions Among the many nonlinear equations of physical interest only a few of them, such as, for example, the Korteweg de Vries and the nonlinear Schrodinger equations, possess exact soliton solutions (usually referred to as kinks), i.e., solitary wave packets with permanent profile. One of the solid state systems where soliton static and dynamic properties have been well established is the planar Josephson tunnel junction (JTJ), a device consisting of two superconducting electrodes separated by a dielectric layer sufficiently thin to allow tunneling of Cooper pairs; more specifically, in a long JTJ, for which one dimension is larger than a characteristic length called Josephson penetration depth, the topological solitons manifest themselves as Cooper pairs current loops, called Josephson vortices or fluxons, as each of them carries one magnetic flux quantum. The leading variable that describes the dynamics of this system is the gauge-invariant phase difference φ of the wave functions that describe both superconducting electrodes When studying the propagation of linear and nonlinear waves in JTJs, it is desirable to avoid influences of the boundaries. In this respect, a very interesting object is the annular Josephson tunnel junction (AJTJ), topologically obtained by bending a finite length JTJ into a curved form until its extremities are jointed to form a doubly-connected or ring-like JTJ; then the free-ends boundary conditions of the open simply-connected configuration are replaced by periodic conditions. A unique property of AJTJs is the fluxoid quantization in the superconducting loop formed by either the top or the bottom electrodes of the tunnel junction. Then, one or more fluxons may be topologically trapped inside the junction during the normal-superconducting transition. A circular AJTJ, whose tunneling area is sketched in the top panel of Fig. The physics of Josephson tunnel junctions is known to drastically depend on their geometrical configurations and also tiny geometrical details might play a determinant role. Based on the fact that the circle is a special case of an ellipse with no eccentricity, the circular AJTJs have been recently In this paper we will focus on the properties of the electromagnetic resonances in flux-free AJTJs. The presentation in the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the propagation of the traveling, in general nonlinear, waves in lossless infinite JTJs. We calculate the energy of the system and study its density dependence. Section 3 addresses the resonant modes in a autonomous circular AJTJ; later on, the analysis is extended to take into ac-count the perturbative effects of a bias current or an external magnetic field. In Section 4 we present the theoretical model of a confocal AJTJ, based on a perturbed and modified sine-Gordon equation; the wave equation is solved for the small amplitude case and the dispersion relation of the plasma waves is obtained. Section 5 summarizes the results of the analysis and concludes the work. The quantum-mechanical phase difference, φ(x, t), of a lossless onedimensional Josephson tunnel junction (JTJ) obeys a non-linear Klein-Gordon equation Here and in the following, the subscripts on φ are a shorthand for derivative with respect to the corresponding variable. Furthermore, throughout the paper we use circumflex accents to denote normalized quantities. In Eq. (2) In Eq.( is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind. Therefore, the superluminal wave in Eq.( In the (1+1)-dimensional space the Hamiltonian density of a lossless unperturbed sine-Gordon system is Inserting Eq.( is the elliptic integral of the second kind and Am[u, κ 2 ] is the inverse function of the elliptic integral of the first kind also called the Jacobi amplitude. The energy stored per wavelength λ is: with arbitrary x0 . Inserting Eq.( , where E(κ 2 ) ≡ E[2π, κ 2 ] is the complete elliptic integral of the second kind of argument κ 2 , we end up with the energy per unit wavelength: that is an integral of motion (d Êλ /d t = 0). Then, the wave amplitude, through the squared modulus, κ 2 , determines the wave energy density. Seen from the opposite point of view, the energy density of the superluminal wave (together with the free parameter v) parametrizes different solutions to Eq.( In the limit of small amplitude waves, κ << 1, being sn[u, κ 2 ] ≈ sin u, A/2 = arcsin κ ≈ κ and K(κ 2 ) ≈ π/2, the permanent-shape of the progressive wave in Eq.( under this circumstance, the wave amplitude, A, the wavelength λ0 ≡ λ(0) = 2π/ k0 and the period T0 ≡ T (0) = 2π/ω 0 are no longer κ-dependent. Eq.( which is an energy that grows quadratically with the wave amplitude, as 4κ 2 ≈ A 2 . The dashed lines in Fig. The PDE of a circular AJTJ with mean radius r (see the top panel of Figure where θ ≡ x/r is the angular coordinate and, as in Eq.( When cooling an annular JTL below its critical temperature one or more flux quanta may be spontaneously trapped in its doubly connected electrodes. The trapping probability is known to increase with the speed of the normal-to-superconducting transition Throughout this paper we will limit our analysis to the simplest case of no trapped flux, i.e., we will set n w = 0. Apart from the viscous dissipative term, αφ t, Eq.( Making use of Eq.( The rate of dissipation of energy is due to the shunt loss, i.e., Ohmic currents through the barrier. Clearly, the losses do not affect the static solutions; their effect on a time-oscillating solution is to exponentially reduce its oscillation amplitude. In this paper, in order to carry out analytical derivations, we assume an underdamped regime that reduces Eq.( where we have introduced the normalized radius r ≡ r/λ j . The implications of the periodic conditions on the travelling waves allowed in a circular AJTJ are first examined in the absence of external bias current and magnetic field. Then Eq.( that is identical to Eq.( (15) Eq.( where ω2 m = 1 + (m/r) 2 and |A m | << 1. The major difference between the solutions in Eq.( Let ψ(θ) be a static solution to the more general Eq.( where we considered | φ(θ, t)| << 1 to be a small perturbation of the reigning static condition. We look for clockwise rotating non-dissipative waves of the form φ(θ, t) = Φ(θ) exp[-î(ω t -δ)], where the time dependence has been expressed in complex form. Inserting φ into Eq.( Without loss of generality, the (real) phase constant, δ, will be chosen such that Re[ φ(0, 0)] = 0, to be consistent with the previously found solutions. Eq.( The simplest case occurs when a homogeneous bias current, γ, is applied to the circular AJTJ in the absence of a magnetic field. Then, ψ γ = arcsin γ is the (uniform) static solution to the Eq.( m,γ = k2 m + 1 -γ 2 with km ≡ 2π/ λm = m/r; this implies that the wave frequencies, as well as the phase velocities, ωm,γ / km , decrease with the bias amplitude. In Eq.( We next consider the more interesting case of an unbiased circular AJTJ in the presence of a small normalized in-plane magnetic field, |h| << 1, applied in the θ direction. On neglecting terms of order of h 2 and above, the static solution to Eq.( where a = r2 (ω 2 + h 2 e /4 -1) and q = r2 h 2 e /8 ≥ 0. Eq.( h,m = A m C(a m , q, θ); then, in order for Φe h,m (θ) exp[-î(ω t -δ)] to be a solution to Eq.( ) 2 ; this latter solution results in a second standing wave initially shifted by π/2 with respect to the former one, namely, φo m,h (θ, t) = B m S(b m , q, θ) cos ωb,m t. As φo m,h and φe m,h are independent solutions with the same angular periodicity 2π/m of the linear PDE in Eq. We notice that, with B m = -A m and h = 0, as expected, this expression reduces to the plane wave solution in Eq.( The analysis of a confocal AJTJ (drawn in the bottom panel of Fig. If the confocal AJTJ is delimited by two closely spaced ellipses identified by the characteristic values ν in and ν out ν in , they have almost the same aspect ratio, ρ (defined as the ratio of the length of the minor axis to the length of the major axis), and so the same eccentricity e 2 ≡ 1 -ρ 2 < 1. When the common focal length, c, of the ellipses tends to zero, then the annulus eccentricity vanishes and the variable-width confocal AJTJ reduces to the constant-width circular AJTJ. For ∆ν ≡ ν out -ν in << 1, the width of the confocal annulus varies as where Q(τ ) is the elliptic π-periodic scale factor, defined as Q(τ ) ≡ (cosh 2ν + cos 2τ )/2, that oscillates between sinh ν and cosh ν with ν ≡ (ν in + ν out )/2. The parameter ν is strictly related to the aspect ratio, ρ = tanh ν ≤ 1, as well as to the annulus eccentricity In the small width approximation, ∆w max = c∆ν cosh ν << λ J , the Josephson phase of a confocal AJTJ does not depend on ν and the system is onedimensional. It has been derived that the radially independent Josephson phase, φ(τ, t), of a confocal AJTJ in the presence of a spatially homogeneous in-plane magnetic field H of arbitrary orientation, θ, relative to the y-axis, obeys a modified and perturbed sine-Gordon equation with a space dependent effective Josephson penetration length inversely proportional to the local junction width where γ is the normalized density of the constant bias current and is an additional forcing term proportional to the applied magnetic field; here, h ≡ H/J c c is the normalized field strength for treating long CAJTJs and ∆ is a geometrical factor which sometimes has been referred to as the coupling between the external field and the flux density of the annular junction As usual, the α term in Eq.( Eq.( No analytical solutions exist to Eq.( AJTJs having an aspect ratio ρ = 1/2 and 1/4 showed that dynamic solutions to the PDE exist in the form of rotating 2π-kinks (fluxons) and/or circulating waves where we have introduced the normalized focal distance ĉ ≡ c/λ J . This linear PDE can be solved by variable separation assuming that φ(τ, t) = Φ(τ ) exp[-î(ω t -δ)]. Inserting φ into Eq.( where a = ĉ2 (ω 2 -1) cosh 2ν/2 ≥ 0 and q = -ĉ 2 (ω 2 -1)/4 ≤ 0. With q = 0, Eq.( where a,m -1)/4 and p m = -ĉ 2 (ω 2 q,m -1)/4. The solution in Eq.( We have investigated the propagation of EM waves in annular Josephson tunnel junctions having different geometrical configurations, namely, the well-known circular geometry and the more general confocal elliptic geometry. In both cases, perturbed sine-Gordon equations govern the junction phase dynamics whose spatial dependencies, in the limit of small amplitude oscillations, are found to be periodic solution to the Mathieu equations. Qualitatively similar dispersion relations have been predicted in circular JTJs when a magnetic field is applied in the plane of the junction and in confocal AJTJs with no applied field. More specifically, for each discrete mode m, that corresponds to a wavelength equal to the annulus circumference divided by m, two eigenfrequencies exist that are related to the even and odd spatial dependence of the wave. As a result of this frequency split, the traveling wave is given by the superposition of two standing waves with the same wavelengths but different oscillation periods. Therefore, the wave profile and the velocity of the wave front are not permanent, but undergo periodic changes. Although the main manifestation of EM waves is represented by their nonlinear interaction with traveling solitary magnetic flux quanta in long JTJs our analysis applies to junction of any physical and electric length. All our finding on AJTJs have been successfully double-checked by detailed numerical simulations. Once the Mathematica dynamics has been enabled the code provides a frame with the phase profile at t = 0, φm,h (θ, t) with θ in the interval [-π, π], as shown in Figure 