In contrast to the in-plane transport electron mean-free path in graphene, the transverse meanfree path has received little attention and is often assumed to follow the 'universal' mean-free path (MFP) curve broadly adopted in surface and interface science. Here we directly measure transverse electron scattering through graphene from 0 to 25 eV above the vacuum level both in reflection using Low Energy Electron Microscopy and in transmission using electron-Volt Transmission Electron Microscopy. From this data, we obtain quantitative MFPs for both elastic and inelastic scattering. Even at the lowest energies, the total MFP is just a few graphene layers and the elastic MFP oscillates with graphene layer number, both refuting the 'universal' curve. A full theoretical calculation taking the graphene band structure into consideration agrees well with experiment, while the key experimental results are reproduced even by a simple optical toy model. The mean free path (MFP) of electrons, i.e., the average distance between scattering events, plays a key role in numerous areas of science and technology. As an electron moves through a medium (gaseous, liquid, solid, or plasma) it will undergo scattering which may be either elastic, or inelastic due to interaction with phonons, plasmons, nuclei or other electrons. The MFP of electrons determines many physical phenomena on all energy scales. At or near the Fermi level in a solid, the MFP is a key ingredient to the transport properties. For example, ballistic transport is only possible when the MFP is larger than the critical device dimension. At somewhat higher energies (several eV), where electrons can overcome the workfunction of a material and escape into the vacuum, the MFP determines from which depth below the surface an electron can escape. Thus, the probing depth of electrons in a Low Energy Electron Diffraction (or Microscopy) experiment, the electron escape depth in photoemission experiments, the efficacy of electron emission in electron sources and electron multipliers, and the spatial extent and resolution of electron interactions in Scanning Electron Microscopy, all depend on the electron MFP. At higher energies yet (1 keV to 500 keV), the MFP is of key concern in Transmission Electron Microscopy, and in plasmas for the interaction of energetic electrons with other plasma constituents and the solid surfaces in contact with the plasma. Finally, in the few MeV energy range, the relatively short MFP is useful in electron beam treatment of superficial cancers. For electrons with vacuum energies from just a few eV to tens of keV, the MFP in solids is often assumed to be described by a 'universal' curve, which implies the MFP to depend strongly on energy, but only weakly on material Here we explicitly measure electron propagation through few layer graphene by recording the energydependent reflectivity and transmissivity in this low energy range directly. We demonstrate that the electron MFP strongly depends on electronic material properties in contrast to the 'universal' curve. In particular, it changes greatly with the number of graphene layers and thus electronic interlayer resonances. This shows that, the motion of electrons through solids is intricately linked to band structure -which is materials specific -and thus, that electron mean free paths cannot be universal. We describe a set of experiments on thin graphene layers illuminated with electrons with kinetic energies E 0 in the range from 0 to 25 eV where only the specularly reflected and the directly transmitted beams are present (first order Low Energy Electron Diffraction can only be excited above ∼28 eV, which thus sets an upper limit to a straight-forward, quantitative interpretation). In addition to these energy-loss-free coherent beams, electrons scatter 'thermally' (Debye-Waller scattering) and inelastically. Here, we quantitatively determine the elastic scattering fractions in both the specularly reflected and the transmitted electron beams as a function of energy, using the ESCHER aberration-corrected Low Energy Electron Microscope (LEEM) To understand this energy dependence in an idealized system, let us assume that at a particular electron energy, at normal incidence (k = 0), our sample has a bandgap. In the absence of incoherent and inelastic channels, we would then expect a reflectivity of 1 and a transmissivity of 0 for electrons of that energy Figure 2 shows such R(E 0 ) LEEM (a) and T (E 0 ) eV-TEM (b) spectra for electrons with energies E 0 from 0-25 eV, obtained on sample areas with 1-4 layers of graphene. In addition to a decrease with energy, strong modulations that depend not only on energy, but also on the number of graphene layers are visible for R(E 0 ) and T (E 0 ). For 2LG and thicker we find a broad maximum in reflectivity and minimum in transmission between 5 and 15 eV, corresponding to the graphite bandgap seen in Fig. where I 0 the incident intensity and d the sample thickness. Similarly, the inelastic MFP λ inel can be obtained from the sum of reflected and transmitted intensities I er and I et , as the total elastic signal is depleted by inelastic scattering only. where R is the elastic reflectivity shown in Fig. The experimentally measured λ tot , λ inel and λ el are plotted in units of graphene layers as a function of electron energy in Fig. 15 eV, λ el is largest for 1LG [see inset in Fig. In the next band (15-22 eV), an increased λ el is clearly visible while layer-number-dependent maxima are broadened due to inelastic effects, and no longer resolved. This second high transmission band was predicted by Feenstra et al. To arrive at a qualitative and intuitive understanding of these results, we turn to a simple toy model. In analogy with an optical multilayer, every graphene layer is modeled as a semitransparent boundary with reflectivity R 1 = |r| 2 and transmissivity T 1 = |t| 2 where r and t are the reflection and transmission amplitudes, respectively. The total reflectivity R and transmissivity T of a multilayer are then determined by the interference of all possible wave reflections and transmissions within the multilayer, while gaining a phase φ when propagating from layer to layer. Losses due to absorption, incoherent scattering, etc. are taken into account for every layer by setting R 1 + T 1 < 1. The energy-dependent R(E 0 ) and T (E 0 ) can be calculated using the transfer matrix approach (see Supplemental Materials The full quantum mechanical approach [Fig. We have presented the first direct measurements of elastic electron reflection and transmission data in the energy range between 0 and 25 eV. While the 'universal' MFP curve for electrons in this energy range would suggest very large mean free paths, up to 100 nm at the lowest energies The advent of eV-TEM in conjunction with LEEM, in a single instrument, has made it possible to study elastic reflection and transmission of low energy electrons from the same sample for the first time. This allows us to develop a more complete and detailed understanding of the interaction of low energy electrons with solids. These results challenge the perceived universality of electron MFP, and demonstrate that such universality cannot exist. The electronic structure of a material depends on its elemental composition, crystal structure, crystal orientation, and sample thickness and dominates scattering at low electron energies. The imaging and spectroscopic capabilities close to E 0 = 0 demonstrated here enables other eV-TEM experiments. For instance, using eV-TEM, we have succeeded in imaging single DNA origami molecules with electron energies below 5 eV, where radiation damage appears to be negligible 