During the fabrication of casting parts sensor data is typically automatically recorded and accumulated for process monitoring and defect diagnosis. As casting is a thermal process with many interacting process parameters, root cause analysis tends to be tedious and ineffective. We show how a decomposition based on non-negative matrix factorization (NMF), which is guided by a knowledge-based initialization strategy, is able to extract physical meaningful sources from temperature time series collected during a thermal manufacturing process. The approach assumes the time series to be generated by a superposition of several simultaneously acting component processes. NMF is able to reverse the superposition and to identify the hidden component processes. The latter can be linked to ongoing physical phenomena and process variables, which cannot be monitored directly. Our approach provides new insights into the underlying physics and offers a tool, which can assist in diagnosing defect causes. We demonstrate our method by applying it to real world data, collected in a foundry during the series production of casting parts for the automobile industry. The present paper deals with the decomposition of temperature time series collected from a thermal manufacturing process into physically meaningful components. Such data is routinely collected in automotive industry during the casting process of vehicle frame or car engine parts made of aluminum. Manufacturing processes at high temperatures are usually thermally unstable, i.e. a highly skewed distribution of measured temperatures during production is generally observed. The reason is a multitude of factors influencing the temperature during the casting process. We treat these influencing factors as independently acting sources, and as such consider the problem a blind source separation (BSS) problem which we solve by employing non-negative matrix factorization (NMF). The new contribution of this work is related to applying NMF to temperature time series data sets T n (r, t m ), n = 1, . . . , N, m = 1, . . . M uncovering the effect of different hidden sources during the casting process. We show that if the initialization of the hidden causes is based on physically motivated signals, the decomposition of the temperature signals yields meaningful and interpretable components which provide new insights and information about ongoing physical phenomena during the process. This thus offers a new tool for data mining and process optimization. Our approach is demonstrated with real world data collected in a foundry of a German car manufacturer. Motor parts like aluminum crank cases and cylinder heads are typically produced in mold casting. This section will provide a simplified description of the casting process and the data collected thereby. As the aim in this paper is not about technical details, we hereby refer to related engineering literature. Fig. In our study, we focus on the sensor signals collected from one specific sensor during consecutive production of components. These recordings resulted in a dataset T ∈ R N ×M , where N is the number of components, i. e. consecutive time series recorded at the sensor, and M the number of time points at which the sensor signal was sampled. Fig. For our approach we make some assumptions about the data: • Thermal processes will be affected by different contributions varying in their strength. These can be process related (e.g. heating, cooling, initial temperature) or external causes (e.g. ambient temperature) • The sources of variations change independently and do not interact. • The sources affect the shape of the temperature -time curves in a specific way, and the intensity of the variation can only change as a whole. Considering the flow of heat energy Q = c p ρT inside the mold and the liquid metal filling, local temperature changes, as recorded by any specific sensor, are determined by the nonstationary heat equation, which represents a parabolic partial differential equation where ∇ denotes the nabla operator estimating the local gradient, T (r, t) denotes the temperature measured at fixed sensor position r and at time points t, and λ T = λ q /(ρc p ) represents the thermal diffusivity, λ q the thermal conductivity, ρ the mass density and c p the specific heat at constant pressure. For simplicity, here we consider units such that λ T = 1. In our case we also have external heat sources like heating and cooling channels, which can be modeled by a source function f (r, t) ∝ (ρc p ) -1 ∂q(r, t)/∂t where q(r, t) denotes the heat flux density. The corresponding stationary and homogeneous situation is described by the Laplace equation ∆T (r) = 0, the solution of which is composed of harmonic functions. hereby ∆ L ≡ ∇ 2 denotes the Laplace operator. The inhomogeneous stationary case, however, is ruled by the Poisson equation ∆ L T (r) + f (r) = 0 and its solutions can be obtained with the help of Greens-functions. A special solution of the heat equation, called the fundamental solution, yields the heat kernel, which belongs to the family of exponential functions (a Gaussian) where σ 2 denotes the spatial variance and .. the Euclidean norm. The general solution to the non-stationary, inhomogeneous heat equation is given by a sum of contributions where T h (r, t) solves the homogeneous case, and T s (r, t) denotes the specific solution to the inhomogeneous problem in case of vanishing initial contributions from the external heat sources: Here the source function f (r, t) describes any heat source active during the process. So the resulting temperature at the sensor can be written as a sum of contributions, of which one captures the information about external sources in the process. We thus propose to model the registered temperature -time curves T (r 0 , t) at fixed sensor position r 0 as a linear superposition of yet unknown independent, non-negative contributions from external heat sources. Note that we are only interested in the time dependence at fixed spatial position implying that the terms describing the spatial variation of the spatio-temporal temperature changes drop out and we have and T s (r, t = 0) = 0. ( Due to heat flow towards the sensor and away from it, we expect a description similar to the theory of master equations where, occasionally, solutions are obtained as weighted sums of exponentials. Integrating equation (5) yields the measured temporal temperature variation at the sensor position according to where T First introduced in 1994 by Suppose we have a data matrix T ∈ R N ×M , with N being the number of registered time series (samples) and M the number of time points (features) at which the temperature is sampled. This matrix is approximated by two smaller factor matrices where K ≤ min(N, M ). Note that from basic physics of heat flow we have Q ∝ T, thus the matrix in its N rows the weights, with which the component processes Here and in the following we denote with T n * the n-th row, and with T * m the m-th column of matrix T ∈ R N ×M . NMF is just one of many linear dimensionality reduction techniques differing in their cost function and underlying assumptions. Other prominent examples are principal component analysis (PCA) There exist many different approaches to solve the NMF problem. Since ( (9) But in the last decade many different cost functions have been tried and proven to also yield fast and robust algorithms. Other prominent choices are Bregman divergences like the Kullback-Leibler divergence Exploiting the fact that in This rule is also used to update Θ by exploiting the symmetry of the problem T -WΘ 2 F = T T -Θ T W T 2 F . We chose this algorithm because of its convergence speed and low computational cost compared to other NMF algorithms. Secondly, it is guaranteed to converge to a stationary point with just some mild assumptions. For a detailed comparison of the most common NMF algorithms see Without contraints the NMF algorithm yields two indeterminancies. One is the non-uniqueness of the extracted components scaling. Each solution WΘ can be transformed by multiplying with a matrix B and its inverse WBB -1 Θ. The matrix B can be at least any non-negative monomial matrix, i.e. a permutation and scaling matrix. Secondly the number of the extracted components isn't determined automatically, but must be set to a fixed K beforehand. How to deal with the non-uniqueness remains an open question and no satisfactory solution yet exists for all cases Instead of using a data driven initialization technique, we construct the starting values for the matrix Θ by using functions that reflect simple physical heat transfer phenomena, i.e. solutions to the one-dimensional heat transfer equation under idealized conditions. Suppose the signals we wish to model are measured with a time step ∆t over a t end long time period. Then we construct the time vector t, having components with m = 0, . . . , M -1 and (M -1) • ∆t = t end . The K rows of the factor matrix Θ init are initialized with values of the following functions: • The mean of all the input time series in the rows of T. • Heating and cooling in a heat bath, which cools down following an exponential decay (Fig. • Exponential cooling process (Fig. • Exponential heating process in a heat bath of constant temperature (Fig. Here Θ km denotes the amplitude of the k-th component process, while τ > 0 are positive time constants for the underlying cooling and heating processes. The Θ km are the arranged as the initial component matrix: The mean of all input data is chosen to capture the general trend for all the component temperature curves. The other components will then superimpose onto this general trend. This justifies the restriction of the entries of the coefficient matrix W to be strictly non-negative, as the lower bound of any variation will have a zero coefficient. An illustration is given in Fig. This initialization strategy aims to extract components resembling the initial curves as expressed in equations 14 -13. Thus by using prior knowledge about the physical processes involved, the extracted components can be easily related with the ongoing physical phenomena. To contrast our knowledge-based proposal with a more canonical approach, for this study we decided to also use a data-driven approach called NNDSVD-based initialization procedure [?]. The initialization strategy is based on the singular value decomposition (SVD) of the data matrix T where U, V represent the left and right matrix of eigenvectors of the data matrix, respectively. Furthermore, Σ denotes a diagonal matrix of related singular values. Another way to write the SVD is as a sum of J singular triplets: where we have set C (j) = u j v T j . If we assume the matrix T to be non-negative, the NNDSVD method uses a modification of this sum. We denote any vector x or matrix X, which is projected into the positive quadrant, as x + ≥ 0, X + ≥ 0, where x + , X + denotes a vector or matrix of the same size that has all negative components set to zero. In the same way the projection into the negative quadrant is denoted x -≥ 0, X -≥ 0 and is defined by X = X + -X -, with a corresponding definition in case of a vector. Using this definition we can write: The positive and negative section can thus be written as: We only take the positive section σ j C + and consider their SVD decomposition. It can be proven that they have at most rank(σ j C (j) + ) ≤ 2, hence possess only at most two non-zero singular values μ j+ , μ j-and corresponding eigenvectors. The eigenvectors and eigenvalues can be readily obtained from From there we take the dominant singular triplet (μ j-, ûj-, vT j-) or (μ j+ , ûj+ , vT j+ ) to initialize the columns and rows of W and Θ: If we wish to initialize an NMF run with K ≤ J components we take the dominant (μ k± , u k± , v T k± ) derived from the k leading σ k C (k) . This NNDSVD initialization yields some useful properties, as we will show with real world examples. In this example we study the decomposition of N=540 time curves collected during the series production of a cylinder head. The casting process is presented in simplified form in section I-A. The process goes on for a time span of ∆t = 155 s, and every temperature curve consists of 32 time points. Thus our initial data matrix T has 540 rows and 32 columns. The latter are ordered by their respective timestamp, i.e. the first row belongs to the first part and the 32-th row belongs to the last part. We decompose T using different initialization techniques, i. e. knowledge-based initialization, NNDSVD and also random initialization. Since the NMF output is not unique in terms of scaling, we normalize the rows of the matrix Θ by dividing by the L 1 -norm and multiplying the columns of W with the same value. The goal is to render the extracted weights comparable in their individual contributions. Three example time curves from different recordings at one sensor are shown in Fig. Using the knowledge-based initialization with the functions from 13 and 14, we extract the decomposition shown in Fig. Alternatively, Fig. To contrast our knowledge-based initialization with a more canonical approach, we also employed the NNDSVD initialization on this dataset. In Fig. In this second application, we use a dataset collected from the same casting process, but from a different sensor. It is close to a cooling channel which is switched on and off during one cycle. We demonstrate that our knowledge-based approach can also be applied to this more complex case. The data matrix is constructed as explained before and has the same dimensions as the one from the first example. In Fig. Finally we compare the convergence speed of all simulations when the three different initializations have been employed. Fig. The presented results demonstrate that NMF is able to extract component temperature profiles which can be related to thermal processes during manufacturing. In the examples given, we used prior domain knowledge about basic thermal phenomena to initialize the hidden NMF component profiles Θ i * . One advantage of such a knowledge-based model initialization is that it immediately identifies the proper region of the solution space and any additional complex physical modeling is unnecessary. With the extracted weights, for example like those shown in Fig. Our contribution joins in with recent studies showcasing the promise in the idea of combining machine learning techniques with physical knowledge We have demonstrated an NMF based approach to analyze temperature profiles measured by a temperature sensor and generated by a thermal manufacturing process. An arrangement of multiple time series in a data matrix can be decomposed into physically meaningful features, which can be associated with ongoing physical phenomena during the production process. This decomposition can be guided by a knowledge-based initialization strategy, linking the NMF model to fundamental heat transfer equations. Our approach is motivated and demonstrated by its application to real world data sets. The extracted features can be used for process monitoring and defect diagnosis and further analysis. Placing sensors to cover all the different aspects and interactions during a manufacturing process is a challenging task. Thus the possibility to extract multiple sources from a single sensors signal is very appealing. 