Nematic order in the iron-based superconductors is closely tied to a lattice distortion and a structural transition from tetragonal to orthorhombic symmetry. External stress of the appropriate symmetry acts as a conjugate field of the nematic order parameter and can be utilized to detwin nematic domains but also smears an otherwise sharp nematic transition. On the other hand, applying stress in proper symmetry channels allows one to tune the nematic phase transition. Recent experiments analyzed the stress-induced changes of the nematic and magnetic phase transition temperature. Here we show that the observed trends can be understood in terms of spin-induced nematicity. The strain sensitivity is shown to be a fluctuation effect. The strong sensitivity to antisymmetric strain is a consequence of the anisotropic nature of the magnetic excitation spectrum. The formalism presented here can be naturally generalized to determine the strain-sensitivity of vestigial phases related to other magnetic states that have been observed in the iron-based systems, such as e.g. the spin-charge density wave and the spin-vortex crystals. Nematicity is a well-established state of electronic order in Fe-based superconductors crystallographic axes Symmetry sector ex = (100), ey = (010) εA 1g εB 2g εB 1g ex = (110), ey = (-110) εA 1g εB 1g εB 2g FIG. , FIG. Whereas this work shall focus on the nematicity associated with fluctuations of a spin-density wave order, the nematic order may also arise due to orbital or charge order Co-doped BaFe 2 As 2 in different symmetry channels such as 1 B 2g and A 1g , see Fig. with D B2g > 0, and a dominant linear variation for symmetric strain With regards to the quadratic response of the type ∝ ε 2 it was further found that D A1g D B2g , i.e. the change in the nematic transition temperature due to antisymmetric strain is stronger than due to symmetric strain. In this paper we analyze the tuning of nematic order through to critical symmetric and antisymmetric strain within the theory of spin-driven nematicity. We demonstrate that the effect of strain is a fluctuation effect, a behavior that is caused by the frustrated nature of the striped magnetic order. We then show that the behavior observed in Ref. We start our analysis with a lattice model of localized spins on a two-dimensional J 1 -J 2 Heisenberg model. This model is a specific microscopic realization of the more 1 In this paper we use a unit cell with iron-iron bonds along the coordinate axes. Thus, the irreducible representations B 1g and B 2g are interchanged if compared to Ref. The effect of the symmetry-preserving B2g strain can be studied in a J 1 -J ± 2 spin lattice model with asymmetric next-nearest neighbor interactions J ± 2 = J2(1 ± εB 2g ). Bottom: The classical groundstate (black) is unaffected by strain, while fluctuation effects lower the energy and favor the development of a spin nematic order (green), see Eq. Here s(r i ) denotes the spin at the lattice site r i , ij refers to a pair of nearest neighbor spins and ij to next-nearest neighbor spins. The important regime for us is where J 2 dominates over J 1 . The J 1 -J 2 Heisenberg model was shown in Ref. where the two signs refer to the two diagonal couplings of a square lattice, that corresponds to the single-iron unit cell description of the iron-based materials. The coupling constant κ can be determined from a microscopic firstprinciples calculation. As it always as a prefactor to ε B2g , we drop κ in what follows. Fourier transformation of the Hamiltonian yields with of this model is unchanged by strain. The energy gain due to the enhancement of one diagonal coupling J + 2 is off-set by the loss in exchange coupling along the orthogonal diagonal J - 2 , see Fig. In what follows we will evaluate how fluctuations affect the correlation length ξ and lead to a the reduction ∆E of the ground state's energy density. This program will require a separate discussion of long-wavelength and shortdistance fluctuations. When combined, the energy scale (∆E)ξ 2 reveals the characteristic temperature where nematic order appears. The long-wavelength fluctuations are described by considering s(k) for k near Q 2d x = (π, 0) or Q 2d y = (0, π). The associated real-space modulation then reads where n a (r) 2 = 1 are unit vectors and the coordinate r = (x, y) becomes a continuous variable. The two coupled, interpenetrating Néel sub-lattices magnetizations n 1,2 can be modeled in a nonlinear sigma model Here g = T /2J 2 s 2 is the stiffness and α = J 1 /J 2 . One can eliminate the strain term proportional to ε B2g through two successive coordinate transformations. First, we introduce . This is precisely the model without strain, yet with a reduced (effective) next nearest neighbor interaction It is important to note that fluctuations are affected by strain while the classical ground-state energy is not. This gives rise to a shortening of the magnetic correlation length ξ. For the two-dimensional spin model follows from the usual renormalization group procedure with a 0 of the order of the lattice constant, z = z(α) The straininduced reduction of the spin-wave stiffness is the is the predominant effect of strain on long wavelength magnetic fluctuations. In performing the above coordinate transformations one has to be careful as they may change the boundary conditions and thus the symmetry of the system. This turns out to be a problem if one considers ε B1g strain that couples to the Ising-nematic order parameter. For ε B2g discussed here this problem does not exist. Whereas B 2g strain modifies the stiffness of long-wave fluctuations, is will affect the system's energy through short distance fluctuations. This energy depends on the angle θ ≡ arccos(n 1 • n 2 ) between the two sub-lattices, see Fig. where This allows us to analyze the free energy corrections due to spin-wave excitations, which-in the limit T → 0corresponds to the correction to the ground state energy ∆E = ∆F (T = 0). Performing the momentum integration, we obtain the additional biquadratic exchange energy where The coefficient γ (0) Q ≈ 0.26025 describes the situation without strain and was already given in Ref. Combining long and short wave-length excitations finally allows us to determine the nematic transition temperature T nem . The order parameter of the nematic state is the Ising variable which relates to the angle θ between the two sublattices via cos(θ) = φ. To determine T nem we consider the typical interaction energy of a region of size ξ 2 . If this energy is comparable to the temperature, one expects the nematic phase transition to take place We obtain two opposite trends due to external strain: On the one hand, the correlation length gets smaller which reduces the transition temperature. On the other hand, ∆E gets larger, which tends to enhance T nem . For any system that is near a second-order magnetic phase transition the correlation length is about to diverge. Even for weak first-order transitions, the correlation length above the magnetic ordering temperature is exponentially large, see Eq. ( Since the analysis of this section was performed for a two-dimensional system with exponentially growing magnetic correlation length, it is important to analyze the role of three-dimensional, albeit anisotropic spin correlations, relevant for many iron-based materials. This analysis will be performed in the next section. In this section, we consider the long-wavelength theory of collective magnetic degrees of freedom along the lines of Ref. where the m x,y (R) vary smoothly in space. In distinction to Eq. ( where the Lagrangian L = L + L ⊥ consists of an intralayer term and a coupling between nearest neighboring layers The Pauli matrices τ α act in the space of two ordering vectors, e.g. mτ 3 m = m x •m x -m y •m y . Depending on the sign and the magnitude of the coupling constants u, g and v, several magnetic phases and their associated vestigial orders have been discussed In the presence of strain ε αβ the response of collective spin modes is governed by a modified action with the stress tensor In our subsequent analysis we will work at constant strain. This is clearly adequate to describe measurements such as the elasto-resistivity In the following, we focus on in-plane strain; in particular we introduce the strain combinations and similar for the stress tensor. In this notation the strain-stress term in Eq. ( For the trivially transforming A 1g combination follows while the stress associated to the two nontrivial irreducible representations B 1g and B 2g read The combination (T xy -T yx )/2 = α∂ y mτ 3 ∂ x m describes the response to a rotation about the z axis and will not be discussed further. In our treatment of anisotropic three-dimensional systems, the dispersion in the third direction is characterized by the coupling between neighboring layers of Eq. ( x + q 2 y + q 2 z where q 2 z stands in fact for 2q 2 0 [1-cos(q z /q 0 )]. Here q 0 is a measure of the in-plane versus out-of-plane anisotropy. The 2d case is obtained in the limit q 0 → 0, while for q 0 → ∞ the isotropic 3d case is recovered. By parametrizing the in-plane momentum vector as (q x , q y ) = q(cos φ, sin φ)] (consequently q 2 = q 2 + q 2 z ), and after introducing an ulta-violett cut-off q < Λ, the momentum integral of a function f (q) takes the form A. Analysis without strain The subsequent analysis extends the approach used in Ref. where the Green's functions associated with m 1,2 read In the large-N limit, the partition function may be evaluated at the saddle-point solution. Then emerges as the Ising nematic order parameter. Expressing the saddle-point equations in Fourier space, we assume here that η and φ are not coordinatedependent, we obtain the self-consistency equations where we introduced r = r 0 -i3uη and used the convention of Eq. 35. In order to highlight solution of this set of equations, let us consider the case α = 0 first. The more general case α = 0 will be treated below when we include finite strain. The renormalization of r 0 → r gives rise to a change in the in-plane magnetic correlation length ξ, via In absence of nematic order φ = 0 we use r ≡ r(φ = 0) which obeys r = r 0 + 6uI 1 (r). ( where I 1 (r) belongs to a series of reappearing integrals I n (r), for which we introduce a unified notation, see Appendix A. Treating the onset of nematicity perturbatively we write r ≈ r+dφ 2 and find d = (3g) 2 6uI 3 (r)/[1+6uI 2 (r)] from Eq. This is the equation of state for φ that can be interpreted as being due to an effective φ 4 -theory, for the nematic order parameter: At high temperature, when the coefficient 1 -6gI 2 (r) is positive, no nematic order exists. A vanishing of this coefficient defines the nematic transition temperature T nem via the temperature dependence of r. Substituting I 2 (r) by its expression in an anisotropic 3d system, as derived in Appendix A, the nematic phase sets in when r(r + 4q 2 0 ) = 3gq 0 /2π. The sign of the square bracket in Eq. ( When applying an external strain in the A 1g -channel, ε xx = ε yy = ε A1g the inverse Green's functions with γ = (1 + 2ε A1g ) renormalizing the bare parameters r 0 , u, and g as well as the gradient term. From this renormalization follows immediately, that ε A1g affects the transition temperatures to linear order. The self-consistency equations for r and φ now read with the integrand's denominator Considering the effects of α and ε A1g as perturbations to the system, motivates the Ansatz Specifically, the above self-consistency equations respond linearly to an external strain while the combination q 2 xq 2 y only allows for even powers in α. By expanding the first equation and equating coefficients we find d as in the case without strain as well as with the functions J ,m n (r) defined in Appendix A. Notice, if the index n subscript exceeds the sum of the superscripts +m by more than 1, the integral is convergent for the anisotropic 3d case. For n = +m+1 the integral is logarithmically divergent. Expanding the second selfconsistency-equation (47) in the small parameters ψ, α and ε A1g yields the equation of state 0 = a A1g (ε A1g )φ+bφ 3 , see Eq. ( The coefficient a A1g (ε A1g ) now determines the ground state at finite strain and, in particular, the onset of the nematic order. As anticipated the A 1g -strain changes linearly the onset of nematic order, as featured by a term ∝ ε A1g in the linear coefficient a of the effective φ 4 theory. Anticipating a discussion with the results obtained in other strain channels, the expansion in ε A1g has been carried to quadratic order. In this context it is important to note that the coefficient f A1g and the square bracket determining the quadratic correction ∝ ε 2 A1g remain bounded for strongly anisotropic systems. As we shall see, this is in contrast to the quadratic terms in the B 1g and B 2g channels where the coefficient ∝ ε 2 B2g logarithmically diverges upon approaching the twodimensional limit. Next, we consider an external strain with the components ε xx = -ε yy = ε B1g . Following the derivation scheme discussed above, the layer-diagonal part of inverse Green's functions (37) will be augmented by additional terms while the inter-layer terms remain unchanged The self-consistency equations for r and ψ now read with In the equation for φ, the term ∝ αε B1g of the integrand's numerator implies that the nematic order exists at any temperature. In fact, this term generically produces a finite value for φ. As shall become clear below, the symmetry-breaking term acts as an Ising field h eff lifting the phase transition. An expansion of Eq. ( with effective source field h eff = 4αε B1g [J 0,1 2 (r)-2J 2,0 3 (r)] induced by strain. Since φ and ε B1g transform according to the same irreducible representation, it is natural to expect the nemato-elastic term λ n.e. φε B1g in the free energy expansion. Our analysis shows that the nematoelastic coupling constant is and simplifies to λ n.e. = αq 0 /2π in the 2d limit. Subleading corrections in ε B1g or α to the Landau parameters a and b have been omitted here 2 . The parameters α and ε B1g now appear to linear order on the left-hand side of the above equation and generically induce a finite nematic order at any temperature. The nematic order is 2 Quadratic corrections in α and ε B 1g on the left-hand side of Eq. ( The denominator indicates the softening of φ when approaching the underlying (for αε B1g = 0) nematic transition. This trend is also reflected in the susceptibility which diverges at the transition temperature. Let us note here that our analysis is performed at fixed strain. The nematic transition hence corresponds to that observed in measurements of the elastoresistivity, with resistivity anisotropy ∆ρ, as well as that obtained from the Raman response R B1g (ω) in the B 1g channel This susceptibility χnem differs from the 'true' thermodynamic nematic quantity where h nem is a field conjugate to the nematic order parameter and g ren = g +λ n.e. /C (0) 66 is the nematic coupling constant renormalized by the coupling to elastic degrees of freedom The nematic symmetry is preserved for strain with the components ε xy = ε yx = ε B2g . Here, the intra-plane inverse Green's functions where -[3gφα(q 2 xq 2 y )] 2 The systematic appearance of the strain ε B2g in combination with the odd function q x q y in momentum space implies that all corrections to the unstrained case are (at least) quadratic in ε B2g . An expansion similar to the earlier ones, with r ≈ r + dφ from Eq. (62). The positive coefficient f B2g implies that the correlation length ξ ∼ (r -3gφ) -1/2 is shortened by strain, pointing towards a generic suppression of the nematic transition temperature. The equation of state (62) takes the form 0 = a B2g (ε B2g )φ + bφ ]. Note that in the limit of quasi two-dimensional systems, the coefficient determining the shift of nematic transition is dominated by the logarithmic term in J 2,0 3 (r) (constituent of d ). Its magnitude is also decisive in determining the sign of the shift giving rise to a suppression of the nematic transition temperature. In the following discussion we focus on the (strongly) anisotropic limit q 0 → 0 relevant for many layered mag-netic, or electronic systems. The Landau coefficients (51) and (66) can be expanded in the vicinity of the unstrained value a, for simplicity we assume α = 0 here. This expansion requires using the expressions (A7) and (A9) listed in the Appendix A as well as the solution r ≈ 3gq 0 /2π valid in the limit q 0 g. By associating the Landau coefficient with a nematic transition temperature via a = (1 -T nem /T ), we identify the phenomenological parameters as defined in Eqs. ( For A 1g strain the quadratic correction is regular, while that of the B 2g channel is logarithmically divergent in the 2d limit. In light of the experimental finding In conclusion, we have investigated the response of a nematic order to strain belonging to different symmetry classes (ε A1g , ε B1g , ε B2g ). Hereby special attention was given to the symmetry channel B 2g , for which recent experimental work These findings, combined with more general symmetry considerations lead to several observations. The degeneracy-lifting B 1g strain is expected to act as an effective source field h eff , thus replacing the nematic transition by a smooth cross-over. In contrast, the symmetryconserving strains of the A 1g and B 2g type preserve the transition and merely yield a shift ∆T nem = T nem (ε) -T 0 nem in the transition temperature. In the A 1g channel, we find ∆T nem = C A1g ε A1g -D A1g ε 2 A1g , with a dominant linear contribution. In the B 2g sector, the deviation is quadratic, i.e. ∆T nem = -D B2g ε 2 B2g . Approaching the problem from a field-theoretical approach we provide a quantitative tool to evaluate the parameters h eff , C A1g , D A1g and D B2g from the underlying Lagrangian formalism. In this approach, the strong response of nematic order to symmetric B 2g , i.e. D B2g D A1g , is found to be a generic feature of strongly anisotropic, quasi-2d systems, see Fig. A related issue is that other emergent vestigial phases are known to appear in the spin-based scenario of ironbased materials The B 2g strain effects are to be mapped to the B 1g sector in the experimental work