Light emitters in wide band gap semiconductors are of great fundamental interest and have potential as optically addressable qubits. Here we describe the discovery of a new color center in high-quality hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) with a sharp emission line at 435 nm. The emitters are activated and deactivated by electron beam irradiation and have spectral and temporal characteristics consistent with atomic color centers weakly coupled to lattice vibrations. The emitters are conspicuously absent from commercially available h-BN and are only present in ultra-high-quality h-BN grown using a high-pressure, high-temperature Ba-B-N flux/solvent, suggesting that these emitters originate from impurities or related defects specific to this unique synthetic route. Our results imply that the light emission is activated and deactivated by electron beam manipulation of the charge state of an impurity-defect complex. Luminescent defects in wide band gap semiconductors are of great importance for both fundamental physics and future technological applications. Many of these defects are single photon emitters (SPEs), a likely component of next-generation information technologies, especially quantum cryptography h-BN or "white graphite" has been of great interest to the nanoscience community over the last several decades, in part because it is isostructural to graphite and forms many of the same types of nanostructures as sp 2bonded carbon, but with different electronic and thermodynamic properties In this communication we report the discovery of a new color center in high-quality h-BN, activated and characterized by an electron beam. We show that these emitters are highly localized, are spectrally pure, and have an emission signature indicative of weak lattice coupling at room temperature. These properties make the new color center a promising candidate for future applications in quantum information science. Ultra-high-quality h-BN crystals used in this study (generally accepted as the best substrates available for sensitive device applications and scanning probe measurements) are synthesized using a Ba-B-N solvent precursor at high temperature and high pressure at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) by Watanabe and Taniguchi We use CL in a scanning electron microscope (SEM) to activate and characterize light emission from the h-BN. CL measurements are performed using a home-built SEM CL system shown in FIG. sample is collected by a parabolic mirror and directed down an optical path for characterization. Synchronous data from SEM (secondary electron and in-lens detectors) and optical (photon counting point detectors and spectrometer) channels are acquired using the Molecular Foundry ScopeFoundry software As the electron beam is rastered across the sample, the light emission from each point of the scan can be coupled into an optical fiber (Thorlabs FG200UEA) using a UV-enhanced parabolic aluminum reflector and recorded using a spectrometer (Princeton Instruments SP2300i) with CCD camera (Andor 970-UVB) to capture the spectral distribution of the light at each pixel, resulting in a three-dimensional data set we refer to as a spectral image (SI). The spectra are not intensity corrected for the wavelength dependent efficiency of the spectrometer grating and CCD camera. Alternatively, the light can be directed through a series of dichroic mirrors and bandpass filters to an array of photon counting photomultiplier tube pointdetectors (Hamamatsu H7360-01, Hamamatsu H7421-40, and Hamamatsu H7421-50), resulting in intensity images of well-defined wavelength bands. We refer to such data throughout the text as bandpass (BP) images. Time-correlation of the emitted light can be measured by coupling to a Hanbury-Brown-Twiss (HBT) setup. The arrival times of photons at the detectors in both arms of the apparatus are recorded with 50 ps resolution and a coincidence histogram as a function of delay time between the two detectors is made. The raw coincidence histogram is then normalized by the number of coincidences at long delay times. A background correction is performed using the signal to background ratio esti-mated independently for each measurement All data analysis is performed using common opensource packages in the Python programming language. Multivariate statistical analysis (MVA) of hyperspectral images is carried out using the HyperSpy Python package We first describe results from NIMS-BN. In order to activate and characterize individual emitters, we initially identify large (lateral size of 10-100 μm) flakes of h-BN using the raster scan images from the SEM electron detectors, shown in FIG. There are several striking features in each channel of the BP images. FIG. The bright, point-like features in the Blue BP image between 430-470 nm in FIG. We further characterize electron-stimulated light emission from NIMS-BN using hyperspectral CL imaging by collecting a CL spectrum from each pixel in a raster scan. To isolate the unique spectral signature of each type of emitter we perform a non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) decomposition ) are a close match to UV SPEs in h-BN seen in previous CL studies Spectral information from the hyperspectral imaging can be used to perform time-correlation measurements of light from the blue emitters. A bandpass filter is selected that covers a large portion of the emission peak from FIG. The majority of previous studies of light emission in h-BN have measured g P L (τ ) using PL. In stark contrast, g CL (τ ), measured in this study, exhibits a bunching peak as opposed to an anti-bunching dip. This behavior, which has been explored previously Previous work There are two striking differences between the Blue emitters shown in FIG. To further investigate this, we acquire a 2.5-hour time series of long scan time (262 seconds per image) BP images over a flake of h-BN. Each image corresponds to an exposed dose of 2.3 × 10 7 e -/ Å2 per image, with a total exposed dose of 5.7 × 10 8 e -/ Å2 . Time-series data are aligned and registered using template matching and cross-correlation to correct for sample drift during the experiment. Individual emitters were automatically identified in each frame of the time series using the difference of Gaussian blob finding algorithm. 50x50 pixel regions around emitters were extracted and image feature vectors were calculated using the PCA weights of each image. Fi-nally, false positives were removed by inspection of the output of k-means clustering on the feature vectors. FIG. We note that we have also attempted characterization of these emitters using PL. NIMS-BN samples on indexed Si substrates are seeded with emitters using the SEM, characterized using CL, and then transferred to a CW PL setup using 1 mW 349 nm, 10 mW 405 nm, and 30 mW 532 nm excitation focused to a diffraction limited spot. No emission is observed in the Uv-Vis range using available excitation energies and intensities within reasonable integration times. This fact, in conjunction with the activation/deactivation behavior observed under the electron beam, hints that the origin of this emission is associated with the charge state of an electron irradiated point defect, similar to SPE in other semiconductor systems Furthermore, we note that the Blue 435 nm emission is not observed using PL or CL in any samples of commercial h-BN powder. This implies that the new emission may be closely related to the unique synthetic origin of NIMS-BN. We consider possible mechanisms for the new emission. We immediately rule out the direct creation of defects via knock-on damage and electron-beam-induced heating. The electron energy threshold for knock-on damage in h-BN is in the range of 70-80 keV The change in temperature of the sample can be estimated We propose that the origin of this new emitter is electron-beam-induced defect chemistry, outlined in FIG. This change in charge state has two possible origins. One scenario is that incident beam and secondary electrons are captured by the defect complex, resulting in a negative charge state. Alternatively, the incident or secondary electrons ionize the defect, resulting in a positive charge state. Currently, neither possibility can be excluded suggesting future experiments and calculations. Previous studies have shown that a low energy electron beam can cause diffusion of impurities or vacancies, vacancy-impurity defect reconstruction, and charge state switching in other wide band gap semiconductors. While speculative, our proposed model is consistent with previous findings of electron beam induced luminescent diamond NV centers We propose that this emission has not been previously observed in h-BN for several reasons. Past studies of color centers in h-BN have typically not used NIMS-BN which has a unique synthetic origin, but rather commercially obtained h-BN. We surmise that the Ba-B-N solvent precursor used in the NIMS-BN synthesis could produce barium impurities in these samples, which would not be present in commercially obtained material synthesized using different growth precursors. Under the assumptions of our model, the new emission would not be observed in the absence of this unique impurity. PL studies of color centers in h-BN that do use NIMS-BN have used a 532 nm laser excitation to probe the sample and have focused on light emission in a high wavelength range. This excitation energy is too low to probe a state that emits at 435 nm. It is likely that the charge recombination dynamics in this regime are dominated by non-radiative transitions. It is possible the 435 nm emission is only present using CL because of the large number of electron-hole pairs created per incident electron, as well as the high intensity of the electron probe. A final, more speculative reason that this emission has not been observed to date is the possibility that the particular defect complex responsible for the emission needs the high energy density of the electron beam in order to drive interstitial-vacancy recombination. Our experimental results of the spectral and spatial character of this new emitter in h-BN show many features observed in quantum emitters, suggesting that this new color center is a potential source of single photons. The emission is highly localized, spectrally pure, exhibits a ZPL with phonon replicas, and can be modified with an electron beam, all features of SPEs in other solid state systems. The bunching behavior seen in the g We have identified a new color center unique to highquality hexagonal boron nitride using cathodoluminescence in the SEM. The emission is peaked at 435 nm and has spectral characteristics indicative of weak lattice coupling. The electron beam activates and deactivates emission from point defects in the crystal. We propose that this emission originates from a barium atom interstitial impurity forming a defect complex with a vacancy driven by the energy of the electron beam. The charge state of this defect is changed by the electron beam resulting in the emitters switching on and off.