The proximity coupled topological insulator / superconductor (TI/SC) bilayer system is a representative system to realize topological superconductivity. In order to better understand this unique state and design devices from the TI/SC bilayer, a comprehensive understanding of the microscopic properties of the bilayer is required. In this work, a microwave Meissner screening study, which exploits a high-precision microwave resonator technique, is conducted on the SmB6/YB6 thin film bilayers as an example TI/SC system. The study reveals spatially dependent electrodynamic screening response of the TI/SC system that is not accessible to other techniques, from which the corresponding microscopic properties of a TI/SC bilayer can be obtained. The TI thickness dependence of the effective penetration depth suggests the existence of a bulk insulating region in the TI layer. The spatially dependent electrodynamic screening model analysis provides an estimate for the characteristic lengths of the TI/SC bilayer: normal penetration depth, normal coherence length, and the thickness of the surface states. We also discuss implications of these characteristic lengths on the design of a vortex Majorana device such as the radius of the vortex core, the energy splitting due to intervortex tunneling, and the minimum thickness required for a device. Creating an experimental platform which hosts Majorana bound states (MBSs) in a condensed matter system is a goal that has received great attention recently. There have been a number of studies on the Bi-based TI (Bi 2 Se 3 , Bi 2 Te 3 , etc) /SC systems through point contact spectroscopy (PCS), In contrast, a microwave Meissner screening study investigates the high frequency electromagnetic field response. The microwave field propagates through an insulating layer and penetrates inside the superconducting system to the scale of the penetration depth, which is comparable to the thickness of typical thin-film bilayers (< 200 nm). Since the field screening response arises throughout the entire bilayer, it can reveal more details of the proximity-coupled bilayer The distinct capabilities of the Meissner screening study on the proximity-coupled system have been previously demonstrated on conventional normal (N) / superconductor (S) bilayer systems such as Cu (N) / Nb (S). In this article, we conduct a microwave Meissner screening study on SmB 6 /YB 6 : a strong candidate for topological Kondo insulator / superconductor bilayer systems. The existence of the insulating bulk in SmB 6 is currently under debate. SmB 6 /YB 6 bilayers were fabricated through a sequential sputtering process without breaking the vacuum to ensure a pristine interface between SmB 6 and YB 6 for ideal proximity coupling. The details of sample fabrication can be found in the Appendix Sec. A 1. The geometry of the bilayers is schematically shown in Fig. . (1) Here, G geo is the geometric factor of the resonator. To quantitatively analyze this unconventional behavior, an electromagnetic screening model for a proximitycoupled bilayer is introduced. from which one can obtain an effective penetration depth from the relation L(T ) = μ 0 λ ef f (T ). Here, H 0 is the amplitude of the applied microwave magnetic field at the top surface of the normal layer (see Fig. The spatial dependence of screening of the proximitycoupled normal layer is imposed by that of the induced order parameter ∆ N (Fig. are used, with ξ N (T 0 ) as a fitting parameter. Here, T 0 is an arbitrary reference temperature of interest. Note that the divergence of ξ N (T ) as T → 0 should be cut off below a saturation temperature due to the finite thickness of the normal layer, which is theoretically predicted, 15,54 and also experimentally observed from magnetization studies on other bilayer systems. A given set of these parameters λ S (0), λ N (0, 0), ξ N (T 0 ), and d N determines a model curve of ∆λ ef f (T ). Therefore, by fitting the experimental data to a model curve, one can determine the values of these characteristic lengths. This screening model has successfully described ∆λ(T ) behavior of various kinds of normal/superconductor bilayers. As seen in Fig. We now fix the value of λ S (0) of the YB 6 layer and focus on extracting the characteristic lengths of the induced superconductivity of the bilayers. Recent PCS measurements on a series of SmB 6 /YB 6 bilayers 41 help to reduce the number of fitting parameters: the point contact measurement on the bilayer with t SmB6 = 20 nm at 2 K showed perfect Andreev reflection, i.e., conductance doubling at the interface between a metal tip and the top surface of the SmB 6 , indicating that the entire 20 nm thick SmB 6 layer is proximity-coupled. Therefore, d N is fixed to 20 nm when fitting the ∆λ ef f (T ) data of the bilayer with t SmB6 = 20 nm. The fitting is conducted with the clean and the dirty limit temperature dependence of ξ N (T ) as shown in Fig. We now discuss the implications of these results and propose a microscopic picture for the proximity coupled bilayers. The important implication of the above results is the absence of Meissner screening in the bulk of proximity-coupled SmB 6 , which is consistent with the existence of an insulating bulk region inside the SmB 6 layer. If the entire SmB 6 layer is conducting without an insulating bulk inside, the proximity-coupled thickness d N should be equal to t SmB6 for thicker films too, considering the long normal coherence length of ≈ 52 nm. In that case, as t SmB6 increases, one would expect a continuous evolution of stronger ∆λ(T ) as seen in the Cu/Nb system (Fig. Besides confirming the existence of an insulating bulk in the SmB 6 layer, the extracted fitting parameters based on the electromagnetic model provide an estimate for the important characteristic lengths such as ξ N , λ N , and t TSS , as seen from Sec. IV. These estimates can be utilized in designing a TI/SC device such as a vortex MBS device. ξ N determines the radius of the vortex core r v . In the mixed state above the first critical field, λ N determines the maximum spacing R v between neighboring vortices in the vortex lattice. Therefore, information on ξ N and λ N helps to evaluate how secure the MBSs of a device will be against the intervortex tunneling. t TSS determines a minimum required thickness of the device. If the thickness of the device is too thin (t SmB6 ∼ t TSS ), the wavefunction overlap between the top and bottom surface states becomes significant, which opens a large hybridization gap up to the Fermi level. As a result, the surface states lose not only the electric conduction but also lose the spin-momentum locking property. In summary, a microwave Meissner screening study is introduced and utilized to investigate the spatially dependent electrodynamic screening response and the corresponding properties of the TI/SC bilayers. The advantages of the study in investigating the properties of a TI/SC system is demonstrated by the measurement and modeling of the temperature dependence of the screening with systematic TI-layer thickness variation. The study goes beyond the surface response to examine the screening properties of the entire TI layer, and uncovers the existence of an insulating bulk in the TI layer conclusively. Also, the study provides an estimate for characteristic lengths of the TI/SC bilayer, which sheds light on the design of a vortex MBS device providing guidelines for the radius of the vortex core, the energy level splitting due to the intervortex tunneling, and the thickness of the device. With its versatile capabilities, the microwave Meissner screening study can serve as a standard characterization method for a variety of TI/SC systems before using them as building blocks in topological quantum computation. In the main text (Fig. To confirm the validity of the estimated values of the characteristic lengths of the SmB 6 /YB 6 bilayers obtained in Sec. IV, one of the parameters ξ N is converted to the Fermi velocity v F , whose value has been reported from other measurements on SmB 6 . From the clean limit relation ξ N = hv F /2πk B T , one arrives at v F = 8.5×10 4 m/s. As seen from Table . II, this value is similar to the values obtained from the ARPES and DC transport measurements. However, the v F values from theory and STM are an order of magnitude smaller. Recent DFT calculation accompanied by STM measurements Here, 3 Ω is the geometric factor calculated numerically using the field solution inside the resonator for TE 011 mode derived by Hakki et al. The error bar in the effective penetration depth ∆λ ef f (T ) is determined by the error bar of determination of the resonance frequency f 0 (T ). The error bar of the f 0 is determined by a deviation of f 0 from the estimated value, which increases the root-mean-square error σ of the fit by 5%. The main source of the error bar of f 0 is the noise in S 21 (f ) data. If the signal to noise ratio of S 21 is large (small) which makes the S 21 (f ) curve well-(poorly-) defined, f 0 can have a narrower (wider) range of values while giving fits with similar values of σ. Once the error bar of f 0 is determined, with the standard error propagation from the relation between ∆λ ef f (T ) and f 0 (T ), the error bar in the ∆λ ef f (T ) data is estimated. The error bar for the estimated fit parameters (ξ N (T 0 ), λ N (0, 0), and d N ) obtained from fitting ∆λ ef f (T ) data are determined by a deviation from the estimated value which increases σ by 5%. Although explained in detail in Ref., With Eq.(D1) and the approximated spatial profile of the induced order parameter in the normal layer ∆ N (z, T ) = ∆ N (0, T )e -z/ξ(T ) and the normal penetration depth λ N (z, T ) = λ N (0, T )e +z/ξ N (T ) , one can obtain the spatial profile of the magnetic field in the normal and superconducting layer as follows: 