Since their experimental discovery in 1989, the electron-doped cuprate superconductors have presented both a major challenge and a major opportunity. The major challenge has been to determine whether these materials are fundamentally different from or essentially similar to their hole-doped counterparts; a major opportunity because answering this question would strongly constrain the possible explanations for what is the essential physics that leads to high temperature superconductivity in the cuprates, which is still not agreed upon. Here we argue that experimental results over the past 30 years on electron-doped cuprate materials have provided conclusive answers to these fundamental questions, by establishing that both in hole-and electron-doped cuprates, superconductivity originates in pairing of hole carriers in the same band. We discuss a model to describe this physics that is different from the generally accepted ones, and calculate physical observables that agree with experiment, in particular tunneling characteristics. We argue that our model is simpler, more natural and more compelling than other models. Unlike other models, ours was originally proposed before rather than after many key experiments were performed. Shortly after the discovery of high temperature superconductivity in cuprate superconductors in 1986 Then, on Electron-hole symmetry is to be expected if the undoped parent insulating compound is assumed to be described by a half-filled band governed by the Hubbard Hamiltonian Instead, immediately after the discovery of the electron-doped materials we pointed out Already very soon thereafter, EELS experiments suggested the presence of holes at the oxygen sites in electron-doped cuprates However several key questions remain unsettled. What is the nature of the electron and hole carriers in the electron-doped materials? Why, if there are hole carriers in electron-doped cuprates, aren't there electron carriers in hole-doped cuprates? Are the hole carriers in the electron-doped materials of the same nature as those in the hole-doped materials? Even if they are, is the pairing mechanism the same? We argue that definite answers to these questions whould go a long way towards elucidating the origin of superconductivity in both hole-and electron-doped cuprates. In this paper we elaborate on the simple answers to these questions that we proposed 30 years ago In a nutshell, our proposal was and is: hole carriers responsible for superconductivity in both hole-doped and electron-doped materials reside in a band resulting from overlapping oxygen pπ orbitals in the Cu-O 2 plane that point perpendicular to the Cu -O bonds, as shown in Fig. As discussed above, experiments indicate The simplest way to have two-band conduction for the system shown in Fig. There is a simple way to understand why doping with electrons can create holes in the O band, illustrated in Fig. Second, as discussed in ref. This process can (and will) happen in the electrondoped cuprate materials because of the absence of apical oxygens in their structure (T ′ structure), that increases the electrostatic potential at the Cu ++ site relative to the case of the hole-doped materials (T structure). Because the apical oxygen is relatively closer to the Cu atoms than to the the O atoms in the plane, the Cu hole energy level is relatively higher with respect to the O levels in the T ′ structure (right side in Fig. In all the other models that have been proposed to describe the electron-doped and hole-doped cuprate superconductors in recent years, the O pπ orbitals are not included. It is assumed that the O band is far below the Fermi energy and can be ignored. We discussed in Ref. (ii) Two-band t -J model Another possible model to give rise to two-band superconductivity with electrons and holes was suggested by T. Xiang and coworkers In these models it is suggested that some kind of translational symmetry breaking with wavevector (π, π) doubles the unit cell and this gives rise to both electron and hole carriers. Lin and Millis We argue that our proposed model (i) is simpler and more natural than models (ii) and (iii). In the following sections we discuss in more detail experimental and theoretical reasons in favor of our model versus the other models. Initially, Hall coefficient measurements on electrondoped cuprates yielded a negative Hall coeffcient Figure FIG. In the hole-doped material, R H is almost temperature independent and positive over the entire doping range where superconductivity occurs (up to x = 0.125). For doping approaching x = 0.125 the positive Hall coefficient becomes very small. For doping x = 0.15 and above (not shown), the Hall coefficient is negative and no superconductivity exists These results for the Hall coefficient of hole-doped cuprates were initially qualitatively interpreted Instead, we argue that the results for R H for holedoped cuprates shown in Fig. The behavior of the Hall coefficient for electron-doped cuprates as a function of temperature and doping shown in Fig. and will be negative if the mobility of the hole carriers (μ h ) is much smaller than that of the electron carriers (μ e ). Wang et al Further evidence for the existence of two-band conduction in the regime where electron-doped cuprates superconduct comes from the sign and magnitude of the magnetoresistance. Already in 1994 Jiang et al pointed out Over the years Greene and coworkers have performed extensive measurements In 2007, Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations in underdoped hole-doped cuprates provided clear evidence for the existence of closed small Fermi surface pockets in those materials Within our model, in hole-doped cuprates holes are doped into the Opπ band that is initially full, so we would expect small hole orbits around the (π, π) point in the Brillouin zone, consistent with the Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations observed. It is not clear how these observations can be consistent with doping a half-filled Hubbard band with holes, since according to what we reviewed in the previous section the Hall coefficient at low temperatures in that model reflects the bare band structure. In electron-doped cuprates, Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations first detected in 2009 in N d 2-x Ce x CuO 4 Instead, within our model these observations are simply explained by the existence of a small number of hole carriers in the Opπ band giving rise to the low frequency oscillations, and electrons doped into the Cu -Opσ band giving rise to a large Fermi surface corresponding to a more than half-filled band and corresponding high frequency Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations. Recent photoemission investigations on electron-doped cuprates were reviewed by Horio and Fujimori It is consistent with our picture that electron doping induces hole carriers in the plane, hence by charge conservation this generates extra electron carriers in addition to the ones doped. Horio and Fujimori (HF) emphasize the fact that annealing in a reducing atmosphere plays an essential role in giving rise to superconductivity, and point out that superconductivity can arise even in the absence of Ce doping. Contrary to earlier findings, they suggest that reduction removes oxygen from the rare-earth layers rather than from impurity oxygens at the apical sites. This is in agreement with our prediction The photoemission results reviewed by HF show a Fermi surface developing around k ∼ (π, 0). Upon further doping it becomes a large hole Fermi surface centered around (π, π). Similar results are found in photoemission measurements by Song et al Tunneling measurements have often been at odds with photoemission experiments; both types of experiments have unknown uncertainties because of the difficulties with surface preparation, etc. as discussed in Ref. Here we wish to focus on tunneling asymmetry, i.e. the difference in coherence peak heights, depending on whether the sample is negatively or positively biased with respect to the tip. For hole-doped cuprates, a large number of studies have found that tunneling spectra are asymmetric, with asymmetry of universal sign Tunneling spectra of Jubileo and coworkers In the theory of hole superconductivity for a single band, the asymmetry predicted by this model is clear We consider a tight binding model for the orbitals shown in Fig. The bands of interest for us are bands 4 and 5. Figure Instead, in our picture band 4 is the more important one. As seen in Fig. There have been various calculations performed using these ideas that take the Mott-Hubbard gap into account [ 14 The second problem is that the antibonding pπ band (band 4 in Fig. ), which comes to about 2 eV below the Fermi level at the point, is assumed to be rigid. Here we argue that this assumption is incorrect and that in reality the energy of holes doped into this band is raised by several eV by orbital relaxation and that as a result doped holes will go into this band rather than into the Cu-O pσ band. In other words, the energetics of orbital relaxation, not reflected in the band structure shown in This local effect is not captured by band structure calculations. Band 4 contains the hole carriers that we believe are responsible for superconductivity both in hole-doped and electron-doped cuprates. In the hole-doped cuprates, we argue that when holes are added to the undoped system they go into this band rather than into band 5. For electron-doped cuprates, we argue that adding electrons creates electron carriers in band 5 and through the process depicted in Fig. We consider a reduced Hamiltonian to describe transport and superconductivity in those 2 bands. Following Suhl et al As discussed in Ref. The intraband potentials are assumed to have identical form; we adopt the form from Ref. where U i corresponds to the on-site repulsion, K i the modulated hopping, and W i the nearest-neighbor repulsion (i = 1, 2 correspond to a, d in Eq. ( as found previously Figure The fact that the T c found in experiments (Fig. Fig. In this paper we have argued that a simple two-band model resulting from the orbitals shown in Fig. In contrast, all other theoretical explanations of experimental observations in electron-doped cuprates assume that the only electrons involved are from Cu d x 2 -y 2 orbitals hybridized with O pσ orbitals. To explain how clear experimental signatures of two-band physics arise from such a single band necessitates invoking electronic correlations, Fermi surface reconstruction and hidden exotic orders, which in our view are complicated and contrived explanations not supported by experimental observations. In addition to the experiments already discussed, important information about electron-doped cuprates has been recently inferred from the behaviour of the superfluid density. The upward curvature of superfluid density versus temperature in electron-doped cuprates has been argued to be clear evidence for the presence of two types of superfluid carriers The physics uncovered by the analysis of Li et al. is in agreement with what the model of hole superconductivity predicts, that was discussed in Sect. VII and in our earlier work on hole superconductivity in two-band models Li et al. conclude from their analysis There has been conflicting experimental evidence on the question of the symmetry of the order parameter in electron-doped cuprates In summary, our model provides a simple, natural, elegant, unified and compelling explanation for a wide variety of experimental results gathered through intensive experimental research and analysis thereof over three decades 