Low-energy incommensurate (IC) magnetic fluctuations in Sr2RuO4 are investigated by the high-resolution inelastic neutron scattering measurements and random phase approximation (RPA) calculations. Analysis of the L dependences of the low-energy IC magnetic fluctuations enables us to observe the spin resonance at Qres = (0.3, 0.3, 0.5) and ћωres = 0.56 meV which corresponds well to the superconducting gap 2Δ = 0.56 meV estimated by the tunneling spectroscopy. The spin resonance shows the L modulated intensity with maximum at around L = 0.5. The L modulated intensity of the spin resonance and our RPA calculations demonstrate that the superconducting gaps regarding the quasi-one-dimensional α and β sheets at the Fermi surfaces have the horizontal line nodes. The present results can give a strong constraint on the pairing symmetry of Sr2RuO4, and possible superconducting order parameters are discussed. Strontium ruthenate Sr2RuO4 with Tc = 1.5 K 1 has attracted a great deal of interest as the prime candidate for a chiral p-wave superconductor So far, various experimental techniques reported that the superconducting gaps of Sr2RuO4 have line nodes technique can directly measure imaginary part of generalized spin susceptibility (χ ′′ ) as a function of momentum (Q) and energy (ћω) transfers, yielding abundant information of Fermi surface topology. In addition, Q dependence of the spin resonance as a consequence of the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) coherence factor can provide the information on the symmetry of superconducting gaps. In Sr2RuO4, the most pronounced magnetic signal in the normal state is nearly two-dimensional incommensurate (IC) magnetic fluctuations at QIC = (0.3, 0.3, L) owing to the Fermi surface nesting between (or within) the quasi-one-dimensional α and β sheets consisted of the dzx and dyz orbitals of Ru Based on the horizontal line nodes model, the spin resonance is supposed to emerge at Q = (0.3, 0.3, L) with finite L but not at (0.3, 0.3, 0) because the sign of the superconducting gap changes along kz Overall features of high-energy (ћω ≫ 2Δ) IC magnetic fluctuations with L = 0.5 in Sr2RuO4 are summarized in Fig. where χ ′ is the static susceptibility and Γ the relaxation rate [or the peak position of χ ′′ (ħω)], yielding Γ = 6.3(2) meV [6.5( In the following, we concentrate on the low-energy (ћω ≃ 2Δ) IC magnetic fluctuations of Sr2RuO4. As described below, in the superconducting state, a spin resonance appears at Qres = (0.3, 0.3, 0.5) and ћωres = 2Δ (white arrow in Fig. The IC peak at ћω = 0.56 meV along Q = (H, H, 0.5) is enhanced below Tc (solid area in Fig. L dependence of the low-energy IC magnetic fluctuations provides us the compelling evidence to clarify the line nodes at the superconducting gaps To theoretically elucidate the origin of the L modulated intensity of the spin resonance in Sr2RuO4, RPA calculations assuming the horizontal line nodes at the superconducting gaps [Eq. ( Because of the L analysis of the low-energy IC magnetic fluctuations below and above Tc, we succeeded in observing the spin resonance at Qres = (0.3, 0.3, 0.5) and ћωres = 2Δ in Sr2RuO4. This result indicates that the quasi-one-dimensional α and β sheets are active bands for the bulk superconductivity. Our RPA calculations reveal that the observed L modulated intensity of the spin resonance originates from the horizonal line nodes at the superconducting gaps, in agreement with the field-angle-dependent specific heat capacity measurements We now discuss the pairing symmetry of Sr2RuO4. Among the pairing symmetry with the horizontal line nodes proposed by the resent uniaxial pressure and NMR works The single component order parameter is also in line with the absence of a split transition in the presence of uniaxial strain and Tc cusp in the limit of zero strain In summary, we investigated the low-energy IC magnetic fluctuations in Sr2RuO4 below and above Tc by analyzing the L dependence. Below Tc, the spin resonance appears at Qres = (0.3, 0.3, 0.5) and ћωres = 0.56 meV. The spin resonance shows the L modulated intensity with maximum at L ~ 0.5. The L modulated intensity of the spin resonance and our RPA calculations indicate that the superconducting gaps regarding the α and β sheets have horizontal line nodes. Three single crystals of Sr2RuO4 with a total mass of ~10 g were prepared by the floatingzone method Time-of-flight neutron scattering measurements at 0.3 and 1.8 K were performed using the disk chopper spectrometer AMATERAS installed at Japan Proton Accelerator Research Complex To construct a realistic model, we perform density functional theory (DFT) calculations using the Wien2k package χŝ(q, ω) = χ0(q, ω)[I S ̂χ0(q, ω)] -1 (3) χ0(q, ω) χ0 ,G (q, ω) + χ0 ,F (q, ω) 