The possibility to keep wireless communication channels static is investigated. When an antenna is moved away from its position, this will in general cause the channel to change. Considerations suggest that wireless communication channels can be kept static by performing a counter-movement of the antenna to keep it in its original position relative to outside observers. Feasibility is shown for a platform moving in straight motion over a finite distance. The channel is kept static by countering the platform's movement with physical movement of the antenna in the opposite direction. The experiment is conducted with a quarter-wavelength monopole antenna in the gigahertz range. S TATIC communication channels are a prerequisite for modern wireless transmission schemes, which rely on the channel being static during the time it takes for a transmission, or for the time period between channel estimation and transmission. However, in many applications antennas are mounted on moving platforms. Prominent examples are user equipments in mobile communications and automotive antennas in vehicular communications. Even if the environment is static otherwise, platform movement generally changes the amplitude, phase and frequency of the transmitted and/or received electromagnetic waves. In turn, this changes the communication channel and it becomes time-variant, even if the initial channel without the platform's movement would not be time-variant. Modern communication schemes that use the channels between multiple antennas suffer severely from changing channels Attempts to keep communication channels static have been undertaken previously. Several concepts aim to keep wireless channels constant between estimation and transmission. Examples are the Predictor Antenna Considerations in this work suggest that wireless communication channels can be kept static by performing a countermovement of the antenna. The channel static antenna concept is evaluated experimentally for finite linear motion. Measurements are performed in an anechoic chamber and in an office environment. The following considerations suggest that communication channels can be kept static by performing a counter-movement of the antenna on the platform. Consider the following gedankenexperiment sketched in Fig. The gedankenexperiment is now evolved by seemingly adding complexity in Fig. An antenna inside an imaginary volume in infinite empty space might be of interest in space applications. In most other applications it is desired to mount the antenna on a moving platform. The gedankenexperiment is therefore modified towards applications. Consider an antenna that is mounted on a perfect conducting sheet of infinite size (e.g. in x-y Bottom: The channel stays static because nothing has changed; except that an imaginary volume was moved. Fig. plane, see Fig. Although still theoretical, this consideration leads towards more practical systems. The space underneath the sheet is entirely irrelevant to the channel, because electromagnetic waves can not penetrate it. From a design viewpoint, the space below the sheet can house arbitrary components. Antennas mounted on large ground planes with finite conductivity are in widespread commercial use. Examples are monopole antennas mounted on vehicle roofs and inverted-F antennas mounted on mobile phones. A finite size of the moving platform limits the distance x y z Fig. As exemplary calculations, consider antennas mounted on a car and a cellular phone. Assuming the length of a typical car as 4 m [7] and considering a speed limit of 150 km/h or 42 m/s, it would be then possible to keep channels constant for 95 ms. Assuming only 1 cm for antenna movement on a smart phone at a speed of 20 km/h, it would be possible to keep channels constant for 1.6 ms. These times are long e.g. when compared to the 0.5 ms slot duration of LTE. The gedankenexperiment is altered for the first experimental evaluation. Without loss of generality, the platform movement is limited to a straight line. The infinitely long line is further replaced by a platform of finite length. The movement of this platform is limited to finite lengths that are shorter than the platform, such that the antenna can counter the platform's movement by physically moving into the opposite direction (without falling off the platform). The experiment is conducted on the Vienna MIMO Testbed The antenna is built as a quarter-wavelength monopole antenna. The perfect conductive ground plane of infinite size is approximated by an aluminum sheet with a diameter of 180 mm (≈ 1.5 λ). The antenna is elevated by a 26 cm long column such that a coaxial cable can be connected to the subminiature version-A (SMA) connector on the bottom. A second quarter-wavelength monopole antenna is placed in the same room at a distance of ≈ 2 m. Both antennas are connected to a vector network analyzer (VNA) with coaxial cables. Narrowband channel measurements are performed in the industrial, scientific and medical (ISM) band at 2.45 GHz. The measurements are automated by controlling the platform movement, the antenna movement and the VNA with a laptop. The platform is moved in steps, because the VNA measurements take some time. In a step the platform is moved 0.02 λ, then the setup waits for 0.2 s to wear off vibrations from acceleration/deceleration, then the VNA measurement is performed. Therefore, Doppler shift The anechoic chamber is a simple environment in terms of wireless channels. Multi-path propagation is heavily attenuated and as a result there are no delayed taps, no angle-of-arrival, and no small-scale fading. Amplitude is expected to vary little over antenna position. Three measurements are performed. First, the platform is moved over a distance of 6 λ (≈ 73 cm). The antenna is fixed to the platform and moves with it. Second, the platform is moved over 6 λ and the antenna counters the platform's movement by performing a counter-movement in the opposite direction. Third, both the antenna and the platform remain still in the initial position. The third measurement acts as a reference to quantify the channel changes caused by the environment, which are not compensated in the presented work. Fig. Fig. The experiment is repeated in a laboratory/office environment. This environment contains a large number of different materials that are arranged in complex shapes (see Fig. Again, three measurements are performed. First, the antenna is fixed to the platform and moves with it. Second, the antenna is mounted to the platform and it counters the platform's movement with a counter-movement in the opposite direction. Third, both the antenna and the platform remain still to quantify environmental influences. Fig. The above considerations suggest that electromagnetic waves between a transmitter and a receiver moving relative to each other can be kept static in amplitude, phase and frequency with proper antenna design. This suggests that Doppler Shift The channel static antenna concept is proven to be feasible. Experimental results are presented and discussed for an anechoic environment and an office environment. The channels in the investigated scenarios are intrinsically static. Even in the office, wave propagation is complex, but the channel remains largely static without the presence of moving scatterers (e.g. people). Changes to these channels are caused by the antenna's own movement. It is state-of-the-art to accept this. The presented measurements proof that wireless communication channels can be kept static by compensating the movement of the platform that they are mounted on. State-of-the-art transmission schemes accept that communication channels change. When the channel gets worse, then the received amplitude drops below the initial estimate and the signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) decreases. When the channel gets better, then the potential is wasted. Several methods have been developed to combat these errors. Their applications might need to be reevaluated and adjusted. Modern transmission schemes that utilize channel information between several antennas and users suffer severely from movement Channel static antennas allow a separation of wireless communication channels by their cause, i.e. changes that are caused by platform movement and channel changes that are caused by the environment, e.g. for vehicular channels I am confident that antennas can be generally used to keep wireless communication channels static, and not only as a compensation for platform movement. Patent pending 