Quantum coherent coupling between a zone-center phonon and two acoustic phonons was observed in two GaAs/AlAs superlattices (8 nm/8 nm and 5.4 nm/5.4 nm) at ambient temperature. Using degenerate coherent phonon spectroscopy, a multi-cycle oscillation feature appears in the time-resolved phonon amplitudes of both samples, as a result of the coherent energy exchange between a driving phonon mode near first Brillouin zone center and two target acoustic phonon modes. This feature resembles the photon resonant parametric down/upconversion processes, as well as the reversible coherent energy exchange between the optical field and a mechanical oscillator, suggesting quantum coherent coupling between the driving and target phonon modes. In the 8 nm/8 nm superlattice, the coupling strength increases nonlinearly at high pump fluences, which may eventually reach an extreme state where all three phonon modes share the same coherent state, as predicted by Orbach in the 1960's. Quantum computing, utilizing quantum mechanical phenomena without classical counterpart, can enable enormous computational tasks not possible with traditional computers. The coherent coupling among quantum states forms the basis of quantum computing. When the energy exchange rate between two quantum states exceeds their decay rates to the background, this interaction is called quantum coherent coupling (QCC). So far, QCC has been observed in many different quantum systems, including photon-mechanical vibration In 1966, Orbach predicted a phonon QCC regime where the driving phonon mode selects a particular channel to release its energy The excitation energy would flow back and forth coherently between the driving and target modes. This process was termed "phonon breakdown" but has not yet been observed experimentally. Recently, Teitelbaum et al. Energy is coupled from an optical mode to a mechanical mode (forward process) and vice versa (backward process). In the case of bismuth In superlattice (SL) structures, the phonon dispersions are folded into a smaller first Brillouin zone, and more phonon modes fall into the optically accessible region (0 to 2kprobe, the wave vector of probe laser). With coherent phonon spectroscopy (CPS), phonon modes up to 1.25 THz have been excited coherently in superlattices, such as GaAs/AlAs As shown in Fig. Degenerate pump-probe experiments were performed in a non-collinear reflection geometry at room temperature with a mode-locked Ti: Sapphire femtosecond laser (Tsunami, Spectra Physics). Both pump and probe pulses have an 800 nm central wavelength, ~258 fs pulse width (FWHM) incoming on the sample surface and a 76 MHz repetition rate. At this wavelength the pump photon energy (1.55 eV) lies above the bandgap of 8 nm GaAs (1.49 eV from photoluminescence spectra, Fig. The absorption depth for GaAs at 800 nm is 743.2 nm ⁄ intensity) of 13.38 m and 6.69 m respectively. For a closer look at this phenomenon, the time dependent FFT amplitudes of SL8/8 at 305 GHz are plotted for all the fluences in Fig. A natural question is: what is the physical origin of the phenomenon reported here? A similar collapse and revival feature of A1g phonon amplitude was observed in a single crystalline bismuth in 2004 No leaking modes exist in our experiments because we do not have thick cap layers in our sample. Furthermore, the phenomena observed in Ref. Rabi-oscillation is a quantum beats feature originating from a strong coupling effect in a twolevel quantum system, where the system can cyclically absorb and re-emit photons. Experimentally, Rabi-oscillations display an amplitude proportional to sin 2 ( 1 2 Ωt) , corresponding to the probability of being in either of the two states In the field of nonlinear optics, the resonant parametric down/up-conversion processes exchange energy between one high-energy photon and a pair of low-energy photons Very similar phenomena has been observed in the case of QCC between a mechanical oscillator and an optical cavity mode, e.g. multi-cycle oscillations between coherent optical and mechanical excitations We have used a coupled harmonic oscillator model to simulate the coupling process between ω 0 and ω 1 (Section VII in supplemental material): where f(t) is the laser pulse field, a Gaussian pulse with FWHM of 258 fs; Q is the normal mode coordinate, and γ 1 and γ 0 are the phenomenological damping constant for ω 1 and ω 0 respectively. To generate a feature such as is observed in Fig. As a result, the population of driving phonons generated in SL8/8 should be larger than that of SL5.4/5.4, and can reach the critical threshold for QCC at a lower pump fluence. Fig. In conclusion, we have used coherent phonon spectroscopy to study power-dependent coherent phonon dynamics in a GaAs/AlAs 8 nm/8 nm and a GaAs/AlAs 5.4 nm/5.4 nm superlattice structures. The evolution of the FFT amplitude of the zone-center modes exhibited a collapse and revival signature. We suggest this is representative of quantum coherent coupling, QCC, between zone center phonon mode ω 1 and two bulk acoustic phonon modes (2ω 0 = ω 1 ) along the in-plane direction. This concept suggests an exciting opportunity to use high quality SL structures to manipulate coherent phonon propagation in the nonlinear region. This would result in direct quantum control of large wave vector acoustic phonons that cannot be directly excited because of wave vector matching. Extrapolation of experimental data suggests that one can reach an extreme QCC state where all three phonons are in the same coherent state and are indistinguishable. Our current experimental system cannot reach this region because of sample damage. Nevertheless, it is possible to apply electrical bias 