Reducing a set of diverse bulk-optic-based optical components to a single ultrathin and compact element that enables the same complex functionality has become an emerging research area, propelling further integration and miniaturization in photonics. In this work, we establish a versatile metasurface platform based on gap-surface plasmon meta-atoms enabling efficient linear-polarization conversion along with the complete phase control over reflected fields. Capitalizing on the meta-atom design, multifunctional metamirrors involving linear-polarization conversion and focusing are experimentally demonstrated to generate various kinds of focused beams with distinct phase distributions and wavefronts (including orthogonally-polarized vortexbeam and vector-beam), reproducing thereby the combined functionalities of conventional halfwave plates, lenses, and even spatial light modulators. The proof-of-concept fabricated metamirrors exhibit excellent capability of linear-polarization conversion (> 75% on average) and focusing (absolute average efficiency > 22%) within the wavelength range of 800-950 nm under linearly-polarized excitation. The multifunctional metamirrors design developed in this study opens new avenues in the advanced research and applications targeting photonics integration of diversified functionalities. Optical metasurfaces, planar artificial materials with subwavelength-scale thickness and unprecedented control over optical fields, have attracted progressively increasing attention and provided promising solutions for cost-effective and high-performance optics in recent years Unlike conventional refractive optics that mold the flow of light through gradually accumulated phase variations during light propagation, metasurfaces can directly modify the boundary conditions for impinging optical waves by arranging meta-atoms with tailored optical response in a periodic or aperiodic manner. In this regard, metasurface-based optical elements have the advantages of lightweight, compactness, planar profiles and relative ease of fabrication, while meeting requirements for delivering increased performance and functionality, therefore offering great potential in the integration and miniaturization of conventional bulky optical components. The recent development of metasurfaces has led to fascinating novel physics and numerous promising ultra-compact devices, such as beam-steering In addition to the aforementioned metasurfaces designed for specific functionalities, multifunctional metasurfaces that efficiently integrate multiple diversified functionalities into single compact devices have become an emerging research area In this paper, we propose a reflective metasurface platform based on gap-surface plasmon (GSP) meta-atoms, enabling efficient linear-polarization conversion along with the complete phase control over reflected fields. Multifunctional metamirrors based on GSP meta-atoms for simultaneous linear-polarization conversion and focusing are experimentally demonstrated, generating focused beams with distinct phase distributions and wavefronts in the near-infrared range, mimicking thereby the combined functionalities of conventional half-wave plates, lenses and even spatial light modulators. The fabricated metamirrors exhibit excellent capability of linear-polarization conversion (> 75% on average) and focusing (absolute average efficiency > 22%) within the wavelength range of 800-950 nm under linearly-polarized excitation. In addition, this approach is further extended to realize multifocal metamirrors with distinctly engineered wavefronts focused at different locations in the same focal plane. The overarching design principle is based on the use of meta-atoms ensuring efficient linear polarization rotation akin to half-wave plates and taking into account the fact that the phase of the cross-polarized reflected field can be changed by π radian simply by rotating the corresponding meta-atom over 90. Therefore, designing two meta-atoms that produce the crosspolarized reflected fields with the phases cr1 and cr2 being different by π/2 (elements 1 and 2 in Fig. The corresponding meta-atoms represent gold (Au) nanoantennas tilted by 45° with respect to the x-axis, separated by a silicon dioxide (SiO2) spacer layer from a continuous Au film. This configuration supports the GSP resonance formed by the near-field interaction between two metallic layers The facile ability and freedom provided by the proposed meta-atoms to achieve efficient linear-polarization conversion along with the complete phase control over reflected fields allows us to implement multifunctional metamirrors. To validate the excellent performance and versatility of such platform, here we experimentally realized, for the first time, reflective multifunctional metamirrors enabling simultaneous linear-polarization conversion and focusing at the near-infrared wavelength range, which mimics the combined functionalities of bulky halfwave plates, lenses and even spatial light modulators. Employing the proposed platform, a broadband metamirror for orthogonal linear-polarization conversion and focusing (PCFM) is first designed and demonstrated. Fig. In Fig. Besides the good focusing characteristics, this PCFM features excellent capability of orthogonal linear-polarization conversion. At the design wavelength of λ = 850 nm, the measured PCR is found to be ~ 86%. Remarkably, the good linear-polarization conversion performance is sustained over the wide spectral range of 800-950 nm, indicating the broadband response with good focusing characteristics and highly-efficient orthogonal linear-polarization conversion (Fig. Though the PCFM shows poor ability to convert the linear-polarization at λ = 775 nm, the focusing quality remains high and the cross-polarized light still assembles a tiny focal spot (Supplementary Fig. To further examine the operating performance of designed PCFM, the absolute focusing efficiency, defined as the ratio of the light intensity from the focal spot to the incident intensity, is measured and calculated at the investigated wavelength spectrum, as shown in Fig. Optical vortex-beam with phase singularity was first discovered in the 1990s, which possesses a helical phase front so that the Poynting vector within the beam is twisted with respect to the principal axis of light propagation Thus OAM beams are being considered as potential candidates for encoding information in quantum systems, which can greatly increase the information capacity Since the focused vortex-beam is solely assembled by the converted cross-polarized light, PCR can quantitatively gauge the conversion efficiency of the metamirror, which is defined as the ratio of the beam carrying OAM in cross-polarization to the overall reflected power Predictably, the vortex-beam is predominantly focused in cross-polarization with the averaged efficiency exceeding 27%, exhibiting at least 10-fold enhancement compared with that in Vshaped antenans The polarization properties of the demonstrated metamirrors can be designed on demand, beyond the aforementioned homogeneous polarization distribution after orthogonal linear-polarization conversion. In particular, vector-beams, characterized by a spatially varied distribution of polarization vector, have opened new degrees of freedom for numerous unique functionalities and potential applications in nanophotonics Fig. Additionally, the reflected light can be switched between RP and AP beams by changing the polarization state of the incident light between x-polarized and y-polarized. Fig. Subsequently, the VBFM sample was measured using the same setup in Supplementary Fig. Regarding the VBFM, the conversion efficiency CE is critical, defined as the ratio of the pure vector-beam to the reflected power in total. The evaluated CE is found to be sufficiently high with the averaging values of ~ 78% and ~ 75% in the wavelength region of 800-950 nm and possesses a drop at λ = 775 nm for both the RP and AP beams under x-and y-polarized excitation, respectively, which is in good agreement with the PCR values of PCFM and PCVFM. Since the generated vector-beam is non-ideal, one may notice the slight fluctuations in the intensity distributions of reflected light through the linear analyzer (Fig. In this work, we have established a versatile approach to realize efficient linear-polarization conversion along with the complete phase control over reflected fields. By spatially positioning and rotating the meta-atoms, multifunctional metamirrors enabling simultaneous linearpolarization conversion and focusing have been demonstrated to generate various kinds of focused beams with distinct phase distribution and wavefronts, including orthogonally-polarized beam, orthogonally-polarized vortex-beam, and vector-beam, mimicking thereby the combined functionalities of conventional half-wave plates, lenses, and even spatial light modulators. The proof-of-concept fabricated PCFM and PCVFM samples feature excellent capability of orthogonal linear-polarization conversion and focusing within the wavelength range of 800-950 nm with an averaged polarization conversion ratio of ~ 80% and absolute focusing efficiency exceeding 22% under normal illumination with the x-polarized beam. Meanwhile, broadband (800-950 nm) focused vector-beam has been experimentally demonstrated with the VBFM sample, where the averaged conversion efficiency CE are found to be ~ 78% and ~ 75%, and the averaged absolute efficiencies reach as high as ~ 35% and ~ 34% for the RP and AP beams under x-and y-excitation, respectively. Owing to the compactness, integration compatibility, and remarkable multifunctional performance, our flat metamirrors approaches pave an innovative avenue to integrate multiple diversified functionalities into a single compact device to efficiently minimize the plasmonic and photonics circuits and systems. 