Abstract-Can we build small neuromorphic chips capable of training deep networks with billions of parameters? This challenge requires hardware neurons and synapses with nanometric dimensions, which can be individually tuned, and densely connected. While nanosynaptic devices have been pursued actively in recent years, much less has been done on nanoscale artificial neurons. In this paper, we show that spintronic nano-oscillators are promising to implement analog hardware neurons that can be densely interconnected through electromagnetic signals. We show how spintronic oscillators maps the requirements of artificial neurons. We then show experimentally how an ensemble of four coupled oscillators can learn to classify all twelve American vowels, realizing the most complicated tasks performed by nanoscale neurons. Spintronic nano-oscillators are magnetic tunnel junctions, whose CMOS-compatible technology is essentially identical to magnetic memory cells that can be fabricated by billions on a chip The key feature of spin-torque nano-oscillators that makes them interesting as neurons is their non-linear response. As can be observed in Fig. The non-linear response of spin-torque nano-oscillators combined with their stability and long life time enables neuromorphic computing. This has been experimentally demonstrated recently by our team and collaborators Spin-torque nano-oscillators feature an oustanding tunability We have recently given a proof of concept of microwave signal classification through synchronization We have recently shown that this neural network of four spin-torque nano-oscillators could be trained to classify seven American vowels (https://youtu.be/IHYnh0oJgOA). The frequencies characteristics of the vowels are accelerated and combined to generate two input signals in the microwave domain. The experimental recognition rate after training is 89% on the test data (84% after cross validation). This performance is comparable and even slightly better than that of a multilayer perceptron trained on the same task with a similar number of parameters. Indeed, in our scheme the coupled oscillators cooperate to decide which vowel is recognized. This is not the case in perceptrons where intra-layer neurons are not connected. This result demonstrates that spin-torque nanooscillators dynamical properties can be finely tuned to learn. It also shows that their coupling and synchronization properties can be harnessed to classify. To go further, we show here that our scheme can be extended to classify all twelve American vowels. For this we use a larger number of the twenty experimentally observed synchronization states and combine them to recognize a vowel. The currents injected in the oscillators, their frequency and the recognition rate during training are plotted in Fig. We have shown that spin-torque nano-oscillators can nonlinearly transform inputs and broadcast the result of their computation. We have shown that they can also learn to classify the microwave signals they receive. Two main challenges remain to build large scale deep neural networks with these devices: fabricating synapses that can tune the inter-neuron microwave communication, and densely interconnecting neurons through these synapses. In future work, we will investigate how the multifunctionality of spintronic building blocks 