Passivated, hole-selective contacts play important role in reducing surface recombination by lowering the concentration of electrons in the rear side of a solar cell. However, parasitic optical losses in these contacts can still limit the performance of the cell. In this work, the long wavelength optical losses of silicon solar cells featuring hole-selective molybdenum oxide (MoOx) rear contacts are investigated using optical simulations. The potential of these selective contacts for possible enhancement of photogenerated current density was also investigated for their use with nanostructured dielectric layers. Silicon is still the dominant material in the market for photovoltaic (PV) energy conversion. Although the levelized cost of electricity of PV systems has dropped to incredibly low levels in recent years, there is still room for further improvements in terms of the efficiency, manufacturing cost, and durability of PV cells and modules. To maximize cell efficiency, the optical losses, recombination losses, and resistive losses In traditional p-type cell architectures (e.g., Al-BSF, PERC), Shockley-Read-Hall recombination at the metal/semiconductor interfaces of the electrical contacts can be a dominant loss mechanism that lowers the potential efficiency of these cells. Passivated, carrier-selective contacts can help reduce this contact recombination loss, and considerable effort is being put into the development of both electron and hole-selective contacts using various materials, including doped amorphous silicon Molybdenum oxide (MoOx) is one such material that acts as a hole-selective contact when deposited on silicon. The high work function of MoOx induces band bending in the silicon that can drastically lower the concentration of electrons at the silicon surface. However, the magnitude of this band bending is dependent on the type of passivation material (if any) used between the silicon and the MoOx, the thickness of the MoOx film, the deposition process used, the metal put in direct contact with MoOx, and any post-deposition annealing. This is due, in large part, to relationship between the work function of MoOx and the concentration of oxygen vacancies present in the films. In this work, the optical losses of silicon solar cells featuring hole-selective molybdenum oxide as both a full area rear contact and local rear contacts are investigated. Here, simulations of the photogenerated current (JG) are performed for monocrystalline p-type cells featuring a rear MoOx contact with different contact metals and contact fractions. In addition to 1D thin film stacks, 2D grating structures are considered to evaluate any potential current gains due to scattering and diffraction. Losses in JG are broken down to identify the amount of parasitic optical absorption in individual layers. These results are compared to the losses for Al-BSF and PERC cells. An illustration of the cell architectures considered in this work is shown in Figure In this work, two simulation tools are used. (1) SunSolve used to perform ray tracing of the optics of the solar cell and all of the thin films present within the device thus quantify JG, front and escape reflectance loss and parasitic optical absorption. (2) Lumerical is used to perform finite difference time domain (FDTD) simulations to evaluate potential improvements in light trapping if nanostructures dielectric layers are used. This tool accounts for reflectance, scattering (if any), absorption, and transmission within the substrate itself, and the results of Lumerical are fed back into SunSolve to calculate the potential gains in JG. For the ray tracing simulations carried out with SunSolve, the same front surface was considered with a random upright pyramids and a 75 nm SiNx ARC. A wafer thickness of 180 μm was also assumed in each case. For each simulation, the maximum achievable JG is determined based on the different rear surface configurations. These configurations include: an Al-BSF rear surface with an Al-Si eutectic and p + BSF; a dielectrically passivated rear surfaces featuring 20 nm of aluminum oxide (Al2O3) followed by a 100 nm SiNx film. Finally, a Lambertian scattering factor was changed from zero (i.e., purely specular) to one (i.e., purely Lambertian). This factor strongly influences escape reflectance and therefore the overall JG. FDTD simulations were carried out for a full area holeselective rear contact and three different local hole-selective rear contact structures demonstrated in Figure The estimated JG values calculated using SunSolve are shown in Figure As expected, the dielectric passivated Al2O3/SiNx surface has the maximum expected JG due to unity internal reflectance The three different local contact structures along with full area contact structure shown in Figure There are two pathways to the absorption loss in the rear side. The first is the partial propagation of the normal component of the incident light (especially when the SiO2 and MoOX films are thin) and eventually getting absorbed in the metal. The second one comes from the excitation of the surface plasmon polariton (SPP) due to the presence of any sharp corner. Both the loss mechanisms are present in the other three contact structures. The full area contact, where the second mechanism is absent therefore shows higher reflectance than the rectangular and cylindrical grating structure as illustrated in Figure The above explanations becomes clearer when we take a close look into the parasitic absorption loss profile illustrated in Figure The full area contact suffers from significant parasitic absorption, especially in the Ni layer for both normal and 41.4° incidence. Red means more parasitic optical loss and blue means less in the figure. The angled incidence shows less loss through propagation since the normal component of the propagation vector is smaller for the angled incidence. As depicted in Figure When Figure The reason lies in the fact that the absorption profiles and the characteristics depicted in Figure Overall, Figure Optical simulations have been carried out to evaluate ways of maximizing the photogenerated current of hole-selective rear contacts. Parasitic optical absorption in the Ni interlayer used is the dominant optical loss mechanism in these structures, similar to the case of Al-BSF cells that features similar absorption in the Al-Si eutectic. As with Al-BSF cells, the use of a dielectrically passivated surface covered the majority of the rear surface can reduce both optical and recombination losses in the MoOx hole-selective contacts. Comparisons between a full area contact and local contact structures were investigated using both ray tracing and FDTD simulations in this work. Inverse cylindrical passivation nanostructures are found to be the best choice considering high reflection and low absorption it can provide. The structure will be optimized looking into the JG benefit coming from reflection, scatting and avoiding parasitic absorption losses. Then it will be incorporated in the standard solar cell architecture for better performance.