Motivated by the need to understand the role of internal interfaces in Li migration occurring in Li-ion batteries, a first principles study of a coincident site lattice grain boundary in LiFePO4 cathode material and in its delithiated counterpart FPO4 is performed. The structure of the investigated grain boundary is obtained and the corresponding interface energy is calculated. Other properties, such as ionic charges and magnetic moments, excess free volume and the lifetime of positrons trapped at the interfaces, are determined and discussed. The results show that while the grain boundary in LiFePO4 has desired structural and bonding characteristics, the analogous boundary in FePO4 needs to be yet optimized to allow for an efficient Li diffusion study. A key challenge for developing efficient lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) is to preserve homogeneous Li flows. Li inhomogeneity can appear at internal interfaces within the LIB. Grain boundaries that result from heat treatments aimed to improve the phase crystallinity of LIB cathodes can therefore hinder the homogeneity of the Li distribution. Among LIB cathodes, LiFePO4 or triphylite (aka lithium iron phosphate, LFP) is an environmentally friendly and cheap material The triphylite exhibits an orthorhombic structure with the space group Pnma (No. 62, standard setting) There can be many types of GBs for a given material. We will consider just planar GBs with suitable periodic boundary conditions that can be handled with ab initio electronic structure codes (classical molecular dynamics could in principle be performed too if appropriate interatomic potentials are available). A geometrical method based on the 'coincidence site lattice' (CSL) principle The relaxation of GB configurations was performed using the Vienna ab-initio simulation package (VASP) Positron annihilation spectroscopy The GB construction starts by selecting the tilt axis. We take [010] (perpendicular to the structure mirrors with the coordinates y = 1⁄4 and 3⁄4), which is in fact parallel with the LFP crystallographic axis b. Such an axis allows us to construct GBs with Li atoms at the GB plane in order to be able to study Li diffusion at this GB and its neighborhood in a follow-up study. By trying various tilt/rotation angles along the chosen axis selecting the Li atom at the (0,0,0) position as origin, a nearly perfect coincidence occurs at ~48.3° for a near-CSL GB with a {101} plane. The CSL is determined by translation vectors a-c, b, and 3c, which implicates that the CSL unit cell volume is three times more than that of the original lattice determined by vectors a, b, and c. Thus, the complete designation is (near-CSL) symmetrical Σ 3 (101)/[010] GB, with Σ specifying the ratio of volumes. The total volume of the GB box is then 6 times the LFP unit cell volume (the lower part is not rotated and the upper part is rotated by 48.3° degrees along the [010] axis). In this way, each box contains two GB boundaries (one is in the middle and the other one at the upper and lower faces). It is useful to note that Li ions lie on the (101) GB plane and since this plane is not a mirror, the GB lacks mirror symmetry. The result of the construction procedure called further configuration 1 (or C1) is shown in Figure Since the GB construction procedure described above is based on a geometrical concept, it might not necessarily lead to the best chemical bonding of atoms at the interface (after 'cutting' and 'welding' two pieces of crystal together). In order to bond better the atoms at the GB regions, we shift the upper grain along the [010] direction (b axis) by b/2, which is what a detailed examination of the interfaces suggests. In this way, the coherence/'matching' of both interfaces could be improved. No atoms are added or removed in the present GB configuration constructed to be charge neutral (the same holds for C1). The result of this transformation (including the relaxation of atoms and the last cell dimension) is shown in Figure where A is the area of the GB in the supercell/box, considering that there are two GBs in each supercell. Using the dimensions ar, br, and cr of the relaxed bulk supercell, A can be calculated as arbr ≈ b(a 2 +c 2 ) 1/2 when we relate it to the original primitive lattice dimensions. The minimum along this relaxation path corresponds to the equilibrium volume. Our results on the GB interface energy are given in Table In the case of delithiated system, i.e. FPO4 or FP, we proceed in a similar way to that employed for LFP. Even if the lattice parameters a, b, and c do not change much when going from LFP to FP by removing Li atoms, the c/a ratio important for CSL construction varies more significantly (increases by ~7 %). This change affects the tilt angle becoming now ~51.4° and increases the Σ parameter to 4 since Σ 3 yields poor coincidence (certainly tilt angle and Σ are correlated). The result is a near-CSL symmetrical tilt Σ 4 (101)/[010] GB for FP Figure Magnetic moments of all atomic species in the reference bulk box are μ(Fe) = 4.01μB, μ(P) = 0.01μB, μ(O(1)) = 0.18μB, μ(O(2)) = 0.16μB, and μ(O(3)) = 0.00μB (magnitudes are given). Because of an AF order, the total magnetic moment of the cell is zero. The magnetic moment of iron ions is slightly increased over the value for bulk LFP, but it does not reach the value 5μB expected for a free Fe 3+ ion in the high spin state. As for GB configurations, magnetic moments of Fe atoms in configuration 1 are modified slightly only -usually within 0.02μB -regardless of atomic positions (close to the interface or in bulk-like regions). The magnetic moments of oxygen atoms are also affected when they are close to the interface (and have dangling bonds). The size of the total magnetic moment is 0.08μB, indicating slight disturbances in the AF order. An examination of configuration 2 reveals less expected behavior. Namely, three Fe ions close to the interfaces have their magnetic moments diminished to about 3.33μB, while remaining Fe ions are almost unchanged. O ions with dangling bonds (i.e. those close to interfaces) have their magnetic moments also changed compared to bulk-like regions. The total magnetic moment of C2 is 1.16μB, suggesting a strong disturbance of the AF order. We mention that a GGA+U approach (see e.g. Ref. Concerning the positron behavior at the studied C1 and C2 configurations, preliminary calculations carried out using the so called atomic superposition method The study of a special grain boundary in LFP (LiFePO4) and FP (FePO4) shows interesting and to some extent peculiar properties of GBs in these materials. In particular, we examined a near-CSL tilt Σ 3 (101)/[010] GB in LFP and its counterpart Σ 4 (101)/[010] GB in FP. For each GB type, two configurations (C1 and C2) were constructed with the aim to optimize the reconnection of atomic bonds at the GBs. In the case of Σ 3 GB (LFP), both configurations exhibit an acceptable coherence and C2 provides a lower GB energy. In addition, C1 GBs are slightly charged, whereas this effect is negligible for C2. Positron lifetime calculations suggest that both GB configurations trap positrons, which requires further experimental verification. GB excess free volumes do not correlate well with positron lifetimes, likely due to the complex morphology of the GB interstitial space. When Σ 4 GB (FP) is considered, the level of coherence at the GB interfaces decreases compared to LFP. We trace back this effect to changed (Σ 3 → Σ 4) GB coincidence conditions and modified character of the bonds in FP, which becomes a more covalent system when Li is removed from LFP. As a result, we observe a weak GB cohesion, slight charge modulation within the supercells and asymmetry in the GB structure between the two GB interfaces in the supercell. Nevertheless, the calculated ionic charges and magnetic moments are reasonable both in the bulk and in regions close to the interfaces. Positron lifetime calculations again suggest that positrons are trapped at the GB interfaces. Configuration C2 is regarded to have more regular properties than C1, including the fact that it possesses a lower GB energy. Thus, we expect that C2 has less influence than C1 on the performance and the degradation of LFP electrodes though it should be studied in more detail. On the other hand, both C1 and C2 trap positrons and most likely Li atoms as well. Therefore, this observation supports the hypothesis that both C1 and C2 lead to inhomogeneous Li distributions producing stresses and damages inside the cathode of LIBs. For the sake of completeness, it should also be mentioned that Lachal et al. In order to proceed with the Li diffusion study in the GB examined, we intend to improve the FP Σ 4 GB properties, e.g. by putting a few cations (Li or Fe) at the interfaces or shifting slightly the interface plane to become occupied by Fe cations. One could also attempt to relax a Σ 3 GB despite its poor coincidence properties. Independently, we plan to explore how the choice of exchangecorrelation functional may influence the results of GB studies in LFP and FP materials. Specifically, GGA+U 