As an analogue of electromagnetically induced transparency (EIT), plasmon-induced transparency (PIT) has been realized both in plasmonic metamaterial and waveguide structures. Via near-field coupling within unit cells, PIT with broadband could be produced by plasmonic metamaterials, which, however, has not been realized in on-chip plasmonic waveguide structures. Here, we introduce broadband PIT based on a plasmonic metal-insulator-metal (MIM) waveguide system. Utilizing the direct coupling structure, PIT emerges based on an easy-fabricated structure without gap. By tuning coupling distance, the transparent window can be continuously tuned from narrowto broadband. Such device is promising for on-chip applications on sensing, filtering and slow light over a broad frequency range. Electromagnetically-induced transparency (EIT) is a quantum phenomenon arising from the interference within two different excitation channels in a laser-driven atomic system The structures are presented in the form of 2D as shown in Fig. Where is the dielectric constant for the infinite frequency, refers to the bulk frequency of plasma, is the damping frequency of electron oscillation, and gives angular frequency for the input light wave. For Ag, these parameters are =3.7, = 1.38× 10 Hz, and = 2.73×10 Hz. In the MIM waveguide structure, there is only transverse-magnetic (TM) mode Where is the waveguide width, is vacuum wavelength of the input light, and and is dielectric and metal permittivity, respectively. is the propagation constant of surface plasmon waves, represents effective refractive index inside the waveguide, and = 2 ⁄ is wavenumbers. 2D Finite-Difference Time-Domain (FDTD) method is used to calculate the optical response of proposed structures, which will have the same results as 3D simulation when the height (along the z direction) of the structure is more than 1 um Where # is effective refractive index of the waveguide, which can be solved by Eq. ( Here, is the common resonant frequency of two SRRs, and j is the imaginary unit. According to power conservation and time reversal symmetry, the input and output wave amplitudes have a relation: Where % *, = 0 because light is input from the left. Based on Eq. (4-5), the transmission spectrum can be given as: The transmission spectra for the structure in Fig. Here, we introduce a novel direct coupling structure as shown in Fig. The Hz distributions at two transmission dips (two supermodes) in structures with different coupling distances are also given in Fig. One of the most conventional applications of PIT is slow light. A sharp transmission peak always indicates that there exists intense dispersion in the transparent window, which will cause the group velocity delay Here, ./ 0 is the transmission phase shift from the light source to the monitor, c stands for the light speed, 1 -refers to the group velocity in the waveguide, and D is the length of this system, which is 500 nm. Fig. In summary, on-chip broadband PIT has been realized based on MIM waveguides with a no metalgap structure. Such structure not only possesses low intrinsic loss, but also can greatly simplify the fabrication, which is a valuable approach for experiments. More importantly, broadband PIT has been introduced into a MIM waveguide system, which is promising for on-chip broadband applications. This work has potential applications on sensing, filtering, nonlinear enhancement and slow light over a broad frequency range in the future highly integrated all-optical circuits.