We have successfully synthesized the c-axis oriented YBa 2 Cu 4 O 8 (Y-124) film on a SrTiO 3 (1 0 0) substrate via a coprecipitation and a dip-coating method. The precipitations including Y, Ba and Cu ions were obtained using their metal nitrates solution and the aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide and oxalic acid. Superconducting transition of the synthesized film was observed at 64-70 K corresponding to bulk Y-124 in the magnetization and resistance measurement. The developed method is suitable to synthesize superconducting Y-124 films for technological applications. The cuprate superconductors have two-dimensional superconducting properties such as the anisotropic critical current density. The coprecipitation process in Y-124 was similar to the previous study. X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern was measured by θ-2θ method with a CuKα radiation using Mini Flex 600 (Rigaku). The sample morphology and the chemical composition were identified by a scanning electron microscope (SEM) using JSM6010-LA (JEOL) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray analyzer (EDX). The temperature dependence of magnetization was measured using a magnetic property measurement system (MPMS; Quantum Design). The temperature dependence of resistance was measured by the standard four-probe method. Gold wires as four probes were attached on the film with silver paste (4922N; Du Pont Co., Ltd.). Figure The SEM image of the synthesized Y-124 film reveals that the film exhibits a porous surface consisting aggregations of small particles with submicron order, as shown in Figures Figure Oe. The magnetization started to exhibit the large diamagnetic signal at 70 K according to superconductivity in the ZFC mode. In the FC mode, the magnetization rose and exhibited the positive values due to the magnetism of the SrTiO 3 substrate. Figure In conclusion, the superconducting Y-124 films are successfully synthesized just by dipping the precipitations on a SrTiO 3 (1 0 0) substrate and heating. The precipitations are easily obtained using the Y, Ba and Cu nitrates solution and the aqueous precipitants of NaOH and oxalic acid. The fabricated film clearly exhibits superconductivity at 64-70 K in the temperature dependence of magnetization and resistance. Our Y-124 film was well oriented to a c-axis direction and showed in-plane characteristics. The developed method in this study is suitable to fabricate Y-124 films for superconducting applications. 