We discuss spontaneous spin current generation from the vacuum by strong electric fields as a result of interplay between the Schwinger mechanism and a spin-orbit coupling. By considering a homogeneous slow strong electric field superimposed by a fast weak transverse electric field, we explicitly evaluate the vacuum expectation value of a spin current (the Bargmann-Wigner spin current) by numerically solving the Dirac equation. We show that a non-vanishing spin current polarized in the direction perpendicular to the electric fields flows mostly in the longitudinal direction. We also find that a relativistic effect due to the helicity conservation affects direction/polarization of spin current. According to Dirac, our vacuum is not a vacant space, but can be understood as a sort of semi-conductors, in which all the negative energy states are occupied by electrons (the Dirac sea picture Recently, there has been significant progress in the research area of spintronics, in which spin polarization/transport is well controlled by optimizing the spacetime profile of external fields Notation and convention: We adopt the natural unit = c = 1. We work in the Heisenberg picture throughout this paper, and Heisenberg operators are indicated by a hat as ψ. We consider quantum electrodynamics (QED) in the presence of a homogeneous slow strong electric field Ē superimposed by a fast weak transverse electric field E with frequency Ω, where x μ = (t, x, y, z) and we defined the x-and the z-axis by the direction of the fast weak electric field E and the slow strong electric field Ē, respectively. We adopted the temporal gauge A t = 0, and assumed that the fields have finite lifetime T > 0 so as to make sure that the system becomes non-interacting at |t| → ∞. Note that the sudden switching on and off at t = 0, T are not essential in our results as they do not affect spin dynamics. We discuss spin current generation from the vacuum by the external electric field A μ (1) by explicitly evaluating a vacuum expectation value of a spin current operator at t → ∞ on the basis of the canonical operator formalism under external fields (see, e.g., Ref. To this end, we first expand the field operator ψ as Here, p and s label canonical momentum and spin, respectively. We also introduced the mode functions U p,s , V p,s which are two independent solutions of the Dirac equation in the momentum space where m and P (t) ≡ p -eA(t) are electron's mass We require the mode functions U p,s , V p,s to satisfy a boundary condition set at t = 0, where u p,s , v p,s are the Dirac spinors satisfying with ω p ≡ m 2 + p 2 being on-shell energy. Namely, we require that for t < 0 the mode functions U p,s , V p,s coincide with the plane wave with positive/negative frequency mode. Therefore, one can naturally identify âin p,s , bin p,s as annihilation operators for an electron and a positron at in-state t = -∞, respectively. By normalizing the mode functions the anti-commutation relations for the annihilation operators read In the presence of external fields, the annihilation operators âin p,s , bin p,s at in-state t = -∞, are no longer the same as those at out-state t = +∞, which we write âout p,s , bout p,s . This is because the interactions with the fields mix up the particle and anti-particle modes during the time-evolution 0 < t < T . As the system is non-interacting for t > T , one can safely expand ψ in terms of the plane waves and identify âout , bout as the expansion coefficients of the plane wave expansion. Thus, from the orthonormality of the Dirac spinors u p,s , v p,s , one On the other hand, as the Dirac equation ( The matrix elements M (ij) p;s,s are diagonal in momentum p because of the spatial homogeneity of the field configuration become time-dependent. The eigenvectors are time-independent if a given electric field configuration is time-dependent E(t) = const. and/or is pointing only to one direction as E(t) ∝ E i (t)e i (i = x, y, z). In other words, one has to superimpose two electric fields with different directions (of which one electric field, at least, should be time-dependent) just as the field configuration (1) in order for the eigenvectors to be timedependent, i.e., for the matrix elements M (ij) p;s,s to be off-diagonal in spin. If M (ij) p;s,s is diagonal in spin s, the resulting dynamics is trivial in terms of spin and no spin current flows. By plugging Eq. ( Physical observables (e.g. spin current, U(1) charge current) at out-state are defined as an in-in expectation value of a corresponding composite operator as where we assumed that the system is initially a vacuum, i. Note that Eq. ( It is convenient to re-express Eq. ( Note that one may discard severely oscillating contributions ∝ e ∓2iω P (T ) t t→∞ ---→ 0 thanks to the i -prescription of quantum field theory. Physically, the first and the second terms represent contribution from electrons and positrons, respectively. The formula p;s,s in order to evaluate an observable O. This can be done by numerically solving the Dirac equation (3). We explicitly evaluate the in-vacuum expectation value of a spin current, and show that a spin current is spontaneously generated from the vacuum by the strong electric fields (1). spin current (J /m 3 duration mT 0=(J s x) x = (J s x) z = (J s y) y = (J s z) x = (J s z) z (J s x) y (J s y) x (J s y) z (J s z) y FIG. For this aim, we consider the Bargmann-Wigner spin current J i [26-29] where with the Dirac matrices α i ≡ γ 0 γ i , β ≡ γ 0 , γ 5 ≡ iγ 0 γ 1 γ 2 γ 3 , and the spin tensor Σ i ≡ γ 5 γ 0 γ i = (iγ 2 γ 3 , iγ 3 γ 1 , iγ 1 γ 2 ). The Bargmann-Wigner spin current is a relativistic generalization of the non-relativistic spin current J i NR ≡ Σv i with v i being velocity. Indeed, by sandwiching with the plane waves ψ (0) p,s = u P ,s , v P ,s , one obtains Note that it is sufficient to consider the plane waves because all the fermion bi-linears appearing in the formula ( flows. The U(1) charge current has non-vanishing j x , j z because E x , E z = 0. It is important here that j is not necessarily directing to the electric field's direction j ∝ / E for the superimposed electric field configuration (1); see Fig. We emphasize that spin is never polarized without the superposition of the time-dependent transverse electric field because E × j must be vanish-ing for a single electric field. Besides, the non-linearity of the Schwinger mechanism, which is taken into account by non-perturbatively solving the Dirac equation on a computer, plays an important role here. Indeed, within the linear response theory, the U(1) charge current should flow in the direction exactly proportional to E, for which E × j = 0 follows. Note also that the spin current oscillates in T after some transient behaviors at small T , which originates from the oscillation of E × j (see Fig. In addition to (J s y ) x , (J s y ) z , Fig. This is a relativistic effect: For relativistically light particles, helicity is approximately conserved, i.e., spin and momentum directions tend to be aligned in the same direction. Thus, the spin alignment, which is originally directing to the y-direction, is modified to the momentum direction. At the same time, the momentum direction is also modified to the spin direction. Therefore, we have non-vanishing (J s x ) y , (J s z ) y from the spin current components induced by the spin-orbit coupling (J s y ) x , (J s y ) z . Indeed, one can show Then, by using Eq. ( Thus, a relativistic spin current with spin polarization s i and direction j, (J s i ) j , approaches that with different polarization s j and direction i, (J s j ) i , as decreasing mass because of the helicity conservation (see Fig. Figure (see Eq. ( The bottom panel of Fig. We discussed a novel spontaneous spin current generation mechanism from the vacuum by strong electric fields. Namely, we considered a homogeneous strong slow electric field superimposed by a fast weak transverse electric field. We showed that electrons and positrons are spontaneously produced from the vacuum via the Schwinger mechanism, and, in turn, are spin polarized in the perpendicular direction with respect to the two electric fields due to the spin-orbit coupling. As a result, a spin current polarized in the perpendicular direction flows mostly in the longitudinal direction. We also found that a relativistic effect due to the helicity conservation modifies direction/polarization of a spin current, which results in a non-vanishing spin current flowing in the perpendicular direction with polarization along the electric fields' direction. Our findings suggest a novel viewpoint, i.e., spin, to study the Schwinger mechanism, and propose novel spin-dependent observables for the up-coming laser experiments (e.g., ELI A similar spin current generation mechanism should occur in condensed matter materials as well. Dirac semi-metals, graphenes, and semi-conductors such as GaAs are good candidates, in which electrons' dynamics is governed by equations similar to the Dirac equation with small gap energy and our formulation may directly be applied 3 . This is not only interesting to high-energy physics, but also to condensed matter physics. Indeed, the present mechanism offers a novel way to generate a spin current in condensed matter materials which does not require either any spin carriers at initial time (i.e., the Fermi surface is inside of the gap) or any special conditions/matters (e.g. symmetry breakings, impurities, interband mixings) other than an ordinary Dirac fermion. This is in contrast to the conventional spin current generation mechanisms (e.g. spin-Hall effect It would be worthwhile to further investigate such cooperative effects due to superposition of electric fields on controlling/generating a spin current. Note that a spin current generation mechanism for a Dirac fermion with a Fermi surface inside of the gap via the spin-Hall 3 The relativistic Dirac Hamiltonian is a 4×4 matrix, which may look distinct from typical 2×2 Hamiltonians used to describe non-relativistic condensed matter materials, because of the additional anti-particle degree of freedom. However, because of the CP symmetry, particle and anti-particle degrees of freedom contribute to physical observables by the same amount. In this sense, the existence of the anti-particle degree of freedom is not important for the present spin current generation mechanism, and hence the size of the Hamiltonian does not matter. effect was previously discussed in Ref. In addition to applications to condensed matter systems, there appear very strong electromagnetic fields in some extreme systems such as heavy ion collisions, neutron stars, and the early Universe. It is interesting to study phenomenological/observational consequences of our spin current generation mechanism in such extreme systems. We leave this as a future work. Historically, the Schwinger mechanism was first invented in the context of QED, for which the mass m is given by the electron mass m e ∼ 511 keV. Nevertheless, the idea of the Schwinger mechanism, i.e., pair production of charged particles by a strong electric field, is applicable to any charged particles with arbitrary mass (even massless), and hence we treat the mass m as a free parameter in the following. Strictly speaking, the Bargmann-Wigner current describes a flow of magnetic moment. Indeed, Eq. (16) has an odd parity under charge conjugation for i = j. The diagonal component i = j has an even parity under charge conjugation, but is vanishing if the pseudo-scalar condensate ψ † γ 0 γ 5 ψ is vanishing. In the present study, the parity symmetry is strictly preserved, so that the diagonal component is vanishing, and hence the Bargmann-Wigner spin current is always odd under charge conjugation.