In condensed matter physics, there is a novel phase termed "quantum spin liquid", in which strong quantum fluctuations prevent the long-range magnetic order from being established, and so the electron spins do not form an ordered pattern but remain "liquid" like even at absolute zero temperature. Such a phase is not involved with any spontaneous symmetry breaking and local order parameter, and to understand it is beyond the conventional phase transition theory. Due to the rich physics and exotic properties of quantum spin liquids, such as the long-range entanglement and fractional quantum excitations, which are believed to hold great potentials in quantum communication and computation, they have been intensively studied since the concept was proposed in 1973 by P. W. Anderson. Currently, experimental identifications of a quantum spin liquid still remain as a great challenge. Here, we highlight some interesting experimental progress that has been made recently. We also discuss some outstanding issues and raise questions that we consider to be important for future research. I. As we learn from the textbook, a magnetic material tends to have their electron spins arrange into a certain, for example, parallel or antiparallel pattern at low temperatures to minimize the free energy. The two patterns correspond to the ferromagnet and antiferromagnet, which are governed by a negative and positive superexchange coupling constant J, respectively. However, for materials that have competing magnetic interactions, the situation sometimes can be complicated. For example, in each of the edge-shared triangular lattice as sketched in Fig. Compared to the triangular lattice, quantum fluctuations due to the geometrical frustration and low coordinations are even stronger in the kagome lattice, which has six corner-shared triangles surrounding a hexagon as illustrated in Fig. (1) Here, H is the Hamiltonian, and K x,y,z are the nearestneighbour Ising-type spin interactions along the x, y, and z bonds (Kitaev interactions). It has been shown that the exact ground state of the Kitaev model is a QSL, which may be gapped or gapless depending on the relative strength of the Kitaev interactions along the three bonds. The Kitaev model is simple and beautiful but was considered as a "toy" model in the beginning, since the underlying anisotropic Kitaev interactions are unrealistic for a spin-only system. One brilliant proposal to realize the Kitaev interaction is to include the orbital degree of freedom in a Mott insulator that arises from the combination of the crystal electric field, spin-orbital coupling (SOC), and electron correlation effects. QSL is a highly nontrivial state of matter. Ordinary states are often understood within Landau's framework in terms of order, phase transition, and symmetry breaking. However, a QSL does not have a local order parameter and avoids any spontaneous symmetry breaking even in the zero-temperature limit, so to understand it requires theories beyond Landau's phase transition theory. In fact, most QSLs are believed to be associated with topological order and phase transition. Motivated by the rich physics and fascinating properties of QSLs, studying these materials has been a 45-year long but still dynamic field. There has been a lot of progress made both on the theoretical and experimental aspects. QSLs in one-dimensional magnetic chain have been well established and will not be discussed in this work. For reference, there is a recent review article in this topic in ref. 50. Here, we will focus on QSLs in two or three dimensions. There have been many theoretical proposals for QSLs. For details, please refer to the reviews and references therein. 5,6,17 . Experimentally, numerous materials have been suggested to be candidates for QSLs, some of which are tabulated in Tables Specific heat is also quite often measured to help screen a QSL. For a material that orders magnetically at low temperatures, a λ-type peak in the specific heat vs temperature curve is generally expected. By contrast, for a QSL, such a sharp peak is typically absent, unless in the case such as that there is a topological phase transition. These measurements reveal very important information but are not completely satisfactory, partly because: even though magnetic ordering can be excluded, such a ground state without a long-range order may be caused by the disorder which leads to a percolative breakdown of the long-range order. In such a case, the spin-liquid-like ΘCW and J are the Curie-Weiss temperature and exchange coupling constant, respectively. * Notes: κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu2(CN)3: With a J ∼ 250 K, no magnetic order nor spin freezing is observed down to 20 mK, One of the most convincing evidences for the presence of deconfined spinons with fractional quantum number S = 1/2 is the observation of broad continuum magnetic excitation spectra in INS measurements. Since magnetic neutron scattering is a spin-1 process, at least one spinon pair must be excited in a spin-flip event. In this case, any pair of the spinons that satisfies the energy-momentum conservation rule E q = s (k) + s (q -k) can be excited. Here, s (k) is the dispersion of spinons, and E and q are the energy and momentum transfers, respectively. Since there are many k values that obey this rule for any particular combination of E and q, a continuous spectrum which is broad both in momentum and energy can be observed by INS measurements for a QSL whose fractional excitations are spinons. Such a continuum has been reported in various compounds, such as ZnCu 3 (OH) 6 Cl 2 (herbertsmithite), the free-Cu 21 magnetic form factor. Here the measured data indicate longer-range correlations than the nearest-neighbour singlet model. Figure (H , H , 0 ) e q u iv a le n t (H, 0, 0) equivalent from the five-orbital Hubbard model and based on the energy-band structure calculated from the first-principles method, Wang et al. have found that the minimal effective model to describe the zigzag order in α-RuCl 3 is the so-called K-Γ model, Thermal conductivity κxx over temperature T as a function of T 2 at low temperatures for EtMe3Sb[Pd(dmit by either an in-plane magnetic field 72 or pressure. In recent years, a lot of progress has already been made in the research of QSLs, but for the existing QSL candidates, there are more or less some drawbacks and unresolved issues. For example, for the Kitaev QSL candidates listed in Table Recently, there has been accumulating evidence that YbMgGaO 4 is a promising candidate as a gapless QSL. A key feature that distinguishes a disorder-or thermally-driven spin liquid from a QSL is whether there exist fractional spin excitations, such as the chargeneutral spin S = 1/2 spinons in this case. For a U(1) gapless QSL as proposed for YbMgGaO 4 , At present, we may still have not found an ideal QSL. But with such intensive and sustained efforts on theory, material searching, and characterizations, this field has been substantially moved. Below, we raise several points which we hope to motivate future research. i), In material searching, we should still look for QSL candidates in materials with small spins and strong geometrical frustration in triangular, kagome, and pyrochlore lattice. 1 Ideally, a promising QSL candidate material should fulfill the following criteria: i) It should have large magnetic exchange interactions, so that it is robust to disorder and easier to be accessed experimentally; ii) It should have little disorder, so that the intrinsic physics is more prominent; iii) It should have minimal extra interactions, so that the ground state exhibits no static magnetic order. Besides, now the material search can be extended to the SOC-assisted Mott insulators in the honeycomb lattice, which may possess anisotropic bonddependent Kitaev interactions needed to form a Kitaev QSL. iii), In QSLs, orbital, spin, and lattice are quite often involved and interacting. Therefore, quantum manipulating by various tuning parameters such as magnetic field, pressure, and doping, can lead to emergent intriguing physics. For example, according to the theoretical proposals, QSLs are the parent states of hightemperature superconductors. 