It has been suggested by theoretical works that equal-spin triplet pair correlations can be generated in Josephson junctions containing both a ferromagnet and a source of spin-orbit coupling. Our recent experimental work suggested that such triplet correlations were not generated by a Pt spin-orbit coupling layer when the ferromagnetic weak link had entirely in-plane anisotropy (N. Satchell and N.O. Birge, Phys. Rev. B 97, 214509 (2018)). Here, we revisit the experiment using Pt again as a source for spin-orbit coupling and a [Co(0.4 nm)/Ni(0.4 nm)]×8/Co(0.4 nm) ferromagnetic weak link with both in-plane and out-of-plane magnetization components (canted magnetization). The canted magnetization more closely matches theoretical predictions than our previous experimental work. Our results suggest that there is no supercurrent contribution in our junctions from equal-spin triplet pair correlations. In addition, this work includes the first systematic study of supercurrent dependence on Cu interlayer thickness, a common additional layer used to buffer the growth of the ferromagnet and which for Co may significantly improve the growth morphology. We report that the supercurrent in the [Co(0.4 nm)/Ni(0.4 nm)]×8/Co(0.4 nm) ferromagnetic weak links can be enhanced by over two orders of magnitude by tuning the Cu interlayer thickness. This result has important application in superconducting spintronics, where large critical currents are desirable for devices. Artificial superconducting -ferromagnetic (S -F ) hybrids have been an area of intense research effort for over a decade due to the new physics which arises when superconducting pair correlations traverse the exchange field of a ferromagnet Several theoretical studies have shown that spin-orbit coupling can act to convert spin-singlet correlations into equal-spin triplet correlations, potentially removing the need for ferromagnetic spin-mixer layers in Josephson junctions Multilayers of Co/Ni are of interest for spintronic applications such as spin-transfer torque memory (STT-MRAM) The films are deposited, patterned and measured using identical methodology to our previous work Layer thicknesses (in brackets) are in nm. The bottom superconducting electrode is a multilayer [Nb(25)/Au(2.4)] 3 /Nb(20) which grows considerably smoother than single layer Nb of comparable total thickness. The bottom electrode, layers comprising the junction, and a capping bilayer Nb(5)/Au Further magnetization data are available in the Supplemental Materials The magnetization versus field data are shown in Figure The magnetization vs field data suggests the [Co(0.4)/Ni(0.4)] ×8 /Co(0.4) multilayer cannot be described by the Stoner-Wohlfarth model of a single domain ferromagnet, since there is no obvious easy axis. Therefore the hysteresis of our samples is due to the formation of domains. Previous work suggests that the domain size of Co/Ni multilayers of similar total thickness is 100 nm By measuring the I -V characteristic as function of applied magnetic field and extracting the critical current (I c ) assuming the resistively shunted junction model, the I c (B) 'Fraunhofer' patterns for each Josephson junction are determined. Figure As Figure Due to the IP magnetization component of the F layer, the Fraunhofer patterns are offset (H offset ) from H = 0 and the central lobe is located between about μ 0 H offset = -10 mT and μ 0 H offset = -20 mT, Figure where d F is the thickness of the ferromagnet and λ L is the London penetration depth of the superconducting leads Figure The saturation in I c R N occurs for Cu interlayers at the thicker value of Cu= 6.5 nm, and the highest reported I c R N for Cu is higher than any Pt sample. The most striking feature of our experimental study is the greatly enhanced I c R N in the S-F'-F-F'-S Josephson junctions containing Ni(1.2) spin-mixer layers (Figure We do not attribute any of the observations of this work to spin-orbit coupling mediating singlet-triplet con-version. Compared to the Ni(1.2) traditional S-F'-F-F'-S triplet samples, the I c R N product for the other Josephson junctions in this study containing Cu or Pt interlayers are between about ×50 and ×1000 lower. Even the largest Pt I c R N is smaller than that of the Cu(6.5) sample, where we expect the contributions from spin-orbit coupling to be negligible in comparison to Pt. There are, however, other interesting trends in our data. The I c R N increases dramatically with interlayer thickness for both Pt and Cu interlayer samples and then saturates within the thickness range of this study. The increase in I c R N is larger for the Cu interlayer samples, and the peak value for Cu(6.5) represents a ×100 increase in I c R N from Cu(2.5). This result is very important in the study of S -F -S Josephson junctions for cryogenic memory devices. In the proposed Josephson magnetic RAM (JMRAM) memory cell architecture, the S -F -S Josephson junction acts as a passive phase shifter, so must have I c greater than the S -I -S junctions (where I is an insulator) in the cell The rapid increase in I c R N with increasing Cu and Pt interlayer thickness we attribute to the type of subtle structural effects present in our previous study with these interlayers in Co/Ru/Co Josephson junctions Although similar trends in I c R N are observed here with Cu and Pt, the difference in the absolute values of I c R N between Cu and Pt may be caused by structural differences such as; roughness, nonequilibrium growth modes Finally, we compare our current and previous exper-iment to theoretical predictions. In our previous work where σ is the vector of the Pauli matrices and α is referred to in the literature as the Rashba constant. Equation (2) has components (2h x , h y , h z ). Therefore, in order to satisfy the condition for equal-spin triplet generation, the exchange field components h x and at least one of h y or h z must be non-zero, giving (2h x , h y , h z ) a component perpendicular to the exchange field. In our previous work, a major shortcoming was the predominant in-plane anisotropy (h x = 0 and h y or z = 0 in the notation of the theory) of the Co/Ru/Co F layers In the future it would be interesting to try non-metallic S -F -S Josephson junctions with strong intrinsic spinorbit coupling. This could be accomplished by incorporating a semiconductor weak link with strong spin-orbit coupling such as InAs This work compares the role of Pt and Cu interlayers in Josephson junctions containing [Co/Ni] n /Co ferromagnetic weak links, where the magnetization of the multilayer is neither in-plane nor out-of-plane. By comparing the critical current of junctions with Pt or Cu interlayers (where Pt has much larger contribution to spin-orbit coupling than Cu), we find no evidence in this work for spin-orbit coupling mediating singlet-triplet conversion. Due to both fcc Pt and fcc Cu facilitating the growth of the multilayer, a large enhancement in critical current is observed for both interlayers in the thickness range (0 -9 nm) studied here. This result has important implications for Josephson junction devices in the field of superspintronics, where large critical currents are desirable. The data associated with this paper are openly available from the University of Leeds data repository 