B20 compounds are the playground for various non-trivial magnetic textures such as skyrmions, which are topologically protected states. Recent measurements on B20-MnGe indicate no clear consensus on its magnetic behavior, which is characterized by the presence of either spin-spirals or 3-dimensional objects interpreted to be a cubic lattice of hedgehogs and anti-hedgehogs. Utilizing a massively parallel linear scaling all-electron density functional algorithm, we find from full firstprinciples simulations on cells containing thousands of atoms that upon increase of the compound volume, the state with lowest energy switches across different magnetic phases: ferromagnetic, spinspiral, hedgehog and monopole. Most of the current research activity dealing with magnetism in B20 compounds is closely connected to the field of skyrmionics. Skyrmions are two-dimensional nontrivial magnetization solitons The canonical theory of helimagnetism in B20 compounds Experimentally, the magnetic structure has been interpreted as consisting of helical spirals In this article, we present results on B20-MnGe both from a magnetic model approach and large-scale allelectron calculations for a supercell whose extent compares to the periodicity of the experimentally observed helical textures. After discussing the electronic properties and analyzing the magnetic interactions obtained from the ferromagnetic unit cell, we explore various potential magnetic textures obtained from the selfconsistent large-scale ab-initio simulations. The accuracy of the results are scrutinized in terms of convergence of the magnetic interactions as function of the interatomic distances and their sensitivity to various parameters. We found that the experimentally proposed hedgehog structures are marginally higher in energy than the ferromagnetic state around the experimental lattice parameters. Increasing the volume of the cell can lead to a stabilization of single spirals and of hedgehog lattice states. While possible disagreement with recent experiments can be blamed on the accuracy of the calculated electronic structure, our investigation calls for further studies on the three-dimensional magnetism in B20-MnGe. All of the results presented below are based on Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations. We utilize the DFT codes juKKR In section III, we review the basic electronic and magnetic properties of the primitive cell of B20-MnGe. To identify the appropriate exchange and correlation functional to utilize for the large supercells, we determine the theoretical equilibrium lattice parameter within the scalar-relativistic approximation as implemented in KKRnano. As exchange-correlation functionals, we choose the local density approximation (LDA) according to the spin-dependent scheme of Vosko, Wilk and Nusair 55 , and the generalized gradient approximation as given in PBEsol 56 . A grid of 14 × 14 × 14 k-points is used. In section IV, we perform first-principles calculations including spin-orbit coupling For the large-scale calculations with KKRnano in section V we use supercells built of 6 × 6 × 6 unit cells so that 1728 atoms are treated including spin-orbit coupling. PBEsol is used as exchange-correlation functional and only a single k-point, i.e. the Γ-point, is included. The Green function is truncated beyond a distance of 2a. The magnetic states are imposed on the system by forcing the atomic exchange-correlation B-fields to point into specific directions. The majority (minority) spin channel is denoted by positive (negative) y-values. The spin splitting, which gives rise to the magnetic moment of the Mn atoms, is clearly recognizable. B20-MnGe orders in a cubic structure that is described by the P 2 1 3 space group. This space group is noncentrosymmetric, which means that there is no lattice inversion symmetry. The eight atoms in the primitive cell are located at the Wyckoff positions (u, u, u), , where u is a constant value that is determined for each atom type. We choose these parameters as u Mn = 0.135 and u Ge = 0.8435 which is in good agreement with experimental findings We start by computing the basic electronic properties of the ferromagnetic 8-atom unit cell with the lattice parameter set to the experimental lattice parameter, a = 4.79 Å21,60,61 . In Fig. Next we explore how the magnetic moment depends on the assumed lattice constant. We recover the pressureinduced magnetic transition from a high-spin state (HS) to a low-spin (LS) state (see Fig. The computed total energies as a function of the lattice parameter show that the LDA equilibrium lattice constant, a = 4.65 Å, is substantially lower than the PBEsol one, a = 4.76 Å, see Fig. To summarize, a HS/LS transition is predicted with both LDA and PBEsol, where PBEsol correctly finds the ground state to be the HS state while LDA does not, for the respective theoretical lattice parameters. As the PBEsol equilibrium lattice constant is also much closer to the experimental value, we restrict ourselves to PBEsol as exchange-correlation functional in the following. The magnetic pair interactions are associated with the following extended Heisenberg model where m i is the unit vector for the orientation of the Mn magnetic moment at site i, J ij is the isotropic exchange interaction and D ij is the vector characterizing the DMI, and both connect the moments on sites i and j. Since each Ge atom carries a small magnetic moment of 0.1 μ B , they are not considered in our magnetic models. The canonical theory of helical magnetic structures in the B20 materials is based on the competition between the isotropic exchange interactions and the DMI where m( r ) is the normalized magnetization field, A is the exchange stiffness, and D is the DM spiralization as already mentioned in the introduction. The period of the helical structure λ is then proportional to A/D and given by the provision where q is the wave number. Note that this expression is only valid for the helical 1Q phase. In order to apply this theory to MnGe, the exchange stiffness A and the DM spiralization D are evaluated from their respective interatomic counterparts, J ij and D ij , respectively, by summation over all pairs of magnetic sites up to a chosen cutoff distance. The relation between the lattice and micromagnetic models is discussed in appendix A. In this section, we first compute the magnetic pair interactions from the ferromagnetic state and then construct the micromagnetic parameters A and D. We investigate the sensitivity of the computed magnetic interactions to the structural parameters defining the unit cell in two ways. First, we keep the lattice parameter fixed at the theoretical PBEsol value, but vary the internal positions of the Mn atoms by setting u Mn = 0.125, 0.135 and 0.145 (the positions of the Ge atoms are fixed). The computed J ij and | D ij | are shown in the top two plots of Fig. Second, we keep the internal positions fixed (u Mn = 0.135) and vary the lattice parameter. We consider only lattice expansion, as we expect that it might weaken the dominant nearest-neighbor ferromagnetic coupling, and so open the possibility of a different magnetic ground state. The values of J ij and | D ij | are shown in Fig. Now we turn to the micromagnetic spin stiffness A and DM spiralization D, which are defined in terms of their interatomic counterparts as explained in appendix A. The results are shown in the bottom panels of Fig. Despite the lack of convergence of the summations, many conclusions can still be taken from studying the micromagnetic parameters. First we discuss the role played by varying the internal positions of the Mn atoms. As a function of the interatomic cutoff distance in the summations, the spin stiffness starts from fairly large values, dips at ≈ 0.9a due to antiferromagnetic J ij (c.f. top left panel of Fig. Next we discuss the impact of expanding the lattice on the micromagnetic parameters. As a function of the cutoff distance in the summations, the spin stiffness initially follows the same trend as the first shell of the J ij , weakening as the lattice parameter is increased (see the bottom panel of Fig. The preceding analysis of the trends and properties of the micromagnetic parameters raised some doubts on whether the canonical theory based on the micromagnetic model is the right approach to describe the magnetism of MnGe. However, we can revert to the lattice spin model of eq. ( We return to the isotropic pair interactions, J ij , and use a Monte Carlo approach to estimate the Curie temperature as a function of the range of the considered interactions. In this way we can ascertain if the longranged nature of these interactions impacts this finitetemperature property. As a test case, we choose the u Mn = 0.135 case at the theoretical PBEsol lattice parameter. The results of the Monte Carlo simulations are shown in Fig. As the first-principles DFT simulations implicitly account for all possible magnetic interactions based on the electronic structure, we next settle whether such nonferromagnetic structure can be stabilized by performing the appropriate calculations on large supercells of MnGe. In this section, we present the large-scale DFT results that we obtained with KKRnano for B20-MnGe. We set up a supercell consisting of 6 × 6 × 6 conventional unit cells (1728 atoms), which can describe features on a length scale of 6a ≈ 3 nm, the magnetic periodicity found experimentally In our study, the lattice constant is varied and the total energies corresponding to the three states are tracked with respect to the ferromagnetic phase. As mentioned in the introduction, the main reason that motivates the usage of KKRnano in conjunction with B20-MnGe is that Tanigaki et al. reported on the existence of the 3Q hedgehog lattice state in this material where q = 2π λ is the wavenumber given in terms of the helical wavelength λ and x, y and z are the spatial coordinates within the unit cell. Note, that M ( r) is not normalized. Equation ( An illustration of an anti-hedgehog is given in Fig. Other works In the following, we refer to this as the 1Q state (see Fig. Based on our findings in section IV, where we encounter a DM spiralization that does not seem to be larger than 10 meV Å, we also consider a magnetic configuration which can exist without a large DM spiralization but could yield transmission electron microscopy stripe contrasts similar to the 3Q state. An obvious candidate for this is a Bloch point texture which can be conveniently defined by means of the four spherical parameters φ, θ, Φ and Θ. The parameters φ and θ designate the position of an individual atom in the unit cell which is described by the common polar and azimuthal angle and Usually, the atomic positions are given in the Cartesian coordinates x, y and z. In the definition above, we define the origin of the coordinate system, i.e. the tuple (x = 0, y = 0, z = 0), to be at the center of the unit cell. In this frame of reference, all atoms that lay in an x-yplane that intersects with the center are described by θ = π/2. The orientation of the individual atomic magnetic moments for a BP texture is then defined by the polar angle and the azimuthal angle where the angles designating the atomic position enter as arguments. The phase factor is set to φ 1 = π, hence all magnetic moments point at the origin of the coordinate system. An illustration of this configuration is given in Fig. Since the lattice parameter of a material can be modified via strain that originates from the manufacturing process of the sample, we investigated the dependence of B20-MnGe's magnetic properties as function of volume. Such a dependence is depicted in the upper part of Fig. In the lower part of Fig. We investigated the magnetic properties of B20-MnGe through ab initio calculations. First we considered the basic properties of the ferromagnetic unit cell, recovering the already-known pressure-induced transition from a high-spin to a low-spin state. Then we analyzed the magnetic interactions derived from the first-principles calculations with both lattice and micromagnetic models. Lastly, we performed large-scale electronic structure calculations with KKRnano to quantify the relative energetic stability of different candidate magnetic structures, 1Q (helical spiral), 3Q (hedgehog-antihedgehog lattice) and BP (Bloch point) state, in relation to the ferromagnetic state. Both the magnetic model simulations and the supercell first-principles calculations found the ferromagnetic state to be the most stable state at the experimental lattice parameter, which is quite close to the theoretically determined one with PBEsol. This is in clear contradiction with all reported experimental results. The computed magnetic pair interactions showed that the isotropic exchange interactions J ij are very longranged and alternate between ferro-and antiferromagnetic as a function of distance, while the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions D ij are rather weak in relation to the former. This is theoretical evidence for the competing long-range magnetic interactions scenario proposed to explain the short period of the magnetic structure The first-principles calculations performed for the ferromagnetic, 1Q, 3Q and Bloch point structures found that it is possible to stabilize either the 1Q or the 3Q structures with respect to the ferromagnetic state if the lattice parameter is increased. This can be interpreted by the computed magnetic pair interactions, which showed a change in sign of A due to a weakening of the ferromagnetic nearest-neighbor J ij , and a strengthening of D due to a rotation of the D ij towards the bond directions, which more than compensates the reduction in their magnitudes. Overall, the energy differences between the 1Q and 3Q structures and the ferromagnetic state was at most 10 meV per Mn atom, which is a modelindependent verification that the magnetic interactions in the system are indeed competing, so that quite different magnetic structures have very similar energies. Regarding the Bloch point structure, the imposition of periodic boundary conditions in KKRnano means that the magnetic spins at the boundaries of each supercell are aligned in an unfavorable antiferromagnetic way and thus there is a large energy penalty. Notably, this energy cost decreases by increasing the lattice parameter, which can again be related to the reduction of the nearest-neighbor J ij . As all our results are based on first-principles calculations, a possible explanation for the disagreement with experiment could be in the computed electronic structure. First, the small energy differences found for the supercell calculations might make the results sensitive to intrinsic deficiencies of the exchange-correlation functional. Second, and perhaps more likely, could be an excessive delocalization of the Mn d-orbitals. This is a well-known common failure of the standard functionals, which could upset the energetic balance between the different magnetic structures by strengthening the nearestneighbor J ij . The work reported in Ref. where z i denotes the z-coordinate of the respective atomic site. It can be shown that such a magnetic struc-ture interpolates smoothly between the discrete lattice and the continuum limit. We define the Heisenberg energy with isotropic exchange interaction and DM interaction as Insertion of eq. (A1) and usage of addition theorems leads to = N (-J(q) + D z (q)) , (A3) where we used the translational invariance of J ij and N is the number of atoms. For the helical spiral defined in eq. (A1), only the z-component D z ij of D ij needs to be considered. where A is the so-called spin stiffness and D the DM spiralization which gives us a provision on how the wave number q depends on the magnitude of DM spiralization and spin stiffness. The atomistic and the micromagnetic model are connected in the limit q → 0, i.e. for a helical spiral that extends over multiple unit cells. Equation (A3) can then