Understanding the mechanisms of thermal conduction in graphene is a long-lasting research topic, due to its high thermal conductivity. Peierls-Boltzmann transport equation (PBTE) based studies have revealed many unique phonon transport properties in graphene, but most previous works only considered three-phonon scatterings and relied on interatomic force constants (IFCs) extracted at 0 K. In this paper, we explore the roles of four-phonon scatterings and the temperature dependent IFCs on phonon transport in graphene through our PBTE calculations. We demonstrate that the strength of four-phonon scatterings would be severely overestimated by using the IFCs extracted at 0 K compared with those corresponding to a finite temperature, and four-phonon scatterings are found to significantly reduce the thermal conductivity of graphene even at room temperature. In order to reproduce the prediction from molecular dynamics simulations, phonon frequency broadening has to be taken into account when determining the phonon scattering rates. Our study elucidates the phonon transport properties of graphene at finite temperatures, and could be extended to other crystalline materials. Inspired by the reported ultrahigh thermal conductivity from measurements Fruitful results from the PBTE approach have been obtained, which deepen our understanding for thermal transport in graphene and other two-dimensional materials Despite considerable progress having been made, there are several concerns that might affect the usage of the PBTE approach on predicting the thermal properties of graphene. Firstly, in most previous studies on graphene, three-phonon scatterings are treated as the main origin of inelastic phonon scatterings and higher-order phonon scatterings are ignored. However, recent studies have shown that four-phonon scatterings have to be taken into account in the PBTE calculations for some bulk materials, such as cubic silicon Secondly, interatomic force constants (IFCs) used in PBTE studies on graphene were usually obtained at the static limit (0 K), and the temperature effects on these IFCs were not taken into account Imaginary frequencies, a sign of instability, usually occur if using the interatomic force constants extracted at 0 K to compute the phonon dispersions of the high-temperature phases Thirdly, when calculating the phonon scattering rates appearing in the PBTE, one has to employ the Dirac delta function to ensure energy conservation condition before and after the phonon scattering In this paper, we perform PBTE calculations to determine the thermal conductivity of graphene modeled by the optimized Tersoff potential. Three-phonon scatterings, four-phonon scatterings, and phonon-boundary scatterings are fully taken into account in the phonon transport modeling. While most PBTE studies used IFCs from first-principles as inputs and tried to match the measured experimental data, we employ the empirical potential to generate the interatomic force constants. This is because the thermal conductivity measurements on two-dimensional materials are still quite challenging and there is still no consensus on the accuracy of the existing measurement methods The vibrational properties of a material are determined by the Hamiltonian, which is expressed as where T and V are the kinetic and potential energies; the pair (i, α) means the degree of freedom in the material corresponding to the α direction of atom i; u is the atomic displacement away from the equilibrium position; φ, ψ and χ are the so-called second-order harmonic, third-order and fourth-order anharmonic force constants; E 0 is the potential energy when u = 0. The concept of phonons is based on the harmonic oscillators, which assumes the anharmonic terms (the last two terms) in Eq. ( Mathematically, φ, ψ and χ are regarded as the negative first-order, second-order and third-order derivatives of atomic force with respect to atomic displacements. To obtain the IFCs, one, two or three atoms are usually displaced away from their equilibrium positions by a small distance along the Cartesian directions. The IFCs were then determined by either finite difference scheme on the atomic forces As the temperatures increases, the amplitudes of atom displacements become larger so that the anharmonic terms in Eq. ( where φ ̂ is the effective second-order harmonic force constants and E ̂0 is the effective equilibrium potential energy, to approximate the Hamiltonian, Eq. The residue, H -H ̂, are compensated by the effective anharmonic terms through where ψ ̂ and χ̂ are the effective anharmonic IFCs. Since the temperature determines the range of atomic displacements, the effective harmonic Hamiltonian is temperature dependent. Correspondingly, the effective harmonic and anharmonic force constants should be temperature dependent as well. To obtain the temperature dependent (effective) IFCs, we employ a stochastic sampling technique where s i  is a component that corresponds to the  direction of atom i of the s-th eigenvector in the system, ξ 1 and ξ 2 are uniform random variables between (0, 1 With the randomly generated atomic displacements, the atomic forces can be computed based on the interatomic potential, after which the second-order effective harmonic force constants are extracted first by fitting the obtained displacement-force data through Then, we fit the displacement-residual force data to obtain the third-order and four-order anharmonic force constants using the relation During the fitting processes, the translational invariances of the interatomic force constants are imposed using the singular-value decomposition technique, which is documented in Ref. It is noted that one has to know the mode frequencies and eigenvectors at temperature T, which are not available in advance, in order to go through the procedures mentioned above. Here, we use the harmonic force constants at 0 K as an initial guess to compute the frequencies and eigenvectors. , where λ (≡ qs) denotes the s-th phonon mode with a momentum q, n λ 0 is equilibrium phonon population, and F λ x is the so-called deviation function for mode λ, which can be calculated by solving the steady-state linearized PBTE. With the solved deviation functions, the thermal conductivity along the x direction is expressed by the contribution from each phonon mode where ħ is the Planck's constant; V represents the volume of the unit cell; ω λ and v λ are the phonon frequency and group velocity of mode λ, respectively, which are determined by the phonon dispersion of graphene. For a defect-free graphene, the PBTE can be written as where the left-hand-side term represents the phonon diffusion driven by temperature gradient, and the right-hand side are the collision terms originated from three-phonon, four-phonon and phononboundary scatterings. The phonon-phonon scattering terms on the left-hand side of Eq. ( While W λ,λ ′ ,λ ′′ ± in Eq. ( V 3 and V 4 in the above equations are three-phonon and four-phonon scattering matrix elements, quantifying the strength of the scattering events. The expressions for V 3 and V 4 can be found in Refs. and with a reciprocal vector G, are ensured by the Δ function. Depending on whether G equals 0 or not, the scattering is a normal process or a Umklapp process. The Dirac-delta function δ in Eq. ( and for the three-phonon and four-phonon processes, respectively. The phonon-boundary scattering term depends on the phonon lifetime due to phononboundary scattering, which is written as The phonon lifetime is usually assumed to be proportional to the ratio between the sample size and the phonon group velocity. The constant number a in Eq. ( To calculate the thermal conductivity through Eq. ( For a given mode λ (qs) and the other two (three) phonon branches, s′ and s′′ (s′, s′′ and s′′′), fixed, there is a four-dimensional (six-dimensional) space of q′ and q′′ (q′, q′′ and q′′′) that can form a three-phonon (four-phonon) scattering event. Taking the advantage of the momentum conservation condition in Eqs. ( If one treats q′ and q ′′′ as continuous variables, the summation over q′ and q′′′ in Eqs. where Ω denotes the first Brillouin zone. Using the q-point grid as the quadrature grid for q ′ and q ′′′ , the above multiple integral could be determined straightforwardly through numerical integration if the integrands are continuous functions. However, additional attention should be paid to perform the above integrations when the Dirac delta function appears in the integrands. For the integration over q ′ and q ′′′ , one can always perform the numerical integration over q ′ first by fixing q ′′′ . Without loss of generality, the integrals over q′ in Eqs. ( where φ(q′) is a function with respect to q′. We employ the so-called tetrahedron method to calculate the integration with the Dirac delta function As a result, the integral over this triangle is non-zero if the line of q ′ that satisfies the energy conservation condition intersects with a specific triangle. The contribution of the line integral from each triangle can be evaluated by the values of ω and φ at the three corners of the triangle through interpolation, and the integral is written as r m n (W) is a weight factor and is related to W and the corner frequency of the s′-th band, ω q m ′ s ′ n . The expressions for r m n (W) are provided in Appendix A. For a crystal with finite size, the phonon frequencies are also discrete values and summations in Eqs. ( where ε is a small number. Turney et al. where 2Γ is phonon linewidth (Γ is also interpreted as phonon scattering rate and 1/Γ phonon lifetime), for all three-phonon processes. Similarly, we express ε as for all four-phonon processes. Although the strict justification for the substitution of the phonon linewidth dependent Lorentzian function for the Dirac delta is not mentioned in the references where E and E′ are the initial and final states; Δ means the energy shift. In the limit of small Γ, the golden rule is recovered. Once the coefficients in Eqs. Although the focus of this work is the PBTE method, we will closely compare the results from it against those from classical MD simulations. Among the various MD based methods, the homogeneous nonequilibrium MD (HNEMD) method A. Temperature dependent interatomic force constants Figure For example, the obtained maximum frequency at the Γ point is reduced from 1690 cm -1 to 1685 cm -1 if one uses the IFCs at 300 K to replace those at 0 K. Second, as shown in Fig. The phonon shifts are originated from two sources. One is due to the thermal expansion, which is usually modeled through the quasiharmonic approximation. The thermal expansion coefficient of graphene is known to be a negative value at room temperature The other source for phonon shifts is the explicit anharmonicity Since the linearizing of the ZA phonons due to the explicit anharmonicity overcomes the phonon softening due to compressive strain, the frequency of ZA modes are positive and the phonon dispersion is linear near the Γ point. In addition to the second-order harmonic force constants, third-order and fourth-order anharmonic force constants are also affected by the temperature. Tables Material list the values of the anharmonic IFCs estimated at 0 K and 300 K. Since the magnitude of the anharmonic IFCs decays rapidly with the interatomic distance, we only list ψ 112 αβγ and χ 1112 αβγθ , where 1 and 2 refer to two neighboring carbon atoms, as examples. The change of anharmonic IFCs due to temperature could be understood by the fact that at high temperatures the anharmonic terms in the Hamiltonian go into the harmonic terms and the effective anharmonic terms are altered. From Table Figure As most previous PBTE studies did, we first calculate the thermal conductivity using the IFCs extracted at 0 K and consider the three-phonon processes as the only phonon-phonon scattering mechanism. The analytical tetrahedron method is employed to impose the energy conservation before and after the scattering. The computed thermal conductivity is around 3100 W/mK and found to be weakly dependent on the number of q-points. Our results based on three-phonon scatterings are close to the classical thermal conductivity of graphene described by the optimized Tersoff potential from a similar three-phonon PBTE study by Singh and Fisher Figure To incorporate the temperature effects on the IFCs, we compute the phonon dispersion and phonon scattering rates using the force constants extracted at 300 K. The scattering rate of a specific mode is related to the transition probability through Figure However, as shown in Fig. To clarify the discrepancy between the results from PBTE calculations and EMD and HNEMD simulations on graphene, one has to be aware of the discrete nature of molecular dynamics. In a periodic system whose size is finite, the available wave vectors have to be q = b 3 due to the Bloch's theorem, where b i is the reciprocal vector, N i is the number of unit cells along the direction of the i-th translational vector of the crystal and n i is a non-negative integer that is smaller than N i . Thus, the wave vectors and phonon frequencies are discretized in such a periodic system, and phonons have less chance to find other phonons that are of proper wave vectors and frequencies to strictly fulfill the momentum and energy conservation conditions to let the phonon scattering happen. Hence, the phonon scattering could be weaker in a finite size system compared with a larger system where more phonon modes are available. Due to the anharmonicity, phonon frequencies are broadened, which is characterized by the phonon linewidth, making the phonon scatterings happen even if the phonon frequencies do not exactly satisfy the energy conservation condition. As we will show below, the phonon broadening is crucial to correctly compute phonon scattering rates in a finite system. The justification of neglecting the phonon broadening in PBTE calculations on large crystalline materials will be discussed at the end of this section. To take the effects of phonon broadening into account, we employ Eq. ( We also compute the thermal conductivity of graphene without including four-phonon scatterings and extremely high values (~30000 W/mK) are obtained with 36×36 q-points. To explore the role of three-phonon and four-phonon scatterings in a relatively small finite system, we show the phonon scattering rates (one half of the phonon linewidths) of the ZA modes in Figure To further confirm that the PBTE calculations with phonon linewidth dependent Lorentzian function as the Dirac delta could well reproduce MD predictions, we shows the length dependent (classical) thermal conductivity of graphene at 300 K calculated through the PBTE in Fig. However, with the increase of the sample length, the PBTE results become smaller than the prediction from NEMD simulations. This observation is in accordance with the study by Tadano et al. we also perform calculations using a = 1.0 in the phonon-boundary scattering term, and the results are shown as red solid line in Fig. A possible explanation for the failure of a = 2.0 for large L to reproduce the NEMD data is as follows. In these NEMD simulations, the thermal conductivity is computed through K = -J/(∂T/∂x ), where J is the heat flux and ∂T/∂x is the temperature gradient determined by fitting the linear temperature profile in the middle region of the sample, so that the effects of phononboundary scatterings on phonon transport between the two reservoirs are not correctly considered. To recognize this issue, one might think about a purely harmonic crystalline material sandwiched between two reservoirs. There is no temperature gradient within the sample but the thermal resistance occurs at the edges between the sample and the reservoirs. Using the linear temperature region to calculate the temperature gradient, the thermal conductivity becomes infinitely large. However, since phonons experience ballistic transport, the thermal conductivity is not infinite but a sample-size dependent value. Therefore, the reported thermal conductivity from most NEMD studies should be overestimated and one has to use a weaker phonon-boundary scattering (a = 1.0) in PBTE calculations to match the NEMD results. Very recently, some researchers suggested to use ∂T ∂x = ΔT/L to determine the temperature gradient in NEMD calculations We plot the thermal conductivity data from their NEMD simulations as red diamonds. This treatment makes the length dependent thermal conductivity from NEMD simulations excellently agree with our PBTE calculations. Despite the good agreement between PBTE calculations and MD simulations, one may ask whether the thermal conductivity as well as phonon scattering rates computed using the two different methods of treating the energy conservation are converged when the number of q-points is sufficiently large. To explain this, let us consider a one-dimensional system and assume that the q-points grid is so dense that the phonon dispersion can be treated as quasi-continuous. The integral involving the δ function, Eq. ( where η is an infinitely small number and ε a finite number that is determined through Eqs. Figure We also compute both classical and quantum thermal conductivity using the tetrahedron method, in which the wave vectors of graphene are assumed continuous. When both three-phonon and four-phonon scatterings are considered, the difference between classical and quantum thermal conductivity is found to be less than 10% even at 300 K. Although 300 K is still much lower than the Debye temperature, the small difference is expected due to a cancellation between two competing factors: 1) the mode heat capacity of high-frequency phonons is overestimated in the classical system; 2) the phonons become more likely to be scattered since more high-frequency phonons are available to take part in the phonon-phonon scatterings in the classical system. In the whole temperature range we explored, the classical thermal conductivity is slightly lower than the quantum thermal conductivity, suggesting that compared with the Bose-Einstein statistics the reduction of the thermal conductivity due to stronger phonon scatterings in the classical system overweighs the enhancement due to the change of heat capacity. To quantify the importance of four-phonon scatterings, we examine the ratio (K 3ph -K 4ph )/K 4ph . At 300 K, neglecting four-phonon scatterings would lead to a 90% overestimation of the quantum thermal conductivity. With the elevation of the temperature to 900 K, the ratio increases to 115%, confirming that four-phonon processes are more significant at higher temperatures In summary, we study the phonon scattering mechanisms and thermal conductivity in singlelayer graphene, whose interatomic interaction is described by the optimized Tersoff potential, using the PBTE formalism. Two different methods are applied to determine the IFCs of graphene. The IFCs corresponding to 0 K are extracted by the widely used small-displacement method, and temperature dependent IFCs are obtained through fitting the displacement-force data from MD simulations. The 0 K IFCs are found to substantially underestimate the thermal conductivity of graphene by predicting much stronger four-phonon scatterings compared with the calculations based on temperature dependent IFCs. Furthermore, we show that in order to reproduce the thermal conductivity of graphene from MD simulations the discrete nature of phonon modes in the system and phonon broadening due to anharmonicity has to be considered when determining the phonon scattering rates. By using the phonon linewidth dependent Lorentzian function to approximate the Dirac delta function, which represents energy conservation condition before and after phonon scatterings, satisfactory agreement between MD simulations and PBTE calculations is achieved. The PBTE formalism employed here could also be applied to explore phonon transport in other two-dimensional and high-temperature functional materials. < W < ω q 2 ′ s ′ n , the expressions for r m n in Eq. ( 