The bound states that can occur in a superfluid vortex have recently called for attention owing to the capability of detecting them experimentally. However, a detailed theoretical account for the presence of these vortex bound states is still lacking, for all temperatures in the superfluid phase and couplings along the BCS-BEC crossover. Here, we fill this gap and present a systematic theoretical study based on the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations for the bound states that occur over the two characteristic (inner and outer) spatial ranges in which the extension of a superfluid vortex can be partitioned. It is found that the total number of bound states decreases from the BCS (weak-coupling) side of the crossover toward the intermediate-coupling region where they are still present, whereas the bound states disappear upon entering the BEC (strong-coupling) side. A scaling relation is also obtained that connects the number of bound states in the inner spatial range of the vortex to the depth and width of the vortex itself. A criterion is finally provided in terms of the local density of states, to distinguish where a given fermionic superfluid is located in the coupling-temperature phase diagram of the BCS-BEC crossover. Recently, interest has arisen in the internal structure of vortices in type-II superconductors, owing to the presence of bound states in the vortex core region of a Y123 superconductor that were detected experimentally In Ref. The occurrence of bound states in a superconducting vortex was originally proposed in Ref. To obtain a more complete information on the properties of bound states in a superconducting vortex, however, it would be worthwhile to address both their coupling and temperature dependences at the same time. From a technical point of view, in Refs. In the present paper, we take advantage of the above procedures developed in Ref. The main results obtained in this paper are as follows: (i) By relying on the numerical procedure to solve the BdG equations for a fermionic superfluid vortex developed in Ref. The plan of the paper is as follows. Section II recalls the main features of the solution of the BdG equations drawn from Ref. We begin by briefly recalling the method used in Ref. The BdG equations read Here, H(r) = -∇ 2 /2m -μ where m is the fermion mass and μ the chemical potential (we set = 1 troughout). The local gap parameter ∆(r) in Eq. ( where f F ( ) = (e /(k B T ) + 1) -1 is the Fermi function at temperature T (k B being Boltzmann constant) and v 0 is the bare coupling constant of the contact interaction. A suitable regularization of the inhomogeneous gap equation (2) was implemented in Appendix B of Ref. where k F = (3π 2 n 0 ) 1/3 is the Fermi wave vector associated with the (bulk) number density n 0 and a F is the scattering length of the two-fermion problem. This coupling parameter enables one to span the whole BCS-BEC crossover When looking for bound states inside a vortex like in the present context, coupling values on the BCS side of unitarity should primarily be considered, since it will turn out that the number of bound states rapidly vanishes upon entering the BEC side of unitarity. In addition, on the BEC side of the crossover at finite temperature it would be necessary to include pairing fluctuations beyond mean field For an isolated vortex with unit circulation and directed along the z axis, the spatially dependent gap parameter is written in cylindrical coordinates as ∆(r) = ∆(ρ, φ, z) = ∆(ρ)e iφ with ∆(ρ) real. Correspondingly, the eigenfunctions of the BdG equations (1) take the form: where ν r is the radial quantum number, is an integer (both positive and negative), and {u νr, ,kz (ρ), v νr, ,kz (ρ)} are real functions for the bound states of primary interest here. Within this approach, for given values of and k z the BdG equations are numerically integrated outwards, starting from ρ = 0 with suitable indicial conditions, up to a maximum value R out (values ranging from .0 proves sufficient for practical purposes). At that point, "free" boundary conditions are enforced at ρ = R out by using suitable linear combinations of Bessel, Neumann, and Hankel functions, in terms of which the solutions of the BdG equations can be expressed for ρ ≥ R out . This procedure offers a definite advantage, in that it avoids the common practice of constraining the vortex in a cylinder with infinite walls at ρ = R out . For this reason, this procedure allows one to clearly distinguish truly bound states (which decay exponentially for ρ R out ) from continuum states (with oscillating behavior extending up to infinity). In practice, we have considered values of not smaller than 200 and values of |k z | up to 3k F . In this way, for given k z and irrespective of the value of , a first energy threshold between bound and continuum states occurs at the (temperature-dependent) value ∆ 0 recovered by ∆(ρ) deep in the bulk region when μ > 0 (where μ = μ -k 2 z /2m), while a second threshold occurs at ∆ 2 0 + μ2 when μ < 0. Accordingly, for 0 < ε < ∆ 0 only bound states can be found, for ∆ 0 < ε < ∆ 2 0 + μ2 bound states embedded in the continuum (with different values of k z ) can also be found, and for ∆ 2 0 + μ2 < ε only continuum states occur. Once the eigenfunctions {u νr, ,kz (ρ), v νr, ,kz (ρ)} have been determined together with the corresponding eigenvalues {ε νr, ,kz } according to the above procedure, one can obtain the local density of states given by: which has dimensions of [volume×energy] -1 . This quantity, which is of primary experimental interest It is further relevant to point out that, contrary to a common assumption that the radial vortex profile approaches asymptotically the bulk value ∆ 0 in an exponential way Accordingly, in the following we shall find it convenient to partition the vortex profile into an "inner" region (where the exponential decay applies) and an "outer" region (where the power-law behavior takes over), the boundary between the two regions being (approximately) taken at ρ ≈ ξ. The counting of the number of bound states will similarly be partitioned. We are then going to distinguish whether a given bound state with quantum numbers (ν r , , k z ) belongs to the inner or to the outer region, by looking at the (dimensionless) partial normalization condition: We then attribute the location of the bound state to the inner (outer) region when P νr, ,kz (ξ) exceeds (falls behind), say, 0.5 as compared to the value 1.0 of the complete normalization when the upper limit of the integral in Eq. ( In practice, the bound states in the inner region (and therefore their number) are numerically much more under control than those in the outer region, especially when the latter ones hinge mostly close to the boundary at R out where the connection with decaying exponentials is enforced through the boundary conditions. In addition, when several vortices would be packed up together to form a vortex lattice, the nature of the bound states in the remote external part of the outer region of what would have been a vortex in isolation is expected to be strongly modified by the presence of the surrounding vortices. For this reason, it may anyway not be worth to insist in extending the size of the outer region beyond those values of R out that we have considered in practice for the numerical calculations. We pass to characterize the presence of bound states in an isolated vortex, for all temperatures in the superfluid phase and couplings along the BCS-BEC crossover, by taking advantage of our accurate numerical calculations in terms of the BdG equations following the methodologies developed in Ref. One of the main questions to be asked at the outset is where the various contributions, in which the local density of states N (ρ; E) of Eq. ( Accordingly, we express the local density of states N (ρ; E) of Eq. ( We have further verified that, past unitarity upon approaching the BEC regime, there occurs a progressive depletion of N (ρ; E) ib in the central region of the vortex, implying that bound states tend to disappear in this coupling regime. In addition, for given coupling this depletion is essentially complete for T = 0, while it becomes only partial upon increasing the temperature. We shall return below to a more detailed discussion of this feature. Another relevant piece of information can be obtained by a simple count of the number of bound states, separately in the inner and outer regions as defined above. To this end, we recall that the bound-state wave functions are localized in the x-y plane orthogonal to the z axis of the vortex, so that a whole branch spanned by the wave vector k z is associated with each bound state with given angular momentum and radial quantum number ν r . Accordingly, in the following the numbers of bound states will be given per unit length along the direction of the vortex axis, since they will be summed (integrated) over the wave vector k z (as it is also done in Eq. ( Figure A few general features can be evidenced from these plots: (i) Both N inner and N outer rapidly decrease from the BCS regime to the UL and quickly vanish once the BEC side past unitarity is reached, thus implying that the bound states have no relevance for the composite bosons that form out of fermion pairs in the BEC regime; (ii) For given coupling, N inner increases upon increasing the temperature, whereby the depth ∆ 0 of the vortex decreases but at the same time its width ξ increases; (iii) For given coupling and temperature, N outer by far exceeds N inner , although N outer appears to be essentially independent of temperature. It should be remarked that the values of N outer we have obtained are numerically less reliable that those of N inner , because they depend on the value of the radius R out where the boundary conditions are enforced on the solutions of the BdG equations (cf. Section II). In this context, we found it numerically too demanding to make this radius exceed k F R out = 1500 for the smaller coupling we could reach deep in the BCS regime. For these reasons, in the following we shall limit ourselves to further examine the dependence of N inner on ∆ 0 and ξ, leaving aside similar considerations for N outer . A characteristic feature, that distinguishes whether a homogeneous attractive Fermi gas lies in the weak-coupling (BCS) or the unitary regime, is the degree of asymmetry of the single-particle spectral function, with the two peaks of this spectral function being much more symmetric about zero frequency in the BCS regime than at the UL As we have already noted while commenting Figs. 1-3, all three contributions to the local density of states N (ρ; E) that we have considered become progressively more asymmetric when passing from the BCS to the unitary regime. A more quantitative characterization of this asymmetry can be obtained as follows. Let us consider a spatial region in the inner part of the vortex, say, of linear extension ξ/2 around the vortex center at ρ = 0 (in such a way to concentrate our attention close to the center of the vortex). We then look for the behavior of the integrated quantity where N (ρ; E) is the local density of states Plots of D(E) vs E are shown in Fig. An even sharper characterization, about the development of this asymmetry when approaching the UL from the BCS side, can be obtained by integrating D(E) over either the positive or negative portions of the gap region, which have dimensions of [length] -1 . In this way, a suitable asymmetry parameter (N + -N -)/(N + + N -) can then be introduced, which can be analyzed as a function of coupling and temperature. The results are reported in Fig. In Fig. Accordingly, we have organized the numerical values N inner from Fig. The resulting linear scaling dependence of N inner vs ∆ 0 ξ 2 (which is evidenced in the figure by the straight line N inner /k F = 0.263 ∆ 0 ξ 2 ) appears quite remarkable, to the extent that essentially all data with individually quite different values of ∆ 0 and ξ fall on this straight line. We have further verified that this scaling relation , where the values of ∆0 and ξ are obtained at given coupling and temperature. For each coupling value listed in the figure, the values of Ninner correspond to the three temperatures T = (0, 0.5, 0.9)Tc (with the exception of the coupling (kF aF ) -1 = -2.0 for which the value for T = 0.95 Tc is also added, and of the coupling (kF aF ) -1 = -4.0 for which the value for T = 0.9 Tc is missing). between N inner and ∆ 0 ξ 2 holds also when the counting of bound states residing in the inner region is enlarged, by shifting ξ, e.g., to 2ξ in Eq. ( In this paper, we have given a detailed account about the number, energy location, spatial location, and shape of the large number of bound states that are present within an isolated vortex embedded in an otherwise homogeneous superfluid. We have done this by an accurate solution of the BdG equations based on the methods developed in Ref. We have further verified that bound states occur in the interior of a vortex for couplings on the BCS side of unitary, and rapidly disappear when entering the BEC regime past unitarity. Consistently with this theoretical finding, a clear experimental finding for the occurrence of bound states in a vortex in a superconducting material In this paper, the analysis has been limited to considering an s-wave order parameter, and the question may arise about the role of the symmetry of the order parameter on our results. In this context, we may refer to the results of Ref. A further comment is in order on the existence of bound states in the continuum (usually referred to as BICs) that we have found in an isolated vortex for symmetry reasons, owing to the different values of the quantum k z between these bound states and the continuum states in which they are embedded. As a consequence, a slight geometric perturbation of the vortex line along the z-direction could turn BIC states into decaying resonances On physical grounds, the Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon bound states that are present in the interior of a vortex have a similar origin as the Andreev-Saint-James states that show up as subgap states in the context of the Josephson effect which to the leading order yields C = -s 2 /2 and γ = -2. For s = 1 it results that f (η) tends to unity as f (η) = 1 -1 2η 2 , as reported in Ref. 