Typical nanoparticle-based plasmonic index sensors detect the spectral shift of localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) upon the change of environmental index. Therefore, they require broadband illumination and spectrometers. The sensitivity and flexibility of nanoparticle-based index sensors are usually limited because LSPR peaks are usually broad and the spectral position cannot be freely designed. Here, we present a fully designable index sensing platform using plasmonic Doppler gratings (PDGs), which provide broadband and azimuthal angle dependent grating periodicity. Different from LSPR sensors, PDG index sensors are based on the momentum matching between photons and surface plasmons via the lattice momentum of the grating. Therefore, index change is translated into the variation of inplane azimuthal angle for photon-to-plasmon coupling, which manifests as directly observable dark bands in the reflection image. The PDG can be freely designed to optimally match the range of index variation for specific applications. In this work, we demonstrate PDG index sensors for large (n = 1.00~1.52) and small index variation (n = 1.3330~1.3650). The tiny and nonlinear index change of water-ethanol mixture has been clearly observed and accurately quantified. Since the PDG is a dispersive device, it enables on-site and single-color index sensing without a spectrometer and provides a promising spectroscopic platform for on-chip analytical applications. Introduction Plasmonic nanoparticle-based sensors have attracted tremendous attention. Here, α is the incident angle,  0 is the vacuum wavelength of the incident light, ɛ m is the permittivity of material, P is the periodicity of the grating, n d is the refractive index of the surrounding dielectric medium and m is the resonant order. Eq. ( (2) Here, φ is the in-plane azimuthal angle, at which free space photons effectively excite SPs. ∆r is the radius increment and d is the displacement of the ring center. They are the two most important design parameters for a PDG because they determine the span and the central wavelength of the spectral window. By choosing these two design parameters, a PDG can be easily designed for optimal sensing performance for large index change or small index change. Inserting Eq. ( Nanofabrication PDGs were fabricated by applying gallium focused-ion beam (FIB) milling (Helios Nanolab 600i System, FEI Company) to create grooves on the surface of chemically grown ultrasmooth single-crystalline gold flakes The angle distribution of grating periodicity and thus the sensitivity can be freely designed by choosing suitable ∆r and d. From azimuthal angle 0 to 180, the periodicity changes continuously from the maximum ∆r + d to the minimum ∆r -d. For example, for large index change (n d = 1.00 to 1.52), the PDG has been designed to possess grating periodicity from 360 nm to 640 nm by choosing ∆r = 500 nm and d = 140 nm. For sensing the small index variation of the water-ethanol mixture (n d = 1.3330 to 1.3650), the PDG has been designed to "zoom-in" to this range by choosing ∆r = 390 nm and d = 40 nm. The possibility to freely design and optimize the sensitivity for specific applications makes PDG a convenient and unique index sensing platform. Figure By plotting the open angle (2φ) between the two symmetric SP resonance bands (upper panel of Fig. Here, the tiny and nonlinear index change due to the formation of hydrogen bonds in water-ethanol mixture was used as the model system. When water (n d = 1.3330) and ethanol (n d = 1.3615) are mixed, the refractive index of the mixture solution can go up to n d = 1.3650, exceeding that of pure ethanol. This is due to the intermolecular interaction between water and ethanol molecules. The nonlinear refractive index change has been broadly used to evaluate the density of the water-ethanol mixture and to indicate their mixing ratio. We have demonstrated the design and applications of PDG index sensors for large range and small range of index change. Since the working principle of PDG index sensor is based on photon-to-plasmon coupling via azimuthal angle dependent plasmonic gratings, the sensitivity of a PDG index sensor can be easily optimized for specific applications by choosing suitable design parameters. With an optimal design, we have demonstrated the ability of PDG to quantitatively measure very small index change of water-ethanol mixture. The peculiar index enhancement in water-ethanol solution has been clearly observed and precisely quantified. Since PDG is a planar and dispersive microstructure, it can be easily integrated into microfluidic channels for on-site spectrometer-free index sensing. With surface functionalization, PDGs can also perform spectrometerfree biochemical analysis. By incorporating active controllable materials, it is also possible to actively control the optical response of a PDG. We anticipate various sensing applications using PDGs. Supporting Fitting parameters used for the profiles in Fig. The uncertainty in peak position (x-x m ) was estimated using the following equation (Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1986, 57, 1152-1157) , where the dimensionless quantity t is the amplitude threshold level. Г is the considered data range under the threshold t. The choice of t = 2 corresponds to using the measurement signal falling within ± 2Г about the peak maximum. √S reflects the signal to noise ratio for Poisson statistics. Δ is a numerical constant that depends on the chosen confidence level c. For c = 0.68 ("±1 σ"), Δ takes values of 1, 2.3, or 3.5 for opening one, two or three parameters for fitting. In this work, three parameters have been open for fitting. Therefore, Δ = 3.5 has been used. N Г is the number of data points within the distance Г from the peak center. The dependence on the threshold setting for Poisson-distributed noise is given by the function √ tF p (t). The value of √ tF p (t) is obtained from the reference (Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1986, 57, 1152-1157). In our work, it is 1.3 for data with Poisson noise at t = 2. Taking the intensity angle distribution of a PDG in air illuminated with red light (λ=650 nm) as an example, SNR was calculated to be 10.54, the uncertainty in peak position is thus x -x m = 92 Table For the Table of Content Only