A full-zone 30-band k•p model is developed as an efficient and reliable tool to compute electronic band structure in Ge1-xSnx alloy. The model was first used to reproduce the electronic band structures in Ge and α-Sn obtained with empirical tight binding and ab initio methods. Input parameters for the 30-band k•p model are carefully calibrated against prior empirical predications and experimental data. Important material properties such as effective mass for electrons and holes, Luttinger parameters, and density of states are obtained for Ge1-xSnx alloy with the composition range 0 < x < 0.3. The 30-band k•p model that requires far less computing resources is a necessary capability for optimization of sophisticated devices made from Ge1-xSnx alloy with a large parameter space to explore. The field of Si photonics has seen impressive growth since the early vision in 1990s The electronic band structure of bulk Ge 1-x Sn x alloy can be calculated using empirical pseudopotential method (EPM) In this article, we present a 30-band k•p model that can be used to map out full-zone electronic energy band structures for Ge 1-x Sn x alloys where Sn composition varies from 0 to 0.3. This composition range covers most GeSn alloys currently under development for device applications. The model is anchored at reproducing the previously known band structures of Ge and α-Sn that are obtained using either ETB or ab initio method. This step establishes a set of reliable input parameters for the 30-band k•p model at the two extreme compositions: x = 0, 1. The parameters needed for any Ge 1-x Sn x alloy in 0 < x < 0.3 are then obtained in the spirit of virtual crystal approximation (VCA) with either linear or quadratic interpolations between the two extreme points at the composition x that is adjusted with available experimental results. The electronic band structures calculated with the 30-band k•p model allow us to extract many electronic and optical properties that are important to electronic and photonic devices of all kinds made from Ge 1-x Sn x . In this work we present the results of effective masses along different crystalline directions, Luttinger parameters, and density of states (DOS) at Γ and L valleys for relaxed Ge 1-x Sn x alloys spanning across the alloy composition range 0.0 < x < 0.3 at room temperature. In addition, this model can be used to pinpoint the alloy composition x for Ge 1-x Sn x to transition from indirect to direct bandgap and the prediction x = 7.25% is in good agreement with experimental measurement The 30-band k•p model Hamiltonian matrix can be written as whose diagonal blocks of different orders where the wavevector , and diag(...) stands for diagonal matrix. E Γ is the eigen energy level for the considered Γ states. H SO Γ is the spin-orbital coupling (SOC) matrix: where ∆ Γ is the SOC strength. The nonzero off-diagonal blocks in Eq. ( The 15 energy-level parameters of various Γ states from O h and the SOC strength introduced by Condona and Pollock The starting point of our calculation is the electron structure of single crystal Ge and α-Sn. The previous application of the 30-band k•p model to obtain the Ge band structure For α-Sn it has been reported that ab initio calculation could result in underestimating the band gap because of its negative band gap The VCA 0.566-0.449x+1.401x 2 for both L and Γ-valley bandgaps as given in Table Luttinger parameters that adequately characterize the valance band near Γ point can also be obtained using the following relationships with the HH and LH effective masses along [001] and hh At last, DOS in conduction band and valence bands, which are key features determining a range of electronic and optical properties that impact device performance, are calculated for Ge 1-x Sn x alloy with different compositions. Figure In conclusion, we present a 30-band k•p model that can be used efficiently to calculate the electronic band structures for relaxed Ge 1-x Sn x alloy of various compositions. This model was first validated to show consistency in calculating the electronic band structures of the α-Sn and Ge by ab initio and ETB methods, respectively. Two sets of input parameters were optimized for band structure calculation at various Sn compositions: 1) coupling matrix elements and 2) eigen energy levels and SO splitting at Γ point for various Sn compositions, 0 < x < 0.3. Based on this model, the indirect-to-direct crossover is determined to take place at the Sn composition of 7.25% which is good agreement with previous predication and experimental result. Bowing parameters that describe the relationship between bandgaps at Γ and L-valley and Sn composition are obtained. The calculated band structure allows for extraction of electron effective mass at Γ valley, longitudinal and transverse electron effective mass at L-valley, as well as HH and LH effective masses along different crystalline directions. From these HH and LH effective masses, Luttinger parameters that characterize the valence band around Γ-valley in Ge 1-x Sn x alloy can be established. Finally, DOS in both conduction and valence band as well as their associated effective-mass DOS can be calculated as well. The 30-band k•p model fulfills the need for an efficient and effective tool that can be used in calculating the electronic band structure of Ge 1-x Sn x alloy across its entire BZ, establishing material parameters, and optimizing device performance. a From Ref. 5. b From Ref. 6. . Matrix elements of the linear momentum p(a.u.) used in the present 30-band k•p model. All are in atomic unit(a.u.).