Spin fluctuations are widely believed to play an important role in the superconducting mechanisms of unconventional hightemperature superconductors. Spin fluctuations have been observed including iron-based superconductors. However, in some iron-based superconductors such as LaFePO 0.9 , they have not been observed by inelastic neutron scattering (INS). LaFePO 0.9 is an iron-based superconductor with a low superconducting transition temperature (T c = 5 K), where line nodes are observed in the superconducting gap function. The line-node symmetry typically originates from sign reversal of the order parameter in spin-fluctuation-mediated superconductivity. This contradiction has been a long-standing mystery of this superconductor. Herein, spin fluctuations were found at high energies such as 30-50 meV with comparable intensities to an optimally doped LaFeAs(O,F). Based on this finding, the line-node symmetry can be explained naturally as spin-fluctuationmediated superconductivity. In iron-based superconductors, superconductivity appears in the vicinity of an antiferromagnetic (AF) phase and a structural phase transition from tetragonal to orthorhombic phases. Therefore, spin and multi-orbital dynamics are believed to play an important role in the superconducting mechanisms The parent stoichiometric material LaFePO 1.0 exhibits no superconductivity, long range magnetic order, or structural phase transition The constant-energy (E) cuts of the dynamical structure factor S(Q, E) at each momentum and energy transfer (Q and E) for LaFePO 0.9 and the optimally doped LaFeAsOF at 30 K are shown in Fig. At high energies, however, a spin fluctuation in LaFePO 0.9 was found as shown in Fig. For the temperature dependence, magnetic signals usually become weak at high temperatures mainly due to the shortening of lifetime. On the other hand, phonon intensity simply increases with increasing temperature based on the Bose factor. Figure Any strong AF spin fluctuations have not been observed previously for both LaFePO 0.9 and the optimally doped LaFeAsOF in the nuclear spin relaxation rate 1/T 1 T of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements On the other hand, the spin fluctuations in the optimally doped LaFeAsOF have a much lower energy component, as shown in Fig. The existence of low-energy spin fluctuations may be related to the proximity to the AF parent compound with a structural phase transition. For the LaFeAsOF system, the low-temperature enhancement of 1/T 1 T is observed only in the vicinity of the AF ordered phase. Upon electron doping, the enhancement is rapidly suppressed, suggesting an energy gap in χ"(E) at low energies 