The compositional diffusional trajectories for phase-separation of γ(face-centered-cubic (f.c.c.))-γ′(L12) phases are studied in a quaternary Ni-0.10Al-0.085Cr-0.02Re (mole fraction) alloy, aged at 700 o C for 0 h to 1024 h, utilizing atom-probe tomography (APT). As the γ′(L12)precipitates grow, Ni, Cr and Re become enriched and the Al is depleted near the interface on the γ(f.c.c.)-matrix-side as a result of diffusional fluxes crossing the γ(f.c.c)/γ′(L12) interface. The experimental (APT) compositional trajectories of the two-phases, γ(f.c.c.) and γ′(L12), are displayed in a quaternary phase-diagram, employing a tetrahedron, and compared with the Philippe-Voorhees (P-V) coarsening model, which includes the off-diagonal terms of the diffusion tensor for a multi-component system. and oxidation resistance at elevated temperatures In a dilute binary alloy, the coarsening of precipitates (Ostwald ripening) is described by the Lifshitz-Slyozov-Wagner (LSW) diffusion-controlled model Herein, we present detailed results concerning γ(f.c.c.)-γ′(L12) phase-separation and the temporal-dependent compositional trajectories for a quaternary Ni-Cr-Al-Re alloy utilizing APT. The effect of Re, a slow diffuser in Ni-Al-Cr alloys, on the temporal evolution of the compositional trajectories is represented utilizing a tetrahedron for a quaternary phase-diagram for the first time. The Ni-based superalloy was prepared by induction-melting of relatively high purity elemental constituents under a partial Ar atmosphere and chill-cast in a copper mold to form a polycrystalline master ingot with a target composition of Ni-0.10Al-0.085Cr-0.022Re (mole fraction). The cast ingot was fully homogenized in the γ(f.c.c.)-phase field at 1300 o C for 20 h in vacuum and furnace cooled. The ingot was then sectioned into 1 cm thick slices, which were resolutioned at 980 o C for 4 h in a drop-quench furnace and immediately water quenched without exposure to atmospheric pressure. The final solutionizing temperature is based on the differential thermal analysis (DTA) solvus temperature, ≈ 922 o C, which was performed on homogenized samples, at a rate of 10 K min -1 in a helium atmosphere, cycled twice through the temperature range of the reaction. Finally, as-quenched samples were aged in the γ(f.c.c.) plus γ′(L12)-phasefield at 700 o C, for times ranging from 0.25 h to 1024 h in flowing argon, followed immediately by a quench into ice-brine water. APT nanotip specimens were cut from each of the aged samples and sharpened by a two-step electro-polishing procedure; 10% by volume perchloric acid in acetic acid and 2 vol.% perchloric acid in butoxyethanol at (5 to 21) V dc The 3-D APT experiments were performed utilizing a local-electrode atom-probe tomograph, LEAP5000XS * , which has an 80 % detection efficiency Figure where K is the rate constant for the temporal evolution of <R(t)>, ' is the difference in the equilibrium compositions between the γ(f.c.c.)-and γ′(L12)-phases and the superscript letter T indicates the transpose of , M is the mobility tensor and 1 M -is its inverse, and ' m V γ is the molar volume of the γ′(L12)-phase, (6.7584 x 10 -6 ) nm 3 mol -1 | P a g e The reduction of the number of equations from N to N-1 is obtained from the definition of the second-derivative of the Gibbs free energy as a dependent variable The value of σ is also strongly influenced by the off-diagonal terms in the G γ and D tensors, which are included in the P-V model. The compositional trajectory as a function of aging time in the γ(f.c.c.)-matrix is determined from where ,eq i C γ are the far-field concentrations of elements in the γ(f.c.c)-matrix at infinite time. The γ(f.c.c.)-matrix supersaturations have the same temporal exponent, -1/3, in the LSW and P-V models, which have, however, a different amplitude for each element with a different rate constant. Because the amplitude is a product of a time-independent scalar and the difference of equilibrium compositions, the matrix supersaturations coincide with the tie-line representing the equilibrium conditions between the two-phases. The time-dependent composition of the γ′(L12)-phase precipitate is given by where ',eq i C γ is equilibrium concentrations of element, i, in the γ′(L12)-precipitates, V ∆ is the partial molar volume difference between the γ(f.c.c.)-and γ′(L12)-phases, ' G γ is the secondderivative of the Gibbs free energies with respect to concentrations in the γ′(L12)-phase, which are obtained using TCNi8 employing Thermo-Calc The calculated and measured compositions of the γ(f.c.c.)-matrix and γ′(L12)-precipitate phases are presented in a partial Ni-Al-Cr-Re quaternary phase-diagram utilizing a tetrahedron, Fig. (4 and 5) and are represented by small solid-yellow circles. Because the P-V model is only for the quasi-stationary coarsening regime with an equilibrium volume fraction, the calculated points commence at an aging time of 16 h for both the γ(f.c.c.)-and γ′(L12)-phases, which are compared with the APT results employing blue-and red-circles, which start at 0 h (Table In summary, the compositional diffusional trajectories in a phase-separating quaternary Ni-0.1Al-0.85Cr-0.02Re (mole fraction) alloy aged at 700 o C for 0 h to 1024 h are studied utilizing the temporal evolutions of the concentration profiles at the γ(f.c.c.)/γ′(L12)-interface, utilizing proximity histograms, as determined by atom-probe tomography (APT). The local equilibrium concentrations across the γ(f.c.c.)/γ′(L12) interfaces are represented in a quaternary phase-diagram, employing a tetrahedron, and compared with the Philippe-Voorhees (P-V) coarsening model in the quasi-stationary coarsening regime. Initially, the small diffusivities of Cr and Re compared to Al's large diffusivity, results in a curvilinear behavior during the nucleation and growth regimes of the precipitates, which deviate from the equilibrium γ(f.c.c.)-γ′(L12) tie-line. In the quasi-stationary coarsening regime, >16 h, the concentration trajectories are close to a straight line (a vector), which follow the stationary diffusional behavior described by the P-V model for both the γ(f.c.c.) and v N t γ ∆