Recent experimental discoveries of superconductivity and other exotic electronic states in twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) call for a reconsideration of our traditional theories of these states, usually based on the assumption of the presence of a Fermi surface. Here we show how such developments may even help us finding mechanisms of increasing the critical temperature of superconductivity towards the room temperature. Last year's Physics World Breakthrough of the Year award went to the experimental discovery 1 of an exotic superconducting state in a system where two layers of graphene were twisted close to a "magic" angle of around 1 degree. This angle was believed to be important because of an earlier prediction of a "flat" electronic band taking place at this angle. Needless to say, these observations lead to a flurry of theoretical activity, with dozens of papers trying to explain the observations from different points of view, including our own. 6 This quest is still on-going, and here we try to illustrate two fundamental aspects of these systems. First, we cannot extend what is known in regular Fermi surface systems to those with flat bands by simply increasing the density of states or considering some generic low-energy Hamiltonian. Rather, in many cases we need to know the structure of the entire flat band. Secondly, we discuss how it might be possible to control the critical temperature of superconductivity in these systems. Let us start by sketching why the flat band physics becomes essential in TBG. Placing two honeycomb lattices on top of each other and twisting them relative to each other (Fig. The picture given here is a schematic one, but can be reproduced by more microscopic calculations. For example, Fig. One can also generalize the BCS theory for other types of electronic spectra. For Dirac or Weyl semimetals the density of states becomes very small close to the Dirac or Weyl points. On the mean-field level, this means that interaction effects are suppressed. For example, the Cooper instability according to which any Fermi surface is unstable to an infinitesimally small attractive interaction is turned into a more stringent condition for superconductivity: at the Dirac or Weyl points, superconducting state is obtained only above a critical coupling strength. The experimentally obtained critical temperatures for the twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) are of the order of one or two kelvin at maximum. Based on the electron-phonon model (assuming it is the valid approach, which is still under debate), how can we understand this low value? It is not due to the weakness of the electron-phonon interaction, but rather from the small size of the flat band: In twisted bilayer graphene, the flat band takes place in the first Brillouin zone of the moiré superlattice. In momentum space the area of the flat band is inversely proportional to the square of the superlattice lattice constant, and the latter is quite large around the magic twist angles. To increase the critical temperature, we would hence need a way to create more extended flat bands. From the viewpoint of the theory more extended flat bands can be obtained in multilayer systems. The extreme case would be bulk graphite where it is known that extended flat bands appear in systems containing interfaces between differently twisted or stacked graphite regions. 