The last five years have witnessed a remarkable progress in the field of lead halide perovskite materials and devices. Examining the existing body of literature reveals staggering inconsistencies in the reported results among different research groups with a particularly wide spread in the photovoltaic performance and stability of devices. In this work we demonstrate that fractional, quite possibly unintentional, deviations in the precursor solution stoichiometry can cause significant changes in the properties of the perovskite layer as well as in the performance and stability of perovskite photovoltaic devices. We show that while the absorbance and morphology of the layers remains largely unaffected, the surface composition and energetics, crystallinity, emission efficiency, energetic disorder and storage stability are all very sensitive to the precise stoichiometry of the precursor solution. Our results elucidate the origin of the irreproducibility and inconsistencies of reported results among different groups as well as the wide spread in device performance even within individual studies. Finally, we propose a simple experimental method to identify the exact stoichiometry of the perovskite layer that researchers can employ to confirm their experiments are performed consistently without unintentional variations in precursor stoichiometry. Over the past 5 years lead halide perovskites have been shown to be remarkable materials for application in low cost solar energy devices with efficiencies of up to 22.7 % having been demonstrated to date. Many deposition methods have been reported to result in smooth and pinhole-free perovskite films employed in high performing devices. The vast majority of these are based on either a solvent quenching technique, or a two-step process using a mixed perovskite composition of formamidinium (FA), methylammonium (MA), I and Br. Several studies have investigated the effect of stoichiometry on device performance and, in some cases, stability, with conflicting results showing that either excess PbI2 In this article, we present a detailed study on how fractional, and quite possibly unintentional, changes in the stoichiometry of the precursor solution have an enormous effect on the properties (surface composition and energetics, photoluminescence, crystallinity, energetic disorder etc.) of perovskite films with seemingly similar, or the same, microstructure and as a result on the device performance and stability. Our study reveals that such fractional changes in the precursor solution could account for the often reported and encountered discrepancies between results of various research groups, and even within the same laboratory. Our work provides vital information on the importance of accurate control and optimization of stoichiometry during fabrication in order to obtain reproducible results compatible with large-scale production and long-term stability, and contributes to further understanding of the sensitive intrinsic properties of this material class. We employ a recipe based on a lead acetate trihydrate (Pb(Ac)2•3H2O, abbreviated as PbAc2) precursor with the addition of hypophosphorous acid (HPA). However, for a precursor solution amount of 1 ml at 42 wt % (a typical amount for laboratories with small sized substrates), a fractional variation of ≈ 0.5 mg MAI (while weighting 295.5 mg) is sufficient to change the stoichiometry by Δy = 0.005. Alternatively, a deviation of as little as ≈ 1.5 μL when adding an appropriate amount of MAI/N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) stock solution to PbAc2 will also result in such a change. Such errors are so small that they commonly occur in laboratory settings. Throughout the study, we vary the stoichiometry from y = 2.96 to y = 3.075 and perform the variations by adding precisely controlled amounts (in a range of μL) of a MAI/DMF stock solution into the starting perovskite solution (with an accurately weighted stoichiometry y). The exact procedure and parameters of solution preparation are explained in greater detail in the Experimental Section and Supplementary Note 1. Fig. Such remarkable spread in VOC has been reported in literature when comparing the results published by different groups using the same device structure Our results indicate that even by using identical fabrication conditions and the same recipe for deposition, the IP of the resulting films can be tuned over a range of 0.5 eV due to fractional variations of the precursor stoichiometry. We note that the Pb4f7/2, I3d5/2 and N1s core levels shift to lower binding energies as the precursor stoichiometry increases (Fig. As expected, the ELQE increases over three orders of magnitude, indicating that indeed the recombination at the perovskite/PCBM interface is a strongly reduced with increasing stoichiometry. The remarkable changes in the composition and electronic structure of the surface suggests that the excess MAI from the precursor solution is mainly incorporated into the perovskite lattice in the surface region and possibly in the grain boundaries, while the bulk of the film is composed of a more stoichiometric composition. Measurements at 6 kV are more representative of film regions closer towards the surface, while those at 10 kV probe the complete bulk. 41 Fig. While it is often claimed that iodine vacancies are the most abundant defects in perovskite films, In addition to the large variation in device performance reported by different research groups for seemingly similar device structures and fabrication procedures, large variations in device stability have also been reported. In stark contrast, even a minute excess of MAI in the precursor solution (y >= 3.00) results in significantly reduced stability, with a decrease in the JSC and FF apparent already in the first several hundreds of hours. The SPO measurement in Fig. Recently it has been shown that device stability, when exposed to O2 These results show that the fractional stoichiometric variations do not significantly alter the microstructure of the active layer and thus cannot be the cause of the strong variations in device performance and stability. Many studies employing PEDOT:PSS report rapid performance degradation, often even when stored in inert atmospheres without light illumination. As we have shown previously, the fractional variations result in strong changes in surface composition, especially in the amount of MA + and I -species. The diffusivity and reactivity of these species results in device degradation, which is further accelerated by the presence of moisture, heat or light. To probe changes in the crystal structure we performed X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements in 2θ/ω scan mode, as shown in Broadening and shifts in the XRD peak can be induced either by a reduced grain size (Scherrer broadening) or increased microstrain in perovskite films which could influence device efficiency and stability. Thus, especially for the range 3.00 < y < 3.05, we exclude the rather small changes in FWHM and peak intensity as the cause for the strongly reduced device stability we observe. Generally, improved crystallinity has been linked to improved device performance. Emission properties of perovskite films have been extensively studied with conflicting reports regarding the evolution of the photoluminescence quantum efficiency (PLQE) over time and the influence of atmospheric conditions. While all films show an enhancement of PLQE in nitrogen, the dynamics of this process is strongly affected by the exact stoichiometry. Slightly overstoichiometric films show the fastest rise time and saturate at a lower PLQE, while the understoichiometric films do not exhibit a stabilized PLQE even after 20 min of illumination. The lower PLQE of overstoichiometric samples is attributed to the increased number of non-radiative decays paths due to a higher amount of iodine at the surface. an increase of the PL occurs for understoichiometric samples (2.985 < y < 3.005), while for y > 3.005 a quenching of the PL can be observed. Several studies have shown that the PL response to light and various atmospheres on a short timescale (i.e. before degradation occurs), is related to trap annihilation either due to exposure to oxygen, The degree of energetic disorder (characterized by Urbach energy Eu) of the perovskite films is also strongly influenced by the exact precursor stoichiometry. Photothermal deflection spectroscopy (PDS) measurements (Fig. To explore the universality of the effect of fractional variations in precursor stoichiometry on device performance, we also varied the device architecture (standard vs. inverted) and the perovskite deposition recipe (PbAc2-based vs. PbI2-based). For the PbI2-based recipe, we chose the commonly fabrication route in which the perovskite is derived from of a MAI:PbI2 mixture in DMF:DMSO co-solvent, using a solvent quenching method. Detailed information concerning the methods of solution preparation and device fabrication for each type of device can be found in the Experimental section and Supplementary Note 1. The PV parameters and an illustration of the layer stacks for the four studied device types are presented in Fig. In conclusion we have revealed the tremendous effect of fractional, and possibly unintentional, variations in the precursor solution on a variety of properties of perovskite films, their photovoltaic performance and stability. Our results suggest that such small variations could account for the often-reported discrepancies in literature and widely varying device performances even when fabricated in the same laboratory, and highlight the critical importance of using the same exact stoichiometry for device fabrication as for film characterization. We suggest that some published results should be carefully examined and rechecked using various perovskite recipes and stoichiometries. Our work highlights the low tolerance perovskite materials have to small variations in precursor stoichiometry and underlines the need to use high precision and high accuracy instruments (balance, pipettes) with great care when preparing the perovskite solution. We also propose a simple experimental method based on photoluminescence spectroscopy that would allow the identification of systematic errors and should be routinely used as a tool for confirmation that studies are performed on films and devices of the same stoichiometry. Finally, our results demonstrate that optimization of devices should be performed by carefully fine-tuning the precursor stoichiometry. While reports investigating the effect of precursor ratio changes on the order of 10-20% are common in literature, we show that even a 0.5-1% difference is sufficient to drastically vary the device performance and stability. To perform such studies accurately, we propose that researchers apply our method of using a single perovskite solution, the stoichiometry of which is gradually tuned by adding small amounts of stock solution of only one of the precursors. We hope that our work will help researchers to obtain more reproducible results, as well as help to accomplish a good control over stoichiometries for solution processed devices allowing for further optimization of their efficiency and stability. Poly-TPD and 0.2 mg/ml F4-TCNQ in Toluene and was spin coated at 2000 rpm for 30 s, followed by annealing at 130° for 10 min in ambient air. The solar cells using SnO2/PCBM as HTM had the architecture of FTO/SnO2/PCBM/ CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag. Tin (IV) chloride pentahydrate (SnCl4•5H2O; Sigma-Aldrich) was dissolved in anhydrous 2-propanol (0.05M) and stirred for 30 min. The solution was spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 30 s. The substrates were then dried at 100° C for 10 min and annealed at 180° C for 60 min. PCBM was dissolved in anhydrous chlorobenzene (CB; Sigma-Aldrich) at 4 mg/ml and spin-coated on top of the as-prepared SnO2 layer in a nitrogen-filled glove box at 4000 rpm for 40 s and annealed in nitrogen at 70°C for 5 min. The solar cells using SnO2 nanoparticles (SnO2-NP) as HTM had the architecture of ITO/SnO2-NP/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag. The SnO2 colloid precursor was obtained from Alfa Aesar (tin(IV) oxide, 15% in H2O colloidal dispersion). Before use, the particles were diluted by H2O to 2.67%. The final solution was spin coated onto glass/ITO substrates at 3000 rpm for 30 s and then baked on a hot plate in ambient air at 150° C for 30 min. The perovskite solution for the PbAc2 recipe was spin coated at 2000 rpm for 60 s in a drybox (RH < 0.5 %). After drying for 5 min at room temperature, the samples were annealed at 100 °C for 5 min. The perovskite solution for the MAPI recipe was spin coated first at 5000 rpm for 10s with a 6s ramp-up and 6s ramp-down in a nitrogen filled glovebox. 18 s after the spin-coating program began, 300 μL of Anisole was dynamically dispensed onto the wet perovskite film. The film was transferred to a hotplate immediately after spin-coating and annealed for 15 minutes at 100°C. The perovskite solution for the CsFAMA recipe was spin coated first at 1000 rpm for 15 s and then at 6000 rpm for 30 s in a nitrogen filled glovebox. 200 μL toluene was dripped onto the sample 10 s before the end of the second spinning step. The film was transferred to a hotplate immediately after spin-coating and annealed for 30 min at 100°C. For the devices in the inverted architecture, PCBM in chlorobenzene (20 mg mL -1 ) was dynamically spin-coated at 2000 rpm for 45 s and annealed at 100 °C for 10 min in a nitrogen filled glovebox. BCP was fully dissolved in isopropanol (0.5 mg mL -1 ) and dynamically spin coated at 4000 rpm for 30 s. For the devices in the standard architecture, spiro-OMeTAD solution was spin-coated on the perovskite layer at 2,500 r.p.m. for 40 s in a dry box (relative humidity <15%) as a hole-transporting layer. To obtain a spiro-OMeTAD solution, we dissolved 85.7mg spiro-OMeTAD (Borun Technology) in 1ml anhydrous chlorobenzene with additives of 28.8 μl tert-butylpyridine (tBP) and 20 μl lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI) salt in acetonitrile (520 mg/ml). Then the devices were kept in a closed container with a relative humidity ~15-20 % overnight to induce oxidisation. To complete the devices, 100 nm silver electrode was deposited via thermal evaporation under high vacuum. Current density-voltage (J-V) curves. The current density-voltage (J-V) measurements were performed under simulated AM 1.5 sunlight at 100 mW cm -2 irradiance (Abet Sun 3000 Class AAA solar simulator) with a Keithley 2450 Source Measure Unit. The light intensity was calibrated with a Si reference cell (NIST traceable, VLSI) and corrected by measuring the spectral mismatch between the solar spectrum, the spectral response of the perovskite solar cell and the reference cell. The mismatch factor was calculated to be around 10 %. The cells were scanned from forward bias to short circuit and back at a rate of 0.5 V s -1 after holding under illumination at 1.2 V for 2 s. The cells employing PEDOT:PSS as HTL and SnO-NP as ETL were fabricated in Heidelberg with an active area of 0.045 cm -2 . The cells employing Poly-TPD as HTL and SnO2/PCBM as ETL were prepared in Oxford with an active area of 0.0919 cm -2 and a photomask that covers the areas surrounding each pixel from illumination was employed. The External Quantum Efficiency (EQE) was measured with the monochromatic light of a halogen lamp from 375 nm to 820 nm, which was calibrated with a NIST-traceable Si diode (Thorlabs). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). SEM and EDX analysis were performed using an JSM-7610F FEG-SEM (Jeol). Samples were mounted on standard SEM holders using conductive silver paste to avoid sample charging. For SEM, a working distance of 2 mm and an acceleration voltage of 1.5 kV were used. The size distribution of perovskite grains was estimated using the software ImageJ, analyzing at least 400 grains for each sample. For EDX, a working distance of 15 mm and an acceleration voltage of 6 kV or 10 kV were used. The magnification was chosen low and the integration time was kept short to minimize sample damage. Photoemission spectroscopy (XPS/UPS). The perovskite films investigated for PES measurements were fabricated the same way as the corresponding photovoltaic devices. After the films were spin coated in the dry box, they were stored in a nitrogen glovebox before being transferred into an ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) chamber of the PES system (Thermo Scientific ESCALAB 250Xi) for measurements. The samples were exposed to air only for a short time span of approximately 30 seconds. All measurements were performed in the dark and several spots on each sample were measured in order to ensure enough statistics. UPS measurements were carried out using a double-differentially pumped He discharge lamp (hν = 21.22 eV) with a pass energy of 2 eV and a bias at -10 V. XPS measurements were performed using an XR6 monochromated Al Kα source (hν = 1486.6 eV) and a pass energy of 20 eV. Optical absorption spectra were measured with a Jasco UV-660 spectrophotometer in the range from 400 to 820 nm. The absorption of the substrate was subtracted as a baseline correction. To correct for scattering effects and for better comparison, the curves were shifted by a constant value to match at 820 nm. PDS was used to determine Urbach energies of the perovskite films. Perovskite layers for PDS characterization were prepared on spectrosil in an identical way to those on ITO/PEDOT:PSS. The samples were mounted into a sample holder filled with Fluorinert FC-770 (IoLiTec) in a nitrogen filled glovebox. A 150 W Xenon short-arc lamp (Ushio) provides light for a monochromator (Cornerstone 260 Oriel, FWHM 16 nm) to achieve a chopped, tunable, monochromatic pump beam. The heat caused through absorption of the pump light in the perovskite films changes the refractive index of the Fluorinert. This change is detected by deflecting a probe He-Ne-laser (REO) whose displacement in turn is measured by a positionsensitive-detector (Thorlabs, PDP90A). The magnitude of the deflection is determined by a lock-in amplifier (Amatec SR 7230) and directly correlated to the absorption of the film. To estimate the Urbach energies a python leastsquare routine is used to fit an Urbach tail to the measured absorption spectra in the range of the absorption edge. The X-ray diffraction spectra of the prepared films were measured using a Rigaku SmartLab X-ray diffractometer with CuK1 (1.54060 Å) and a HyPix-3000 2D hybrid pixel array detector.