Patterning of diamond-like carbon (DLC) and DLC:metal nanocomposites is of interest for an increasing number of applications. We demonstrate a nanoimprint lithography process based on silicon containing thermoplastic resist combined with plasma etching for straightforward patterning of such films. A variety of different structures with few hundred nanometer feature size and moderate aspect ratios were successfully realized. The quality of produced patterns was directly investigated by the means of optical and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Such structures were further assessed by employing them in the development of gratings for guided mode resonance (GMR) effect. Optical characterization of such leaky waveguide was compared with numerical simulations based on rigorous coupled wave analysis method with good agreement. The use of such structures as refractive index variation sensors is demonstrated with sensitivity up to 319 nm/RIU, achieving an improvement close to 450% in sensitivity compared to previously reported similar sensors. This pronounced GMR signal fully validates the employed DLC material, the technology to pattern it and the possibility to develop DLC based gratings as corrosion and wear resistant refractometry sensors that are able to operate under harsh conditions providing great value and versatility. Patterning of diamond and diamond-like materials is of interest for a number of applications, such as stamps in nanoimprint lithography (NIL), in hard X-ray optics or infrared optics There exists a variety of amorphous carbon materials that can be fabricated employing different deposition techniques using a vast number of precursors. Therefore optical, electrical, mechanical and other properties of DLC films can also be tuned greatly. More detailed information on diamond like coatings can be found in review articles Despite the great potential of such materials, their patterning is still challenging and usually depends on complex processing involving multilayer masks and elaborate etching schemes The GMR phenomenon occurs in subwavelength dielectric periodic structures, where under resonant conditions incident light can be coupled to leaky surface wave and guided by the nanostructure resulting in Wood-type anomalies at the resonant wavelength in the transmission or reflection spectra. Resonant spectral response and wavelength depends on material and geometry of periodic structure. Moreover resonance conditions are also very sensitive to the effective refractive index and extinction changes in the vicinity of the grating surface, i.e. evanescent field of the leaky wave. Combination of GMR sensor together with fluid cell enables to use the leaky waveguide chip as an in-situ refractive index sensor with sensitivities down to 10 -6 RIU (refractive index units). Compared to the metallic nanostructures based on localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) phenomenon, GMR sensors can offer comparable sensitivity, have the advantage of tunability, which allows working in desired region of the spectrum, and also usually have narrower peaks resulting in orders of magnitude higher figure of merit During the growth of the DLC film it is possible to dope it with nanometer scale clusters of metals and semiconductors. This doping of DLC films is an additional advantage since it further broadens their application spectrum and helps to reduce internal stress. However, this also increases the complexity of patterning of such composite materials. Metal-doped DLC has all the intrinsic properties associated with DLC. In addition, DLC films containing metal nanoparticles show interesting optical characteristics due to localized surface plasmon resonance. Silver, gold and copper doped films are particularly interesting because they have a matrix and metal dielectric function and nanoparticle size dependent pronounced plasmonic absorption peak in the visible region of the spectrum. It has been shown that by changing film deposition conditions and applying plasma post processing it is possible to control size and amount of nanoparticles on the surface Although DLC films can be effectively etched with oxygen plasma, the use of standard resist (i.e. PMMA, photoresist, etc.) is hampered since the selectivity between typical organic resists and DLC is extremely low In this work we present a method capable of pattern DLC films in a straightforward way by using thermal nanoimprint lithography (T-NIL) DLC as well as other carbon based materials e.g., diamond or polymeric resists, can be etched by reactive ion etching (RIE) using pure oxygen plasma Furthermore, in order to simplify the process and reduce the number of steps, it was intended to eliminate the fluorine chemistry step and use directly the oxygen plasma for conversion of the SiPol into a SiO 2 hard mask. For this purpose, the residual layer had to be as thin as possible and ideally close to 0 nm. The optimized processing scheme used to pattern DLC and DLC:Ag films in the step by step fashion is graphically depicted in Fig. DLC films were synthesized on silicon and Borofloat glass substrates by a direct ion beam deposition employing a closed drift ion beam source and acetylene gas as a precursor. Film growth parameters were as following: precursor gas C 2 H 2 99.6% purity; base pressure: 2•10 -4 Pa, working pressure 1-2•10 -2 Pa, ion energy 800 eV±20eV, substrate temperature 293±3 K, film thickness 250-450 nm. The refractive index of the films measured by a laser ellipsometer (Gaertner L115) at 633 nm wavelength was 2.8 ± 0.1. DLC:Ag films were fabricated by direct current reactive magnetron sputtering using an argon and acetylene gas mixture and a silver cathode. Film growth parameters using C 2 H 2 with 99.6% purity and Ar with 99.9% purity as precursor gases were as following: base pressure: 2•10 -4 Pa, working pressure 1-2•10 -2 Pa. The Ar flow was 70 sccm, C 2 H 2 flow was 18 sccm, magnetron current 0.1-0.15A, substrate temperature 293±3 K, film thickness 250-450 nm. Before the deposition, substrates were cleaned in acetone (VLSI quality) in an ultrasound bath for 1 min and rinsed in isopropanol. Additionally, oxygen RIE plasma cleaning was used to remove remaining solvents and activate the surface prior DLC deposition. The Vickers hardness (HV) of fabricated coatings measured by nanoindentation employing a HM2000S (Fischer Technology) tester was 9750 HV for DLC and 7470 HV for DLC:Ag, respectively. More details on the used deposition processes, optical and mechanical properties of the films can be found in Master stamps with different geometries for nanoimprint process were fabricated using an EBPG 5000Plus (Vistec) direct writing electron beam lithography (EBL) tool. Zeon ZEP520A spin-coated on silicon substrates was used as a positive e-beam resist. After development and etching with oxygen plasma to remove residual layer, the resist was used as a mask to transfer pattern into silicon by SF 6 /C 4 F 8 ICP plasma. Etched Si masters were cleaned with oxygen plasma. Prior to use the Si masters were cleaned by oxygen plasma (Oxford RIE 80 plasma system, 100 W, 1 mbar, 120 s) and then silanized by trichloro-(1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyl)-silane. Silanization was performed in a custom vacuum chamber at 10 mbar pressure for 10 min. Typical masters were 20×20 mm 2 in area and had 250-350 nm deep cavities. Thermal NIL (T-NIL) was chosen for patterning the resist, due to its large area, high throughput patterning capabilities with nanoscale resolution Imprints with 2-5 min long thermocycles with an applied pressure of 10 7 Pa•s were found to be sufficient for the resist to homogeneously fill stamp cavities for proper and effective pattern transfer. After cooling down to a temperature 20 C below the T g of the polymeric resist material, the stamp was separated from the substrate with the patterned resist layer. The imprinted SiPol resist, exhibiting a negligible residual layer, was directly used as a mask for pattern transfer into DLC, avoiding the usual window opening with fluorine based plasma. Hence, direct etching of DLC with pure oxygen plasma can be performed immediately after imprint. When etched by pure oxygen, the organic content is removed at the surface and SiPol converts into silicon oxide which has high etch resistance. In contrast to the standard process presented before, it converts only a thin surface skin into SiO 2 and thus the remaining SiPol is still organic in the bulk with negligible further thinning down. As for etching of DLC process is fairly straightforward. The exposed DLC surface is chemically etched by reactive oxygen species creating volatile products in combination with physical etching caused by ion bombardment. In order to achieve high etch rates and smoothly etched surfaces a high plasma density, reasonably high bias and low pressure for strongly directional ion bombardment of the sample are required. For these reasons the etchings were done with a RIE100 (Oxford Instruments) ICP system. Optimal etching parameters were determined resulting to highly directional sidewalls and smooth surface of etched DLC structures. The same method was applied for the DLC:Ag nanocomposite containing 8 at.% of Ag. In this case during the O 2 -RIE the DLC was effectively etched but the exposed Ag particles started acting as hard mask preventing the etching of the underlying DLC. In order to overcome this issue, combined O 2 and Ar plasma was used, resulting in a more efficient etching of the nanocomposite material. Although, the selectivity of the mask with respect to the composite material is slightly reduced it was still large enough to allow the patterning. Etch rates of both DLC and DLC:Ag against SiPol are presented in Fig. Numerical simulations of the polarized white light reflection spectrum from the DLC grating were performed employing RCWA based GSolver software (Grating Solver Development Co.). In RCWA method the results are provided for one frequency only, therefore multiple simulations are necessary in order to cover the broadband spectrum. The profile relief and optical properties of the structure were chosen according to the SEM micrographs of the actual investigated samples (as seen in Fig. Additional information regarding numerical simulations can be found in Experimental optical measurements of GMR response in DLC linear gratings were carried out using custom optical setup consisting of a white light source (halogen lamp), collimating optics and a Glan-Taylor polarizing prism, thermostated fluidic cell with sensor chip, fiber optics and spectrometer (see humidity. The measured spectra were normalized to the lamp spectrum taking into account different polarizations and integration times. The spectrum was collected at angle of incidence of 20o. The polarized white light spectra reflected from grating was coupled to an optical fiber connected to a AvaSpec-2048 (Avantes) spectrometer using a quartz lens fixed on a platform that can be rotated independently around the same axis as the grating. The spectrometer collects the data with a spectral range between 360-860 nm and a resolution of 1.2 nm. The whole setup is automated and controlled through custom LabView based software. The setup is described in more detail in Due to poor adhesion between DLC and SiPol the conventional imprint routine when the resist completely fills stamp cavities was found to be unsuitable for densely packed patterns. Lack of adhesion between DLC and SiPol always resulted in complete or partial resist peel off from the substrate (silicon or DLC) during stamp separation. None of the usual measures, e.g. surface pre-treatment (plasma, baking), variation of imprint conditions or low demoulding temperature, provided significant positive effect. The combination of low-temperature and incomplete filling approach was found to be the best solution to cope with the issue and also greatly simplifies the process by enabling pattern transfer with the single etching step. Imprinted structures into SiPol are presented in Fig. Small rims at the sides of up ~20 nm are caused by wetting of sidewalls and do not interfere with a pronounced anisotropic etching (this even might reduce the rounding of the resist edge during etching). At the same time, almost zero residual layer thickness was achieved due to the high ability of the SiPol material to flow (Fig. The maximum fill rate of stamp cavities for the linear grating patterns until delamination of SiPol from the underlying DLC substrate starts to occur was found to be at the aspect ratio of ~0.7. For not such dense patterns e.g., holes, where much larger area of resist is in contact with substrate than with stamp, this is less of an issue and the ratio could be higher. The low-temperature, incomplete filling approach greatly simplifies the process by enabling the transfer of the masking layer pattern into DLC films with oxygen plasma. The etching of SiPol itself is a complex process which has two goals: the thinning down of the organic-inorganic polymer until windows are opened and the conversion of the remaining polymer into almost pure SiO 2 by removing the organic content. In the ideal case this results in a thin homogeneous layer of SiO 2 which would not be susceptible to heat in the extended oxygen process. Since we virtually achieved a zero residual layer patterning, a pure oxygen etching step was found sufficient to achieve the removal of any resist residues but this process would not convert the SiPol into SiO 2 completely, as for the standard SiPol removal process. Once the upper few nanometers of SiPol are converted, it would not further etch and develop into a thin skin on the still intact SiPol. The thermoplastic properties of this core would then be susceptible to any heat treatment, which in case of oxygen plasma was found enough that the resist lines would develop into thermally reflowed cylinder structures (see Fig. Etching parameters for DLC were optimized to achieve highly directional transfer. From etching rates depicted in Fig 3 . Selectivity between Sipol and DLC were determined to be at least 1:4. The linear gratings and hexagonal structures (both holes and pillars) were successfully transferred into DLC. Fig. The pillars in the DLC shown in Fig. The SiPol mask was also used to etch DLC films doped with silver (DLC:Ag). However, in this case etching with pure oxygen plasma wasn't sufficient, due to presence of silver nanoparticles scattered all over the surface (and in the bulk) with each of one acting as individual etching mask. In this case the addition of Argon in the plasma was beneficial resulting in more effective removal of silver. Argon also contributed to the faster deterioration of SiPol resulting to lover selectivity of 1:2.5 towards DLC:Ag. The residues of SiPol on the surface were removed as in the pure DLC case. This process was employed to structure DLC:Ag films with 400 nm period and approximately 150 nm depth (the precise depth is hard to determine due to roughness of the etched profile) grating patterns (see Fig. Using the fabrication method described above, 380-400 nm period grating type structures were fabricated in DLC and their optical response was characterized. As can be seen in reflectance spectra (Fig. A total number of hundred reflectance spectra measurements for each concentration were carried out and the automatically defined average value of the peak position was chosen for refractometry calibration plot. In (Fig. Furthermore, such sensitivity is much higher than reported recently for conventional grating sensors We demonstrated the successful use of the new thermoplastic resist SiPol as a hard mask to pattern DLC films by thermal NIL process. SiPol can serve as efficient hard mask for etching DLC coatings, ensuring 1:4 selectivity for non-doped and 1:2.5 for silver doped DLC coatings. Adhesion issues can be addressed by using low temperature imprint in combination with incomplete filling of stamp cavities. The low temperature imprint approach, combined with incomplete filling of stamp cavities did not only allow a virtually zero residual layer imprint but also facilitated the original SiPol process involving an organic transfer layer by removing intermediate etchings resulting into minimum number of processing steps. DLC coatings and to some extent DLC coatings doped with silver can be effectively etched with oxygen plasma (ICP) with high precision and vertical sidewalls at least up to 500 nm depth. This enables the homogeneous transfer of relatively large area patterns of 20×20 mm 2 into DLC. The current applications have moderate aspect ratio and resolutions down to several hundred nanometers, which does not seem to be the final limit. High quality gratings fabricated by this method have been characterized as DLC leaky-waveguides-based sensors. The optical response shows a high agreement with simulations of ideally rectangular gratings, resulting in a measured high sensitivity (319 nm/RIU) to refractive index changes in the analyte. This represents an improvement close to 450 % when compared to previous works. These results confirm the high quality of the obtained structures, validating the use thermal NIL for patterning of DLC based devices with a high degree of reproducibility. 