Great achievements have been made in alloying of two-dimensional (2D) semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), which can allow tunable band gaps for practical applications in optoelectronic devices. However, telluride-based TMDs alloys were less studied due to the difficulties of sample synthesis. Here, in this work we report the large-area synthesis of 2D MoTexSe2-x alloy films with controllable Te composition by a modified alkali metal halides assisted chemical vapor deposition method. The as-prepared films have millimeter-scale transverse size. Raman spectra experiments combining calculated Raman spectra and vibrational images obtained by density functional theory (DFT) confirmed the 2H-phase of the MoTexSe2-x alloys. The A1g mode of MoSe2 shows a significant downshift accompanied by asymmetric broadening to lower wavenumber with increasing value of x, while E 1 2g mode seems unchanged, which were well explained by a phonon confinement model. Our work provides a simple method to synthesize large-scale 2H phase Te-based 2D TMDs alloys for their further applications. Two dimensional (2D) semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have shown great potential applications in the area of electronics It is difficult to prepared 2H-phase Te-based TMDs or their alloys, especially using CVD, because it always undergoes a phase transition from 2H to 1T' at cooling stage, thus resulting in the metallic or semi-metallic samples Recently, molten-salt-assisted CVD has been successfully used to synthesize largearea and a wide variety of TMDs and their alloys Large area continuous MoTexSe2-x films were synthesized in a home-built threetemperature-zone (a single-zone low-temperature furnace and a two-zone high temperature furnace) CVD system. The low-temperature furnace at upstream was used to heat Se powders (350 °C) and the high temperature furnace at downstream was used to heat Te powders (550 °C or 580 °C) and Mo precursors and substrates. The same weight (2 g) of Se and Te powders was used. 20 mg of MoO3 powders and NaCl powders (2:1) were mixed by grinding together in a mortar and then were pressed into a disc at 10 MPa as the Mo precursors. The disc was placed on a quartz sheet and a piece of SiO2/Si substrate was placed next to the disc at downstream. The pressure in the 2 inch furnace tube was firstly pumped down to 10 mTorr, then kept at 100 Torr with 55 sccm Ar and 3 sccm H2 as the carrier gas. The growth temperature was 750 °C and time was 5 min. Then the furnace cooled down to room temperature gradually. Raman measurements were performed under atmospheric environment in a Renishaw inVia Raman microscope equipped with a 532 nm laser. The system was firstly calibrated with the strongest Raman peak of silicon at 520 cm -1 before measurements. Raman spectra and vibrational modes of monolayer MoTexSe2-x at two composition (x = 0.11 and x = 0.25) were calculated by density functional theory (DFT). The 3×3 supercell with one Te atom corresponds to x = 0.11, and the 2×2 supercell with one Te atom corresponds to x = 0.25. Vacuum spacing in the out-of-plane direction is set to be more than 18 Å to avoid spurious interaction. Structure and phonon properties are calculated by Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) using the projectoraugmented wave (PAW) methods and Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional with D3 correction (DFT-D3). The energy cutoff was set as 400 eV and residual forces for ion iteration as 10 -4 eV/Å. The -centered Monkhorst-Pack (MP) k-points were set as 12×12×1 and 16×16×1 for x = 0.11 and x = 0.25 respectively. After the structural relaxations, the normal vibration modes are calculated within frozen phonon approximation. Giving these vibration mode, Raman intensities are obtained based on the calculation of the derivatives of the dielectric tensors with respect to phonon vibration using script "vasp_raman.py". This is a Raman off-resonant activity calculator using VASP as a back end. Lorentz broadening of the modes' intensities yielded the Raman spectrum. Figure As we can see in Figure Then this modified molten-salt-assisted method was used to synthesize 2D MoSe2-xTex alloy films. In a recent work, it has been demonstrated that large amount of Te alloying in WSe2(1-x)Te2x (more than 0.5) leads to a phase transition from 2H to 1T' To avoid this phenomena, the heating temperature of Te powders was set at a lower point (550 °C). The composition of Te in MoTexSe2-x alloys can be easily tailored by modifying the heating temperature of Te powders to 580 °C. Figure x alloy series when x≤1 where LD is the average distance of defects or the domain size, corresponding to the density of defects and (q) is the phonon dispersion of 2D MoSe2. The phonon dispersion of monolayer MoSe2 calculated by DFT is shown in figure In summary, we have synthesized large-area continuous 2H phase MoSe2-xTex films, and tailored the Te composition through modifying the heating temperature of Te powders independently in a three-temperature-zone CVD process. The evolution of peak position shifts and linewidths of the A1g mode and E 1 2g mode is well explained with the phonon confinement model using the phonon dispersion of MoSe2 calculated by DFT. On the other hand, the Raman spectra and atomic vibrational images of 2D MoSe2-xTex obtained by DFT calculation give an additional view of the behaviors of the first-order optical phonons with increasing Te compositions, which also agree very well with the experimental data. This work provides a simple method to synthesize largescale 2D MoTexSe2-x alloy series and gives a fundamental study of their Raman scattering properties. Incubation Program of the development of basic research outstanding talents (No. 01509321) and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation.