Technologically useful and robust graphenebased interfaces for devices require the introduction of highly selective, stable, and covalently bonded functionalities on the graphene surface, whilst essentially retaining the electronic properties of the pristine layer. This work demonstrates that highly controlled, ultrahigh vacuum covalent chemical functionalization of graphene sheets with a thiol-terminated molecule provides a robust and tunable platform for the development of hybrid nanostructures in different environments. We employ this facile strategy to covalently couple two representative systems of broad interest: metal nanoparticles, via S-metal bonds, and thiol-modified DNA aptamers, via disulfide bridges. Both systems, which have been characterized by a multitechnique approach, remain firmly anchored to the graphene surface even after several washing cycles. Atomic force microscopy images demonstrate that the conjugated aptamer retains the functionality required to recognize a target protein. This methodology opens a new route to the integration of highquality graphene layers into diverse technological platforms, including plasmonics, optoelectronics, or biosensing. With respect to the latter, the viability of a thiol-functionalized chemical vapor deposition graphene-based solution-gated field-effect transistor array was assessed. Whilst pristine graphene is one of the most relevant materials of the decade, several important shortcomings must be overcome before it may step from fundamental physics to applied technology. Here, we use a new, recently reported strategy On the other hand, thiol chemistry is an ideal tool to couple a wide range of molecular architectures, in particular biomolecules through the formation of strong sulfide bridges. Finally, it is important to remark that whilst the UHV environment provides highly controlled preparation of functional material surfaces, these generally fail when exposed to the atmosphere. The 13 orders of magnitude difference in pressure, commonly known as the pressure-gap that separates the real world from the artificially defined world of surface science, is a very difficult barrier to overcome. In this work, both worlds are successfully combined. UHV protocols and characterization techniques for covalent attachment and characterization of the process are employed, and solutionbased and atmospheric protocols are used to incorporate technologically important nanoarchitectures (see Figure The mechanism mediating the functionalization of graphene has been understood in terms of the extra charge accumulated in the broken dangling bonds around the single atomic vacancies that selectively oxidize any molecule containing an amino moiety (Figure In order to assess the effect of functionalization on the electrical properties, the pristine graphene and G-pATP surfaces were compared via a magnetotransport method. At such low surface coverage, neither Raman nor infrared spectroscopy could detect the thiol functionalities; thus, their presence was assayed in a liquid environment by dipping a functionalized graphene surface for 1 h into a DTP solution. Figure Once confirmed the robustness of the thiol-functionalized graphene upon exposure to both air and liquid environments, we focus on its capacity for conjugation to metal NPs or biomolecules. The particle size and size distribution also vary for both types of NPs, as obtained from the AFM height measurements, undertaken in order to avoid tip convolution effects that coarsen the lateral image size. After measuring more than 50 Au NPs from each sample type, the size distribution histogram in Figure With regard to the density of NPs deposited, the top row of Figure In most studies of decoration of high-quality graphene with NPs, these are simply deposited on the surface from solutions, Furthermore, an important advantage of our methodology is that the number of available thiol moieties on the surface can be relatively easily tuned up to a maximum estimated density of approximately 8 × 10 12 cm -2 , which would correspond to approximately 0.1-1% thiol-functionalized surface. With regard to the development of biohybrid interfaces, we have also explored the suitability of the G-pATP surfaces to immobilize an in vitro selected thiol-derived ssDNA aptamer with high specificity for the recognition of a target protein, where we explored the possibility of forming a stable disulfide bridge bond between the S atom of the free thiol group of the pATP molecule linked to the graphene surface and a terminal S atom present in the thiol-modified aptamer molecule. In this respect, we employed a previously obtained 76 nucleotideslong ssDNA aptamer with selectivity for the protein PCBP-2, a pleiotropic protein that participates in a number of cellular processes including transcriptional and translational regulation. We use the protocol described in the experimental part to first produce an aptamer-modified graphene surface and, second, to expose it to a solution containing target protein molecules. The final dried surfaces are studied in air using AFM, and a typical AFM image of the G-pATP/aptamer/PCBP-2 system is shown in Figure It should be pointed out that one of the added values of using a biosensing system based on aptamers instead of antibodies is their reversibility with temperature. denaturing temperature used for our aptamer (with a length of 76 nucleotides) without compromising its integrity is 95 °C. Unlike antibodies, which undergo irreversible denaturation above 37 °C, aptamers can refold into their original, active conformations when optimal temperature (in our case, 25 °C) is restored. Therefore, the aptamer is fully denatured at 95 °C, and the target molecule (in this case, the protein PCBP-2) is completely released, and then the surface immobilized aptamers can be reused. The G-pATP system is perfectly capable of resisting this temperature level, which allows repeated reutilization of the same G-pATP/aptamer sensing platform. It is important to note that the developed chemistry in this work is perfectly capable of resisting this denaturation temperature. The binding mechanism is different in both cases. In the case of metal NPs, they are based on the strong affinity of the sulfur-containing compounds for noble metal surfaces, specifically gold. The mechanism of binding NPs to the functionalized G surface consists of a reductive elimination of hydrogen of the S-H bond by the metal surface. However, in the case of G-pATP functionalization with the thiolated aptamer, it relies on the oxidation of both sulfhydryl groups reaching a disulfide bridge. Figure In summary, we present here a facile and controllable methodology to decorate a graphene surface with covalently linked organic spacers containing exposed thiol functionalities that can be employed in diverse chemical linking strategies. In particular, we illustrate the linking of metal NPs and aptamers, bisensor-relevant biomolecules, to a graphene surface. This methodology opens the door to the growth of controllable and stable nanobiohybrid structures on graphene platforms, with a broad applicability in plasmonic, biotechnology, and biomedicine. 4.1. Graphene Surface Functionalization. Although we have employed several types of graphene surfaces, all with similar results, most of the experiments reported were performed on high-quality graphene layers epitaxially grown on 4H-SiC(0001) by CVD with or without H under the superficial graphene layer. These surfaces behave as quasi freestanding monolayer graphene, with Hall mobility values above 8 >000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 . The main steps in the functionalization process are illustrated in Figure 4.2. NP Fabrication. Citrate-stabilized gold NPs were synthesized according to the Turkevich method. Au NPs were fabricated in UHV via a gas-phase synthesis route using a MICS, 4.3. Binding of Aptamers to G-pATP and Target Protein Recognition. Aptamers are RNA or ssDNA oligonucleotides that are selected in vitro from a vast library of synthetic oligonucleotides (in general, from 10 13 to 10 15 ) with random sequence We have used a 76 nucleotides-long ssDNA aptamer specific to the protein PCBP-2 (also known as hnRNP E2 or CP-2), which is a member of the cellular heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein family that mediates relevant biological processes including mRNA stabilization, transcriptional regulation, translational control, and apoptotic program activation. . The recombinant protein PCBP-2 used as the target in this work (purchased from Abnova, Taipei, Taiwan) is a 362 amino acids-long globular protein that includes a GST-tag at its N-terminal end (MW of 65.56 kDa). The 5′ thiol group of the aptamer was introduced to establish a disulfide bond with the free thiol group of the G-pATP. The terminal sulfur atoms of thiolated DNA have a tendency to form dimers in solution, especially in the presence of oxygen. Therefore, dithiothreitol (DTT) was used as a reducing or "deprotecting" agent for thiolated DNA. Typically, a 10 mM DTT solution in 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 8.3) was mixed with a 100 μM thiolated aptamer solution and allowed to react for 1 h at room temperature. Then, DTT was removed by filtration using a 3 K Amicon Ultracentrifugal filter. Subsequently, 30 μL of the thiolated ssDNA aptamer (at 1 μM concentration in selection buffer, SB, composed of 100 mM NaCl, 6 mM MgCl 2 and 100 mM HEPES pH 7.4) was renatured (by incubation at 95 °C for 10 min, and then at 37 °C for 10 min). The renatured, thiolated ssDNA was deposited onto the G-pATP surface and left to react via disulfide bridge Raman spectra were obtained in the Raman laboratory of the characterization service of the ICTP-CSIC employing a Renishaw inVia Reflex-dispersive Raman spectrometer incorporating a Leica microscope, using a 100× (N.A. = 0.85) objective with a 514.5 nm (2.41 eV) laser power of approx. 2 mW at the sample surface, and multiple scans in order to obtain adequate signal-to-noise ratios. The in-air AFM measurements were performed in the dynamic mode with a Nanoscope IIIA (Veeco) system, an Agilent 5500 PicoPlus, and a Cervantes system from Nanotec Electronica S.L. under ambient conditions. We employed silicon tips with nominal force constants of 40 N/m and softer silicon cantilevers of 2-4 N/m for imaging the aptamer/ protein complexes. TEM measurements were performed using a JEOL JEM 1011 with a Gatan ES1000Ww camera. TEM samples were prepared by placing one drop of a dilute suspension of Au NPs in water on a carbon-coated copper grid, and the solvent was slowly evaporated at room temperature. Magnetotransport was investigated over macroscopic dimensions (10 mm × 10 mm) in the square van der Pauw configuration using a Quantum Design 9T PPMS (R) and press-on contacts from Wimbush Scientific (R). Resistance measurements were collected in helium atmosphere (5 Torr) along the sample edges (xx and yy) and diagonal (xy) directions. 4.5. Theoretical Computational Methods. Physical and electronic properties of the pATP molecules incorporated within a SAV created in the graphene were using a set of accurate DFT-based calculations by the plane-wave scheme implemented in the QUANTUM ESPRESSO simulation package. 4.6. gSFET Device Fabrication and Testing. CVD graphene transistors were fabricated using graphene layers grown by a CVD process using a 25 μm thick copper foil of 99.8% metal basis obtained from Alfa Aesar. The copper foils were cleaned with acetic acid, then rinsed with deionized (DI) water, followed by cleaning cycles with acetone, DI water, and isopropyl alcohol. The sample dimensions were 6 × 5 cm 2 , and the growth conditions were 10 min at 750 °C, 2 sccm H 2 and 5 min at 800 °C, 25 sccm CH 4 /H 2 . A 700 nm poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) layer was deposited on top of the graphene surface. The graphene layer was separated from copper using an electrochemical delamination process following the procedure described by Rosa et al. A Si/SiO 2 wafer was used as a substrate. The first layer of Ti/Au metal contacts was deposited by electron-beam vapor deposition and subsequently structured by optical lithography. Then, CVD graphene was transferred to the wafer using the process described in the previous section. The graphene active area W = 40 μm × L = 2.5/5/10/20/40 μm of the sensors was then defined by oxygen plasma in a reactive ion etching system. A second metallization layer of Ni/Au was then evaporated and lithographically defined, followed by a lift-off step. To electrically insulate the device, a 2 μm thick SU-8 epoxy photoresist (SU-8 2005 Microchem) layer was spin-coated on top and defined in such a way that only the graphene area was left uncovered. The chips were finally individually cut. This is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.Downloaded via CSIC onApril 26, 2019 at 12:32:11 (UTC).See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles. DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b03152 ACS Omega 2019, 4, 3287-3297