The stability of a Fermi liquid is analyzed by summing series of diagrams with an interaction mediated by a system close to quantum criticality. The critical temperature and the gap are derived in terms of an effective coupling constant and do not depend on the density of states at the Fermi surface. The forward scattering process is identified as the main pairing mechanism for the case of low, or vanishing, levels of doping. Cooper instability The usual derivation of the Cooper instability relies on the adiabatic assumption Originally, acoustic phonons were considered to mediate the attractive interaction. Since then, many other pairing mechanisms were suggested. It is widely believed that modes that are related to a quantum phase transition Yang and Sondhi We start by looking on a simple model. Consider a single electronic band k is a (creation) annihilation operator of a particle with momentum k and ξ k is the energy of that particle. In the ground state |0 , all states with ξ k < 0 are occupied. More explicitly we can write where m is an effective mass and μ is the chemical potential so k F = √ 2mμ is the largest momentum state that is occupied. Now consider an interaction, where has an energy ξ k 1 + ξ k 2 -g, which can be negative even if ξ k 1 and ξ k 2 are positive. A naive pairing picture would be to claim it is a bound state and that any single particle state, up to an energy g can be paired. Thus, the the Fermi liquid phase is unstable. However, this model has a more severe instability in dimension greater than two. Since [H I , H 0 ] = 0, we can find the eigenstates of the system: they are given by specifying a set {k i } of single particle momenta that are occupied. The contribution of the interaction to the energy is ∝ gN 2 where N is the number of occupied states Indeed, the interaction in Eq. ( The source for the effective interaction between two electrons is a coupling of a single electron to another system, which then mediates the interaction to another electron. The dynamics of the mediating system is a crucial factor for the properties of the resulting effective interaction. The model we consider here is a system close to a quantum phase transition and, in general, our results apply to any such system, provided that it has significant coupling to itinerant electrons at small momentum transfer. An important effect of the proximity to a quantum critical point, in the context of this work, is a diverging correlation length, which implies the Greens function of the system is highly peaked at zero momentum. In the Matsubara formalism, the Greens function is given by where Ω is some energy scale of the system 27 and ω q is the frequency of a mode with momentum q. The important properties of the system, which are a consequence of the proximity to a quantum critical point, are manifested in ω q , which is not necessarily isotropic, but we assume it has a minimum at |q| = 0. The quantum critical point is characterized by a vanishing gap, i.e. the minimal energy ω |q|=0 vanishes. The long range correlations, which typically exists at criticality, implies the curvature is large. To be explicit, one can consider a quantum paraelectric system, such as strontium titanate The bare scattering process: Fermion propagators, denoted by solid lines, are coupled via modes of the mediating system, with the propagator in Eq. ( long-range interactions were observed We can start with the second order diagram, shown in Fig 1 where k 1 and k 2 (q and q) are the 4-momenta of the incoming electrons (mediating modes) and G (k) = 1/(iωξ k ) is the electronic Matsubara Green's function. Using the fourcomponent notation means the summation over the internal degrees of freedom involves a sum over Matsubara frequencies and an integral over the Brillouin zone ∑ q → T ∑ m d 3 q, where T is the temperature and m is the frequency index ω = 2πT m. The frequency summation can be done exactly and the resulting expressions, shown in the appendix, are rather cumbersome. Here, we focus on two limits, each implying a certain approximation, and obtain much simpler expressions. The limits can be expressed as considering ω q in Eq. ( We start with the case of large ω q , which is similar to the conventional derivation of superconductivity. Assuming D(q) Ωω -2 q is roughly independent of frequency, the sum in Eq. ( where and N F (ξ ) = 1/(e ξ /T + 1) is the Fermi occupation function. This assumption implies ω q T but also ω q ξ k , since ξ k determines the width of G (k) in the frequency domain, and that width is assumed be smaller than the width of D(q). This makes it natural to set a cutoff on ξ k that is related to ω q , i.e. the Debye frequency. Our focus is on the forward scattering process and, as we show now, no cutoff is required. Instead, we assume ω -2 q is strongly peaked at |q| = 0. Technically, we replace it with a suitably normalized delta function ω -2 q ∝ δ (q), which makes the momentum integral trivial. More specifically, ω -2 q is assumed to be negligible outside a small region around |q| = 0. The other quantities in the integrand are assumed to do not have a strong momentum dependency at that region ξ k+q ξ k , |g q | 2 |g 0 | 2 . The size of that region, which will affect the result, can be incorporated into the normalization of the delta function. We get where is the coupling constant for the effective interaction. Unlike typical definitions for the coupling constant A "Ladder" diagram with 4 loops, corresponding to V 4 given by Eq. ( employing a cutoff in energy, we assume the interaction occurs only at small momentum and employ a delta function in momentum. In the scenario we are considering, a low doping level and an interaction mediated by a quantum critical system, the former assumption is unjustified while the latter is. We now turn to the case of small ω q . When ω q T , D(q) is strongly peaked at ω = 0 where D(0, q) = Ωω -2 q , while D(ω = 0, q) ∝ T -2 . To first order in ω q /T we can neglect all terms in the frequency sum in Eq. ( The momentum integral is done as before and we get where λ has the same definition, Eq. ( The expressions in Eq. ( dominates and also that it is a better approximation. In what follows, we treat the two limits as two separate cases, so each of them can be described with relatively simple expressions. The full expression, including the two contributions and other corrections, is give in the appendix. Now we want to study higher order diagrams. We consider the so-called "ladder diagrams", as shown in Fig where V 0 = D ( q) |g q| 2 is the bare interaction for the momentum q that is not integrated over. We have already evaluated V 1 , which is given by Eq. ( for ω 0 /T 1 and for ω 0 /T 1. In order for the series to converge, the term that is exponentiated to the power of n, should have a magnitude smaller than unity. We will now study this term, the one inside the large parenthesis in Eq. ( For Eq. ( At T = 0, the denominator amounts to (-)1 when ξ k 1 , ξ k 2 (< ) > 0 and vanishes otherwise, i.e. the momenta k 1,2 have to be both inside, or outside, the Fermi volume. It is also requires that the total energy have to be smaller than the coupling energy, ξ k 1 + ξ k 2 < λ . Thus, we can expect a gap of size λ with states above it still representing single quasi-particles while for lower energies other type of states emerge. At higher temperatures the denominator in Eq. ( T , we have N F (ξ )-N F (-ξ ) ξ /(2T ) and Eq. ( is the critical temprature. In deriving Eq. ( for the series to diverge. For any finite T , Eq. ( which is obtained by setting ξ k 2 = 0, might be interpreted as a gap. Here as well, the critical temperature, is obtained by taking the limit ξ k 1 , ξ k 2 → 0. These results indicate that in a certain temperature range, in a certain energy range, the system is unstable and unlikely to be in a Fermi liquid state. The nature of the divergence, which is due to the scattering process of two particles, is often interpreted as showing a new type of state where the particles are paired. However, the derivation itself does not explicitly imply anything about the new state that might emerge. Only when one employs some mean field, or a wavefunction ansatz, can the properties of the new state, such as symmetry breaking or even superconductivity itself, be discussed. In fact, these properties are typically introduced by assumption, and the main support for their existence is the self consistency of the solutions. It is possible that the pairing picture arises simply because we focused on the interaction between two particles. Let us now consider other series of diagrams, related to one particle processes, for example the one shown in Fig. As before, we consider the forward scattering process, making the integral over the internal variable q trivial. The frequency summation is done for the two limits and yields for ω 0 /T 1 and for ω 0 /T 1. The divergence of this series indicates the Fermi liquid is unstable in a certain parameter range, similar to the results before. The previous conclusion, namely that a new many body state will emerge in this parameter range, is supported by this calculation as well. However, the physical picture of pairing is irrelevant here. Another series of diagrams, shown in Fig. k 1 q 1 q 2 q 3 q 4 q k 2 (b) FIG. where V n (k 1 , k 2 ) is given by Eq. ( It should be emphasized that the calculations above should not by any means be understood as a exhaustive list of diagrams. Neither do we argue that these represent the most important physical processes for the formation of a new phase, superconducting or otherwise. The aim of this work is to point out some processes that induce an instability, which can be obtained with a high level of analytical control. Unlike the usual derivation of the Cooper instability, our results do not depend strongly on the chemical potential μ, or the density of states at the Fermi level N(0). In fact, the approximation we used, ξ k+q ξ k for small q, is better for small k, which is the case, at the Fermi surface, when μ and N(0) are small. This implies that forward scattering process can dominate the paring mechanism at low, and even vanishing, levels of doping. We have showed that a Fermi liquid is unstable in the presence of an attractive forward scattering process. Interactions mediated by a system close to a QCP are inherently long ranged and thus are likely to be dominated by forward scattering. In the quantum critical regime, the zero frequency term, in the summation over Matsubara frequencies, can dominate the sum and yields a qualitatively different form for the effective interaction. The calculation of instability indicates there is an energy gap and a critical temperature, above which the Fermi liquid might be stable. The results do not indicate what is the new many body state that can replace the Fermi liquid.