Attempts to use Electrohydrodynamic (EHD) flow for propulsion have been made since the last century 1 . Limited success has been registered particularly due to the inhomogeneous generation of the thrust, and also the very light weight and frail nature of the devices versus the power supply weight needed hover the craft 2 . However, EHD propulsion can offer a greater thrust to power ratio than any of the current propulsion technologies 3 . Rotary EHD devices have been employed as demo units for a long time EHD flow is generated as a result of local ionization of air near sharp electrode edges when high voltage above corona onset is applied. The ions accelerate in the electric field and transfer momentum to neutral atoms in a charged particle-neutral coupling process Theoretical background. When ionic wind is produced, EHD thrust is generated from the action of the electric field on the space charge and as a result of momentum conservation for the air-electrode system. If the electric field E and spatial charge density ρ distributions in the volume v are known, the thrust T EHD can be calculated as In static setups, the thrust is proportional to corona current where "I" is the corona current, "d" is the distance between the corona wire/point and the ground electrode, "k" is a proportionality constant, μ is the average mobility of ions, and n is a constant coefficient with n=1 for small currents or less than one otherwise. Corona current is generally accepted to follow a quadratic variation with the voltage above the corona onset where V o stands for corona onset voltage and K is a proportionality constant. Therefore, the thrust should follow a quadratic variation with the applied voltage for constant "d" where B is the new resulting constant. If EHD thrust is applied on the blades of a propeller, it generates torque and the resulting rotational motion can be characterized by J p θ ̈+ Cθ ̇N = τ EHD -τ F f (5) where "J p " is the moment of inertia of the propeller, C is a constant, θ ̇ is the angular speed, θ ̈ is the angular acceleration, τ EHD is the torque associated to the EHD generated thrust, Cθ ̇N is the torque associated to the drag forces with N=1 for laminar flow and N=2 for turbulent flow, and τ F f is the torque associated in our setups to the frictional forces between the axial support needle and the propeller. The thrust efficiency is defined as In conjunction to relation (2), it shows the tradeoff between efficiency of thrust generation and the applied voltage. EHD propeller. Rotational EHD devices were produced by redesigning commercially available mini-drone propellers. Any conductive sharp point or edge can generate EHD flow when in an intense electric field. An electrode was designed on the propeller blades by attaching thin conductive material to at least one blade edge, starting from its axial part (Fig1b). The conductive material used included one or more of the following: thin metal tape, metal pins, thin wire, and conductive ink. A dielectric layer was used to partially cover the conductive material, occasionally leaving the edge exposed to air at the trailing edge of the blade. The dielectric layer partly blocks the EHD flow generation at the covered metal edge while allowing it to form freely at the uncovered side. Both pins and metal tape produce corona wind and therefore thrust and EHD torque τ EHD . An axial metal pin is used to inject high voltage (HV) in the blades through the conductive material running along the blades. As the propeller moves and rotational speed increases, the vertical thrust cancels the normal force on the balancing pin or metal bead, eventually reducing the rotational frictional torque to zero if liftoff is achieved. A surrounding ground electrode helps create an intense electric field. In some designs, metal pins (Fig. Measurements for the propeller (4) -Table Limiting factors and performance. The voltage at liftoff depends on various parameters. The minimum distance between the propeller electrode and the counter-electrode sets the electric field intensity and thus the thrustequation ( The present study was focused on demonstrating the viability of rotary EHD propulsion principle across more than two orders of magnitude of propeller mass. Scaling up the system does not seem to involve dramatic increase in the voltage needed for liftoff, which is also suggested by the quadratic dependence of thrust on the voltageequation ( It is also in accordance to the underdamped response corresponding to equation ( Experimental efficiency ranged for our tests from 0.64 to 6.23 N/kW in comparison to typical turbojet engines 3 at 2.5 N/kW. The highest values of 5.4 and 6.23 were obtained for the heaviest and the lightest propeller respectively. Propellers (10) and ( Electrode design is essential for proper steering of the ions to produce thrust, torque, and propeller liftoff. Fig. However, propeller liftoff was also obtained with no insulating tape. At (or towards) the end of each blade tip a metal pin about 1 cm long (connected to the conductive material on the blade) can be attached orthogonally to the local rotational radius. Frictional torque τ F f is minimized by balancing the propeller on the sharp vertical tip of a metal pin, which injects high voltage (HV) in the blades through the conductive material running along the blades, as shown in Fig. In order to make an EHD propeller spin, an intense electric field must be created on the propeller electrode. This can be achieved with a large variety of counter electrodes and distances between propeller electrode and counter electrode(s). In our experiments, counter electrodes were metal cylinders, disks, and parallel plates which all supported liftoff for at least one type of propeller in Table However, if the counter electrode is covered by insulating paint, the propeller may or may not spin at all. The propeller was usually placed coaxially inside a grounded cylindrical electrode. Nevertheless, rotational motion and liftoff can be obtained even with the propeller outside the cylinder (beneath, above or sideways) although at larger voltages. A Photron high speed camera FASTCAM SA-X2 1000K-M4 -Monochrome