A considerable success in phenomenological description of high-T c superconductors has been achieved within the paradigm of Quantum Critical Point (QCP) -a parental state of a variety of exotic phases that is characterized by dense entanglement and absence of well-defined quasiparticles. However, the microscopic origin of the critical regime in real materials remains an open question. On the other hand, there is a popular view that a single-band tt Hubbard model is the minimal model to catch the main relevant physics of superconducting compounds. Here, we suggest that emergence of the QCP is tightly connected with entanglement in real space and identify its location on the phase diagram of the hole-doped tt Hubbard model. To detect the QCP we study a weighted graph of inter-site quantum mutual information within a four-by-four plaquette that is solved by exact diagonalization. We demonstrate that some quantitative characteristics of such a graph, viewed as a complex network, exhibit peculiar behavior around a certain submanifold in the parametric space of the model. This method allows us to overcome difficulties caused by finite size effects and to identify the transition point even on a small lattice, where long-range asymptotics of correlation functions cannot be accessed. The phenomenon of high-temperature superconductivity (HTSC) still remains very puzzling after more than thirty years since the discovery of superconducting copper-oxide compounds Serious hopes for the understanding of this phenomenon are related to the concept of a quantum critical point (QCP) Other phenomena, such as the formation of Fermi arcs seen in the angle-resolved photoemission spectra of high-Tc compounds The main problem of this approach is its purely phenomenological character. It cannot explain by itself why the high-Tc compounds, contrary to the most of interesting condensed matter systems, do not behave as the Fermi liquid but instead are characterized by minimal quantum viscosity and other fancy properties. Such an explanation requires an analysis of electronic structure of specific materials. Current understanding of high-T c superconductivity in cuprates assumes a crucial role of strong electron correlations where, the first sum is taken over the pairs i, j of nearest neighbors, the second one -over the pairs l, k of next-to-nearest (diagonal) neighbors, c i,σ is the electron annihilation operator, and the on-site occupation operator is n i,σ = c † i,σ c i,σ . For convenience, in what follows we express all energies in units of t . In an attempt to connect the phenomenological and the microscopic levels of description of HTSC, we shall focus on the tt Fermi-Hubbard model and try to detect QCP on its phase diagram. Correlation effects beyond the band structure approximation in this model have been thoroughly analyzed with different methods The search for the QCP in the tt Hubbard model has been performed within the dynamical cluster approximation Since large scale simulations of the fermionic Hubbard model away from half-filling are challenging because of the sign problem, it is natural to ask whether we can extract any information about the tendency to form critical states out of small cluster solutions obtained by means of exact diagonalization. At first, this goal does not seem realistic since studying systems in the critical regime unavoidably requires dealing with long-range correlations, while all the microscopic precursors of the transition on small lattices would be washed out by the finite-size effects. However, it is useful to bear in mind that, in the context of many-body quantum dynamics, the concept of entanglement and the phenomenon of collective emergence go hand in hand. An archetypical example of such relation is the Cooper pairs in the BCS theory of superconductivity: while the ground state wavefunction has a form of a product state of the Cooper pairs, each pair itself is a two-body entangled system. Therefore it is natural to expect that major transitions in phenomenological properties of many-body systems would be reflected in the patterns of entanglement, and quantum criticality should leave its fingerprint on all scales, not only in the deep infrared limit. A nice example of how fruitful this way of thinking can be was given in Refs. Recently, a novel approach to phase transitions in quantum lattice models based on complex network theory has been suggested where S A = -Tr ρ A log ρ A is the von Neumann entropy, and ρ A = Tr Ā ρ is the density matrix of subsystem A. Then we can associate a weighted graph with a state of a quantum lattice system, e.g. the Hubbard model, by considering the lattice sites i = 1 . . . N, where N is the number of sites, as nodes of the graph, and the values of pairwise inter-site mutual information I i j play the role of weights on the graph links (see Fig. Once a wave function on the lattice is known, it is easy to compute the entanglement entropy of a pair of sites and thus the mutual information. At the same time, such a network contains information of quantum correlations which could be very important to understand the dynamics of strongly correlated systems. In the cases of the transverse field Ising and the Bose-Hubbard models in 1d, it was demonstrated that certain characteristics of the mutual information network can be used to detect quantum phase transitions • Clustering of a weighted graph is defined as where N is the total number of sites in the lattice, and I is the N × N matrix of intersite mutual information. One can see that this quantity maximizes on graphs with a lot of three-link loops with high weights. For the cases studied in Ref. • Disparity of a single node in a network is defined as a measure to capture how nonuniformly weights on the links attached to this node are distributed: For example, if the node has the same value of mutual information with all the other nodes of the network, its disparity would be Y i = 1/(N -1), while if it correlates only with one neighbor, the disparity maximizes as Y i = 1. Physically speaking, high disparity of a lattice site means that it tends to correlate only with a few other sites, and "factorize out" of the rest of the system. In the context of quantum many-body physics such a behavior would be typical for states that can be nearly decomposed into product states. On the other hand, low disparity means that the site correlates with a large number of degrees of freedom. • Density is an overall characteristic of a network given by i.e. it is the averaged fraction of all the weights (mutual information values) of the network. To gain more intuition on what properties of the many-body quantum state it reflects, we shall estimate an upper bound on this measure. If site i of the network is maximally entangled with the rest of the system, its entanglement entropy equals S i = ln d = ln 4, where d = 4 is dimension of the local on-site Hilbert space in Hubbard model. On the other hand, mutual information monogamy theorem implies that 2S i ≥ i, j I i j i.e. the mutual information network is generally sparse even if the system is highly entangled. Note that bound (6) can be saturated in physically very distinct cases. D is maximal if either each single site is maximally entangled with just one partner site, and the state as a whole decomposes into a product of Bell pairs, or if the entanglement between the site and the rest of the system is homogeneously scrambled over all the sites. To distinguish between such configurations one has to refer to the disparity which we defined above. • Pearson correlations measure how much two nodes i and j of a network differ from each other: In Ref. For one-dimensional Ising and Bose-Hubbard models [37]. We have computed the complex network measures discussed above across the space of parameters of a 4-by-4 tt Hubbard plaquette. Within each fixed particle number sector, from (5, 5) (37, 5% hole doping) to (7, 7) (12, 5% hole doping), we scan over t and U, Fig. We assume that a transition point is evident if all the measures exhibit some clear features around the same point. Accepting this criterion, we can claim with a high confidence that, for non-periodic boundary-conditions, there is a family of transition points in each sector (except (7, 7)) forming a nearly perfect straight line in the t -U plane that extends in a certain range of t Moreover, for different values of hole doping, all these lines have very similar slope. This can be interpreted as that phase transition occurs on a 2d manifold in the 3d parametric (U/t, t /t, particle number) space of the model. We stick to non-periodic boundary conditions for the reason that the mutual information network has a richer structure in that case. If periodic boundary conditions are imposed, all lattice sites are identical, and every site has only five inequivalent connections to others, making the I i j matrix highly degenerate. Hence, the corresponding network structures are constrained by sym- One can see the pseudogap formation around ω = 0 near the quantum critical point. Its interpretation in terms of the Fano antiresonance due to formation of a "soft fermion" mode was given in Ref. At the same time, in the density of states (d.o.s.) the transition point is (almost) invisible. Some minor peculiarity at the quantum critical point is visible in the density of states at t = -0.3. Around the transition point identified by means of the complex network theory (U = 7.5, sector Discussion. By associating the quantum state of the tt Hubbard model with a weighted network of intersite mutual information, for different values of the next-neighbor hopping t , we have found a set of transition lines in the Ut plane of the model parametric space, where characteristics of the network have a clearly distinguishable cusp. Such a behavior was previously shown to be an indication of quantum phase transitions in different one-dimensional models Both the strength and the weakness of the employed approach is that it helps to identify any critical point while being ignorant about its nature. Therefore we can claim the existence of a manifold of QCP in the tt Hubbard model with a high confidence, but we cannot deduce what order parameter of the corresponding transition is. Still, we tend to relate the observed transition to the critical point discussed in Within the exact diagonalization approach, we were able to consider only a small cluster, where one unavoidably has to deal with strong finite size effects. It would be interesting to conduct a similar analysis for a larger system. The state-of-the-art DMRG allows to study quasi-2d stripes as large 4-by-64 atomic sites Methods. In this section we give the relevant technical details of the calculation of the entanglement measures defined above. The first step is to diagonalize the Hubbard model ( cluster. This can be done either for a periodic or a non-periodic model. The diagonalization is performed using the Lanczos algorithm with 200 Krylov basis vectors The reduced density matrix is computed using its definition that can be symbolically written as: Here a, a denote the many-particle (Fock) basis states describing the subsystem A we calculate the density matrix for, ā stands for the many-particle basis state of the complementary subsystem Ā, thus a couple of those (a, ā) denotes a basis Fock state for the whole cluster explicitly split into two parts. As before, n stands for a particular eigenvector, the density matrices for given eigenstates are weighted with the Boltzmann factors corresponding to their energies. In a given sector for a given set of parameters we use the Boltzmann factor cut-off of 1% meaning e (E 0 -E k )β > 10 -2 , where E 0 is the ground state energy and E k is the energy of the highest (kth) level taken into account. Note that while performing the partial trace over Ā one has to correctly account for the fermionic commutation relations. To this aim one has to effectively change the numeration of sites so that the sites for which we calculate the density matrix stand first. Explicitly it means that each component of an eigenvector, corresponding to a given basis state of the cluster, gets a factor determined as the parity acquired while "dragging" the occupied sites of A to the beginning past the occupied states of Ā. In other words for each basis vector one takes each occupied site from A and for each occupied spin component counts the number of same spin occupied sites from Ā standing before the considered site in the original numeration. Summing up the parities of those numbers for all occupied sites and spins from A one gets the parity that is assigned to a given basis vector with respect to the subsystem A. Having multiplied the eigenvector components with the acquired parities one finally performs the partial trace over the complementary subset Ā. Given the reduced density matrix, we first calculate the von Neumann entropy of a given sub-system and then, with Eq. ( The ω-dependent Green function is given by: Here m, n denote the eigenstates of the system, i and σ denote a given site and spin (in the paramagnetic case the answer is spin-independent), E n is the energy of the n-th state, and Z = m e -βE m is the partition function. Note that m and n necessarily belong to different sectors. The Green function is then used to calculate the spectral density of states, which is defined as To perform numerical computations, delta-peaks in the Green function are broadened with δ = π/β. For a more detailed picture of how complexity measures behave at different values of t , see Ref.[47] 