In this paper we find that confining a second-order topological superconductor with a harmonic potential leads to a proliferation of Majorana corner modes. As a consequence, this results in the formation of Majorana corner flat bands which have a fundamentally different origin from that of the conventional mechanism. This is due to the fact that they arise solely from the one-dimensional gapped boundary states of the hybrid system that become gapless without the bulk gap closing under the increase of the trapping potential magnitude. The Majorana corner states are found to be robust against the strength of the harmonic trap and the transition from Majorana corner states to Majorana flat bands is merely a smooth crossover. As a harmonic trap can potentially be realized in heterostructures, this proposal paves a way to observe these Majorana corner flat bands in an experimental context. Topological insulators (TIs) and superconductors (TSCs) have opened a new avenue for topology in both condensed matter and high-energy physics In second-order TSCs these MZMs have been studied at the corners of a two-dimensional (2D) system and hinges of a three-dimensional (3D) system where neighboring hinges have different chiralities An important issue is to both find and determine the robustness of the MCSs. As shown in Ref. Here, we consider the harmonic potential (HP) as an example of a gradual confining potential. The HP is defined as where v trap is the potential magnitude, and i c = (i c x , i c y ) is the coordinate of the central site of the square lattice which we arXiv:1904.00990v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 3 Mar 2020 take as the origin. There is no well-defined edge associated with a gradual confining potential and near a MCS, there is no additional corner where additional MCSs can appear. In the limit of a HP whose magnitude is much larger than the insulating gap, the region near the four corners of 2D TI in proximity with a d-wave SC becomes the location for unconventional superconductivity. It should be pointed out that in the homogeneous system by increasing the chemical potential there is a topological phase transition with bulk gap closing. Moreover, a time-reversal invariant (TRI) d-wave SC with [110] surface, has zero-energy flat dispersion due to a nontrivial one-dimensional (1D) winding number at a large enough chemical potential 8, In this paper, we show that in a second-order TSCs with a confining HP the MCSs-MFBs transition is merely a crossover: the number of the MZMs gradually increases while there is no 2D bulk gap closing as the HP magnitude increases. We find that the increase of the number of MZMs indicates the appearance of new Majorana states originating from the fact that only 1D gapped boundary modes become gapless without closing the bulk gap. This eventually leads to a new kind of MFBs which we call Majorana corner flat bands (MCFBs). It is found that 2D bulk states do not become gapless with increasing the HP magnitude in a system with open-boundary conditions (OBCs), i.e., the host system for the MCSs. We show that the crossover behavior is important for explaining the increase in the number of MZMs. In contrast, in a system with periodic boundary conditions (PBCs), the 2D bulk gap is closed if the potential magnitude at the corners, v trap (r c ), becomes larger than the insulating gap. We confirm that, under sharp potentials such as circular potential, the 2D bulk gap is closed in both OBCs and PBCs systems. This paper is organized as follows. We introduce the model of a two-dimensional TI with a proximity-induced d-wave superconducting gap, as shown schematically in Fig. The Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian of a 2D TI in proximity with a SC is given by, with Here, c † i,α,β (c i,α,β ) denotes the creation (annihilation) operator of an electron at site i = (i x , i y ), in orbital α = a or b, with spin β = ↑ or ↓. The normal state and superconducting parts of the Hamiltonian are given by ) where m 0 is on-site orbital-dependent energy, and t is the intraorbital nearest neighbor hopping magnitude along the x and y directions with unit vectors x and ŷ. The σ x,y,z and s x,y,z are Pauli matrices acting on orbital and spin degree of freedoms, respectively, and σ 0 and s 0 are 2 × 2 unit matrices. Moreover, ) are the spin-orbit coupling terms with magnitude λ, where the symbol i denoting √ -1 should not be confused with the site-index that generally occurs subscripted. The chemical potential is given by μ and V i is the 2D single particle potential magnitude at site i. The d-wave superconductivity order parameter with d x 2 -y 2 symmetry is expressed as In the absence of any single particle potential (V i = 0), the corresponding BdG Hamiltonian in momentum space 50 can be writ- where τ x,y,z are Pauli matrices in particle-hole space, and τ 0 is the 2 × 2 unit matrix, and (4) The BdG Hamiltonian possesses both particle-hole symmetry (PHS), i.e., PH * BdG (k)P -1 = -H BdG (-k) where P = σ 0 s 0 τ x , and time-reversal symmetry (TRS), i.e., T H * BdG (k)T -1 = H BdG (-k) where T = iσ 0 s y τ 0 . The combination of these two anti-unitary symmetries gives rise to a unitary chiral symmetry, i.e., SH BdG (k)S -1 = -H BdG (k) where S = -iPT . The intrinsic particlehole symmetry of the BdG Hamiltonian guarantees that the eigenstates whose eigenvalues are zero satisfy the Majorana conditions as discussed in the Appendix. It should be noted that the above Hamiltonian without d-wave pairing becomes the paradigmatic Bernevig-Hughes-Zhang (BHZ) model of 2D TIs 51 . In addition, the normal state dispersion is given as so, the insulating gap as an important quantity in our analysis, is given by |m(k = 0)| = |m 0 -2t|. Through this work, we set m 0 = 1.5, μ = 0, t = λ = 1, and ∆ d = 0.5. In a TRI system, MCSs manifest themselves as Majorana Kramers pairs which are protected zero-energy modes localized at the four corners of the 2D TI in proximity with a d-wave. By adding proximity-induced d-wave superconductivity, the helical gapless boundary modes of the 2D TI become gapped, so in our system as a 2D square sample, there are 1D gapped localized modes along the four boundaries when the chemical potential is smaller than the insulating gap. By constructing the low-energy Hamiltonian and through the use of localized modes, we can define the topological invariant, which depends on the direction of a boundary 32 . There should be gapless zero modes at four intersections or corners of the 2D TI known as MCSs Since the 1D effective systems along the vertical and horizontal boundaries have different topological invariants or Dirac masses, We argue that in a second-order TSC, the MCSs-MCFBs transition is actually a crossover in the OBCs system with increasing the HP magnitude: the number of MZMs gradually increases while there is no bulk gap closing as is illustrated in Fig. To see the MCSs-MCFBs transition in more detail, we show the real space dependence of the zero-energy local density of states in Fig. It should be noted that an exact zero-energy eigenvalue cannot be obtained in the theoretical calculations for a finite system because of finite size effects. Thus, zero energy have to be defined. An eigenvalue can be considered as a zero-energy mode in such a finite system if its magnitude is very small. Therefore, the eigenvalue E i can be considered as a zero-energy eigenvalue if it satisfies |E i | ≤ ε condition for a very small ε. By using of this definition for zero-energy modes, we show that as the harmonic trap magnitude is increased, the number of zero-energy eigenvalue increases independent of the value of ε for large enough lattice. In Fig. Let us define the circular potential as where v circ is the strength of the circular potential, and i c = (i c x , i c y ) is the coordinate of the central site of a 2D sample. Here, we take R = N x /2 where N x is the number of sites along x-axis direction. As shown in Figs. 9 and 10, the bulk gap closes in both OBCs and PBCs for a circular potential, so there is no crossover and no MCFBs in the presence of a circular potential which is not similar to the case of the harmonic potential. Let us discuss the difference between conventional MFBs in a d-wave SC and MCFBs in our system. In a SC with order parameter symmetry d x 2 -y 2 , it is well known that there are Andreev flat bound states, which appear at the [110] surface. On the other hand, there is no zeroenergy bound state at the [100] and [010] surfaces where k ⊥ is the momentum in a one-dimensional BZ, and k || is the momentum parallel to the surface that we consider. Moreover, in Eq. ( Although MCFBs consist of many very spatially close MZMs, they cannot hybridize and become gapped out. This is in contrast to the fact that MCSs hybridize and annihilate if they are brought close together. The reasons for the weak hybridization can naturally be explained by the use of the 1D boundary modes, time-reversal symmetry, and the crossover behavior as follows. Without a confining potential, the wave function of MCSs and 1D gapped boundary modes are orthogonal because they are eigenvectors of the BdG Hamiltonian with different energies. The wave functions gradually change with changing the HP magnitude and remain orthogonal since there is no bulk gap closing. Therefore, the crossover makes the MCFBs stable by preserving the orthogonality of these wave functions. In addition, it is known that both Majorana flat bands in a d-wave SC, and Majorana corner states in a second-order TSC are protected by timereversal symmetry It has been recently proposed that a second-order TSC hosts Majorana corner states (MCSs) localized at the four corners of a 2D TI in proximity with some unconventional high-temperature SCs. This work provides a theoretical framework to make only 1D gapped boundary modes gapless without closing the bulk gap in 2D second-order TSCs. Second-order TSCs always have (d -1)-dimensional gapped boundary modes and (d -2)dimensional gapless modes in d-spatial dimensions. Our results suggest that increasing the gradual potential magnitude proliferates the number of MCSs by making only 1D gapped boundary modes gapless without closing the bulk gap. This finally leads to a new kind of MFB, namely Majorana corner flat bands (MCFBs). In contrast to the conventional mechanism, MCFBs cannot be characterized by a 1D winding number and only originate from 1D gapped boundary modes that become gapless without closing the bulk gap. It also has been shown that the presence of timereversal symmetry during the MCSs-MCFBs crossover prevent MCSs from hybridizing and protect MCFBs. There might be a topological invariant for this particular inhomogeneous system to characterize the crossover, but finding that in real-space is a mathematically challenging task and beyond the scope of our present paper. In experiment, if one can observe the MCSs in secondorder TSCs, such as a hybrid structure of TI and an unconventional SC or even cold atom systems, one can also observe the MCSs-MCFBs crossover and MCFBs with adding a gradual potential such as HP. More precisely speaking, for having a hybrid structure of TI and an unconventional SC, a monolayer of WTe 2 as a hightemperature topological insulator 