We present a 1D repetition code based on the so-called cat qubits as a viable approach toward hardware-efficient universal and fault-tolerant quantum computation. The cat qubits that are stabilized by a two-photon driven-dissipative process, exhibit a tunable noise bias where the effective bit-flip errors are exponentially suppressed with the average number of photons. We propose a realization of a set of gates on the cat qubits that preserve such a noise bias. Combining these base qubit operations, we build, at the level of the repetition cat qubit, a universal set of fully protected logical gates. This set includes single-qubit preparations and measurements, NOT, controlled-NOT, and controlled-controlled-NOT (Toffoli) gates. Remarkably, this construction avoids the costly magic state preparation, distillation, and injection. Finally, all required operations on the cat qubits could be performed with slight modifications of existing experimental setups. Quantum computers are expected to efficiently solve classically intractable problems. The realization of a large-scale quantum computer is challenging because the noise induced by the uncontrolled interactions of the computer's components with the environment destroys the fragile quantum features responsible for the expected speedup. Indeed, all algorithms with theoretically proven quantum speedup require some level of protection against decoherence. The theory of fault-tolerant quantum computation In theory, QECCs provide, when operated below the threshold, an arbitrarily good protection against the noise, thus solving the decoherence problem. However, their actual implementation comes at the price of tremendous physical resources to reach a sufficient level of protection. This trade-off between the degree of protection provided by a QECC versus the increase in physical components needed for its implementation is the resource overhead problem. Realistic approaches to quantum computation must deal with this issue. In this light, continuous-variable (CV) systems (such as a harmonic oscillator), in which an infinite-dimensional Hilbert space * jeremie.guillaud@inria.fr is readily available to protect and process quantum information, seem to have a head start over discrete-variable (DV) systems that have only a finite-dimensional Hilbert space. There are many different CV encodings, usually involving the superposition of certain specific states of a harmonic oscillator, such as position and momentum eigenstates The latter encoding, known as cat codes, has been the subject of intensive theoretical and experimental research throughout the past years. A highlight of this research is the first realization of quantum error correction for a quantum memory at the break-even point The concatenation of a CV code, such as the singlemode Gottesman-Kitaev-Preskill code, with a DV one, such as the surface code, has been recently investigated by various groups The pumped (stabilized) cat qubits are known to benefit from a noise bias Previous works show that such a noise asymmetry increases the accuracy threshold of various encodings when it is correctly exploited In the next section, we overview the basics of encoding quantum information in two-photon pumped cat states, and we recall the reasons behind the exponential suppression of effective bit-flip errors. Next, in Sec. III, we present our approach toward hardware-efficient and fault-tolerant quantum computation based on encoding the information in a simple repetition code of cat qubits. We provide a detailed comparison with Ref. The proposal in this paper is focused on cat qubits stabilized by two-photon driven dissipation Driving a nonlinear interaction Hamiltonian between a harmonic oscillator and its bath, it is possible to engineer a nonstandard situation where the oscillator dominantly gains or loses photons in pairs with It has been shown where N ± := [2(1±e -2|α| 2 )] -1/2 . Expanding the coherent states in the Fock state basis, one can note that the in-phase (respectively, out-ofphase) superposition spans even (respectively, odd) Fock states only; thus, the cat state |C + α (respectively, |C - α ) is referred to as the even cat (respectively, odd cat). The steady state of Eq.( where c ++ , c --and c +-are conserved quantities that are entirely determined by the initial state ρ 0 . The cat qubit states are defined as (see Fig. Note that, with respect to our previous publications (e.g. Ref. Note, however, that phase flips, or, equivalently, jumps between even-parity cat state |C + α and the odd-parity one |C - α , can be induced by noise mechanisms such as photon loss or thermal excitations. As a result, an increase of the mean photon number (in order to suppress the bit-flip errors) comes at the expense of higher phase-flip rates. This rate increase is, however, expected to be only linear with respect to |α| 2 . The noise bias exp(-2|α| 2 )/|α| 2 of cat qubits is therefore tunable with the cat size. Some experimental indications of such a tunable bias have been recently observed This protection can also be achieved through a nondissipative process using a strong Kerr-type nonlinearity and two-photon driving with α = 2ph /K the ground states | ± α , are twofold degenerate. The system can be thought of as a double well potentiel, where the tunneling between the two wells is exponentially suppressed with |α| 2 . Note, however, that, with such a Hamiltonian protection, some type of friction needs to be added in order to avoid leakage errors (out of the encoded qubit subspace) due to excursions in each well. The natural photon loss of the harmonic oscillator, if it is stronger than the mechanisms leading to such an excursion, can compensate this leakage. Thus, a promising approach is a combination of the Kerr type Hamiltonian and two-photon dissipation, where the protection against leakage does not come at the expense of higher phase-flip rates. In the next section, we show how to extend this halfprotection to a full protection against both phase flips and bit flips. More precisely, we design an economic encoding that suppresses the phase flips without reintroducing bit flips. We see that cat qubits admit a biased noise where the bit-flip errors are suppressed exponentially with the cat size. In this section, we trace out a viable path toward full protection with minimal hardware overhead. It is tempting to think that physical qubits suffering only from phase-flip errors can be protected through a simple classical-error correction-scheme such as a repetition code. All that is required is the ability to perform parity-type measurements between neighboring qubits. Indeed, this idea can be explored to build a fully protected quantum memory, but performing protected logical gates comes with further complications. The main issue is that, the execution of a gate can in principle convert a phase-flip error into a bit-flip one, which is not suppressed by the simple error correction. One is therefore limited to only employ physical operations that preserve the noise bias (i.e. do not convert phase flips into bit flips). Such operations are called bias preserving. This idea is employed as a first level of encoding in Ref. As discussed in Refs. with Z j being the Pauli σ z operator on qubit j), or more generally the twoqubit entangling gate CZ(θ) = exp(iθ/2Z 1 ⊗Z 2 ) generate such unitary operations commute with phase-flip errors. However, a universal gate set will necessarily contain gates that do not commute with the dephasing errors, such as CNOT or Toffoli. Note that, while these gates do not commute with the phase-flip errors, their action may still be compatible with noise bias. Considering the CNOT= 1 2 (I 1 + Z 1 ) ⊗ I 2 + 1 2 (I 1 -Z 1 ) ⊗ X 2 gate for instance, Z 1 errors commute with CNOT and Z 2 errors are converted into correlated phase-flip errors Z 1 Z 2 . This overall action does not to convert phase flips to bit flips and is therefore correctable by the repetition code. However, as correctly noted by In Ref. Layout of a repetition cat qubit using high-Q 3D cylindrical postcavities operations, the authors construct new gadgets to reduce the overhead for magic state preparation and distillation. The construction of Refs. In this paper, we show that the cat qubits have specific features which allow us to circumvent the aforementioned obstacles and significantly reduce the complexity of protected logical gates. These features rely on the infinitedimensional Hilbert space of the oscillator in which the two-dimensional Hilbert space of the cat qubit is embedded. More precisely, gates are performed by a continuous distortion of the two-dimensional manifold defining the cat qubit, in such a way that the exponential suppression of bit flips remains valid during the execution of the gate. The apparent "magic" comes from the fact that the Z component of the qubit is transformed continuously, which would not be possible using a DV system. Following this idea, we detail in Sec. IV how a universal set of bias preserving gates can be implemented at the cat qubit level. Even more remarkably, the realization of this set requires hardware-efficient operations, with no use of functional ancilla qubits, nor magic state preparation, distillation and injection. In order to extend the protection to phase-flip errors, we propose to embed the cat qubits in a repetition code (Fig. The logical operators for the repetition cat qubit are The logical |+ L and |-L states are given by Note that this definition leads to the following nontrivial logical computational states: where j is an n-bit string composed of 0's and 1's and |j| denotes the number of 1's, called the weight, of the string j. Recalling that |1 c ≈ |α , one can note that the logical information is encoded in the parity of the number of oscillators in the |α -state. This code, with phase-flip error correcting capacity of (n -1)/2, does not detect nor correct physical bit-flip errors. Here, n is chosen such that the probabilities p Z L of logical phase-flip, and p X L of logical bit-flip errors, are of comparable strength, thus producing a C 1 -logical qubit suffering from an effective unbiased noise of strength L := p X L + p Z L . It is worth noting that the accuracy that can be achieved by C 1 is set by the size of the cat states. Indeed, the lower bound for this accuracy is given by p X L and decreases exponentially to zero as the cat size increases. Fixing a reasonable mean photon number of n = 10, this achievable accuracy could be as low as 10 -9 and reduces to 10 -13 for n = 15. Cat states of such sizes have been previously prepared in the context of superconducting circuits Let us now briefly present the picture for the construction of fault-tolerant gates at the level of the repetition cat qubits (see Fig. In this section, we first explain how the set of operations S = {P |± c , M X , X, Z, CNOT, Toffoli} can be realized at the cat qubit level in a bias-preserving manner. The operations in S are sufficient to build the universal set of logical gates for the repetition code (see Sec. V). In addition, we recall at the end of the section how arbitrary rotations around the Z axis Z(θ) (proposal Preparation of |± c . First, we note that the states |± c are eigenstates of the logical X operator which make their preparation compatible with the noise bias (suppressed bit flips) A systematic way to prepare the odd cat state |c = |C - α is to start with preparing the even cat state and then performing a Z operation. A bias preserving rotation around the Z axis is proposed in Ref. Finally, we also note that such a state preparation can be performed through other strategies as well. In particular, in many recent experiments (e.g., Ref. Measurement of X. For the purpose of our scheme, the measurement of X (photon-number parity measurement) could be either destructive or quantum nondemolition (QND) as it is always used on ancilla qubits which can be discarded after each measurement. However, a QND protocol allows us to achieve a better fidelity by repeating the measurements. The QND parity measurement proposed in Ref. To↵oli < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " v P K K X T + O l k 4 k 9 U t f 5 9 j f v s 9 Overall scheme for achieving fault-tolerant universal quantum computation using cat qubits. The fundamental operations (left-hand side) are performed on the cat qubits, in a bias-preserving manner. Fault-tolerant logical operations acting on the repetition cat qubits (right-hand side) are built out of these operations, as depicted by the arrows. This construction is detailed in Sec. V . Û is to flip the ancilla to the state |-= 1 √ 2 (|g -|e ) when the cavity contains an odd number of photons and to leave it unchanged otherwise. A measurement of the σx operator of the qubit thus reveals the parity of the cavity state. Note that, in order to perform such a parity measurement, we need to turn off the two-photon driven dissipation on the measured system. However, as stated earlier, these measurements are performed on ancilla cavities that are thrown out after each measurement. So the absence of protection during the measurement affects merely the measurement fidelity and does not have any consequence on the rest of the circuit. Rather high parity-measurement fidelities of about 98.5% have been previously achieved using this protocol X gate. Our realization of the X gate is based on an adiabatic deformation of the code space. As discussed in Sec. II, the effective dissipation channel κ 2 D[â 2α 2 ] stabilizes the two-dimensional subspace span{|±α }. It is possible to perform nontrivial operations on the encoded information by varying the complex number α in time. When the variations of α(t) are sufficiently slow with respect to κ -1 2 , the dissipator κ 2 D[â 2α(t) 2 ] stabilizes span{|α(t) , |α(t) } at all times t. This stabilization should be thought of as a slow motion of the fixed points of the dynamics in the phase space. Remarkably, such a deformation preserves the quantum information, provided the two states |α(t) and |α(t) remain sufficiently separated in phase space at all times: The state An X operation can be realized in such a manner by choosing a "path" function α(t) such that |α and |α are exchanged, e.g α(t) = αe iπt/T , t ∈ [0, T ] where T κ -1 2 is the gate time which is an X operation for the cat qubit. In addition to such a topological phase, there is a geometric phase accumulated due to the particular path taken by α(t). However, this phase is the same for the two states | ± α and corresponds to a global phase. In the ideal case of a lossless harmonic oscillator and in the limit where the gate time T = +∞, the fidelity of this operation with respect to the X operator is 1. This operation is bias preserving, as the errors caused by the finite gate time are only of the phase-flip type, but the bit flips remain exponentially suppressed in the size of the cat n. Intuitively, this result is not surprising, as the two-photon pumping is never turned off during the gate execution. We depict in Fig. To reduce the phase-flip error rate due to the finite gate time (nonadiabaticity) , the Hamiltonian Ĥ = -π T â † â is turned on while the pumping is being rotated. This Hamiltonian generates the unitary R(t) = e i π T â † ât which rotates deterministically the qubit state R(t)|ψ 0 = c 0 |α(t) + c 1 |α(t) so that it remains at all times a pointer state of the time-dependent dissipative channel: Re(α) In the presence of this Hamiltonian, there is no need to proceed adiabatically; that is, the gate time T can be arbitrarily short. CNOT gate. The idea described above can be adapted to realize a CNOT = 1 2 (I 1 +Z 1 )I 2 + 1 2 (I 1 -Z 1 )X 2 . The CNOT for the cat qubits is given by The approximation is exponentially precise in |α| 2 . Inspired by the proposal of Ref. where we denote by â (respectively, b) the mode of the control cat qubit (respectively, target cat qubit). The dissipation channel on the control qubit L â is the twophoton pumping scheme stabilizing the control cat qubit. The second dissipation channel, however, acts on the target cat qubit but also depends on the first mode â. It should be understood as follows: When the control qubit â is in the state |α , the operator Lb (t) acts on the target mode as b2α 2 , stabilizing the idle code space, but when the control qubit is in the state |α , the pumping becomes b2 -(αe i π T t ) 2 , thus implementing the timedependent two-photon pumping dissipation used for the X α operation. Again, the pumping is never turned off and the bit-flip errors remain exponentially suppressed at all times, thus ensuring that the CNOT gate preserves the biased structure of the noise. In Sec. VII, we explain how the experimental realization of such a time-dependent dissipation operator is a straightforward modification of the regular two-photon driven dissipation We now explain how to deal with two undesired effects that limit the fidelity of the operation: the geometric phase due to the path taken by the states | ± α(t) in the phase space, and the phase-flip errors induced by the finite gate time (nonadiabaticity). In the case of the X gate, the geometric phase corresponded to a physically meaningless global phase, but here this phase is conditioned on the state of the control qubit. As a consequence, the geometric phase induces a deterministic rotation around the Z axis of the control qubit. The rotation angle is given by This deterministic geometric phase can be compensated by applying a local Z(θ) operation (see below). A second option is to ensure that the rotation angle θ is a multiple of 2π, either by setting the number of photons to be an even integer or by choosing a path α(t) such that the result of the integral is a multiple of 2π. Even in this case, the fluctuations along the chosen path inevitably lead to a certain imprecision in the final value of the geometric phase. This situation is not an issue, as it can lead only to phase-flip errors, accounted for by the repetition code. A major part of the phase-flip errors induced by nonadiabatic effects can be compensated in the same way as the X operation, by adding a Hamiltonian evolution of the form while rotating the pumping. In the presence of twophoton pumping, this Hamiltonian is an approximation of π/T |α -α| ⊗ ( b †bn), rotating the target cat qubit conditional to the control cat qubit being in the state |α . Such Hamiltonians have been already realized using parametric methods Toffoli gate. The Toffoli gate is the three-qubit gate corresponding to a "controlled-controlled-NOT": This unitary does not belong to the Clifford group. In fact, this gate, together with any set of gates generating the Clifford group, is universal. In the vast majority of schemes achieving universality, the non-Clifford operation is by far the most difficult operation to be realized. A remarkable feature of our scheme is that the physical implementation of the Toffoli at the cat qubit level is very much like the CNOT gate and, thus, of similar complexity. Three dissipation channels are realized, Here, L â and L b keep stabilizing the two control modes â and b in manifolds spanned by | ± α , and L ĉ rotates the two-photon pumping on the target mode ĉ only when the control cat qubits are in the state |α, -α . As for the CNOT gate, two effects (the geometric phase and the nonadiabaticity) limit the gate fidelity. The deterministic geometric phase associated to the path taken by the target cat qubit can also be eliminated by tailoring the path followed in the phase space by the cat states during the execution of the gate, or by physically applying Z(θ) and CZ(θ) operations. To reduce the phase-flip errors induced by non adiabaticity, the Hamiltonian is added. We analytically analyze the performance of this gate in Sec. VI, and in Sec. VII, we discuss an experimental implementation. From a theoretical point of view, assuming the required couplings between any number of modes are available, the mechanism presented above could be straightforwardly extended to realize the n-qubit entangling gate C n-1 X where C n-1 denotes the controls on the first n -1 qubits (the CNOT being CX and the Toffoli, C 2 X). Rotation around Z of an angle θ. As discussed in Ref. where To do so, a weak resonant drive Ĥ = Z (â+â † ) is applied in the presence of the two-photon driven dissipation. When the single-photon drive is much weaker than the two-photon dissipation, Z κ 2ph , it induces effective oscillations in the equatorial plane of the Bloch sphere whose frequency is given by Ω Z = 2 Z |α|. Two-qubit entangling gate CZ(θ). In the same spirit, a bias preserving two-qubit entangling gate can be implemented using a weak beam-splitter Hamiltonian Ĥ = ZZ (â ) in the presence of the twophoton driven dissipation (see Ref. In this section, we construct the faulttolerant logical operations of the set S L = {P |± L , M X L , X L , CNOT L , Toffoli L } for the repetition code, using the fundamental set of bias-preserving operations S = {P |± c , M X , X, Z, CNOT, Toffoli} for individual cat qubits. The universality of S L is established by building a Hadamard gate out of operations in this set, which, together with the Toffoli gate, is universal Quantum error correction for repetition code. A prerequisite for using a repetition code is the ability to measure the value of the n -1 stabilizers of the code, also called the parity-check operators. In our setup, these stabilizers are the joint-parity operators of any two pairs of neighboring cat qubits X j X j+1 . The measurement of these operators can be achieved using operations in S, with the circuit in Fig. Joint-parity measurement between two neighboring cat qubits j and j + 1 of a repetition cat qubit, using one ancilla cat qubit. Note that the error propagation from ancilla cat qubit to data ones is exponentially suppressed by the cat size. In order to make these measurements fault tolerant, they are repeated r times, where r is optimized, taking into account the CNOT and measurement errors. We depict in Fig. Preparation of |+ L and measurement of X L . The preparation of |± L = |± ⊗n c can be performed transversally from the preparation of |± c : P |± L = (P |± c ) ⊗n . A subsequent step of quantum error correction enables us to reduce the preparation infidelity according to the distance of the repetition code. Similarly, the measurement of only one cat qubit from the repetition cat qubit using M X already implements a measurement of X L . However, to ensure fault tolerance, M X L is implemented by measuring M X on all the cat . . . . . . m t g l j U 9 5 I W G 1 m q n j s a 6 s 2 J 9 q j 3 V N t b c R / e 2 k 1 p B Y i U t i / 9 J N M / + r U 1 4 k e j j S H g R 5 C j S j 3 D l J l V i f i t q 5 + c m FIG. qubits and then making a majority vote. Logical CNOT gate. This gate is not required in our set of universal gates and can be suppressed from the set S L . However, its implementation is easy and can lead to more economical circuits for the realization of certain algorithms. Indeed, the logical CNOT gate is simply obtained from the physical one by performing n CNOT gates in a transversal manner, as depicted in Fig. < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " / H 3 s j z R 3 H r n 9 J J c y 0 r 9 The fault tolerance of the logical CNOT comes from the transversal construction of the circuit, which prevents the forward propagation of errors that could lead to an uncorrectable logical error. For instance, a phase-flip error occurring on the kth cat qubit of the logical target qubit error on two different blocks, but it cannot induce an error on a qubit j = k. Such errors are detected and corrected by the QEC stage performed after the Toffoli gate's execution. Furthermore, each CNOT gate at the level of cat qubits is bias preserving, and, therefore, the bit-flip errors remain exponentially suppressed at the repetition code level. Logical Toffoli gate. The transversal application of n physical Toffoli gates in a similar fashion as Fig. q + E + t V K z 6 p q k 2 g V 9 L p / N 0 f h + x X H o y Q + y u J h k i q z y p c + e T H L w 9 j e x d y Y P j Z r 3 R q j e P 2 t X O f n q P t u E 5 v I T X e F f e Q w c + w i F 0 g R p l 4 4 3 R M t r m v n l t h u Z w I t 0 q p T n P 4 N Z j f v s N e s 7 u m A = = < / l a t e x i t > QEC < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " J 6 q 5 H b O X Q J U W 7 w g X 3 U 3 w H 5 + z The circuit can be understood as follows. Since the CNOT gate is transversal, the group of three physical Toffoli gates on the left-hand side of the circuit execute a logical CNOT between the logical qubits 2 and 3 (middle and lower blocks) conditioned on the first physical cat qubit of the first logical qubit being in the state |1 c . Similarly, the group of three Toffoli gates in the middle (respectively, on the right) of the circuit also execute a CNOT on logical qubits 2 and 3 when the second (respectively, third) physical cat qubit of the first logical qubit is in the state |1 c . Now, recall from Sec. II that the logical computational states of the first block are given by: The circuit works in this way: When the first logical qubit is in the |0 L state, an even number of logical CNOTs is performed on the second and third logical qubits, which amounts to the identity operation. On the other hand, the input |1 L state results in an odd number of logical CNOTs being performed, thus actually performing one logical CNOT. In other words, this circuit implements a logical "controlled-CNOT", that is, a Toffoli gate. We now discuss the fault tolerance of this circuit. First, as in the case of the CNOT gate, we note that each Toffoli gate at the level of the cat qubits is bias preserving, and, therefore, the bit-flip errors remain exponentially suppressed for the logical gate. Now, a phase-flip error occurring on any cat qubit of the first two logical qubit Z 1,2 (we omit the superscript for clarity) commutes with the successive physical Toffoli gates of the circuit: As a result, an error acting on any qubit of the first two logical qubits does not spread through the circuit and is corrected by the QEC stage performed after the gate's execution. Unfortunately, phase-flip errors on cat qubits of the third logical qubit do not commute with the Toffoli unitary and produce an extra error As the circuit is transversal for the second and third blocks of physical qubits (that is, the kth cat qubit of logical qubit 2 is only connected to the kth cat qubit of logical qubit 3), the forward propagation of an error from the third block to the second one cannot cause a logical error. On the other hand, because of the nontransversality of operations between the first and third logical qubits, a Z 3 error spreads on all qubits of the first logical qubit, resulting in an uncorrectable logical Z L error. Though this result means that the full circuit is not fault tolerant, a logical error can arise only if a majority of the qubits of the first logical qubit have been contaminated. To prevent this error, we perform two stages of QEC during the execution of the circuit, after one-third and two-thirds of the full circuit are executed, as shown in Fig. Note that while the above analysis ensures that the errors do not propagate in an uncontrolled manner, one also needs to prevent an accumulation of the nonpropagating errors (above the threshold of the repetition code) between two rounds of QEC. Indeed, Fig. Construction of Hadamard gate. In order to establish the universality of the set {P |± L , M X L , X L , Toffoli}, we show in Fig. We end this section by mentioning that while we have the possibility of correcting errors after the realization of each gate, it is enough to keep the record of errors by measuring the error syndromes and only apply an error correction before the Toffoli gates. Indeed, the Clifford operations map Pauli operators to Pauli operators and therefore it is only needed to keep track of the errors to update the Pauli frame in software We now study the performance of the physical gates of Sec. IV in a realistic setup. We note that, while the bias preserving character of the state preparation P |± c and the measurement M X is ensured by their definition, the error analysis of our implementation of rotations around the Z axis has been previously discussed in Ref. In our implementation of the X, CNOT and Toffoli gates, the loss of a single photon in the cavity changes the parity of the number of photons. As a result, the effect of photon loss on cat qubits is mostly to induce phase flips u R e E c m 6 Y G y Z p i w + j q / N w l M 6 e i d 2 5 / q U r R I S a n c Y P x h N g 3 y s 9 z t o 0 m N b X r s 3 V N / N V k a l b P / T w 3 w 1 v f 6 j y j b x G r v j f T 4 e q 6 k g 5 Z v S d 9 7 / J D w + 6 p / O y V X l B b L V f W y q v 7 6 6 W t 7 b y P R r G A R S y z V z a w h V 3 s o U r f J m 5 w i z v r 3 n q w H q 2 n j 1 S r k G v m 8 W 1 Y L + / M 7 6 M 0 < / l a t e x i t > FIG. |1 c . Mathematically, this difference can be understood by looking at the matrix elements coupling these states, If the only source of phase-flip errors is the photon loss, the noise bias, defined as the ratio of the phase-flip rate to the bit-flip rate η = p Z /p X scales as η ∼ e -2|α| 2 for large values of |α| 2 . This situation is the case for the X gate: As explained in Sec. IV, the phase-flip errors due to the adiabatic approximation disappear as soon as the Hamiltonian -π/T â † â is added. Furthermore, the precision of the gate is ensured by the fact that the rotation of the cat states leads to a topological phase This phase is not affected by the imprecisions in the rotation angle. Indeed, the phase of the coherent states | ± α is locked to the phase of the pump drives. In this sense, each cat qubit is defined with respect to its own pumps. Therefore, even if the rotation angle is not precisely π, which could happen, e.g., because of the amplitude and phase fluctuations of the pumping drive, the state still accumulates a topological π phase with respect to its local oscillator. The same argument on the gate precision holds for the CNOT and Toffoli gates, and is discussed further in Sec. VII. In the rest of this section, we will analyze the errors induced by photon loss and nonadiabatic effects on the CNOT and Toffoli gates. CNOT gate corrupted by photon loss. In order to understand the effect of a loss of photon during the execution of the CNOT, let us consider the unitary operation approximately generated by the two dissipation channels L â, L b(t) of Sec. IV. Indeed, in the presence of the above driven dissipations where the dynamics is confined in the cat qubit subspace, we approximately implement a unitary operation of the form: First, we investigate the effect of a loss of a photon of the control mode â. Denote by E â the noisy quantum operation performed instead of the CNOT when the control mode is lossy, and by t ∈ [0, T ] the random time at which such a loss occurs. We have: In both cases, we set κ 1ph /κ 2ph = 10 -3 and the gate time is chosen optimal 2ph (see the main text). We plot the real part of the process matrix χ (a,d), and the real (b,e) and imaginary (c,f) part of the error matrix χ err . In the lower row (g,h,i), we check the validity of our theoretical error model for photon loss for various gate times and cat sizes. While the dots illustrate the simulation results where the full master equation in the presence of loss are considered, the plain lines correspond to the analytical formula provided in the main text. The blue dots correspond to the diagonal process matrix element corresponding to the Z1, the red dots correspond to the coinciding diagonal matrix elements corresponding to Z2 and Z1Z2. The green dots correspond to the off-diagonal elements corresponding to the coherence between Z2 and Z1Z2 errors. The pale magenta dots correspond to the off-diagonal elements corresponding to coherence between Z1 and I, this coherence is due to high-order nonadiabatic effects and is not included in our theory. The black dots correspond to all remaining errors, including bit flip-type ones. It is clear that such errors remain exponentially suppressed. cat qubits as In other words, a photon loss on the control cat qubit causes a phase-flip on that qubit but does not affect the target cat qubit. On the other hand, a photon loss occurring on the target cat qubit b at time t propagates as The resulting error induced by the propagation of the photon loss can be expressed in terms of the Pauli operators of cat qubits as where θ = -iπ(1t/T ) is a random phase. The time of the jump being uniformly distributed over the interval [0, T ], the noisy operation E b can be written where ρ = CNOTρCNOT is the image of ρ by a perfect CNOT operation and nκ 1ph T is the average number of photons lost in each mode during the gate's execution. Written in this form, it is clear that the operation E b is a perfect CNOT gate followed by some noise given by the operators appearing in the equation above. The first two terms indicate that the effect of photon loss on the target cat qubit produces two types of error of the same strength: phase flips on the target cat qubit 1 2 Z 2 ρZ 2 as well as a correlated phase flips on both qubits 1 2 Z 1 Z 2 ρZ 1 Z 2 , with some degree of coherence between these two errors. When losses on both modes are taken into account, the noisy CNOT E â, b can be expressed as a Kraus sum: Errors induced by nonadiabaticity. The Hamiltonian compensates most of the errors induced by the finite gate time T . Using the adiabatic elimination techniques of Ref. A more thorough study of the errors induced by the approximate Hamiltonian will be given in a forthcoming paper. Numerical simulations. In order to check the validity of this error model, we perform a numerical process tomography of the CNOT gate [Figs. where U = CNOT is the perfect CNOT operation and the right-hand side represents the minimum over all twoqubit state fidelities. The unitary of the perfect CNOT is factored out in order to obtain the process error matrix χ err (real part in (b), imaginary part in (c)), which characterizes the noise alone: We further investigate our theoretical model for errors caused by photon loss by plotting (Fig. which is found through the analysis above together with second-order perturbation techniques following Ref. This result is represented by the plain line in red. The off-diagonal term representing the coherence between Z 2 and Z 1 Z 2 errors (green dots) also fits very well our expectation from Eq. ( Gate fidelity and optimal gate time. The phase-flip errors occurring on the control mode are caused by two sources that are very different in essence: When the gate time is increased, the "environment"-induced errors, caused by photon loss, are also increased, whereas phaseflip errors caused by nonadiabaticity are reduced. This opposite behavior gives rise to a finite optimal gate time T * for which the gate infidelity is minimal. More precisely, taking into account phase-flip errors caused by photon loss and by non-adiabicity, the total phase-flip error probability on the control cat qubit is given by The gate fidelity F of the implemented CNOT operation, defined by Eq. ( The highest value of the fidelity that can be achieved is set by the ratio κ 1ph /κ 2ph achieved for the optimal gate time For the ratio κ 2ph = 10 -3 considered in Fig. Addition of new noise processes. As discussed in Ref. In Fig. Note that the resulting error matrix and gate fidelity are barely affected by the added thermal excitations and photon dephasing. The addition of thermal noise and dephasing slightly decrease the fidelity of the operation, from 98.2% to 97.8%, but as expected, this decrease is caused by an increased rate of phase-flip errors, while all bit-flip errors remain exponentially suppressed. Numerical considerations. The numerical study of the CNOT gate in the presence of noise (Fig. for 16 different initial states, where Ĥ, Lâ and Lb (t) are defined in Sec. IV. The numerical computations were performed in parallel using the cluster of Inria Paris, composed of 68 nodes for a total of 1244 cores. The nodes are divided in a few hardware generations: 28 biprocessors Intel Xeon X5650 of 6 cores, 12 biprocessors E5-2650v4 2.20 of 12 cores, 16 biprocessors XeonE5-2670 of 10 cores, 8 biprocessors E5-2695 v4 of 18 cores, 4 biprocessors E5-2695 v3 of 14 cores. The simulation of the CNOT gate for cat qubits of n = 10 and a gate time of T = 3κ -1 2ph takes about 13 h on the cluster. The simulation of the Toffoli gate with the same parameters would be about 2000 times longer, for this reason, we do not provide numerical simulations for the Toffoli gate in this paper. However, the analytical discussion that follows explains, in a similar manner to the CNOT gate (plain lines in Figs. Toffoli gate corrupted by photon loss. The effect induced by photon loss during the execution of the Toffoli gate can be derived in the same way as for the CNOT. A photon loss occurring on one of the two control modes â, b does not propagate to the other modes and results in a dephasing error Z 1 and Z 2 , respectively. When the target mode ĉ loses a photon, it gives rise to a correlated error between the three modes. More precisely, the noisy Toffoli operation E â, b,ĉ can be decomposed into a perfect Toffoli operation, again denoted by ρ = Toffoli ρ Toffoli followed by a noise process expressed in Kraus form as where acts on the two control cat qubits. Nonadiabatic effects on Toffoli implementation. Because of the analogies in the way the CNOT and the Toffoli gates are implemented, it is useful to think of the Toffoli gate as a CNOT where the control state |α is replaced by |α, -α . In particular, the methods of Optimal gate time and gate fidelity. Taking into account phase-flip errors caused by photon loss and nonadiabaticity, the gate fidelity F of the implemented Toffoli operation is given by This fidelity is maximum for the same gate time 2ph optimizing the CNOT gate, producing a gate fidelity of The ratio κ 2ph = 10 -3 considered in Fig. The ideas behind our proposal could be applied to qubits possessing an extra degree of freedom, for which one type of error (bit flips or phase flips) is suppressed as soon as the noise processes are local in this degree of freedom (here the locality is in the phase space, but one can also consider the locality in the actual space as in Majorana fermions). The pumped (driven-dissipative or Kerr-type) cat qubits are prototypes of such qubits where the information is encoded and stabilized in a non-local manner in the phase space of harmonic oscillators. The stabilization of cat qubits can, for instance, be implemented in the context of the vibrational degree of freedom of an ion, by engineering two-phonon dissipation and drive We summarize in Table First, we note that the two-photon driven dissipation required to stabilize the cat qubits is realized by parametrically coupling a high-Q superconducting cavity mode â (frequency ω a ), called the storage mode, to a low-Q one d (frequency ω d ), called the dump mode In particular, the amplitude and phase of the coupling, given by the complex value g 2ph , is modulated by the pump (drive at frequency 2ω Here κ 2ph is roughly given by 4|g 2ph | 2 /κ d and α is given by d /g 2ph One important question to answer is whether the bitflip suppression induced by the two-photon process is affected by higher order terms in this adiabatic elimination approximation? The answer, fortunately, is not in a significant manner. In order to see this result, one can note that the states {| ± α ⊗ |0 } are precise steady states of the two-mode system before adiabatic elimination. Indeed, the protection of the coherent states | ± α against local shifts is ensured at all orders because of this stability. The rate of convergence to these states (which can be seen as the rate of protection against such excursions in the phase space) can, however, be modified when considering higher-order terms. However, if these corrections to the two-photon dissipation rate are not too large, the associated protection rate remains larger than the diffusion rate induced by local error mechanisms and, therefore, the bit-flip suppression remains valid. In parallel to these experiments, the measurement operation M X , which is equivalent to measuring the photon-number parity of the cat qubits has been performed in Refs. The realization of the X-operation consists in taking the same approach as the two-photon driven dissipation and simply varying the phase of the resonant drive d between 0 and 2π in a time T . This leads to a dissipation operator κ 2ph D[â 2exp(2iπt/T )α 2 ] which implements a bias preserving X operation. In order to remove the < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " V F + M 8 j S z O J 4 y u q B A g 8 J f j i s C h a phase-flip errors induced by the nonadiabaticity of this variation, one can additionally implement a Hamiltonian of the form -∆â † â with ∆ = π/T . This is simply done by taking the pump at frequency 2ω aω b -2∆ instead of 2ω aω b and furthermore detuning the drive d from resonance by value ∆. These are all simple modifications of the experiments in Refs. Let us now discuss the realization of the CNOT and Toffoli gates. For the CNOT gate between two cat qubits encoded in storage modes â and b, further to a two-photon driven dissipation modeled by the dissipator κ 2ph D[â 2α 2 ], one requires to also implement a timedependent dissipator given by κ 2ph D[ b2α 2 -α 2 (1e 2iπt T )(âα)]. In order to implement such a dissipation operator, we propose to couple the two storage modes â and b to a dump mode d, using a Y-shape transmon similar to In order to reduce the phase-flip probability induced by the nonadiabaticity, we use an additional Hamiltonian )+ H.c.. Such a Hamiltonian can also be implemented in a similar manner to H CNOT . A more detailed discussion of such a Hamiltonian synthesis together with the error probability enhancements is out of the scope of the present paper and will be the subject of a forthcoming paper. Finally, we note that the bias preserving gate CZ(θ) is not required in the fundamental set of bias-preserving operations but may be useful for optimizing the realization of certain quantum algorithms. Such an operation can also be achieved following an approach based on quantum Zeno dynamics, in a similar manner to Z(θ) All the above implementations appear to be rather straightforward extensions of the existing parametric methods, for instance, for two-photon driven dissipation. We expect that the experiments with similar devices and similar parameter regimes as those in the cited references lead to bias preserving gates with phase-flip error probabilities below the threshold of the repetition code. For instance following the error analysis in Sec. VI, we anticipate that a ratio of 1000 between the engineered twophoton decay rate κ 2ph and the natural single-photon loss rate κ 1ph will put us well below the threshold of the repetition code Fault-tolerant computation with protected logical qubits represents a major experimental challenge. The surface code provides a viable solution as it exhibits relatively high accuracy thresholds. However, this property comes at the cost of a tremendous experimental overhead. Indeed, in a realistic implementation of quantum algorithms, the vast majority of operations serve to protect the information rather than performing the computation itself. Furthermore, while certain operations can be performed in a topologically protected manner, certain others (e.g. non-Clifford gates) require magic states preparation, distillation and injection adding further complexity. In this paper, we have proposed an alternative approach by replacing the 2D surface code with a 1D repetition code where the physical two-level systems are replaced by cat qubits. Remarkably, we obtain a universal set of topologically protected logical gates with no need for magic states. The apparent trick lies in the fact that the 2D phase space of the cat qubits are exploited to perform nontrivial operations. In this sense a line of cat qubits has the same properties as an effective 3D system. Furthermore, we show that this approach is readily exploitable at an experimental level and requires only minor modifications of previous realizations. A numerical analysis indicates that the parameter regimes close to the ones achieved in the field of superconducting circuits, result in effective error probabilities below the accuracy threshold of the repetition code. Therefore, this scheme is a promising candidate for a first demonstration of a universal set of fully protected logical quantum gates. Encouragingly, we expect that small logical error rates of 10 -9 could be achieved with a few tens of cat qubits and a mean photon number of about 10. A more thorough error analysis based on a mathematical analysis of the effective error mechanisms and the numerical implementation of an optimal decoding strategy will be subject of a forthcoming paper. Appendix A: A no-go theorem for bias preserving quantum gates As we see in the paper, the extra degree freedom associated to the complex amplitude α in the cat qubits enables us to perform a set of nontrivial operations such as the CNOT or the Toffoli gate in bias-preserving manner. In this appendix, we show the crucial role played by this extra degree of freedom. Indeed, we will prove that such gates cannot be performed in a bias-preserving manner with two-level systems. The analysis of this appendix Noting that D is necessarily a linear combination to twoqubit Pauli operators, it is the same for [D, Z j ] and therefore The only possibility for such a combination is that all the coefficients vanish. Therefore [D, Z 1,2 ] = 0, or equivalently Therefore, the Lie algebra c is spanned by I, Z 1 , Z 2 , Z 1 Z 2 , which means that the associated Lie group does not include CNOT. * d d, ρ]+κ d D[ d]ρ.