Perovskite chalcogenides are gaining substantial interest as an emerging class of 1 Perovskite chalcogenides have been gaining increased attention as a class of emerging semiconductors with rich tunability and excellent optoelectronic properties in the visible to infrared spectrum. or H 2 S., The single crystals were grown using salt flux method with BaCl 2 flux. We have also tried growing these crystals with other salts, such as KI and BaCl 2 /MgCl 2 eutectic. The results were similar, the salt removing process was notably easier, but the obtained crystals were not as large. In the case of BaZrS 3 , the predominant morphology of the obtained crystals was cube-like with sharp edges and well-defined surfaces that correspond to crystal facets, as shown in the images in Fig. We have performed single crystal X-ray diffraction analysis for the crystals. For BaZrS 3 , we observed twinning in the BaZrS 3 crystals and had to break the crystals into smaller pieces for a reasonable solution to the diffraction analysis. A lustrous dark red plate-like specimen of BaZrS 3 , approximate dimensions 0.005 mm × 0.008 mm × 0.008 mm, was used for the X-ray crystallographic analysis. The measurement was performed at 100 K. The integration of the data using an orthorhombic unit cell yielded a total of 4218 reflections to a maximum θ angle of 30.54 The detailed structural parameters are shown in Table One key feature in BaZrS 3 crystal structure is the tilting of ZrS 6 octahedra. The tilting along b axis is in phase, with adjacent octahedra layers in ac plane rotating towards the same direction and remain perfectly overlapped when viewed along b axis, as shown in Fig. For Ba 3 Zr 2 S 7 , previous studies identified several possible structural variants, I4/mmm, 20 P 4 2 /mnm, The integration of the data using a tetragonal unit cell yielded a total of 29151 reflections to a maximum θ angle of 28.32 • (0.75 Å resolution), of which 898 were independent (average redundancy 28.762, completeness = 99.7%, R int = 4.3%, R sig = 1.14%) and 743 (82.74%) were greater than 2σ(F 2 ). The structure was solved and refined using the space group For the bigger crystals of BaZrS 3 and Ba 3 Zr 2 S 7 , we performed out-of-plane thin film XRD scans on isolated crystal pieces in an X-ray diffractometer with monochromatic radiation. For BaZrS 3 , a set of narrow 0k0 type reflections were observed, as shown in Fig. We further performed scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) studies on the crystals. The high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) image of a BaZrS 3 and a Ba 3 Zr 2 S 7 crystal and corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns are shown in Fig. Given the small difference in spacing between the three quasi-cubic directions, (020), ( The growth of high quality BaZrS 3 crystals was achieved using flux growth method with revealed overall high crystallinity of the grown crystal. Ba 3 Zr 2 S 7 crystal was also grown using similar method by varying the starting precursor stoichiometry ratio. X-ray diffraction analysis of Ba 3 Zr 2 S 7 crystal showed a P 4 2 /mnm structure and a rocking curve FWHM of 0.027 • . STEM image with [110] zone axis and corresponding diffraction pattern, along with pole figure analysis for 0010 and 115 were shown to further establish high crystallinity. We expect the crystal growth of perovskite chalcogenides to enable more advanced spectroscopic and transport measurements to study their optoelectronic properties. The single crystals were grown using salt flux method in sealed quartz ampoules with BaCl 2 flux. Barium Sulfide powder (Sigma-Aldrich 99.9%), Zirconium powder (STREM, 99.5%), and Sulfur pieces (Alfa Aesar 99.999%) were stored and handled in an Argon-filled glove box. Stoichiometric quantities of precursor powders with a total weight of 0.5 g were mixed and loaded into a 3/4 inch diameter quartz tube with 1.5 mm thickness along with around 0.5g BaCl 2 (Alfa Aesar 99.998%) inside the glove box. The tube was capped with ultra-torr fittings and a bonnet needle valve to avoid exposure to the air, until it was evacuated and sealed using a blowtorch. The sealed tubes were about 12 cm in length. The tubes were heated to 1050 • C with a ramping rate of 0.3 • C/min, held at 1050 • C for 40 hours and then cooled to 400 • C with a cooling rate of 1 • C/min, and then allowed to naturally cool down after that by shutting off the furnace. The obtained samples were washed with deionized water repeatedly to remove the excess flux, and dried with acetone and isopropyl alcohol. In some cases, residue flux after washing were removed by sonicating the crystals in isopropyl alcohol. The thin film X-ray diffraction and rocking curve measurements were carried out in a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer in parallel beam configuration, using a germanium (004) two-bounce monochromator for Cu K α1 radiation. X-ray pole figure analysis was carried out using a Bruker D8 Discover GADDS with a Co K α source, 1/4 Eulerian cradle and Vantec-2000 area detector. The pole figure data was collected with 1 • resolution in rotation at tilts of 25 • , 50 • , 75 • to ensure coverage over the entire pole sphere. The two-dimensional diffraction data was reduced with Bruker Multex area 2 software and the pole figures were analyzed in MTEX texture analysis software. The single crystal X-ray diffraction data were collected on a Bruker SMART APEX DUO 3circle platform diffractometer and using Mo K α radiation (λ = 0.71073 Å) monochromatized by a TRIUMPH curved-crystal monochromator. The diffractometer was equipped with an APEX II CCD detector and an Oxford Cryosystems Cryostream 700 apparatus for lowtemperature data collection. The crystals were mounted in a Cryo-Loop using Paratone oil. The measurement was performed at 100 K. A complete hemisphere of data was scanned on ω (0.5 • ) at a detector distance of 50 mm and a resolution of 512 × 512 pixels. A total of 2520 frames were collected. The frames were integrated with the Bruker SAINT software package using a SAINT V8.38A (Bruker AXS, 2013) algorithm. The structure was solved and refined using the Bruker SHELXTL Software Package. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained in a JEOL JEM-7001F analytical field-emission scanning electron microscope equipped with EDAX Apollo X 10 mm 2 EDS. The SEM images and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) spectra were acquired with 15 kV accelerating voltage and a working distance of 15 mm. A thin layer of Pt was sputter coated on the crystals to mitigate the charging effects. Magnifications ranging from 100× to 10000× were used to check the consistency of chemical composition ratios across the crystals. The spectra shown were recorded at 400×. We used the commercially preanalyzed BaS as a standard, and measured its EDS side by side with the crystals to serve as calibration for Ba:S ratios. The BaS powders were sealed under argon until entering SEM chamber to minimize potential oxidation. The Ba:S ratio obtained in BaS across multiple magnifications was consistently to be 1.14:1, justifying the need for such calibration. The scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) images were acquired using an aberration-corrected FEI Titan (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) transmission electron microscope operated at an accelerating voltage of 300 kV. Samples for TEM observations were prepared by focused ion beam (FIB) milling using a Ga-ion beam at an accelerating voltage of 30 kV, followed by a cleaning/polishing procedure by Ar-ion milling at 1.5 kV and 700 V to remove FIB induced residual Ga and surface amorphization in the sample.