The pinning/depinning of antiferromagnetic (AFM) domain wall is certainly the core issue of AFM spintronics. In this work, we study theoretically the N├® el-type domain wall pinning and depinning at a notch in an antiferromagnetic (AFM) nano-ribbon. The depinning field depending on the notch dimension and intrinsic physical parameters are deduced and also numerically calculated. Contrary to conventional conception, it is revealed that the depinning field is remarkably dependent of the damping constant and the time-dependent oscillation of the domain wall position in the weakly damping regime benefits to the wall depinning, resulting in a gradual increase of the depinning field up to a saturation value with increasing damping constant. A one-dimensional model accounting of the internal dynamics of domain wall is used to explain perfectly the simulated results. It is demonstrated that the depinning mechanism of an AFM domain wall differs from ferromagnetic domain wall by exhibiting a depinning speed typically three orders of magnitude faster than the latter, suggesting the ultrafast dynamics of an AFM system. Antiferromagnetic (AFM) materials are promising for next generation of spintronic devices and attract substantial attention especially because they have strong anti-interference capability and promised ultrafast magnetic dynamics. Nevertheless, most of these works discuss models on perfect samples and the wall pinning caused by disorder and local defects is neglected. As a matter of fact, the wall pinning may play an important role in magnetic dynamics. On one hand, for a realistic spintronic device where inhomogeneity and lattice defects are inevitable, the wall dynamics could be significantly affected and the wall pinning/depinning becomes the limited step for device operation. For example, it was reported that electrical current induced switching of AFM domains in CuMnAs occurs only in localized regions, strongly suggesting the important role of wall pinning. Fortunately, the domain wall pinning in ferromagnetic systems have been extensively investigated, and the accumulated experience can be partially transferred to the study of AFM domain dynamics. In proceeding, we may discuss the domain wall pinning/depinning for an AFM nanostructure with a notch, without losing the generality, while the calculation methods and main conclusions apply to antiferromagnets with other lattice defects. For simplicity consideration, such a notch has a rectangular section, as shown in Fig. Moreover, it will be shown that the depinning field gradually increases to a saturation value with increasing damping constant, and this prediction allows one to modulate the damping constant through elaborately material design, so that the domain wall depinning can be in turn effectively controlled. In order to understand the underlying physics better, we perform the analytical calculation based on the one-dimensional model which reveals the important role of the internal domain wall dynamics. Our work also proposes a depinning mechanism for an AFM wall different from ferromagnetic wall. This new mechanism allows the depinning speed to be typically three orders of magnitude faster than that for a ferromagnetic wall depinning. We start from the domain wall pinning at a rectangular notch for an AFM nanoribbon. This nanoribbon is geometrically defined by length l along the z-axis, width w, and thickness tl, as shown in Fig. where A0 = 4JS 2 /a is the homogeneous exchange constant with AFM coupling J > 0, spin length S and lattice constant a, m is the total magnetization m = (m1 + m2)/2S with m1 and m2 the AFM sublattice magnetizations, A = 2aJS 2 is the inhomogeneous exchange constant, n is the staggered magnetization n = (m1 ’ĆŁ m2)/2S, L0 = 2JS 2 is the parity-breaking parameter, Kz = 2K0S 2 /a is the anisotropy constant along the z-axis in the continuum model with anisotropy constant K0 in the discrete model, ╬│ is the gyromagnetic ratio, ’ü▓ = S’ā┐/a is the density of the staggered spin angular momentum per unit cell, h is the staggered effective field and nz is the Here, the notch has its width d and depth wN, as depicted in Fig. Noting that m is just a slave variable of n, 22 where A * = A ’ĆŁ L 2 0 /A0 is the effective exchange constant. As shown in the Supplementary Materials for the detailed derivation, the depinning field hdep, based on this Hamiltonian model, can be solved strictly after a similar derivation 26 where ’üŁS is the saturation moment. It's noted that for an ultra-thin nanoribbon, the depinning field is independent of thickness. As clearly indicated in Eq. ( In order to check the validity of Eq. ( where Si is the normalized atomic spin at site i, ’üĪ is the damping constant, Hi = ’ĆŁ╬╝ -1 S ŌłéH/ŌłéSi is the effective field. Without loss of generality, l = 120a, tl = a, w = 8a, K0 = 0.02J, d = 4a, wN = 2a and ’üĪ = 0.02 are selected, as shown in Fig. Fig. When a small h is applied along the z-axis, the wall slightly shifts toward the right side, as seen from the delicate change of the spin configuration. With increasing h, those spins on the left side of the notch mid-plane tend to rotate towards the negative z-axis while those on the right side of the notch mid-plane tend to rotate towards the x-axis, as shown in Fig. Subsequently, we investigate the dependences of hdep on the notch geometry and several physical parameters including the anisotropy and damping constants. The calculated curves (analytical) from Eq. ( hdep shows a gradual growth with ’üĪ until the large ’üĪ regime where hdep becomes saturated, i.e. independent of ’üĪ in the large ’üĪ regime. The difference between Eq. ( In order to uncover the intriguing physics, we need to track the domain wall evolution. In proceeding, we first define the position of a domain wall. Similar to the well-studied skyrmions, the position of a domain wall is estimated by q(t) where q is the coordinate of the wall mid-plane. Given this definition, one starts with the one-dimensional model with inclusion of the internal dynamics of domain wall motion. 28-29 The Hamiltonian density for this model reads 33 where the pinning effect from the notch is described by potential energy V(z). Subsequently, we study the Lagrangian density It is noted that the Rayleigh function density R = ’üĪ’ü▓ ß╣ģ 2 /2 is introduced into the Lagrangian formalism in order to describe the dissipative dynamics. 36-37 Following the earlier work, we assume a robust domain wall structure which can be described by n = [sech((z ’ĆŁ q)/’ü¼)cos╬”, sech((z ’ĆŁ q)/’ü¼)sin╬”, tanh((z ’ĆŁ q)/’ü¼)], 36 where the azimuthal angle ╬” of the wall is introduced as the collective coordinates. After substituting the domain wall ansatz and applying the Euler-Lagrange equation, we obtain the equation of motion for variables q and ╬”, and It is noted that the first term in Eq. ( For simplicity, we assume a parabolic potential where KN is the elastic constant and LN is the radius of the potential well. After substitutions and necessary simplification, the equation of motion for q is updated to where G = ’üĪA0/’ü▓, hN = ╬│A0’ü¼h/’ü▓, and ’üĘN = (’ü¼A0KN/’ü▓ 2 ) 1/2 is the natural angular frequency of the free harmonic oscillator. Here, we can see the existence of domain wall oscillation if damping constant ’üĪ is small. This oscillation is the major reason for the invalid prediction of the depinning field by Eq. ( Noting that Eq. ( where ’üĘp = (’üĘ 2 N ’ĆŁ G 2 /4) 1/2 is the oscillating angular frequency of the wall, and C1, C2 are integral constants depending on the initial condition. For better illustration, the simulated q(t) curves based on the LLG equation at various damping constant ’üĪ are plotted in Fig. As demonstrated in Eq. ( where ’üĘp Ōēł ’üĘN is obtained for ’üĪ < ’üĪc. In this case, since |╬öq|max decreases exponentially with ’üĪ, larger external field is required to generate the wall displacement for the wall depinning. As |╬öq|max > LN, the wall eventually depins from the notch. Noting that the pinning potential parameters including KN and LN are unknown, we need a reasonable estimation of them by fitting the simulated results based on Eq. ( Since the oscillating amplitudes C1 and C2 are proportional to external or current induced field h, one can introduce the field-independent parameters c1 = C2/C1, c2 = (C 2 1 +C 2 2 ) 1/2 /h for brevity. Subsequently, the depinning field under the condition |╬öq|max = LN is obtained: Similar fitting approach can be used to estimate LN. As shown in Fig. Finally, we would like to address the significance of the present results. It is known that the performance of domain wall based race-track memory not only depends on the wall motion velocity, but also relies on the wall depinning time. It is clearly shown here that an AFM domain wall depinning is distinctly different from that of a ferromagnetic domain wall. For a ferromagnetic nanoribbon, the wall oscillation is related to the wall internal angle which is mainly determined by the internal fields including magnetocrystalline anisotropy and Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya (DM) exchange. In conclusion, we study theoretically the domain wall pinning and depinning at a notch in an AFM nano-ribbon. The depinning field depending on the notch dimension and intrinsic physical parameters are derived theoretically and also simulated based on the LLG equation. Contrary to the conventional conception, the remarkable dependence of the depinning field on the damping constant is revealed, which attributes to the time-dependent oscillation of the DW position in the small damping region. A one-dimensional model considering the internal dynamics of DW is investigated theoretically to explain perfectly the simulations. More importantly, our work also demonstrates the different depinning mechanism of an AFM DW from FM DW which may result in a depinning speed typically three orders faster than the latter, demonstrating again the ultrafast dynamics of an AFM system. The model Hamiltonian density reads After eliminating m with m = ’ĆŁL0’āæn / A0, we obtain In the following, we use the same method with Ref. 24 to derive the depinning field for AFM DWs. At low temperatures, we introduce the Lagrange multiplier ╬Š to take into account the constraint condition nŌĆó n = 1, and then construct a new function where fot is the sum of the anisotropy and Zeeman energy. Using the variational method, we obtain 22 20 where lex = (aA * / J) Substituting the configuration of the system into Eq. 9 and we obtain where <nzEF>, <nzCD> are the average z components of n on surfaces EF and CD, respectively. The depinning field represents the minimum field to move a DW, and in other words, the maximum field that Eq. 11 has a stationary solution. Thus, critical condition is the key to deriving the depinning field. Similar to the earlier work, we consider the critical condition <nzEF> = 0, <nzCD> = 1 in our derivation, whose validity is confirmed in Fig. 1/2 