We present a microscopic calculation of the phase diagram of the Ising superconductor NbSe2 in presence of both in-plane magnetic field and Rashba spin-orbit coupling (SOC). Repulsive interactions lead to two distinct instabilities, in singlet-and triplet-interaction channels. While we recover the previously predicted nodal topological superconducting state in the absence of Rashba SOC at large magnetic field with six pairs of nodes along Γ-M lines, a finite Rashba SOC breaks the symmetry that protects these nodes and therefore generally lifts them, resulting in a topologically trivial phase. There is an exception when the field is applied along one of the three Γ-K lines, however. In that case, a single mirror symmetry remains that can protect two pairs of nodes out of the original six, resulting in a crystalline topological superconducting phase. Depending on the Cooper pairs' center-of-mass momentum, this superconducting state displays either Bogolyubov Fermi surfaces or point nodes. Moreover, a chiral topological superconducting phase with Chern number of 6 is realized in the regime of large Rashba SOC and dominant triplet interactions, spontaneously breaking time-reversal symmetry. We begin by observing that for b = 0, and assuming equal densities of states on inner and outer Fermi The observation of superconductivity (SC) in 1H monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides such as NbSe 2 and MoS 2 opens a new avenue to explore superconductivity in systems with strongly coupled spinorbital degrees of freedom The combination of large Ising SOC, which lifts the spin degeneracy, with multiple Fermi pockets has inspired considerable interest in the potential for unconventional superconductivity in these materials Despite the flurry of activity on this front, important questions about the microscopic mechanism of unconventional SC and its stability in realistic experimental conditions remain unaddressed. Here, we go beyond phe- nomenological models and present a microscopic theory of superconductivity in NbSe 2 that considers the most relevant repulsive electronic interactions involving lowenergy fermions. Moreover, we include the simultaneous effects of an in-plane magnetic field B and Rashba SOC, with energy scale α R p F (p F is the Fermi momentum). The latter is commonly present experimentally and can in principle be controlled by gating or by the choice of substrate. Importantly, it qualitatively changes the phase diagram: the nodal SC topological phase present at large fields Our analysis reveals two distinct (B, α R ) phase diagrams, shown in Fig. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we introduce our microscopic model, that includes Ising and Rashba SOC, in-plane magnetic field, and all symmetry allowed spin-conserving interactions. We analyze these interactions using a renormalization group (RG) analysis in Sec. III, and find that (at energy scales where SOC and the magnetic field can be neglected) superconductivity is the only instability. As a result, the RG at lower energy scales becomes equivalent to a selfconsistent mean field analysis. In Sec. IV we use this approach to study the superconducting phase diagram in the presence of SOC and magnetic field, and identify a new crystalline gapless topological superconducting phase at large in-plane magnetic field. Because the Fermi surfaces are no longer symmetric under momentum inversion p → -p in the presence of both magnetic field and Rashba SOC, we also calculate the boundary of the region where uniform superconductivity becomes unstable in Sec. IV C. We show in Sec. V that the gapless phase identified in Sec. IV is a crystalline gapless topological phase, and analyze the resulting boundary modes using a simple tight binding model. We conclude in Sec. VI by discussing possible experimental signatures of the possible topological superconducting phases. A detailed discussion of the chiral state, as well as other technical supporting material, can be found in the appendices. The Fermi surface of undoped NbSe 2 is shown in Fig. where ψ † η,p = (d † η,p↑ , d † η,p↓ ) and d † η,pα creates an electron at the pocket η with spin α =↑, ↓ and momentum p measured relative to the center of the pocket. The Fermi surface has three pairs of spin-split hole pockets centered at the ±K, Γ points in the Brillouin zone, which we label by η = ±K, Γ, using the convention that -Γ ≡ Γ. Here 2mη -μ is the band dispersion, with m K = m -K . The Ising SOC has the form β ±K = ±β I near the ±K points and β Γ = 2λp 3 cos 3θ near the Γ point, where θ is the angle measured relative to the Γ-K direction (see Fig. , where b ≡ 1 2 g L μ B B and g L is the Landé g-factor; this also lifts the spin-degeneracy along the Γ-M lines. We then have where is the effective magnetic field seen by an electron with momentum p. The eigenvalues of the non-interacting Hamiltonian are therefore given by where δ η = |δ η |, and the eigenstates are related to the electron annihilation operators d η,pα by the unitary transformation Here τ = +1 (-1) on the outer (inner) spin-split Fermi surface, α = 1 (-1) for spin up (spin down) (see Fig. where Experimentally, the Ising SOC at K points β I is found to be much smaller than the bandwidth. Thus in the weak coupling theory used here, the overall energy scale is set by β I , and the momentum scale is set by the Fermi momentum p F . To produce the plots in this paper, we took equal masses and chemical potentials at Γ and K points, and chose with p shown in units of p F . This choice roughly matches the Fermi surfaces reported in Although the largest values in this range are most likely above the experimental critical in-plane field value, given the uncertainty in the microscopic parameters, we opt to extend the phase diagrams across a wide range of magnetic field values. Symmetry constrains the possible spin-conserving, momentum-direction-independent electronic interactions between the low-energy fermionic operators to eight. Of these, the four interactions that contribute to superconductivity are (see Fig. Accounting for the anti-symmetric nature of the fermion operators (and including all Hermitian conjugates), the uniform part of the interactions can be separated into singlet and triplet interaction channels, as follows: Since V K,K and V K,-K are related by interchanging the spin indices α , β , combined with an overall minus sign for interchanging two fermion operators, in this representation we have From Eq. ( where θ k refers to the angle of the momentum on the Γ pocket. Note that all higher harmonics can be included in a similar fashion, but they do not qualitatively affect our conclusions. We take |g t i | |g i |, so these interactions have a negligible effect on whether the system enters the singlet or triplet regime. Note that there are four other possible interactions, which we do not include in our analysis here, where we omitted momentum indices and symmetry related terms for simplicity. These interactions decouple from g 1 , ...g 4 , and hence need not be included when analyzing the possible superconducting instabilities. They can in principle give rise to a pair density wave (PDW) which may compete with superconductivity, depending on the microscopic values of g 5 , ...g 8 . We defer analysis of this possibility to future work. To determine which instabilities are favored by the interactions above, we perform a parquet RG analysis, keeping only the dominant momentum-directionindependent interactions of Eq. ( It is convenient to rescale the coupling constants by the density of states (DOS) N η = mη 2π of the η pocket (by symmetry We use the standard parquet RG procedure In the absence of SOC the RG flow equations for for the singlet (a = s) and triplet (a = t) channels decouple: ġ(a) 23 = -2 g(a) where the dot indicates a derivative with respect to the RG scale s determined by the pairing susceptibility via Here ω n are Matsubara frequencies, and the momentum integral is restricted to a thin shell at energy Λ and of thickness dΛ ≡ Λs. is the bare normal state Green's function. Eq. ( 1 , g(a) 23 , and g(a) 4 parameter space: 23 -g(a) 1 Eq. ( ṙ(a) = -r (a) z (a) (20) θ(a) = 0 where, in terms of the coupling constants ga , we have: When γ (a±) > 0, the associated coupling constant flows to ∞. Since γ (a+) > γ (a-) , the former always diverges faster than the latter, so we need only analyze the γ (a+) solution. When N η = N are all equal, these can be expressed: (24) in the singlet channel and in the triplet channel. Having determined the RG flow of the coupling constants, we now discuss which instabilities they cause. To do so, we introduce vertices associated with different types of electronic order (∆ Γ (p)) αβ ∝ d Γ,pα d Γ,-pβ at the Γ pocket, and (∆ ±K (p)) αβ ∝ d ±K,pα d ∓K,-pβ at the ±K pockets. Here α β are spin indices. In the absence of SOC the corresponding superconducting pairing vertices can be decomposed into singlet and triplet channels as follows: where θ Γ,p is the angle about the Γ Fermi surface, D (a) η are momentum-independent coefficients, and the (unit) d vector is the same on Γ and K pockets. Note that ∆ (a) -η (-p) T due to the anti-commutation relations of fermionic creation and annihilation operators. In particular, ∆ K and ∆ -K are not independent gap functions. The one-loop vertex flow correction is then with a sum over repeated indices implied. This reduces to a system of 2 × 2 equations for the D (a) η coefficients: The eigenvalues of the matrix correspond precisely to the decoupled RG effective couplings γ (a±) ; thus, γ (a+) > 0 implies a SC transition in the corresponding a channel. Even when all g j interactions are purely repulsive, this leads to two possible SC instabilities, provided that one of the inter-pocket interactions, g 3 or g 4 , overcomes the intra-pocket repulsion promoted by g 1 and g 2 -see Eqs K , the so-called extended s-wave or s ± -wave state, previously proposed to be realized e.g. in iron pnictides In contrast, when g 3 is the dominant interaction, the SC instability is towards a triplet f -wave state, characterized by (∆ Because spin is conserved in the absence of SOC and magnetic field, the d-vector can point in any direction. Unlike typical triplet gaps, here ∆ K (p) is momentum independent on the K-pocket, since for triplet states we have ∆ -K (p) = -∆ K (p). In order for ∆ Γ (p) to be nonzero, we include the sub-leading momentum-directiondependent interactions Next, we show that the interactions g 1 , ...g 4 do not lead to density-wave particle-hole instabilities in the spin and charge channels within logarithmic accuracy. This means that any instability in these channels requires a threshold value for these interactions, and is thus unlikely to be driven by the low-energy fermions. The vertices associated with the particle-hole instabilities are with μ = 0 corresponding to CDW and μ = x, y, z to SDW order parameters (here we are ignoring the small momentum dependence). Because the pockets at K and Γ are both hole pockets, the spin and charge densitywave channels completely decouple from the SC channels. Explicitly, while the particle-particle bubble has a logarithmic divergence when integrated over all momenta, the particle-hole bubble does not: Consequently, any particle-hole channel is subleading to the SC channel within weak-coupling. For example, There are additional CDW and SDW vertices, but all the equations have χ η in them and thus the flows are all exponentially suppressed by a factor of sech Λ 2T ≈ 2e -Λ 2T as a result. This agrees with the analysis of Ref. The parquet RG treatment of the previous section shows that superconductivity is the only instability generated by the interactions in Eq. ( A. Mean-Field Gap Equation in the Presence of SOC and Magnetic Field In order to determine the appropriate BCS gap equation, we first project the interactions onto the spin-split Fermi surfaces, by using the transformation (5) between eigenstates of spin and eigenstates of the non-interacting Hamiltonian and restricting the gap functions to involve pairs on the same Fermi surface only. Throughout the phase diagrams shown in Fig. After the projection, the interactions generally acquire a dependence on the momentum direction. Explicitly, this gives: (η, η = Γ, ±K). Here terms on the right-hand side with μ = 0 are projections of singlet interactions in There is a phase ambiguity in the definitions of Q η,η are constants independent of p and k (with j = x, y, z): ±K,±K = g where g 1 , ...g 4 are the values of the couplings at the end of the RG procedure described above. For uniform SC (i.e. with zero center-of-mass momentum), the paired electrons are either both from inner pockets or both from outer pockets, with corresponding gap functions where the momentum p is measured with respect to the center of the relevant Fermi pocket. The gaps are diagonal in the index τ , as we assume there is no pairing between inner and outer Fermi surfaces. Note that particlehole symmetry imposes ∆ -Kτ (p) = -∆ Kτ (-p), so these are not two separate order parameters. The new self-consistent gap equation, analogous to Eq. ( (38) After integrating over momenta, the (angle resolved) particle-particle pairing susceptibility Π ητ (θ η,p ) becomes: where θ η,p is the angle along the τ Fermi surface relative to the center of the pocket η (below we simply use θ when this is clear from context). Assuming that the Fermi surface is inversion symmetric, we find with N ητ the density of states at the inner or outer Fermi surface at the η pocket and Λ is the cut-off energy. Although the Fermi surface is only inversion symmetric when α R = 0 or b = 0, the expression ( Plugging Eq. ( where ητ ) are momentum independent gap coefficients. The structure of Eq. ( η , and we thus drop the τ index on D hereafter. Moreover, particlehole symmetry enforces D (μ) -K , consistent with the fact that ∆ -Kτ (p) = -∆ Kτ (-p). Plugging the form (41) back into the gap equation ( where j = x, y, z and the form factors f are given by In the presence of SOC and magnetic field none of the channels (μ = 0, x, y, z) decouple in general. Eqs. (42) thus can be viewed as an 8×8 matrix equation, leading to 8 possible superconducting solutions, of which we choose the one with the highest T c . The choice of phases in Eq. ( real when the densities of state on inner and outer Fermi surfaces are equal in which case the coefficients D (μ) η can also be taken to be real. To study the possible superconducting phases, it is useful to define singlet and triplet instability regimes by considering the limit of no SOC and magnetic field. We define a dominant singlet (dominant triplet) instability to occur when the largest eigenvalue of the gap equation is for the spin singlet (spin triplet) gap with SOC and magnetic field set to 0. The transition temperature for each channel (when the corresponding eigenvalue of the gap equation equals 1) is determined by the couplings g 1 , ...g 4 via where Λ is the upper energy cutoff, and γ (a+) are identical to the couplings obtained in the RG analysis in Eq. ( with g 3 = 1.05g 1 (4.2g 1 ) to produce a singlet (triplet) instability. To describe the phase diagrams in Fig. Rashba SOC transforms as the A 2 irrep of D 3h . This lowers the point group to C 3v , but does not mix the A 1 and E gaps. In contrast, the in-plane magnetic field b transforms according to the E irrep of D 3h . As a result, it mixes the E gap with the A 1 one The electronic spectrum in the superconducting phase is obtained by diagonalizing the Bogolyubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian: where Ψ ητ (p) = (c η,pτ , c † -η,-pτ ) T and with ξ ητ (p) given in Eq. (4). Note that when time reversal symmetry (TRS) is broken, ξ -ητ (-p) = ξ ητ (p) in general. The BdG spectra are given by E ητ (p), -E -ητ (-p), with: where Clearly, nodes only occur if both ξ Sητ and ∆ ητ vanish simultaneously. Note that, in our case, the Fermi surface is symmetric under momentum inversion, p → -p, only when either α R or b vanish. In this case, ξ Aητ = 0 and ξ Sητ = ξ ητ . We are now in position to describe the SC phase diagrams of Fig. We first analyze the phase diagram of Fig. Turning on the Rashba SOC introduces a second spinorbit energy scale that does not vanish along the Γ-M directions. As a result, generally even an infinitesimal Rashba SOC lifts the nodes and destroys the topological character of this state, as shown by the fully gapped BdG spectrum in Fig. We now turn to the case of dominant triplet instability shown in Fig. Along the b = 0 line, the nodes on the Γ pocket in the μ = z triplet state are lifted due the admixture with the sub-leading s-wave μ = 0 state generated by Ising SOC, resulting in an anisotropic gap. This is shown in Fig. For large values of α R (of the order of the Ising SOC), the dominant instability shifts from being in the A 1 irrep of C 3v (previously the A 1 irrep of the original D 3h group) to the 2-dimensional E irrep (previously the E irrep of the original D 3h group). As a result, a new chiral p ± ip superconducting state emerges in the triplet regime at b = 0. The chiral phase, shown in Fig. In the presence of both α R and b, the Fermi surfaces are no longer inversion-symmetric under p → -p. The key , outside and inside the chiral SC phase, respectively (see insets). Note that the gap amplitudes have been rescaled for clarity, since they are not fixed by the linearized gap equations. We used coupling constants given in Eq. ( quantity that measures the degree of symmetry breaking is previously defined in Eq. ( particle-particle bubble in Eq. ( i.e. the infrared logarithmic divergence originally present is cutoff by |ξ Aητ (θ)|. This means that there is a critical value of the parameter ξ c Aητ beyond which uniform SC is no longer stable. The resulting critical lines are shown in Fig. The general shape of the critical lines can be understood from a simple approximation, noting that where δ η are functions of α R p F and b as given in where β I is the Ising SOC on the relevant pocket and θ is the direction of the magnetic field. From (53), we can estimate that the characteristic scale of ξ c Aητ , properly averaged, is of the order T c0 /1.13, where T c0 is the solution of the gap equation when ξ c aητ = 0, see Eq. The critical curve is thus roughly given by As shown in Fig. For inversion symmetry breaking exceeding the critical value, where the uniform SC state is no longer stable, superconductivity with finite center-of-mass momentum p shift = 0, i.e. a so-called FFLO phase Having established the existence of a nodal SC phase for large magnetic fields in the phase diagrams of Fig. The notable exception is when B is parallel to one of the Γ-K directions: in this case, the system has a mirror symmetry associated with reflection about the plane perpendicular to B. For example, when B is parallel to the x axis, the mirror symmetry corresponds to a reflection with respect to the yz plane perpendicular to B, which also flips the y and z components of spin: M x = iσ x R yz , where the reflection R yz corresponds to (x, y, z) → (-x, y, z) and, as above, σ x acts on the physical spin indices. In general the superconducting gap can be either even or odd under this mirror symmetry. We show below that for b > α R p F , where the gap is mirror-odd, the reflection symmetry anti-commutes with particle-hole symmetry. In this case, there is a Z-valued topological invariant that diagnoses the topological superconducting phase We emphasize that the topological nature of this α R = 0 SC state is qualitatively different than that of the α R = 0 SC state, as in the former case the symmetry that protects the SC state is not time-reversal-like, but a mirror symmetry -hence the denomination crystalline gapless topological SC To see how the mirror reflection symmetry protects the nodes in the reflection plane, we will follow the approach of Ref. where p = (-p x , p y ). Since this reflection also reverses the y and z components of the spin, in the spin basis M x acts as iσ x , while in the SOC basis (5) it is momentum dependent, , where φ(p) is given in Eq. The action of mirror symmetry can be extended to the BdG spinors to give On the BdG Hamiltonian Eq. ( Here the relative sign between the two non-vanishing components of M is fixed by whether the gap function is even or odd under the mirror symmetry. For b > α R p F , where the SC gap that gives the highest T c in Eq. ( We begin by linearizing the Hamiltonian in the region b > α R p F around the pair of nodes at p x = 0. This gives a 4 × 4 low-energy effective Hamiltonian, with a new index L, R to keep track of the two nodes. We define τ μ to be the Pauli matrices acting on the L, R indices, while ς μ are Pauli matrices acting on the 2 indices of the BdG spinors (i.e. on the particle-hole indices). In this basis the particle-hole symmetry, which interchanges the two nodes, acts via C = ς x ⊗ τ x K. Note that Eq. ( Since the nodes are in the mirror plane, this leading-order approximation is sufficient to determine which terms can open a gap, We now consider all leading terms of the generic form h(δp y , p x )ς μ ⊗ τ ν allowed by symmetry, with δp y = p y -p (node) y . Note that we do not wish to allow terms that couple the two nodes, as these break translational symmetry; thus we require ν = 0 or z. Recall that the symmetries are Thus h(-δp y , -p x ) = ±h(δp y , p x ) when To gap out the nodes we must have h(0, 0) = 0; thus we need plus signs in both cases. Hence ς μ ⊗ τ ν anti-commutes with ς x ⊗ τ x K and commutes with Mx . This restricts the linearized Hamiltonian for b > α R p F to the form where m and ξ A are constants (for simplicity, we take the Fermi velocity to be 1, so all parameters have the same units). The m term, which plays the role of a chemical potential shift at each node, does not lift the nodes; rather it shifts them in opposite directions along the p y axis, from p y = ±p F to p y = ±(p F + m). The ξ A ς 0 ⊗ τ z term, on the other hand, shifts the nodes in opposite directions in energy by an amount ξ A , inflating the nodes into small Bogolyubov Fermi surfaces (see also The term ξ A ς 0 ⊗ τ z describes a state with broken momentum inversion symmetry, in which the normal state Fermi surface is shifted by a momentum of ξ A relative to the Brillouin zone center. To see this, note that at p x = 0, the normal state Fermi surface at both nodes is determined by δp y + ξ A = 0. This means that Cooper pairs cannot both lie on the Fermi surface. As noted in Sec. IV C, for sufficiently large inversion symmetry breaking, uniform pairing becomes unstable, but an FFLO-type finite-momentum pairing between electrons on the Fermi surface remains a possibility where 2p shift is the total momentum of the pair. This transforms the BdG Hamiltonian in Eq. ( By the bulk-boundary correspondence An alternative way to understand the edge modes, is to view them as topological boundary modes of the family of 1D Hamiltonians H py (p x ) = H(p x , p y ) at fixed p y , which are in topological class A and respect mirror symmetry. Since mirror symmetry is equivalent to inversion in 1D, these are the same systems as studied in + is the number of occupied states of H + py (0) and n + is that of H + py (π), the mirror index is simply + |. There are then 2N M Z edge states, with each state even under reflection being degenerate with an edge state that is odd under reflection. Taken together these edge states form the band of edge modes of the 2D system. At a node (which is at p x = 0), H + py (0) crosses with a state in H - py (0), which changes n (0) + by one and the number of edge states by two. The edge mode thus splits into two bulk modes which cross at the node. To study the boundary modes of our model in the uniform superconducting state, in Appendix C we describe a tight-binding model that captures the key features of our gapless topological superconducting phase. The results are displayed in Fig. It is worth noting that in actual materials, the existence of both bulk nodes and corresponding boundary states is guaranteed only if the relevant mirror reflection is an exact symmetry. As such, these may be sensitive to orientational defects in the crystal. Our microscopic interacting model for NbSe 2 predicts multiple possible exotic superconducting phases in this material, tuned by the Rashba SOC α R and the in-plane magnetic field B. Two different primary SC instabilities (i.e. that would take place when Ising SOC is zero) can be driven by purely electronic interactions: a singlet extended s-wave and a triplet f -wave instability. The phase diagrams for both are qualitatively similar, with a fully gapped superconductor for α R > b, and a crystalline gapless topological SC state for large b and small α R . Interestingly, the topological properties of the latter phase depend crucially on the B field being aligned along one of the Γ-K directions. In addition, the triplet instability supports a chiral topological SC state for small b and large α R . Although direct experimental detection of these topological SC states may be technically challenging, their indirect experimental manifestations should be accessible. For instance, because the chiral SC state transforms as a two-dimensional irreducible representation of the trigonal space group, it should be strongly affected by strain, with T c splitting into 2 separate transitions under externally applied uniaxial strain surfaces, the reduced gap equation (42) can be solved analytically, giving: At large α R , there is a transition from a mixed D (0) , D (z) solution to a solution with D (0) = D (z) = 0, D (x,y) = 0. This solution belongs to the 2D E irrep of C 3v , the relevant point group in this regime. In other words, the (x) and (y) solutions are degenerate, i.e. have the same T c . This degeneracy opens the possibility of spontaneous time-reversal symmetry breaking at b = 0. In the SOC basis (5), TRS acts as Taking ∆ ητ (p) = e iΦητ (p) |∆ ητ (p)|, TRS is therefore satisfied when e iΦητ (p) = ±ie -iθ . In the linearized gap equation Expanding in powers of the gap function, we obtain the fourth order correction (in addition to (A5)): where ζ(x) is the Riemann zeta function. Substituting the general form of the gap function in the (x),(y) channel: K sin θ and approximating α R p F δη(p) ≈ 1 (which is valid as long as α R p F λp 3 F ), we obtain: which is not invariant under the time-reversal symmetry transformation (B2). We thus find that time reversal is spontaneously broken, in agreement with the general result in To show that this TRS-breaking phase is indeed chiral, we calculate the Chern number, given by where the Berry curvature vector is given by To obtain the Chern number we insert these expressions into (B13), and integrate over an annulus around each component of the Fermi surface. To evaluate this integral, we assume with no loss of generality that the gap function is constant in some region around the FS, and completely vanishing in regions sufficiently far from the FS, with a phase independent of the radial direction p, and take U 1 ητ (p) to be independent of p. Finally, observe that v ητ changes rapidly from 0 to 1 in the vicinity of the Fermi surface. For the pocket η, we therefore obtain: (B15) where the integrals over θ and p are understood to be over the tangential and normal directions in a disk including the Fermi surface of the η pocket, respectively. This gives a net Chern number of ±6, with a total contribution of ±4 from the ±K pockets, and of ±2 from the Γ pocket. We emphasize that this result is independent of the choice of ∆ ητ away from the Fermi surface. This is because only the region proximate to the Fermi surface contributes to the integral in Eq. (B7). To see this, notice that any two choices of the superconducting gap away from the Fermi surface must yield the same result, as a topological phase transition requires band touching that can only occur when ξ Sητ and ∆ ητ are simultaneously zero in Eq. ( To study the edge modes in more detail and produce the plot in Fig. The first term describes the normal state band structure in the presence of SOC; the second-term is the Zeeman coupling due to in-plane magnetic field; and the last term represents the superconducting pairing gap. For simplicity we use a tight-binding model that only includes the η = Γ pocket Fermi surface, since the ±K pockets are unimportant for the crystalline nodal topological superconductor. We describe our model in terms of the creation operators d † i,α , where α =↑, ↓ is a spin index, and i is a site index. We have where a ij ∈ {±a 1 , ±a 2 , ±a 3 } is the vector from site i to site j, and ν ij = 1 (-1) if the vector is a 1 , -a 2 , a 3 ( -a 1 , a 2 , -a 3 ) . For our triangular lattice, a 1 = (a, 0) and a 2 = a 2 (1, √ 3), a 3 = a 2 -a 1 = a 2 (-1, √ 3). We consider the singlet-instability regime, in the crystalline nodal topological phase where b α R . In this region the self-consistent solutions of the gap equation obtained in a k • p model are well-approximated by ∆ ij = ∆ t ν ij (σ x cos θ + σ y sin θ) iσ y + ∆ s iσ y (C3) where θ is the direction of the magnetic field, assuming ∆ s ∆ t (higher lattice harmonics are in general needed to match the k • p model exactly). The numerical coefficients are chosen to match the k • p Hamiltonian (including the value of p F ). Our cylinder is created by taking periodic boundary conditions in the vertical y direction, and open zig-zag boundary conditions along the x direction. To produce the plot, we Fourier transform in the y direction: C4) where R i = (R ix , R iy ). Note that i labels the x coordinates of the sites which go in increments of a/2, while the period along the y axis is actually doubled since identical sites are now separated by 2a 2 , resulting in the folding of the 1D Brillouin zone (which has a period of 2π √ 3a ). The resulting BdG Hamiltonian on the cylinder can be expressed In Fig. * -H T kin (-p y )