Microstructural geometry plays a critical role in the response of heterogeneous materials. Consequently, methods for generating microstructural samples are increasingly crucial to advanced numerical analyses. We extend Sonon et al.'s unified framework, developed originally for generating particulate and foam-like microstructural geometries of Periodic Unit Cells, to non-periodic microstructural representations based on the formalism of Wang tiles. This formalism has been recently proposed in order to generalize the Periodic Unit Cell approach, enabling a fast synthesis of arbitrarily large, stochastic microstructural samples from a handful of domains with predefined microstructural compatibility constraints. However, a robust procedure capable of designing complex, three-dimensional, foam-like and cellular morphologies of Wang tiles has not yet been proposed. This contribution fills the gap by significantly broadening the applicability of the tiling concept. Since the original Sonon et al.'s framework builds on a random sequential addition of particles enhanced with an implicit representation of particle boundaries by the level-set field, we first devise an analysis based on a connectivity graph of a tile set, resolving the question where a particle should be copied when it intersects a tile boundary. Next, we introduce several modifications to the original algorithm that are necessary to ensure microstructural compatibility in the generalized periodicity setting of Wang tiles. Having established a universal procedure for generating tile morphologies, we compare strictly aperiodic and stochastic sets with the same cardinality in terms of reducing the artificial periodicity in reconstructed microstructural samples. We demonstrate the superiority of the vertex-defined tile sets for two-dimensional problems and illustrate the capabilities of the algorithm with two-and three-dimensional examples. The geometrical details of a material composition drive many macroscopic phenomena such as crack initiation and propagation For both strategies, however, accuracy critically depends on the representativeness of the provided microstructural geometry, accenting the crucial role of microstructure modelling in multi-scale approaches. Compared to materials with regular microstructures, characterized entirely by Periodic Unit Cells (PUCs), modelling random heterogeneous materials is more intricate; any finite-size representation automatically implies information loss. The optimal microstructure representation should capture intrinsic randomness and fluctuations in a microstructure while remaining computationally tractable (for numerical homogenization) or inexpensive to construct (for fully resolved simulations). One of the widely adopted approaches for modelling heterogeneous materials rests on an extension of PUC generated such that its spatial statistics match that of a reference microstructure. This procedure appears in the literature under various names such as Statistically Optimal Representative Unit Cell The second approach to microstructure generation utilizes reference samples of the microstructure. New realizations are then obtained with a Markovian process, taking individual voxels The previous two approaches suffer from high computational costs related either to optimization or to training the learning models. The applicability of their outputs is also sensitive to the spatial statistics considered, attesting to the ill-conditioning of the microstructure reconstruction problem itself. Achieving a good match in selected statistics does not automatically guarantee similar overall behaviour; for instance, Biswal et al. Complementary to the statistics-informed methods, a third approach to generating microstructural realizations relies on meta-modelling the genesis of a microstructure. These methods range in complexity and include the Monte-Carlo Potts The relevance of packing algorithms extends beyond simple particle-matrix microstructures because the resulting packings often serve as initial seeds for tessellation-based models applicable to polycrystals The original RSA method Albeit significantly faster than RSA or optimizationbased approaches, the latter method still starts anew every time an additional realization is required, imposing overhead on, e.g., investigations of the Representative Volume Element (RVE) size that require multiple microstructural samples to be generated, see Inspired by applications in computer graphics Optimization-based approaches developed initially for the SEPUC design can be extended to incorporate generalized periodic boundary conditions and used to generate the morphology of tiles In this paper, we extend Sonon et al.'s method to Wang tiles in order to produce tile-based representations of microstructures intractable by the former methods Wang tiles constitute the building blocks of the abstract concept used in this work. Albeit the shape of the tile domains can be any parallelogram (or a parallelepiped in 3D), for simplicity's sake we assume only square (or cubic) domains in the sequel. All tiles from the tile set have compatibility codes attributed to their edges (faces), illustrated using colours in Figs. Originally, the concept of Wang tiles was introduced in first-order predicate calculus as a visual surrogate to a decision problem of ∀∃∀ statements Figure Similar to applications in biology The assembly algorithm for stochastic sets works sequentially: an initially empty grid is traversed in a scanline The tiling concept's ability to generate naturally looking patterns from a limited amount of samples-which proved highly appealing in computer graphics The design of a compressed microstructural representation consists of two steps. First, the cardinality of the tile set and a particular distribution of edge (face) codes is chosen. This controls the frequency of tile occurrence in a tiling. Next, tile interiors are designed such that (i) the generated microstructure is continuous across the compatible edges and (ii) assembled tilings resemble the desired microstructure. Note that the latter requirement is not imposed on individual tiles. On the contrary, variability in the compressed representation is the main merit of the tiling concept. Tile interiors together with edge compatibility carry local microstructural characteristics, while the fluctuations over distances larger than the tile size are facilitated via the tile assembly algorithm. Complementary to the edge-based specification introduced above, Wang tiles can be defined using vertex codes. Unlike the standard edge-based definition, the vertexbased definition allows for direct control of tile states across vertices, preventing pronounced repetitiveness when a visually distinctive microstructural feature falls into the vertex region Albeit the two definitions yield the same cardinality of tiles (C 4 ) in the complete set, i.e. the set that contains all combinations of C codes, they differ when it comes to minimal stochastic sets, i.e. sets that contain at least two tiles for each admissible code combination of already placed neighbouring tiles (2C 2 for edge-based sets vs. 2C 3 in the case of vertex-based ones). The difference is even more pronounced in three dimensions: a full face-defined set contains C Mapping vertex-defined tiles 6 to the original definition is straightforward: two vertex codes define one edge code. Hence all the above-mentioned design and assembly procedures directly apply to the vertex-based definition as well. In fact, the mapping provides an effortless way to produce a minimal stochastic edge-defined set with equal occurrence probability of each tile, the set characteristics sought for in Figure Here, we outline a tile set analysis capable of revealing the underlying vertex definition, if it exists. The motivation behind this analysis is the pragmatic question which arises when implementing generalized periodicity: If a particle intersects a tile boundary, what other tiles should it be copied to? While the answer is straightforward for a particle intersecting a tile edge, vertex overlap is more involved. A particle overlapping a vertex is carried to other tiles by both the horizontal and vertical edges. Because the particle overlapped a vertex in the original tile, its images overlap vertices of the other tiles as well. Consequently, these images are propagated further by the newly affected edge codes, see Fig. Assume an undirected graph In three dimensions, a set of Wang cubes can be analysed analogously with only a minor modification: a graph node represents one corner of a cube face. Thus, each face code appears four times in the graph. In addition, cube edges with the same direction vector must be also classified, addressing the situation when a particle intersects a cube edge. The classification follows the exact same procedure as vertex identification in two dimensions, neglecting the codes on faces perpendicular to the analysed edges. As mentioned in Section 1.1, Random Sequential Adsorption (RSA) 8 is one of the most frequent algorithms for generating particle packings and microstructural geometries. It follows the simple idea of throwing particles of an arbitrary shape into a given domain and keeping those that do not overlap with previously placed ones. In (a) its original setting, however, the algorithm poses a critical drawback for higher volume fractions: the success rate for accepting the particle position rapidly decays in later stages, because the majority of the randomly selected positions collide with the already placed particles. Optimally, the remedy would be to sample the new particle position directly from a domain that is certified to result in a nonoverlapping composition. Several such remedies have been listed in Section 1.1. Here, we recall the approach of Sonon et al., because we have extended their methodology to Wang tiles. Sonon et al. In the the remainder of Section 3, we revise individual steps from the Sonon et al.'s framework and introduce necessary modifications facilitating the compatibility constraints arising in the concept of Wang tiles. For the sake of clarity, all procedures are presented in the two-dimensional setting with comments about threedimensional problems when necessary. Section 4 then presents both two-and three-dimensional results. The original Sonon et al.'s approach with the signed distance function d (x, y) given by Consequently, the zero iso-line of L P represents the particle boundary Γ P , as depicted in Fig. Assume for now that we have domain Ω that contains set R of already placed particles and their geometry is encoded in a single level-set field L Ω , see Fig. After placing the new particle P, the level-set field L Ω is updated with L P , This procedure repeats until either a pre-defined stopping criterion (e.g. a desired volume fraction) is met or A = ∅. To increase the volume fraction that can be achieved with this procedure, two additional restrictions can be posed on the admissible subdomain A. First, a maximal distance ρ from existing particle boundaries can be added to Eq. ( Enforcing periodicity of the packing is also straightforward: upon placement of a new particle, the domain levelset field is also updated with the particle's periodic images (eight in 2D; recall the grid in Fig. Compared to generating PUCs, the additional compatibility constraints among individual Wang tiles necessitate several modifications in the original Sonot et al.'s algorithm to generate continuous microstructural morphology of a tile set. For the Poisson discs distribution, Lagae and Dutré As L Ω we use a level-set field L S = T ∈S L T defined on a regular grid for each tile T in the tile set S. For each tile in a pre-processing stage, we identify potential neighbouring tiles and store their indices in a grid (3 × 3 or 3 × 3 × 3 in two or three dimensions, respectively), see Fig. For further description, we define a copy-inducer as a geometrical entity that is responsible for inducing particle copies to other tiles. Hence, a copy-inducer can be either a vertex, edge, face, or formally the tile itself and is related to a code identified in Section 2.3. The particular type of the copy-inducer stems from particle's intersections with a tile boundary (if a particle does not intersect a boundary, the tile is the copy-inducer, indicating that no copy is necessary. If a particle intersects one edge, the edge is the copy-inducer, and so on). Modification 1: Update. The main structure of the modified algorithm follows the original one. After sampling a particle location from A ⊆ S, which yields tile T i and centre x P c ∈ T i where the new particle will be placed, the particle's intersections with the boundary of T i are determined, and-based on the intersections-a copy-inducer is identified. Images of the particle are subsequently copied to the relevant tiles following the matching codes on the corresponding copy-inducers. A level-set field of the whole set is then updated tile-wise as described below. For each tile, we sequentially loop over all tile positions in the neighbours grid shown in Fig. Two implementation approaches are possible at this stage: (i) L P is computed anew for each tile and position in the bookkeeping structure, or (ii) provided that L S is represented with discrete values on a regular grid, L P is precomputed for an auxiliary domain/patch aligned with the particle centre before any update and this field is then reused for all particle instances. Moreover, we combine both approaches with the pre-screening acceleration proposed in While the pre-screening acceleration is significant in all cases, the benefits of a precomputed patch depend mainly on the patch size relative to the particle circumscribed radius, the L S field resolution, and the cardinality of the tile set. Especially in the later stages of the algorithm, when only relatively small parts of L S are updated, precomputing a patch for a particle that is not copied to other tiles might cause unnecessary overhead. Therefore, we use the patch approach only for particles with either vertex, edge, or face copy-inducers. For the three-dimensional set of 16 cubes used in Section 4.3 with ellipsoidal particles of circumscribed radius r = 0.15, the patch pre-calculation delivered 10% saving in computational time on average. Note also that the multiquery problem of finding the shortest distance to a particle boundary from a set of points is trivially parallelizable, changing the trade-off between patch pre-computations and direct calculations with available threads. When all tiles are updated, the algorithm proceeds with identifying A for the next particle. Modification 2: Artificial level-set field. Definition of the admissible domain A must also be modified for Wang tiles; particle centres cannot be sampled directly from A obtained from L S . The reason for this is that the nearboundary parts of each tile must be informed about the interiors of related tiles in order to prevent insertions similar to the one depicted in Fig. To avoid this problem, we replace L S in Eq. ( The modifications described above are sufficient for extending the original Sonon et al.'s level-set-based packing algorithm to the concept of Wang tiles. Note that all control variables, e.g. particle radius r or minimal and maximal distances ρ and σ, can change while the algorithm operates. For instance, to achieve denser packings for multi-modal particle size distributions, it is preferential to start placing large particles first and sequentially proceed to the smaller ones. Nonetheless, our extension inherits the weakness of the original algorithm when it comes to particles whose shapes are significantly different than their circumscribed circle/sphere, e.g. prolonged ellipsoids. In particular, the more the particle volume deviates from the volume of the circumscribed sphere, the less dense the final packing can be. While the geometry of the already placed particles is described exactly with L S (up to inaccuracies due to grid spacing in x), the newly placed particle is represented only approximately during selection of a centre, yielding a pessimistic estimate of mutual intersections. The potential remedy is to translate the particle centre right after sampling according to some heuristic rule aimed at producing denser packings; however, we leave this issue unaddressed in this paper. The acceleration of RSA by adopting the level-set approach is attractive on its own; however, the main appeal of the Sonon et al.'s level-set framework is the elegance with which complex microstructures can be generated. As the simplest example, adding a constant γ to L S enables (i) fine-tuning of particle volume fractions, (ii) smoothing of sharp corners of polyhedral particles, and (iii) particle coating, e.g. for defining the Interfacial Transition Zone. Combinations of L S and L S II permit rendering interparticle bridges and controlled Voronoï-like tessellations; see As in Section 3.1, we present only the essentials of generating foam-like microstructures and introduce necessary modifications. The reader is referred to [50, Section 4] and Assume we have at our disposal all three fields L S , L S II , and L S III , containing the shortest distance to the boundary of three nearest particles (either computed a posteriori for a given particle assembly or already tracked during the packing algorithm). In a manner similar to classical Voronoï tessellation, where a domain is partitioned by boundaries that have the same distance to the two closest seeds, thresholding the modified difference yields a closed-cell, foam-like geometry with t c indirectly controlling the thickness of foam cell walls. In the same spirit, the centrelines of the open-foam ligaments can be viewed as loci with the same distances to the boundary of three nearest particles; hence thresholding produces open-foam ligaments with t o governing their thickness. Finally, combining Eqs. ( allows for more realistic geometries with material concentration at wall intersections, see Fig. First, we compare the periodicity reduction in three planar sets depicted in Fig. Assuming ergodicity of a microstructure, we quantify the artificial periodicity in the tiling assemblies by means of the secondary peaks in the two-point probability function S 2 (x) (FFT) instead of random sampling, because the bias in the statistics caused by the implicit periodicity introduced with FFT is negligible for reasonably large microstructural realizations For each of the three tile sets we ran the presented algorithm 25 times and thus generated 25 different tile set morphologies. Aiming at capturing the artificial periodicity related to the limited number of edge codes and tiles, we resorted to the simplest set-up with circular inclusion of a fixed radius r = 0.1 in order to minimize the influence of particle shapes. In addition, we prevented the particles from overlapping tile vertices in order not to favour the vertex-based tile set a priori 2 ) were discretized using a regular grid comprising 201 × 201 points. Finally, we posed two constraints, κ = 0.01 and ρ = 0.03, on A, recall Eq. ( We assembled 100 microstructural realizations, i.e. tilings, containing 10 × 10 tiles for each tile set and tile morphology and computed S 2 statistics for the inclusion phase. Cross-sections of S 2 along the x 1 coordinate are plotted in Fig. While the Ammann's tile set A16 seems promising locally-note the suppressed secondary peaks at x 1 = 1.0 and x 1 = 4.0 in Fig. Following the outcomes of Section 4.1, we picked the vertex-based set with 16 tiles depicted in Fig. 2 and the corresponding level-set fields were discretized using a regular grid comprising 201 × 201 points. The initial value of the circumscribed radius was set to r = 0.08. After 40 algorithm steps, the radius was increased to 0.1, and eventually we reduced it to 0.06 after next 60 steps. The number of algorithm steps and related radii were chosen randomly to illustrate the algorithm's control options. Only the first two constraints on A from Eq. ( Fig. Finally, we demonstrate a three-dimensional output of the algorithm for a set of Again, we used centred tile domains of a unit size discretized with a grid of 101 × 101 × 101 points. For the packing part of the algorithm, we considered ellipsoidal particles with a random orientation and a fixed circumscribed radius r = 0.10. The ratio between the middle and the major semi-axes lengths was sampled from a uniform distribution U (0.7, 0.9); the minor to the major semiaxes length ratio was randomly generated from U (0.6, 0.7). The admissible domain at each algorithm step was dictated both by L S and L S II with constraints κ = 0.02, ρ = 0.05, and σ = 0.05 in Eq. ( The final microstructure was obtained by performing the morphing operations according to Eq. ( Our extension inherits the O(N ) complexity of the Sonon et al.'s method Interestingly, albeit of the same cardinality, individual 13 All computational times are reported for a workstation equipped tile sets from Section 4.1 exhibit significantly different computational times. This is due to the distribution of edge codes within a set, because a larger part of the tile set domain must be updated with each particle copy in sets with fewer codes, recall Section 3.1.1. Note that Ammann's set with six codes for both horizontal and vertical edges behaves nearly the same as PUC. Computational time related to the morphing operations depends on the operational mode of the algorithm. If the algorithm is used for both packing and morphing at the same time, the level-set fields used during the particle packing phase can be directly utilized for the morphing operations. On the other hand, when the morphing part runs separately, all the distance fields must be calculated again. Yet this recalculation is typically faster than the packing because all copies and compatibility constraints are already taken into account; for instance, generating the particle packing for the microstructure presented in Section 4.3 took 1,280 s while the recalculation needed for the morphing operations finished in 420 s. In this work, we have extended Sonon et al.'s levelset based framework Advancing from the standard Periodic Unit Cell to the generalized periodicity of Wang tiles necessitated several modifications of the original algorithm that addressed difficulties originally not encountered in the case of PUC. Driven by the geometrically-motivated question of where a vertex-overlapping particle should be copied to, we have come up with a simple procedure based on a graph analysis capable of revealing the underlying vertex definition of a tile set, if present. We have also demonstrated that a straightforward copying of boundary-intersecting particles according to the edge and vertex codes is insufficient for preventing spurious particle overlaps because the information about the interior of a tile is not automatically communicated across individual tiles. As a remedy, we have introduced an artificially updated level-set field that facilitates this necessary communication. The width of the updated region in this field is dictated by the required final geometry. If only a particle distribution is to be generated, the width equal to the particle radius r suffices. On the other hand, if foam-like microstructures are desired, the virtual boundary inset by r is necessary in order to preserve continuity of the level-set fields L S II and L S III across tile edges, resulting in the updated region of width 2r. Additionally, we have devised two minor modifications, one capable of breaking a regular underlying grid of possible particle centres by introducing their random shifts within an admissible region, the other accelerating the L S updates by pre-computing L P on a patch. The importance of the latter modification grows with higher L S resolutions and larger cardinality of a tile set. Having a universal framework for generating Wang tile morphologies at our disposal, we have supplemented our previous comparison of strictly aperiodic and stochastic tile sets Admittedly, the presented modification inherits certain limitations posed by the original framework; namely, it provides only indirect control of a resulting microstructural geometry and no spatial statistics are involved in the particle placing process. Albeit addressing these limitations remained out of the scope of this work, ideas conceptually similar to Albeit our extension features linear complexity as in the original Sonon et al.'s framework, the generalized periodicity brings increased computational cost compared to PUC generation, see Section 4.4. Recall though that tile-based compression is intended primarily for generating numerous stochastic realizations with arbitrary sizes. Thus, more time can be spent on preparing the initial microstructure because the increased cost will be amortized later during repeated use of the same compression. Our current focus is on developing a robust finite element discretization tool that would enable meshing both outputs of the framework, i.e. analytical geometries of microstructures and complex geometries implicitly defined via level-set fields and processed with the marching-cube algorithm. In both cases, special attention will be paid to ensuring topological and geometrical compatibility of the resulting finite-element meshes across the corresponding faces/edges. No. SGS18/036/OHK1/1T/11, and J. Zeman received partial support from Czech Science Foundation project No. 17-04301S. We thank Stephanie Krueger for helpful comments and proof-reading the manuscript. 1 In its simplest setting of packing circular or spherical particles, RSA corresponds to the Dart Throwing Algorithm Level-set description based on the signed distance to the nth nearest particle boundary does not fulfil all metric criteria. A statement containing one existential (∃) and two universal (∀) quantifiers. The limitations of aperiodic sets are especially critical in 3D, because only one aperiodic set of Wang cubes has been published to date The same procedure holds also for Wang cubes, where four vertices define one face code. Instead of the standard vertex-edge nomenclature for a graph, we use node and arc terms in order to avoid confusion with similar geometrical notions related to Wang tiles. Sometimes, the term Random Sequential Addition, e.g. From Fig.5it follows that a particle will be copied to all tiles if it overlaps any vertex for the A16 and C16 tile sets.