Neutron and x-ray total scattering measurements have been performed on powder samples of the iron chalcogenide superconductor FeSe. Using pair distribution function (PDF) analysis of the total scattering data to investigate short-range atomic correlations, we establish the existence of an instantaneous, local orthorhombic structural distortion attributable to nematic fluctuations that persists well into the high-temperature tetragonal phase, at least up to 300 K and likely to significantly higher temperatures. This short-range orthorhombic distortion is correlated over a length scale of about 1 nm at 300 K and grows to several nm as the temperature is lowered toward the long-range structural transition temperature. In the low-temperature nematic state, the local instantaneous structure exhibits an enhanced orthorhombic distortion relative to the average structure with a typical relaxation length of 3 nm. The quantitative characterization of these orthorhombic fluctuations sheds light on nematicity in this canonical iron-based superconductor. Understanding the role of electronic nematicity in iron-based superconductors (FeSCs) remains an outstanding goal among researchers in the field. Characterized by an electronically-driven splitting of the d xz and d yz bands that reduces the original C 4 rotational symmetry to C 2 , nematic order manifests as a tetragonal-toorthorhombic structural phase transition and a significant anisotropy in the spin susceptibility, which almost always triggers long-range magnetic order Iron selenium (FeSe) is unique among FeSCs in that it possesses the simplest crystal structure and does not exhibit long-range magnetic order in the low-temperature nematic phase In FeSe and other systems, valuable insight can be gained through studies of not only the static nematic phase, but also fluctuations and other signatures of the nematic phase at temperatures above T s Short-range, fluctuating orthorhombicity has recently been observed in the hole-doped pnictide system Sr 1-x Na x Fe 2 As 2 through pair distribution function (PDF) analysis of neutron and x-ray total scattering data We address that need here by presenting a thorough PDF analysis of x-ray and neutron total scattering measurements of FeSe. We observe short-range, nanometer-scale orthorhombic distortions of the instantaneous structure at least up to room temperature, which grow in correlation length upon cooling and persist in the static nematic phase in the form of enhanced local orthorhombicity relative to the long-range distortion of the average structure. In addition to providing realspace confirmation and a quantitative characterization of enhanced orthorhombic fluctuations in FeSe, these results further establish the relevance of fluctuating nematicity across multiple families of FeSCs. Single crystals of FeSe were grown under a permanent temperature gradient (∼400 • C to 330 • C) using KCl-AlCl 3 flux The neutron total scattering measurements were performed on the General Materials Diffractometer (GEM), a time-of-flight instrument at the ISIS Neutron Source of Rutherford Appleton Laboratory The x-ray total scattering measurements were conducted on the Pair Distribution Function beamline (28-ID-1) at the National Synchrotron Light Source II located at Brookhaven National Laboratory. The incident beam had a wavelength of 0.1867 Å. Background and calibration measurements were performed according to standard protocols, as was also the case for the neutron PDF data. A Perkin-Elmer area detector was used to collect the raw diffraction data, which were then integrated, reduced, and transformed using the Fit2D We begin with the neutron PDF analysis. Due to the time required to obtain high-quality data, we focused on just two temperatures, 196 K (in the high-temperature tetragonal phase) and 23 K (deep in the nematic phase). A fit to the data at 23 K using the Cmma orthorhombic structural model and the nominal 1:1 composition is shown in Fig. An equivalent refinement of the orthorhombic structural model against the data collected at 196 K yields a best-fit δ that is very close to zero for a fitting range of 1.5 -50 Å. This is not surprising, given that the longrange crystallographic structure of FeSe is tetragonal at this temperature. However, refining the same structural model over a shorter fitting range from 1.5 -21.5 Å results in a large δ of ∼0.004. Additionally, refining the purely tetragonal model over the same range yields a significantly worse fit, with R w = 0.128 compared to 0.119 for the orthorhombic model. This indicates that the in-stantaneous local structure up to 21.5 Å is orthorhombically distorted, but when averaged over longer distances up to 50 Å, the distortion is greatly reduced. This local orthorhombicity is similar to that established by previous PDF measurements of Sr 1-x Na x Fe 2 As 2 To examine the length scale of the short-range orthorhombicity at 196 K, we performed a series of refinements of the orthorhombic model over a sliding data window ranging from [1.5 Å -21.5 Å] to [30.5 Å -50.5 Å] in steps of 1 Å. The refined structural model for each fitting window represents the best-fit structure on that length scale. A width of 20 Å for the fitting ranges was chosen because this provides enough data to ensure robust convergence of the fits but is not such a wide range that it averages away any local structure. To reduce the correlation between fitting parameters, we enforced tetragonal symmetry of the atomic displacement parameters (ADPs) within the orthorhombic model, so that the only additional free parameter in the orthorhombic model relative to the tetragonal model was the orthorhombicity δ. We refined δ directly by parameterizing the in-plane lattice constants for the orthorhombic model as a = a mid (1 + δ) and b = a mid (1 -δ), where a mid = (a+b)/2 is equivalent to the tetragonal inplane lattice constant. In addition, we refined the purely tetragonal model over the same fitting ranges to allow a comparison of the goodness of fit for each model. The results of this procedure are displayed in Fig. The blue symbols in Fig. The neutron PDF results presented so far establish the existence of a short-range, instantaneous orthorhombic distortion correlated over approximately 3 nm that exists well into the high-temperature tetragonal phase, as well as locally enhanced orthorhombicity on a similar length scale deep in the nematically ordered state. To obtain a more complete temperature dependence of the local structure, we turn to the x-ray PDF data, which were collected between 6 K and 300 K in steps of 6 K. A representative x-ray PDF fit is shown in Fig. In Fig. We illustrate the growth of the orthorhombic distortion in Fig. Taken together, the results of the x-ray PDF analysis confirm and extend the neutron PDF results, establishing the existence of a nanometer-scale orthorhombic distortion of the instantaneous local atomic structure that survives well into the high-temperature tetragonal phase. This local distortion, a manifestation of nematic fluctuations, grows in correlation length as the temperature is lowered toward the long-range nematic ordering tem-perature T s . Moreover, it persists below T s in the form of an enhanced orthorhombic distortion at low r compared to high r, with an approximate relaxation length of 30 Å until it reaches the magnitude of the long-range distortion. The PDF analysis reported here represents direct evidence of short-range, instantaneous orthorhombic distortions of the FeSe lattice, and further provides quantitative insights into the amplitude, length scale, and temperature dependence of these fluctuations. The robustness of these fluctuations at elevated temperatures is especially notable. Although we conducted no measurements above 300 K, extrapolation of the lengthscale trend in Fig. The present results are quite similar to those from an earlier PDF analysis of Sr 1-x Na x Fe 2 As 2 , which established the presence of short-range orthorhombic distortions on a length scale of 2-3 nm up to temperatures as high as 500 K in undoped SrFe 2 As 2 We note that during the preparation of this manuscript, we became aware of a similar work involving x-ray PDF analysis of FeSe that appeared on the arXiv preprint server 