We present the analysis of high-frequency (dynamic) conductivity with the spatial dispersion, σ(ω, q), of two-dimensional electron gas subjected to a high electric field. We found that at finite wavevector, q, and at high fields, the high-frequency conductivity shows following peculiarities: strong non-reciprocal dispersion; oscillatory behavior; a set of frequency regions with negative σ ′ ; non-exponential decay of σ ′ and σ ′′ with frequency (opposite to the Landau damping mechanism). We illustrate the general results by calculations of spectral characteristics of particular plasmonic heterostructures on the basis of III-V semiconductor compounds. We conclude that the detailed analysis of the spatial dispersion of the dynamic conductivity of 2DEG subjected to high electric fields is critically important for different THz applications. The high-frequency properties of a two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) are determined by the dynamic conductivity, σ(ω, q), where ω and q are the angular frequency and the wavevector of the electric field, E ω,q , of the electromagnetic wave. The dependence of σ(ω, q) on the wavevector, i.e., the spatial dispersion, becomes especially important for samples with submicron-and nanosized lateral structuring. Indeed, a plane electromagnetic wave illuminating a laterally nonuniform sample induces electric field components varying both in space and time, which interact with the 2DEG. The spatial dependence of these field components is defined by characteristic scales of the lateral structuring of the sample. Examples of laterally nonuniform structures with 2DEGs are grating-gated structures, surface-relief grating, plasmonic and metamaterial nanodevices based on the excitation of 2D plasmon modes, etc. Recently The development of such methods facilitates the exploration of excitations and fields at the short time and length scales. In all presented examples, a detailed analysis of the spatial dispersion of the dynamic conductivity is critically important. In the case of samples with submicron-or nano-scaled lateral structurization, when the characteristic lateral scales are shorter than the mean free path of the electrons, l sc , and frequencies are greater than the inverse scattering time, 1/τ sc , the dynamic conductivity should be found by solving the Boltzmann transport equation (BTE) in collisionless (ballistic) approximation. For this case, σ(ω, q) has both real, σ ′ , and imaginary, σ ′′ , parts. The non-zero real part σ ′ is due to the strong phase-mixing property of the BTE 11 , which leads also to the well known Landau damping mechanism for charge oscillations of an equilibrium electron gas In this letter, we present an analysis of the high-frequency conductivity with the spatial dispersion, σ(ω, q), for 2DEG subjected to a high stationary electric field, keeping the nonzero electric field term in the BTE. We solved the BTE in the collisionless limit and calculated the dynamic conductivity. We found that the effect of the field E 0 is significant if the relative gain of electron energy from the field E 0 for a spatial period of the electromagnetic wave is of the order of 1. For the case, when hot electrons can be characterized by the electron temperature, T e , this parameter is γ q = eE 0 /qk B T e , where, e is the elementary charge and k B is the Boltzmann constant. At a given q, and high field, E 0 , the dynamic conductivity shows the following peculiarities: (i) oscillatory behavior versus frequency; (ii) a set of frequency regions with negative σ ′′ ; (iii) non-exponential decay of σ ′ and σ ′′ with the frequency (opposite to the Landau damping mechanism). We illustrate these general results by calculations of the spectral characteristics of particular plasmonic heterostructures based on a III-V semiconductor compounds. In the frame of the semiclassical analysis, the electron characteristics can be calculated using the electron distribution function G(p, r, t) of 2DEG, which, in general, depends on the electron momentum, p, the coordinate vector, r, and time, t. G(p, r, t) is the solution of the BTE: where E(r, t) = E 0 + Ẽ(r, t) is the total electric field given by the sum of the stationary field E 0 and Ẽ(r, t) = Ẽω,q e iqr-i(ω+iδ)t representing the field associated with the electromagnetic wave and Î{G} is the collision integral. In the expression for Ẽ, we introduced a parameter δ → +0, which corresponds to adiabatically-slow turning-on of this field at t → -∞ Assuming that the amplitude of the wave field, Ẽω,q , is small, we can write down the equations for g 0 and gω,q : where Eq.( and Ẽω,q = { Ẽω,q , 0} with q = {q, 0}. For high-frequency perturbation of the distribution function, gω,q , we solved Eq. ( Having the function gω,q (p x , p y ), we can calculate the alternative current, jω,q = -e/m * × dp x dp y p x gω,q , and define the high-frequency conductivity as σ ω,q = jω,q / Ẽω,q . We found that σ ω,q can be expressed in the form of a single integral: where W[ξ] is the so-called the plasma dispersion function The latter allows us to set δ = 0 in Eq. ( The detail analysis of the σ ω,q , we will perform for the so-called shifted Maxwellian function, where n 0 , V dr and T e are the electron concentration, drift velocity, and electron temperature, respectively. For this function, the main peculiarities of σ ω,q including the affect of the high electric field can be studied analytically. The parameters V dr and T e are functions of the applied field, E 0 , and can be found using the momentum and energy balance equations (see, for example Refs. [18, 19]). Using g 0 (p x , p y ) from Eq. ( with V T = 2k B T e /m * being the thermal velocity of the electrons. Finally, Eq. ( As expected, σ ω,q depends on the field, E 0 , via two parameters of the stationary distribution function of Eq. ( If the γ q is negligibly small, we obtain the real part of the dynamic conductivity in the form Noteworthy, σ ′ ω,q presented by Eq. ( with D[ξ] being the Dawson function Returning to the case γ q = 0, the determination of the real and imaginary parts of σ ω,q given by Eq. ( From this result we find that at small ξ, σ ′ ω,q ∝ √ πξ -γ q . Thus, the real part of the conductivity changes the sign at ξ C = γ q / √ π, i.e., the Cerenkov-like instability region is wider than that predicted by Eq. ( The conclusions obtained from analytical considerations are supported by the numerical results shown in Figs. The right parts of these figures correspond to the case of q > 0, ω > 0, the left parts are for q < 0, ω > 0. The apparent non-reciprocal frequency dispersion of σ ω,q is due to the electrons drift subjected to the stationary field, E 0 . In Figs. A schematic of such a hybrid plasmonic structure is shown in Fig. For the structure we set the following geometrical parameters: a g = 200 nm, b g = 160 nm, d = 20 nm, and D s = 2 μm [see Fig. The V dr (E 0 ) function can be used to calculate the differential mobility, μ d (E 0 ) ≡ dV dr /dE 0 , and the scattering time, τ sc = m * μ d (E 0 )/e, of hot electrons. The latter parameter allows us to estimate the criteria necessary for the collisionless approach: ωτ sc ≫ 1, ql sc = q 2k B T e /m * τ sc ≫1. For example, at E 0 = 0.5 kV/cm, we found that τ sc = 0.65 ps, l sc = 1.3 × 10 -5 cm, i.e., for 3...4 THz frequency range we find that ω τ sc ≈ 12...16 and ql sc ≈ 4 at q ≈ π × 10 5 cm -1 (characteristic wavevector corresponding to the grating period, Based on the solution of the Maxwell's equation In particular, the spectral dependences of the absorptivity of THz waves calculated for three applied fields E 0 = 0.5, 0.75, 1 kV/cm (parameters γ q = 0.21, 0.31, 0.39, respectively) are shown in Fig. The above analysis was conducted for σ ω,q with the use of the shifted Maxwellian distribution, which facilitates the analytical study of σ ω,q . Below, we demonstrate how the main features of σ ω,q are reproduced for functions, g 0 (p x ), obtained by the Monte-Carlo method. We use the results of paper and without e-e scattering (dashed and dashed-doted lines, respectively). Though all three functions are seemingly quite similar and give the same mean energy and drift velocity, the two latter functions have more sharp decrease at large momenta p x . Calculations of σ ′ ω,q for these three functions ḡ0 (p x ) are presented in Fig. nanoparticle (a quantum dot, a molecule, etc.), the electron drift in the stationary electric field will provide excitation and instability of this hybrid system if the dipole oscillation frequency of the nanoparticle is in one of the discussed frequency regions We suggest that the discovered features associated with the electron response to high- 