This paper provides a detailed review on applications of ionic electroactive polymer (i-EAP) soft actuators as active elements of microfluidic micropumps, microvalves, and micromixers. The related works that have so far been presented by various research groups in the field have been collected in this review, which in the presented comparative procedure here shows the progress of this field during the time. Microfluidic technology as a pioneer field in bioengineering needs to have some active components likes pumps, valves, and mixers to obtain efficient functionality. Most of the conventional microfluidic active components are challenging to assemble and control outside the laboratory since they need some special facilities, which is not cost-effective. This is while some of the main targets of the microfluidic devices are for the development of point of care (POC) diagnostic systems, home usability, ubiquitousness, and low-cost ability. To solve these problems, i-EAPs have shown promising features to be the proper candidates as active elements of the microfluidic devices. Ionic polymermetal composites (IPMCs), Conducting polymer actuators (CPAs), and Ionic carbon nanotube-based actuators (i-CNTAs) are three main types of the i-EAPs. In this paper, the working principles, fabrication, and microfluidic-based applications of these three categories are described in details. To have a proper comparison between all the reported i-EAP based microfluidic devices, several important features, i.e., applied voltage/frequency, device materials, electrode material, membrane material, and the main measured index of each device, have been reviewed. icrofluidic systems, sometimes known as micro-total analysis systems (μ-TAS), is a field of science which mostly deals with the fluids that are geometrically limited to small feature sizes. Due to some factors such as energy dissipation, fluidic resistance, and surface tension, fluids behave differently at the small scales and different theory and technology for dealing with these behaviors are inquired. Microfluidics is playing a leading role in these kinds of problems, and it can help researchers and industries to find practical solutions for this question that how we can use and manipulate the fluids in a tiny volumes EAP actuators are a group of polymer-based composites that respond mechanically to electrical stimulation. They can imitate the behavior of biological muscles; hence sometimes they are called artificial muscles An alternative way of creating actuation in the EAPs is using mobile ions in their polymeric membrane. Applying an electric field leads to move the ions, and consequently, this movement carries the solvent and makes swelling or contraction in the membrane or electrodes finally making the desired actuation of EAP Ionic polymer-metal composites or in abbreviation IPMCs are a group of soft i-EAPs that can be used as actuators and sensors There are several fabrication procedures for IPMC devices that here we want to talk about the most conventional procedure for a Nafion based and Pt electrodes IPMC. At first, the top and bottom of the membrane of the devices should be roughened by microblasting techniques or simply using small size and soft sandpaper in order to increase the surface roughness and consequently increasing the surface area. After that, to clean the reminding particles of the roughening process, the membrane should be cleaned ultrasonically, treated with boiled HCl (2N) and deionized water for around 30 min (Fig. IPMCs' model can be categorized into two main groups. The first group is system identification based models that model the dynamic behavior of IPMCs using experimental datasets only by finding a mathematical relationship between input (usually applied voltage to IPMC) and output (usually tip displacement of IPMC) Where some electro-physio-chemical phenomena like diffusion, ion migration, and convection are involved in this PDE. In Eq.1 J is the spatial vector of the cations flux, C + is the concentration of cations, T is the absolute temperature, d is the ionic diffusivity, p is the fluid pressure, R is the gas constant, v is the free solvent velocity field, and V  is the volumetric change of the membrane where  is the constant coupling coefficient. In the next steps, by using the definition of bending moment and applying linear Euler-Bernoulli beam theory and also some mathematical efforts, we can calculate the tip displacement of IPMCs. For example, by a similar approach, Chen and Tan The details of this relation and the definition of unknown functions and parameters have been described in IPMC's promising potentials and its capability to be miniaturized have made it to be a good candidate for MEMS The first idea in using of IPMC actuator as an active element of micropumps goes back to the work of Another type of IPMC based micropump was presented in 2004 by Pak et al. In continuing the Pak et al. idea A flap valve IPMC-based micropump is presented in In 2010 Santos et al. Fourteen years after his work as the first IPMC-based micropump The proposed micropump has been made in the form of a cube with the size of 30mm×30mm and 27mm (height). A petal-shaped IPMC actuator is used as the active element of the pump with a PDMS diaphragm and under experimental tests, this IPMC-based micropump was able to pump the fluids by 202 μl/min flow rate in response to a 5-volt 2-Hz applied voltage. In comparison to their previous works The main idea of this type of micropumps is not novel, and Fang and Tan In all of the previous IPMC-based micropumps, a diskshaped or petal-shaped IPMC was used as diaphragm or active element of the micropump, but McDaid et al. In another paper, shoji has presented an idea like the previous discussed ones In order to design an efficient micropump for drug delivery usage, Wang et al. The last and newest IPMC-based micropump is made by Wang and Sugino As discussed before, most of the microfluidic-based applications of IPMC are related to micropumps, but it also has promising potential to play the role of a microvalve for microfluidic devices. So far, just four papers have been published about IPMC-based microvalves. In this work we review all the presented research on this topic as follows. Previously in the section of "IPMC-based Micropump 1" we talked about two papers on IPMC-based micropumps The first IPMC-based microvalve was presented by Yun et al. Another IPMC-based valve For the IPMC-based micromixers, the same as for microvalves, and we cannot find more than two works The work in In the work of C. Meis et al. Conducting or sometimes called conjugated polymers (CPs) are groups of semiconducting polymers that will be conductive when they are doped with donor or acceptor ions This trilayer CPA has a PVDF membrane (separator) with two electrochemically deposited layers of PPy on both sides that have been doped with TFSI -anions. PVDF is an amorphous and porous polymer which for trilayer CPA is a substrate as well as a storage tank for the electrolyte. After applying the voltage to the PPy electrodes, the anode side is oxidized (big anions are attracted to the oxidized PPy layer and make it expand) while the cathode one is reduced (anions leave the reduced PPy layer and it makes a contraction) Oxidation : PPy + TFSI -→ PPy+TFSI -+ e - Reduction : PPy+TFSI -+ e -→ PPy + TFSI - Whereas shown in Fig. Where the details of this relation and the definition of unknown functions and parameters have been described in In order to fabricate a trilayer CPA by the mentioned materials, two layers of PPy should be electrochemically deposited on both sides of the separator (PVDF here). Electrochemical deposition or electrodeposition, also known as electroplating, is a method for coating of a material onto a conductive surface from an electrolyte solution. As it is shown in Fig. Like IPMCs, CPAs also have a variety of promising features such as; working in the air, lightness, large bendability, ease of fabrication, low required input voltage, and especially their ability to be a MEMS element The first CPA-based micropump was proposed in 2004 by Wu et al. In another work, Kim et al. In In another work The first idea for using the petal-shaped i-EAP actuators in micropumps was published by Fang and Tan in 2010 A new kind of valveless CPA-based micropump was presented by Another CPA-based micropump is a miniaturized 'syringe type' pump presented by To solve these problems a proposed stacked CPAs is presented, the schematics of which is illustrated in Fig. In 2013 a Japanese company, EAMEX, developed the world's first semi-commercial micropump that does not require a driving source such as a motor, and it works based on CPA-based diaphragm Like IPMCs, most of the microfluidic-based applications of CPAs are related to micropumps, but they also have great potential to be used as active elements of microfluidic microvalves. So far three works have published in the field of microfluidic microvalves and in this section they will be described. Though one of these works is an MSc thesis The first CPA-based microvalve was published by Berdichevsky and Lo in 2004 When an input voltage is applied between the working electrode (WE) and the counter electrode (CE), PPy(DBS) grown on a sputtered gold layer as WE and the gold deposited tracks shown in Fig. The result of this reaction is an isotropic volume change and for achieving it in this microvalve only a low input voltage is required. Experimentally it has been shown that for having a proper valve operation, this voltage should be about 0 and -2.6 V for switching between it's opening and closing states. The second CPA-based microvalve Due to attractive electrical, mechanical, optical, thermal, and chemical characteristics of nanocarbons, especially carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene, they have been among the most interesting and useful materials during the last three decades, and we can find a variety of applications for this materials One of the most important problems in CNTs is their poor dispersibility and it is difficult to process them. But as discussed earlier, they have several significant features that makes them attractive for the researchers. Hence, in order to solve the dispersibility problem of the CNTs, various approaches in the literature have been proposed As depicted in Fig. The fabrication procedure of the BGAs is very easy but very time-consuming. There are only three steps in this procedure as follows; electrodes layer casting, the electrolyte layer casting, and hot press of them together as a composite where the two electrode layers have sandwiched the electrolyte layer in-between (Fig. To cast the electrodes and electrolyte layers, four main elements are needed, as carbon source, IL, polymer matrix, and the solvent. For example, SWNT, EMIMBF Despite the promising features of BGAs for microfluidic systems, incorporation of BGAs in microfluidic devices is still immature, and only two works have been ever published. The first work is about a BGA-based microvalve and the second one is a micropipette. In this part, these two works will be described. In the work of (1-ethyl-3 methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate), PVDF, and DMAC (dimethylacetamide) were used for the required carbon source, IL, polymer matrix, and the solvent, respectively In the work of (1-ethyl-3 methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate), PVDF-HFP (polyvinylidene fluoride co-hexafluoroborate) and DMAC (dimethylacetamide) were used for the required carbon source, IL, polymer matrix, and the solvent, respectively As discussed earlier, Ionic polymer-metal composites (IPMCs), conducting polymer actuators (CPAs), and Ionic carbon nanotube-based actuators (i-CNTAs) are three main types of the i-EAPs and we have reviewed all the reported microfluidic applications of them in the body of this paper. To compare all the discussed actuators, several technical data have been collected for each of the presented microfluidic devices in Table .2 and also shown as several donut charts in Fig. Another important factor that we can find in the collected data in Table .2, is the used material in i-EAP-based microfluidic chips. As for the conventional microfluidic devices, the main material here is the same PDMS that is used in around 55% of all the devices. And 14% of the reviewed microfluidic devices use PMMA, and as shown in Table .2 the rest are fabricated by verity of other materials such as Acrylic, Teflon, Polyethylene, etc. As stated earlier most of the reviewed devices use IPMCs and CPAs, which are further considered and discussed here. The first thing to be considered is the form of the used IPMCs and CPAs. As seen in the above two donut charts depicted in Fig. The most of active micropumps, microvalves, and micromixers are actuated by pneumatic, thermopneumatic, hydraulic, piezoelectric, electromagnetic, and electrostatic actuators. There are some remarkable constraint in these active devices, for example they are challenging to assemble and control, and need some special facilities and also they are expensive. These constraints are against some of the main targeted advantages of microfluidic devices such as POC development, use at home, availability, low-cost ability, etc. Against these actuators, i-EAPs are different and they are less in struggle with the mentioned constraints. Hence for the purpose of developing the active microfluidic chips without the need to special facilities, the i-EAP actuators have been presented in this review. i-EAP actuators have some promising features for the POC-based systems, home usable, ubiquitous, and low-cost active microfluidic devices. Since 1996 we can find many papers that have been presented for developing some ideas in order to use i-EAP actuators in the active microfluidic devices. But unfortunately they are not oriented or consistent and sometimes overlap each other in contents making it difficult to follow the directions of the research in this field. To address this problem, all the available considerable information about the developed i-EAP-based microfluidic devices to this date have been collected and discussed in this review for making it as a comprehensive reference for the researchers who want to use i-EAP actuators in active microfluidic devices. All in all, this review paper can show that i-EAPs and especially IPMCs and CPAs are the group of good candidates that can play the role of active elements in microfluidic devices. But the current version of the developed devices have significant constraints for their practical applications in the field of active microfluidics and it is necessary to apply some further modification on them.