The performance of lithium and sodium ion batteries relies notably on the accessibility to carbon electrodes of controllable porous structure and chemical composition. This work reports a facile synthesis of well-defined porous N-doped carbons (NPCs) using a poly(ionic liquid) (PIL) as precursor, and graphene oxide (GO)-stabilized poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) nanoparticles as sacrificial template. The GO-stabilized PMMA nanoparticles were first prepared and then decorated by a thin PIL coating before carbonization. The resulting NPCs reached a satisfactory specific surface area of up to 561 m 2 /g and a hierarchically meso-and macroporous structure while keeping a nitrogen content of 2.6 wt %. Such NPCs delivered a high reversible charge/discharge capacity of 1013 mA h/g over 200 cycles at 0.4 A/g for lithium ion batteries (LIBs), and showed a good capacity of 204 mA h/g over 100 cycles at 0.1 A/g for sodium ion batteries (SIBs). In the past decades, nitrogen-doped porous carbons (NPCs) have attracted wide interest due to their potential in catalysis, The experimental details have been placed in the Supporting Information. As presented in Scheme 1, NPCs were synthesized by a templating method inspired by our previous work. Pyrolysis of PMMA/GO/PCMVImBr to generate NPCs was performed on a dry sample by a single-phase, stepwise thermal treatment. The first step was performed at 250 °C for 1 h under nitrogen to thermally depolymerize the sacrificial PMMA nanoparticle template, leaving behind macropores, and in parallel a thermal reduction of GO into graphene (rGO) nanosheets. In summary, NPCs were successfully prepared using PIL as carbon precursor and PMMA nanoparticles stabilized by GO as sacrificial template. PIL provides the nitrogen source of NPCs and facilitates the formation of hierarchical pores. The correlation between pyrolysis temperature and the nature of NPCs was preliminarily investigated in terms of specific surface area and porosity. NPC2 obtained at 900 °C shows a larger specific surface area of 561 m 2 /g with hierarchical meso-and macropore structure and a nitrogen content of 2.6 wt %. More importantly, the NPC2 electrode displays a high reversible charge/discharge capacity of 1013 mA h/g after 200 cycles at 0.4 A/g for LIBs, and 205 mA h/g after 100 cycles at 0.1 A/g for SIBs. This good electrochemical performance clearly demonstrate that such NPCs are promising anode materials for both LIBs and SIBs. It is believed that without any complex techniques or post-treatments, this inexpensive strategy opens up a new stimulating platform for developing novel nitrogen-doped porous carbons from PIL for applications in energy storage, catalysis and environmental treatment. 1.1. Materials. Methyl methacrylate (MMA; > 99%, Aldrich) and α,α′-azoisobutyronitrile (AIBN) (Fluka) were used without further purification. Graphene oxide solution (GO; N002-PS: 0.5 wt % in water, thickness 1.0-1.2 nm, x-y dimension ∼100 nm) was purchased from Angstron Materials. 1-Vinylimidazole (99%), bromoacetonitrile (97%) and divinylbenzene (DVB) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. 3-Cyanomethyl-1-vinylimidazolium bromide (CMVIZBr) was prepared according to literature procedures. PMMA nanoparticles were prepared via the free radical polymerization of methyl methacrylate in presence of GO as stabilizer. The suspension of PMMA/GO in the methanol/water (6/4, v/v) mixture was sonicated by an ultrasonic device for 5 min. Then, CMVIZBr monomer (150 mg, 0.701 mmol) dissolved in deionized water (1 mL), 18.2 mg of DVB as crosslinker (20 mol %) and 3 mg of AIBN were added to the PMMA/GO suspension under vigorous stirring (1000 rpm). The dispersion was degassed by purging with nitrogen for 15 min prior to polymerization. The reaction was conducted under vigorous stirring at 60 °C overnight. The PMMA/GO/PIL particles were separated from the dispersion by centrifugation (10000 rpm for 10 min) and washed with deionized water. After three successive centrifugation/redispersion cycles with deionized water, the PMMA/GO/PIL particles were then dried at 80 °C for 12 h under vacuum until constant weight. In a typical experiment, the dried PMMA/GO/PIL samples were placed into an aluminum oxide crucible in an oven and heated under a N2 atmosphere to 800 or 900 °C following the sequence as schematized in Figure The morphology of the samples was examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM; JEOL JSM 840-A) with an accelerating voltage of 15 kV under high vacuum after metallization with Pt (30 nm). In addition, Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was carried out on a Zeiss EM 912 Omega microscope operating at 120 kV. For sample preparation, one drop of the sample dispersion was placed on a 200 mesh carbon coated copper grid and dried in air. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was carried out using a Q500 machine from TA instruments under a N2 atmosphere at a heating rate of 5 °C/min. The structure of the precursor was studied by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR, PerkinElmer Spectrum BX FTIR instrument) spectra. X-ray diffractograms were collected in Bragg-Brentano geometry using Cu Kalpha radiation (Bruker D8 Twin-Twin). The N-doping levels of the samples was checked by elemental analysis on a Vario Micro setup. The N content reported is the average of four measurements. Nitrogen adsorption-desorption measurements were performed to evaluate the porosity of the materials. The specific surface area, SBET, was calculated using the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) equation, with the adsorption data taken in the relative pressure range 0.01 to 0.10. Pore size distribution was determined by the non-local density functional theory (NLDFT) method. Electrochemical characterization of the NPC materials as anode in rechargeable lithium and sodium ion batteries was performed at room temperature in a half-Li or Na coin cells (CR2025 type) by galvanostatic. The working electrodes were fabricated by grinding NPCs as active materials, carbon black as conducting agent and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) dissolved in N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) as binder in a mass ratio of 8:1:1 to form a homogeneous slurry. Then, the working electrodes were prepared by slurry casting on a copper foil, and then dried in a vacuum oven at 80 °C for 12 h to remove completely the excess of solvent. Pure metal lithium (LIBs) or sodium (SIBs) foils were used as both reference and counter electrodes and a microporous polypropylene membrane (CelgardP) was used as separator. The electrolyte used in the coin cells was composed of 90 μl of 1M LiPF6 in a mixture of LP71 (1 M LiPF6 in EC:DEC:DMC 1:1:1) for LIBs and 1M NaTFSI in EC:DMC (1:1 vol.%) 99.9% for SIBs (Merck). Cycling tests were carried out with voltages between 0.01 V and 3.0 V (vs. Li + /Li or vs. Na + /Na) using a Biologic VMP3 multichannel potentiostat. The specific capacity of the anodes was calculated based on the total mass of the active materials. TableS1. Comparison of the electrochemical performance of various N-doped carbon-based anodes materials.