Numerous studies have focused on a low surface energy coating and a micro/nanoscale surface texture to design functional surfaces that delay frost formation and reduce ice adhesion. However, the scientific challenges for in developing icephobic surfaces have not been fully addressed because of degradation such as mechanical wearing. Inspired by the suppressed frost formation on concave regions of natural leaves, here we report findings on the frosting process on hydrophobic surfaces with various serrated structures. Dropwise condensation, the first stage of frosting, is enhanced on the peaks and suppressed in the valleys when the serrated surface is exposed to humid air, causing frosting to initiate from the peak. The condensed droplets in the valley are then evaporated due to the different equilibrium vapor pressure of ice and water, resulting in a non-frost band on both hydrophobic and superhydrophilic surfaces. The frost growth is systematically studied by employing various levels of ambient humidity, surface wettability, and surface geometry. Numerical simulations show the critical role of diffusion of water vapor in the formation of the discontinuous frost pattern. Ice accretion on surfaces can cause serious energy waste and safety threats in many practical scenarios. Frosting is an interfacial process that can be ubiquitously found in nature when the surface temperature drops down to a certain point. The patterned aluminum surfaces are intrinsically hydrophilic with a static contact angle of 81 ̊. The patterned samples were then cleaned by oxygen plasma for 1 min to remove the organic contaminants. To obtain hydrophobicity, the cleaned samples were immersed in 1 wt. % solution of the fluoroaliphatic phosphate ester fluorosurfactant (FS-100, Pilot Chemical) in ethanol at 70 °C for 30 min. Superhydrophilic samples were made by boiling the cleaned surfaces in water for 30 min to undergo Boehmitization process. The static contact angles on the superhydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces are measured to be 0 ̊ and 123 ̊, respectively. The visualization of the frosting process was done inside a customized chamber (107 cm × 38 cm connected with an ultrasonic humidifier (Pure Enrichment) and an external source of dry air. The air velocity inside the chamber was kept at a low level (< 0.1 m/s) to minimize the effects of convection. Samples were taped (3M TM Scotch Double-Sided Conducted Copper Tape, 12.7 mm wide and 0.04 mm thick) onto a 3D printed cooling unit, one side of which has the same pattern as the aluminum sample. A small wall thickness of 0.5 mm was used to minimize the temperature difference across the aluminum surface. The cooling units were connected to an external circulating liquid chiller (7L AP, VMR) to keep the surface temperature of the samples at -12 ± 0.3 ̊C, which was measured by a digital thermometer (HH66U, OMEGA). Ambient temperature was 23.5 ± 0.5 ̊C. The samples were vertically positioned, and a plastic cover was used to isolate the surfaces from the ambient air before the temperature of the sample surface was stabilized, at which t = 0 is defined. The frosting processes were recorded using a Nikon D5500 camera with a macro lens (Nikon AF-S DX Micro NIKKOR 40 mm f/2.8G) and a handheld digital microscope (Dino-Lite Premier AF3113T). Figure Models for steady state transport of dilute species were used to numerically simulate the diffusion of water vapor near the serrated features. 2-D coordinates were employed for all simulations by neglecting the effect of finite length of the samples in the direction of protrusion. The models were built using the cross-sectional geometries of the serrated surfaces to be studied. Boundary conditions were chosen depending on the specific stage to be simulated. See Results and Discussions for the boundary conditions used for each simulation. 1. Discontinuous frost growth. Figure With repeated experiments, two traits can be identified which are distinct from the frosting process on a flat surface. At the onset stage (t < 80 sec), frosting always initiates from the peaks. At the end stage (t > 2270 sec), frost preferentially covers the peaks, while a non-frost region which spans about half of the total surface area between the two peaks exists at the valley. This discontinuous coverage of frost resembles the frost pattern found on the natural leaves, where frost preferentially covers the leaf veins while the flat regions in between show less frost coverage. Since the rate of frost invasion into the valley becomes significantly slower than that of the frost propagation from the peaks, this non-frosted band in the valley can be considered to resist against frost formation for a long period of time. The multistage frosting process was verified by visualization under a microscope objective lens as shown in Figures 4. It should be noted that the sample under the microscope lens has a vertex angle α = 90 ̊ for better imaging, but it was tested under the same conditions as in Figure Since the surface temperature of the aluminum samples was kept below the dew point under the aforementioned testing conditions, condensation occurs in the first place rather than direct frost deposition by ablimation even though surface temperature is below 0 ̊C (Tsurf = -12 ̊C, Tdew = 1.9 ̊C for RH = 25% and Tambient = 23.5 ̊C). Condensation therefore has a huge impact on the following frosting process. To explain the drop size distribution observed in Figures Following the condensation stage, ice can nucleate in a micro-droplet nearby a larger droplet to initiate propagation of ice front. In summary, we studied the condensation frosting process on hydrophobic surfaces with millimetric serrated features inspired by the veins of natural leaves. Our results show that frosting always initiates from the peak and undergoes a four-stage process including condensation, fast propagation, evaporation, and out-of-plane growth. A discontinuous frost pattern-a non-frosted area centered at the valley-forms and is found to be able to resist further frosting for a long period of time. The spatial span of the non-frosted area is found to expand when the vertex angle of the serrated feature decreases, and when the ambient relative humidity decreases. By simulating the mass transport of water vapor near the serrated features, the distribution of droplet size and number density of drops is explained by the greater magnitude of diffusion flux near the peak than in the valley. We rationale that condensation plays a key role in the formation of the discontinuous frost pattern by comparing the distribution of diffusion flux magnitude and the corresponding frost patterns for the surfaces with various vertex angles and ambient humidity. It is found the frost front for all surface geometries and humidity shares a similar magnitude of diffusion flux, suggesting the frost pattern affected by the millimetric topography originates from the diffusional behavior of water vapor. We envision that this macroscopic surface topography effect can be applied to realize spatial control of frost in a wide spectrum of applications such as aviation, wind power generation, and infrastructure of buildings.