Self-assembled heteroepitaxial BiFeO3 -CoFe2O4 (BFO-CFO) nanocomposite films were grown on (001) oriented piezoelectric Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)0.72Ti0.28O3(001) (PMN-PT) substrates by pulsed laser deposition in which BFO and CFO targets were alternately ablated. Completely reversible electric field induced biaxial strain in this substrate has been exploited to produce reversible electric field control of magnetization in the BFO-CFO nanocomposite film. The surface of the CFO-BFO films shows rectangular CFO pillars protruding out of a flat BFO matrix. The pillars are aligned with their edges along the pseudocubic {110} directions and are homogeneously distributed in the matrix. X-ray diffraction revealed an out-of-plane compression of the CFO unit cell by ~ 0.4%. Magnetic hysteresis loops show a moderate perpendicular anisotropy of the magnetostrictive CFO pillars, which is related to their vertical compression. The application of an electric field to the electromechanical PMN-PT substrate produced significant and reversible changes in the magnetization due to an additional straininduced magnetic anisotropy. This demonstrates completely reversible, room-temperature electric-field-assisted control of magnetization in self-assembled vertical nanocomposites of CFO and BFO. Controlling magnetization directly with an electric field (converse magnetoelectric effect) is important for many different applications because it enables energy-efficient writing of magnetic bits as well as efficient control over magnetic permeability. It has applications in ultra-high density magnetic storage as well as in compact, miniaturized microwave devices Perpendicular recording technology has been introduced in hard disk drives Among different electromechanical substrates, Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)1-xTixO3 has drawn huge interest in recent years. PMN-PT with x  0.3 or 0.38 substrates have in-plane tetragonal domains. Wang et al. Two-phase self-assembled nanocomposite films can be grown by pulsed laser deposition in two different ways: i) ablating material from a single composite target The latter approach offers a more flexible and precise control over film composition and quality (Vinkarola Instruments, purity 99.999%). Growth temperature is a critical parameter for the separation of the two phases which ultimately determines the strain state of the constituent phases in the nanocomposite film Fig. Statistical analysis (not shown here, please see reference Bulk BFO has a lattice parameter (ar ~ 3.96 Å) smaller than CFO (a/2 = 4.19 Å). The epitaxially grown vertical CFO/BFO interface induces a compression in the CFO unit cell. This is likely to induce a small tensile strain (~ 0.5%) in the BFO unit cell in the vertical direction. The small compression in the CFO unit cell (~ 0.4 %) shows that most of the vertical compression in the CFO phase has been released by formation of dislocations at the interfaces between BFO and CFO at the growth temperature The magnetization value has been normalized with respect to the CFO volume in the composite film estimated from the total number of pulses used to ablate the CFO target. The remanence ratio Mr / Ms is 60% for the out-of-plane magnetization and 35% for the in-plane measurement (saturation magnetization in both cases is taken to be 400 emu.cm -3 To identify the source of this anisotropy, we calculated the anisotropy field after taking into account the different sources which contribute to the total energy of the film (for details, see references Moderate perpendicular anisotropy resulting from the weak 'as-grown' strain in the CFO nanopillars is advantageous in this study over strong magnetic anisotropy because it allows us to modulate the magnetic properties of the film using a small strain, driven by an electric field applied across the thickness of the sample. We note here that the magnetic response of the nanocomposite film is entirely due to the CFO nanopillars. Bulk BFO is antiferromagnetic at room temperature (TN = 643 K) and though ferromagnetism has been reported for very thin BFO films An electric field of 7.5 kV/cm was induced along the substrate normal by applying a voltage of 300 V between the top and bottom silver paint electrodes sandwiching the nanocomposite film as shown in the schematic diagram of Fig. Considering the negative magnetostriction of CFO, one expects that the in-plane compression and out-of-plane relaxation of the nanocomposite film induced by the electric field, would produce an enhancement of the in-plane magnetization and a reduction in the out-of-plane magnetization, respectively, in the hysteretic range of the magnetization loop. This can be seen clearly in Figs. respectively. The coercivity of the nanocomposite film is also influenced by the electric field induced elastic strain when measured along the column axis. The effect of the electric field is stronger for the out-of-plane coercive field than for the in-plane value which reveals comparatively little reaction to the reversible strain change (Fig. Fig. We could not find a report on electric field driven reversible strain control of magnetization in BFO-CFO nanocomposites exhibiting perpendicular magnetic anisotropy grown on PMN-PT (x = 0.28). In our previous work In summary, magnetostrictive CFO pillars in self-assembled nanocomposites grown on (001) oriented PMN-PT substrates experience an out-of-plane compression of about 0.4% resulting in perpendicular anisotropy. PMN-PT (001) substrates with x = 0.28 are useful in producing completely reversible electric control of magnetization in the epitaxially grown nanocomposite films. The electric field induced changes in magnetization are the consequence of elastic coupling between the piezoelectric and piezomagnetic phases. Using the changes in the remanence, the calculated magnetoelectric coefficients in the in-plane and out-of-plane orientations have values of ~ 7 × 10 -8 s m -1 and ~ 2.6 × 10 -8 s m -1 , respectively. Although these represent a relatively weak magnetoelectric coupling, the demonstrated reversibility of magnetization changes under applied electric field is remarkable and paves the way for further investigation to enhance the magnetoelctric response. This may be achieved by exploring different matrix/nanopillar materials as well as improving the nature of the interfaces. Reversibility is important in the context of electric field control of data writing and can be useful in overcoming the power dissipation issue in the present current driven write technology and microwave devices. From the point of view of applications, a more uniform size distribution and controlled positions of the CFO columnar grains would be desirable. This can be achieved by using pattering techniques 