Three-dimensional (3D) printing has allowed for production of geometrically complex 3D objects with extreme flexibility, which is currently undergoing rapid expansions in terms of materials, functionalities, as well as areas of application. When attempting to print 3D microstructures in glass, femtosecond laser induced chemical etching (FLICE) has proved itself a powerful approach. Here, we demonstrate fabrication of macro-scale 3D glass objects of large heights up to ~3.8 cm with a well-balanced (i.e., lateral vs longitudinal) spatial resolution of ~20 μm. The remarkable accomplishment is achieved by revealing an unexplored regime in the interaction of ultrafast laser pulses with fused silica which results in aberrationfree focusing of the laser pulses deeply inside fused silica. Nowadays ultrafast lasers (i. e., picosecond lasers of pulse durations below tens of picoseconds and femtosecond lasers) have been widely adopted in fabricating three-dimensional (3D) microstructures in various transparent materials Unfortunately, the high-NA focal systems are inherently of short working distances. Thus, the depth of focal position in the glass allowed by the high-NA lens is typically limited to a few millimeters, which is often desirable to be significantly extended. Previously, a simultaneous spatiotemporal focusing (SSTF) scheme was proposed to tackle this problem, which is able to maintain a reasonable axial resolution even with low-NA focal lenses To examine the fabrication resolutions offered by loosely focusing the picosecond laser pulses into fused silica as a function of focal position along the propagation direction, we first inscribe multiple lines as schematically illustrated in Fig. We notice that the cross section of all the inscribed lines shows a similar geometry of nearly circular shape, which are insensitive to the scan speed, depth of focal position as well as the direction of laser writing. The difference is that with an increasing scan speed, the color in the cross section captured under the microscope in a reflective mode becomes lighter, indicating that a weaker modification of fused silica will be generated with the decrease of the irradiation dose at the increasing scan speed. Since in the 3D glass printing with the FLICE, a chemical wet etching must be carried out for selectively removal of the modified fused silica by the laser pulses, it is important to examine the cross section of hollow channels produced after the chemical wet etching in KOH solution, as shown in Fig. Another unexpected observation in the FLICE with the laser pulses of ~10 ps is that nanograting formation can be avoided as we have discussed in another recent publication The optimum inscription condition determined in Fig. Figure At last, we demonstrate an air turbine with movable parts directly fabricated within glass without any assembling process. The model of the air turbine is illustrated in Fig. To conclude, we demonstrate 3D laser printing of glass-based macro-scale objects with heights up to ~4 cm at a resolution of a few tens of micrometers. With the scan speed reaching 40 mm/s and the layer spacing being set at 50 μm as we demonstrate in the current experiments, the fabrication efficiency can be determined to be 0.16 mm 3 /s. Further improvement on the printing efficiency will be done in the near future by combining a 2D galvo scanner with the 2D motion stage. This design will allow both a high printing speed and a large printing area. The novel 3D glass printing technique is established based on two unconventional characteristics in the interaction of loosely focused picosecond laser pulses with fused silica, namely, the depth-independent aberration-free focusing and the elimination of the self-organized nanograting. The physical mechanisms behind these interesting effects have not yet been clarified. We stress that the interaction of ultrafast laser pulses with transparent media under the loose focusing condition is a largely unexplored area of research, which shall inspire significant interest for further investigations. The high-resolution 3D printing of macro-scale objects in glass is expected to have implications in the fields of photonics, microfluidics, and high-precision mechanics. Experimental setup and fabrication process: The experimental setup is schematically illustrated in Fig. The models used for 3D glass micro-printing were originally generated as stereolithography (STL) files. The STL were firstly covered by a cuboid frame, and then underwent a subtraction operation. Afterwards, the 3D models were sliced into horizontal planes with a fixed slice thickness. We scanned the laser focal spot in the sliced planes along the pre-designed paths layer by layer to produce the 3D structures. The scan process was performed from the bottom to the top of the glass. Typically, there are two scan strategies in the stereo lithography fabrication: the raster scan and the contour scan. In the former strategy, the whole volume of the structure should be scanned; whereas for the later one, the laser focal spot only scans along the contour profile of the 3D structure. In our experiment, since the irradiated part of the glass should be removed after wet etching to get the structure, the raster scan had been chosen. Chemical wet etching after the laser irradiation: After the fused silica samples were selectively irradiated by the focused laser pulses as illustrated in the first two panels of Fig. In principle, the results in Fig. 