Whereas there are two critical fields that are H c1 and H c2 in the ideal type II superconductor, there is another critical field H c1 defined as the field showing the maximum diamagnetic property in the real type II superconductor. We would present that H c1 is able to be proved theoretically and experimentally. We have derived an equation based on flux-pinning effect of volume defects. MgB 2 bulks which were synthesized by Mg and B are similar to this model. The number of quantum fluxes pinned at a defect of radius r, a pinning penetration depth, magnetic flux penetration method, and a magnetization at H c1 in the static state are suggested through the equation of the model. It was speculated that pinned fluxes at a volume defect in the superconductor have to be pick-out depinned from the defect and move an inside of the superconductor when pick-out forces of pinned fluxes is larger than pinning force of the defect (F pickout > F pinning ) or when the shortest distance between pinned fluxes at a volume defect is the same as that of H c2 . In reality, ∆G dynamic which is sum of fluxes movement energy and fluxes vibration energy is involved in movement of pinned fluxes. When volume defects are small and many, the number of pinned fluxes at a volume defect calculated by experimental results was closer to that of ideally calculated ones because of a small ∆G dynamic . However, when volume defects are large and a few, the number of pinned fluxes at a volume defect calculated by experimental results were much fewer than that of ideally calculated ones because of a large ∆G dynamic . One of phenomena which have not been clearly explained in superconductors is that diamagnetic property of superconductors increases after H c1 . Field dependences of magnetization of superconductors (M-H curves) show that most of superconductors increase their diamagnetic property by rounded form after H c1 . This is against the definition that superconductors decrease its diamagnetic property after H c1 . Although the increase of the diamagnetic property after H c1 is obvious in almost all of superconductors, superconductor researchers accept it implicitly because most of superconductors showed the general behavior superficially. Generally, it has been understood that there is H c1 and H c2 in the type II superconductor Although many researchers have studied for flux-pinning effects, their results depend only on experimental techniques owing to the absence of proper theory In fact, it is not easy to indicate H c1 in M-H curves whereas it is simple to indicate H c1 , which is just the applied magnetic field of the maximum diamagnetic property in a superconductor. According to the definition of type II superconductor, M-H curve must be a straight line to H c1 and diamagnetic property of the superconductor must decrease owing to flux penetration if applied field increases over H c1 . However, all of real type II superconductor do not reduce their diamagnetic property although applied field passes over H c1 . They show much better diamagnetic property at H c1 than H c1 . It is certain that diamagnetic property increase if penetrated fluxes are pinned at volume defects and do not move an inside of the superconductor. The behavior means that volume defects in a superconductor are another barrier to prevent the fluxes from penetrating into the superconductor. Many researchers have stated that H c1 of MgB 2 is 250 -480 Oe The phenomenon appears not only in VDSs, but also in planar defect-dominating superconductors (PDS) such as high temperature superconductors (HTSC) which were made by solid state reaction method A study for an increase of diamagnetic property after H c1 is that the one of Bean-Livingston (B-L) is unique However, the phenomenon is not limited to SSC, but rather higher in bulks as mentioned. Although B-L condition (a clean surface) is unsatisfied in bulk superconductors, there is an increase of diamagnetic property than that of H c1 . Thus, the effect of B-L and fluxpinning phenomena are concurrently or competitively occurring in SSCs for the increase of diamagnetic property over H c1 because SSCs are not completely free from defects. On the other hand, there is demagnetization factor in superconductors, which means that diamagnetic property is changed depending on its geometry (Fe, Ti) particle-doped MgB 2 specimens were synthesized using the non-special atmosphere synthesis (NAS) method Figure The deviation point from the linear line is the H c1 . Calculated roughly from the figure, H c1 of 5 wt.% specimen at 0 K is almost same as that at 5 K, which is 600 Oe. Figure On the other hand, H c1 of 25 wt.% specimen at 0 K is approximately 500 Oe which is rather lower than the one of 5 wt.% specimen. The decrease of H c1 can be interpreted as a disturbance of the circulating current by over-doping of (Fe, Ti) particle. M-H curves of 5 wt.% specimen and 25 wt.% specimen to 3 kOe are shown in Fig. When magnetic field is applied on a superconductor, which has m 3 volume defects of radius r as shown in Fig. where α is and r is radius of a volume defect. Φ o is flux quantum which is 2.07×10 -7 G•cm 2 , aL is an average length of quantum fluxes which are pinned and bent between volume defects (a is an average bent constant which is 1 < a < 1.2 and L is the distance between defects in vertically packed state), and P is the filling rate which is π/4 when flux quanta are pinned at the volume defect in the form of square The equation shows how many quantum fluxes are pinned at a volume defect of which radius is r in a superconductor when a magnetic field is applied in diamagnetic increase region. We postulate a theory in the assumption that quantum fluxes pinned at a volume defect in the superconductor are pick-out depinned from the defect and move an inside of the superconductor due to two following reasons. The one is when pick-out forces of pinned fluxes are larger than the pinning force of the defect (F pickout > F pinning ). And the other is when the shortest distance between quantum fluxes pinned at a volume defect are the same as that of H c2 . The justification of the latter came from the fact that there is no flux-pinning effect if the neighborhoods of a volume defect are not a superconducting state anymore. Deviating from H c1 linear line means that magnetic fluxes penetrated into an inside of superconductor. And an increase of diamagnetic property after H c1 means that fluxes having penetrated are pinned on volume defects and block the external magnetic field. Diamagnetic property of a superconductor would continue increasing as H is increasing if there are a lot of volume defect. It is because penetrated fluxes still remain near the surface of superconductor due to a lot of volume defects. However, we noticed that there is a limit of pinned fluxes at a volume defect, which is that fluxes pinned at a volume defect definitely pick-out depinned and move into an inside of the superconductor regardless of ∆G def ect if the short distance (d ) between quantum fluxes pinned at a volume defect is the same as that of H c2 . ∆G def ect is defined as free energy density difference between a volume defect and superconductor. H c1 is the field that pinned fluxes at a volume defect have to be pick-out depinned and move regardless of ∆G def ect . Experimentally, H c1 on a M-H curve appears as a vertex or as a broad region which is ∆H=∆B region. H c1 is the vertex of M-H curve in most of superconductors,, but some of the volume defect-dominating superconductors showed a broad region of H c1 in the M-H curve if volume defects in the superconductor is appropriate Penetrating behaviors of magnetic fluxes to H c1 in a superconductor are explained in Fig. . They are calculated by Eq. ( If a magnetic field H c1 is applied to the superconductor, a free energy (FE) density of a superconductor will be raised to ∆G s = H 2 c1 /8π. On the other hand, FE density of a defect in the superconductor will be ∆G n = 0 at H c1 because there is no magnetic fluxes in the defect and it is not superconductor. Magnetic fluxes begin to penetrate into the specimen beyond the H c1 through the surface of the superconductor in the state of flux quantum. Quantum fluxes which have penetrated into the superconductor are willing to move into an inside of specimen by a concentration gradient of quantum fluxes and repulsive force between them, and will be pinned at the defect where FE density is lower than that of the superconductor. In this situation, fluxes had penetrated into the superconductor are pinned at the defect around the surface of the superconductor if volume defects are many enough. If an applied field is raised to H which is parallel to the specimen surface, FE density difference between superconductor and normal state when penetrated magnetic fluxes after H c1 are pinned at volume defects is where B is magnetic induction which are pinned at volume defects after H c1 Therefore, FE density of a spherical defect is where H is an applied field, r is a radius of defect and ∆ n is FE density increase of the defect by pinned fluxes. Generally, B can be ignored in diamagnetic increase region because they are too small. Since the fluxes in the superconductor exist in the state of quantum, they have vortexes of eddy currents. Hence ∆ n is n 2 Φ 2 o /8π, where n is the number of flux quanta pinned at the defect and flux quantum Φ o is 2.07×10 -7 G•cm 2 . Multiplying 2r to ∆ n in Eq. ( where J s is the total supercurrent density due to vortices where n is the number of quantum fluxes which are pinned horizontally at a volume defect, aL is a average length of quantum fluxes which are pinned and bent between defects (a is average bent constant, 1 < a < 1.2) and J s can be expanded to total supercurrent density. These behaviors are explained in Fig. There are several reports for flux-pinning mechanism in superconductor where k is a quantum flux tension constant and x is the displacement from the center of two defects which pinned quantum fluxes to the forefront quantum flux as shown in Fig. The displacement x can be expressed as where d n is the maximum distance among distances between pinned fluxes as defined in the Fig. On the other hand, there might be quantum fluxes which are not pinned at any volume defect when the distance between defects is wide enough. These unpinned fluxes would be present in a compressed state because there are pinned fluxes before them. Thus, they cause the pushing force (F pushing ) to push pinned fluxes forward. Quantum fluxes pinned at a volume defect begin to move by being pick-out depinned if the pinning force and the pushing plus tension forces are same. Thus, Assuming that Q times fluxes of the number of fluxes pinned at a volume defect exist between defects in the compressed state, where J s1 is the current density of circulating flux quantum in a compressed state. It was assumed that the distance between quantum fluxes pinned at a volume defect to the vertical direction is the same as that of horizontal direction and n v (the number of quantum fluxes vertically pinned at the defect) is same as n, thus fluxes pinned at the defect are vertically subjected to the same tension. They will be pick-out depinned and move into an inside of the superconductor if ∆F pickout is larger than ∆F pinning . - On the other hand, the critical current density (J c ) between two flux quanta can be calculated as Silsbee criterion where N is the number of flux quantum in the superconductor and d is the minimum distance between quantum fluxes pinned at a defect, which is shown in Fig. Since the repulsive force between flux quanta are inversely proportional to d , J c of eddy current circulating the flux quantum are also inversely proportional to d /2 by Eq. ( where r is the radius of a volume defect, n 2 is the number of quantum flux pinned at a volume defect and P is filling rate which is π/4 when pinned fluxes have square form. During the calculation, d /2 is derived from the following equation when flux quanta are pinned at a defect in the form of square The average value of J s between d and d have to be inserted into Eq. ( The term 2n 2 Φ 2 o 8π was ignored owing to Φ 2 o . Putting α= aLH c2 Φo When Q is zero, where f r is the pinning force of a defect of which radius is r and m is the number of volume defects which have pinned fluxes to the flux movement direction. Thus, Therefore, the pinning penetration depth of a specimen at H c1 is x = mL , where L is the distance between defects in regular state. Calculated pinning penetration depths for the various states are shown in Fig. where H is H c1 . Calculated diamagnetic property at H c1 in the static state are shown in Fig. The number of flux quanta pinned at a volume defect has been calculated in a static state. However, two terms are added in the dynamic state. Magnetic fluxes in volume defect-dominating superconductor are approaching a volume defect with their velocity because they are pick-out depinned together when they are depinned, thus there would be a kinetic energy. And there would be a vibration energy because fluxes pinned on volume As a distance between volume defects increases, ∆K.E. increases because a large velocity of the quantum fluxes is induced when they are pick-out depinned from the defect. And ∆G vibration increases as the number of flux quanta pinned at a volume defect increase. Thus, as the radius of volume defect increases, flux quanta would be pick-out depinned from the volume defect at a much fewer flux quanta than that of the static state. We believe in that ∆G dynamic would be related with non-equilibrium movement of fluxes (e.g. flux jump). On the other hand, as the radius of volume defects decreases and the number of them increases, ∆G dynamic decreases. Flux quanta penetrated into the superconductor from the outside, are pinned on the volume defects around the surface, and move into an inside of superconductor before the number of them becomes larger as shown Fig. Another problem that breaks an increase of the diamagnetic property in superconductors is flux jump. What the number of fluxes pinned at a volume defect increases means that the number of fluxes moving together also increase because they are moving together when they are pick-out depinned from the defect, which results in generating a lot of heat, and it means a degradation of the superconductor. Therefore, it is believed that flux jumps are dependent on ∆G dynamic . The maximum diamagnetic property of the pure MgB 2 at 5 K is approximately -100 emu/cm 3 , which is shown in Fig. We used 96.6 wt.% purity of the boron in synthesizing pure MgB On the other hand, calculating n 2 of 163 nm radius defect by Eq.( We experimentally showed an increase of diamagnetic property by flux-pinning effect of (Fe, Ti) particle in MgB 2 which is a volume defect-dominating superconductor. And we theoretically proved the phenomenon and suggested relative equations. A new critical field called H c1 was suggested, which is defined as a field showing the maximum diamagnetic property in the real superconductor. As a results of calculation, H c1 depends on radius and the number of volume defect in superconductor which cause flux-pinning effects. When volume defects are large and a few, the experimental results are much lower than the calculated ones because of a large ∆G dynamic which is origin of flux jump. However, when volume defects are small and many, the experimental results are closer to the calculated ones because of a small ∆G dynamic . 