Resistive switching phenomenon in carbon film is associated with formation and annihilation of low resistance sp 2 nanochannels within the amorphous sp 3 matrix. The thinnest point of these graphitic nanochannels behaves like quantum wire (QW) and limits current flow. Transport mechanism at these bottlenecks can be described within the framework of quantum point contact (QPC) model. The model applies mesoscopic Landauer formalism and correlates device resistance state with the density of the nanochannels as well as lateral area of its constriction. However, QPC model parameter extraction from macroscopic I-V characteristic is not feasible due to multiple nonlinear and closely coupled parameters, e.g. barrier height (Φ), barrier curvature (α) and voltage drop ratio (β). In this work, a hybrid genetic algorithm (GA) based parameter extraction flow is proposed and is applied to extract parameters from experimental result of carbon-based resistive memories. In this proposed flow, the number of single subband channels for low resistance state (NLRS) and barrier curvature parameter at high resistance state (αHRS) were first derived by exploring boundary conditions at low voltage. The four remaining parameters (ΦHRS, ΦLRS, αLRS, and β) were then extracted from experimental I-V characteristic by leveraging hybrid GA. Mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) of fitted QPC models is only 3.7% and the extracted parameters are within reasonable range. Hereby, we regard the QPC model as a viable model to describe conduction mechanism of graphitic nanochannels in carbon-based resistive memories. The scaling of conventional charge-based non-volatile memory (NVM) is approaching its inherent physical scaling limitation Schematic of a typical nanochannel is illustrated in Figure where z is the coordinates in the longitudinal direction, kz is the longitudinal coordinates in kspace, m is electron mass, ħ is the reduced Planck constant and εn(z) can be expressed as: The Equation where Nch is the number of conducting channels, e is electron charges, h is Planck constant, f is the Fermi-Dirac distribution and T(E) is the transmission probability. The analytical expression for transmission probability can be expressed as in Equation In which Φ is the barrier height, α describes the curvature of the barrier and is related to barrier thickness (tB) as shown in Equation here, tB is the barrier thickness at the equilibrium Fermi energy. By inserting the transmission coefficient and expanding Equation here, the barrier height (Φ) and barrier curvature (α) describe the shape of the potential barrier and thus the resistance state of the memory device. Meanwhile, the fraction of voltage drop on cathode and anode is represented by β and 1-β respectively. Unknown parameters in the QPC model are typically determined by assuming a fixed value of β and Φ. For instance, Lian et al. Genetic algorithm (GA) is a directed search and optimization algorithm that resembles the natural evolution and biological processes of reproduction. GA can search and optimize multi-dimensional, non-differential and non-continuous problems. Common GA systems include four operators, i.e. (i) fitness function that describes the quality of chromosomes, (ii) selection operator that identifies chromosomes to reproduce, (iii) crossover operator that mates and breeds the next generation of chromosomes, and (v) mutation operator that introduces variation into offspring's chromosomes to get rid of the local minimum where px are the fitting parameters and D represents the number of parameter that need to be extracted from the optimization problems. The fitness of the chromosome is then evaluated with a fitness function (Equation Once the mating candidates are identified, a crossover point is chosen randomly. For example, offspring 1 may inherit parameters at the left of the crossover point from parent 1, and the parameters at the right of crossover point from parent 2. Likewise, offspring 2 may inherit the remaining portion of the parameters from parent 1 and parent 2. The steps will be repeated until the stopping conditions are met. GA is comparatively efficient in locating the vicinity of global optimum; however, it may take an abundant number of function evaluations to converge to the local optimum within the region. In this regard, hybridization of GA with a local search algorithm has been proved to be orders of magnitude better in terms of speed and accuracy Some QPC Parameters such as the number of the single subband conduction channels in LRS (NLRS) can be extracted directly from the boundary conditions. As the nanochannels are fully formed and the potential barrier is minimum in LRS, the current equation can be reduced to be linearly related to V. In this case, the conductance only depends on the total number of conduction channels and Equation 6 can be reduced to an Ohmic relation as in Equation where G0 is the quantum conductance and NLRS represents the total number of single subband conduction channels in LRS. Hereby, we are able to express the NLRS in a function of paramater (β) and low biased experimental conductance in LRS. where VLRS(0) is the smallest non-zero sampled voltage in the LRS experimental data and ILRS(0) is the corresponding current. For HRS, as the current is limited by a single conductive channel (NHRS=1) with a parabolic barrier Observe that the IHRS includes two components. The first term represents the Ohmic component with the equivalent transmission probability of T(E) = exp(-αΦ). The second term is a nonlinear component dominating at high voltage. Therefore, if only low voltage regime is considered, the nonlinear component is negligible and the HRS current can be expressed as: where VHRS(0) is the smallest sample voltage in the HRS experimental data and IHRS(0) is the corresponding current. By replacing NHRS to one, the barrier curvature parameter at HRS (αHRS) can be represented with a function of barrier height (ΦHRS). With these proposed steps, the formula could be reduced to only four unknown parameters, i.e. ΦHRS, ΦLRS, aLRS and β. Both LRS and HRS data can then be fitted simultaneously using simple GA. The fitness function is defined as the average of mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) for both HRS and LRS data: where ILRS and IHRS are experimental currents at LRS and HRS respectively. IQPC-LRS and IQPC-HRS are the simulated current under the corresponding voltage. The simple GA is repeated until the relaxed stopping criteria are met. The interim solution is then to be set as the initial solution for the subsequent interior point local search algorithm. The proposed QPC model parameter extraction flow is summarized in Figure In this paper, the conduction mechanism of carbon-based resistive memories is explained within the framework of QPC model. Landauer theory for the mesoscopic system is applied to model current transport in the graphitic sp 2 nanochannels. The resistance state of the memory device is correlated to the density of nanochannels. In this work, an efficient hybrid GA based QPC model parameter extraction flow is proposed. The QPC model parameters are extracted from experimental data by using the GA together with interior point algorithm. The proposed hybrid flow reduces the accumulated function calls from 14200 to 1613 by introducing an efficient local search algorithm. The simple GA flow is used to locate the proximity of the global minimum while the interior point algorithm is used to refine and locate the optimum solution. Our results indicate that the hybrid GA is faster and more efficient in parameter extraction compared to the homogeneous GA. The extracted parameters are found to be in appropriate range and the MAPE of the resulting QPC models is only 3.72% compared to the experimental results. Hereby, this work affirms that the QPC model is a feasible model to describe the conduction mechanism of graphitic nanochannels in DLC-based resistive memories.