Laser remote sensing represents a powerful tool that enables the accurate measurement of the speed of moving targets. Crucially, most sensing techniques are 2-Dimensional and only enable direct determination of the speed along the line of sight. A disadvantage that is very often overcome using two-dimensional techniques that in many cases are hard to implement and expensive. Here we put forward a novel 3-Dimensional technique that enables the direct and simultaneous measurement of both, the speed and the spin rate of cooperative targets. This technique is based on the use of complex vector light beams, whose polarization and spatial degree of freedom are coupled in a non-separable way. We present experimental evidence of our technique by performing a laboratory proof-ofprinciple experiment. © 2021 Optical Society of America http://dx.doi.org/10.1364/ao.XX.XXXXXX The ability to measure the in situ velocity and spin rate of targets simultaneously is of great relevance in a wide variety of remote sensing applications such as, space docking, medicine, biology or fluid dynamics, to mention just a few Of great relevance in recent time, was the proposal of a novel technique capable to measure the spin rate using a single laser In this work we put forward a novel technique capable to measure in situ and simultaneously both, the velocity and spin rate of a cooperative target, using a single interrogating beam. For this, we take advantage of so-called vector beams, classicallyentangled in their polarization and spatial degrees of freedom (DoF). Vector beams have become topical in recent time due to their unique properties, which have found applications in a wide variety of research fields Vector beams are commonly generated as non-separable superposition of the spatial and polarization degrees of freedom of light. In a cylindrical coordinate system (ρ, φ) they can be expressed as where, êR and êL are the unitary vectors of the circular polarization basis, w is the half width of the beam, and , known as the topological charge, provides the beams with an h amount of orbital angular momentum (OAM) per photon, h being the reduced Plank constant. Further, the coefficients A = cos β and B = sin β (β ∈ [0, π/2]), enable a continuous variation from fully scalar (β = 0, π/2) to fully vector (β = π/4). More over, the terms C = cos θ and D = sin θ (θ ∈ [0, π]), enables to vary the spatial shape of the right circular polarization term, from a single vortex to a superposition of two vortex beams with opposite topological charges. Equation 1 gives rise to an infinite set of vector modes with very diverse polarization and spatial distributions, as shown in Fig. In order to determine simultaneously both orthogonal speeds, longitudinal and spin rate, let's recall first that in general, the transverse component can be determined directly by employing a structured light beam with a transverse profile Φ(r ⊥ ) according to Here, V(r ⊥ ) and ∇ ⊥ represent the velocity and gradient operator, respectively, along the transverse plane. In principle, the transverse structured phase Φ(r ⊥ ) can take any profile but previous knowledge of the target's trajectory enables the appropriate engineering of the same for a further simplification. For example, in the presence of a rotational motion with constant angular velocity Ω, the prove beam can be engineered with a phase of the form Φ = φ , with = 0, to simplify Eq. 2 to ∆ f ⊥ = Ω/2π Notice that for the same value of Ω, ∆ f ⊥ increases proportional to the topological charge ± . The frequency shift ∆ f ⊥ can be measured interferometrically by combining the back-scattered light with a reference beam, from which the rotational speed Ω can be e extracted In our present case, we can use a cylindrical coordinate system to uncouple the motion of the target into two independent motions, a translation along the line of sight, and a rotation along the transverse plane, as illustrated in Fig. where, k = 2π/λ is the magnitude of the wave vector. In the above equation, the first term contains information about the longitudinal velocity, whereas the second term is related to the transverse velocity. Notice whoever that this information is mixed into a single term, making impossible to compute each velocity component independently. One possible way to separate this information is by sequentially illuminating the target with a Gaussian beam followed by a vortex beam exp(i φ) Here we propose a novel approach that enables to determine simultaneously and using a single beam of both, the longitudinal velocity and the rotational rate. For this, we illuminate the target with a vector beam of the form, whose intensity and polarization distribution is shown in Fig. encoded in two orthogonal polarization components. To demonstrate our technique experimentally, we implemented the setup illustrated schematically in Fig. The polarization distribution of the vector beams was reconstructed via Stokes polarimetry. For this, a series of six intensity measurements were recorded, from which the four Stokes parameters defined as, were computed. Here, I H , I V , I D , I A , I L and I R represent the hor-izontal, vertical, diagonal, antidiagonal, left circular and right circular, intensity components of the vector beam, respectively. These required intensities were obtained using a LP, in combination with a QWP and recorded with a CCD camera. Figure As a first step to demonstrate our technique, we calibrated both, the translation stage and the rotor. Figure It is easy to imagine the highly probable scenario in which, both motions can produce overlapped or very close frequency peaks. Figure Figure In short, we have proposed a novel technique that enables the simultaneous determination of both, the longitudinal velocity and rotation rate of cooperative targets. This technique relies on the use of vector beams formed by the non-separable superposition of the spatial and polarization degree of freedom. In this way, while one spatial degree of freedom inquires the target about its longitudinal velocity, the other inquires it about its rotation rate. Given that each spatial shape is encoded on two orthogonal polarizations, each velocity information can be unambiguously measured upon detection. For this, the assumption that back-scattered light preserves its helicity is crucial, an assumption that requires the size of the scatters to be larger with respect to the wavelength of the interrogating beam. Even though here we only presented a proof-of-principle experiment where an SLM was used to generate the required vector beam, there exist other means to generate vector beams, which can be both, compact and inexpensive. Hence, our technique can be easily incorporated into existing laser remote devices, which at the moment can only measure the longitudinal velocity, to produce a device with the capability to measure also the rotation or spin rate of remote targets.