We study thermal transport induced by soliton dynamics in a long Josephson tunnel junction operating in the flux-flow regime. A thermal bias across the junction is established by imposing the superconducting electrodes to reside at different temperatures, when solitons flow along the junction. Here, we consider the effect of both a bias current and an external magnetic field on the thermal evolution of the device. In the flux-flow regime, a chain of magnetically-excited solitons rapidly moves along the junction driven by the bias current. We explore the range of bias current triggering the flux-flow regime at fixed values of magnetic field, and the stationary temperature distribution in this operation mode. We evidence a steady multi-peaked temperature profile which reflects on the average soliton distribution along the junction. Finally, we analyse also how the friction affecting the soliton dynamics influences the thermal evolution of the system. The possibility of mastering the local temperature of a long Josephson junction (LJJ) by acting on solitonic excitations is scientifically intriguing and it has an applicative potential in fast heat mastering. Since a soliton is a magnetic flux quantum surrounded by a loop of dissipationless supercurrents, how can it affect thermal transport through the system? In this regard, it was recently discussed theoretically In this paper we give a further insight in the research field of phase-dependent caloritronics based on LJJs. In fact, here we explore the effects of both an external magnetic field and a bias current on thermal transport through a temperature-biased LJJ. In particular, we investigate the so-called flux-flow regime The number of applications in different fields based on LJJs is still nowadays growing This paper is organised as follows. In the next section both the sine-Gordon equation and thermal model are presented. In section 3 the theoretical results, including the temperature dynamics as a function of the bias current, the external magnetic field, and the damping parameter, are shown and analysed. Finally, in section 4 the conclusions are drawn. The system is driven by both an external magnetic field, H ext (t), applied in both sides of the device and a homogeneous bias current, I b , flowing through the junction, see Fig. In this formulation, we used normalized space and time variables, x = x/λ J and t = ω p t, respectively, where λ J = Φ 0 2πμ 0 1 t d Jc is the Josephson penetration depth and ω p = 2π Φ 0 Jc C is the Josephson plasma frequency. Here, we introduced the critical current area density J c = I c /(L × W ) (where L and W are the length and the width of the junction, respectively) and the effective magnetic thickness The Josephson penetration depth λ J represents the main length-scale in our system, so that the junction is called "long" when its length and width, in units of λ J , read L = L/λ J 1 and W = W/λ J 1, respectively. Moreover, λ J roughly indicates also the width of a soliton where σ = ±1 is the polarity (so that the + sign indicates a soliton and the -sign indicates an antisoliton) and u is the speed of the soliton, given in units of the Swiharts velocity c = λ J ω p An external magnetic field, H ext , affects the phase dynamics, since it is accounted ‡ For moderate fluxon velocities, the effective damping term including both the quasiparticle tunneling and the surface current losses can be accounted by α ef f = α + β/3 by boundary conditions of Eq. ( The coefficient is called the first critical field of a LJJ In Ref. Dτ s , where D = σ N /(e 2 N F ) is the diffusion constant (with σ N and N F being the electrical conductivity in the normal state and the density of states at the Fermi energy, respectively) and τ s is the quasiparticle scattering lifetime Here, the rhs represents the variations of internal energy density of S 2 and the lhs terms indicate the spatial heat diffusion, taking into account the inhomogeneous electronic heat conductivity, κ(T 2 ), and both the phase-dependent incoming, i.e., P in (T 1 , T 2 , φ, V ), and the outgoing, i.e., P e-ph (T 2 , T bath ), thermal power densities in S 2 . The phase-dependent thermal power density flowing from S 1 to S 2 reads In the adiabatic regime where f (E, T ) is the Fermi distribution function and N j (ε, T ) = Re is the reduced superconducting density of state, with ∆ j (T j ) and γ j being the BCS energy gap and the Dynes broadening parameter The term P e-ph in Eq. ( where is the electron-phonon coupling constant, and ζ is the Riemann zeta function. Here, we are assuming that the lattice phonons of the superconductor are very well thermalized with the substrate that resides at T bath , thanks to the vanishing Kapitza resistance between thin metallic films and the substrate at low temperatures Finally, in Eq. ( and κ(T 2 ) is the electronic heat conductivity For gaining insight in thermal transport through the junction, it only remains to include in Eq. ( In the present study, we consider an Nb/AlO x /Nb tunnel LJJ characterized by a normal resistance per area R a = 50 Ω μm 2 and a specific capacitance C = 50 f F/μm 2 . The linear dimensions (L × W × d 2 ) of the junction are set to (150 × 0.5 × 0.1) μm and d = 1 nm is the thickness of the insulating layer. For Nb electrodes, we assume λ 0 L = 80 nm, σ N = 6.7 × 10 6 Ω -1 m -1 , Σ = 3 × 10 9 Wm -3 K -5 , N F = 10 47 J -1 m -3 , ∆ 1 (0) = ∆ 2 (0) = ∆ = 1.764k B T c (with T c = 9.2 K being the Nb critical temperature), and γ 1 = γ 2 = 10 -4 ∆. We impose a thermal gradient across the system, specifically, the bath resides at T bath = 4.2 K, and S 1 resides at a temperature T 1 = 7 K kept fixed throughout the computation. This value of the temperature T 1 assures the maximal soliton-induced heating in S 2 , for a bath residing at T bath = 4.2 K The electronic temperature T 2 (x, t) of the electrode S 2 is the key quantity to master thermal transport across the junction, since it can modulate under the influence of both the external magnetic field and the bias current. By taking into account the specific temperature-dependence in both t d (T 1 , T 2 ) and J c (T 1 , T 2 ) The evolution of the temperature T 2 at fixed values of bias current I b = 0.2 and magnetic field H = 1.75 is shown in Fig. where ... stands for the integer part of the argument. The mean voltage across the junction can be estimated as according to the a.c. Josephson relation Then, despite the fast soliton dynamics, the flux-flow regime triggered by the bias current results in a peculiar temperature profile along the junction. In Fig. In Fig. The effect of the magnetic field on the temperature T 2 is well outlined in Fig. Although the timescale of the solitonic evolution is generally shorter than the timescale of thermal relaxation processes , the results discussed so far show that solitoninduced thermal effects emerge also in the flux-flow regime, that is when a chain of The Swihart velocity can be of the order of c ∼ 10 7 m/s. Thus, a soliton moving at a speed equal, for instance, to 0.1 c takes approximatively 7 ps to cover a distance roughly equal to the length scale of the system ∼ λ J 7 μm. Conversely, in a Nb-junction the estimated thermal response time is of the order of a fraction of nanosecond Thus, to understand the thermal response in the flux-flow regime, we can define the time average of the normalized local magnetic field along the junction as where t 0 is the time at which flux-flow starts and T p is a much longer time than the typical timescale of the solitonic evolution. The H in (x, t) t profile obtained for H = 1.75 and I b = 0.16 is shown in Fig. Since the peaked behaviour of the temperature profile along the junction can be mainly ascribed to the phase-dependent contribution in Eq. ( ¶ A similar surfing soliton dynamics was also previously discussed investigating the behaviour of SG chiral soliton lattice in helimagnetic structures in the presence of a magnetic field Finally, we observe that in this work we are neglecting noisy effects eventually induced by stochastic thermal fluctuations affecting both the phase dynamics and the thermalization process. In other words, we could in principle include stochastic whitenoise sources into both the SG equation In this paper we study thermal transport in a temperature-biased LJJ operating in the flux-flow regime. Specifically, the electrodes forming the junction reside at different temperatures and the device is driven by both a bias current, I b , and a magnetic field, H. The magnetic field used is close to the threshold value, H thr = 2, the latter being the magnetic field, in normalized units, above which solitons enter a junction also in the absence of a bias current. In this case the fluxon density along the junction is not very high and we can suppose to highlight soliton-induced well-localized thermal effects in the system. We observe that, by increasing the bias current, as soon as the junction enters in the flux-flow mode, the temperature profile along the junction modifies. Despite in this regime solitons rapidly move along the junction, the temperature tends to rise just in specific points, depending mainly on the value of the applied magnetic field. In fact, by increasing further the magnetic field a multi-peaked structure in the temperature emerges. Specifically, we compare thermal evolutions obtained by setting the normalized magnetic field to an underthreshold value H = 1.75 and to H = H thr = 2. We study also the number of fluxons and the mean voltage drop across the junction as a function of the bias current, to highlight the I b values triggering the flux-flow regime. Finally, we investigate how the friction affecting the phase dynamics enters into play in the thermal evolution of the system. Specifically, we study how a change in the damping parameter α influences the stationary temperature profiles along the junction. Our findings are important for understanding the interplay between soliton dynamics and thermal evolution in a LJJ, in those conditions in which, despite the extremely rapid time evolution of the Josephson phase should suggest the absence of relevant thermal effects, we are still able to highlight the emergence of intriguing phenomena. Markedly, we observe that, starting from a homogeneous system, we finally observe some inhomogeneously-distributed temperature profiles. The initial symmetry of the system is indeed broken by the applied bias current, which forces the soliton to move in a specific direction. Since thermal effects that we discussed are independent on the polarity of the magnetically-excited soliton, similar temperature configurations can be obtained by inverting both the bias current flowing direction and the polarity of the solitons, the latter depending on the direction of the in-plane external magnetic field. as a function of x, at fixed values of I b = 0.2 and H = 1.75, by varying the damping parameter α ∈ [0.1 -1].