Lieb lattice, a two-dimensional edge-depleted square lattice, has been predicted to host various exotic electronic properties due to its unusual band structure, i.e., Dirac cone intersected by a flat band (Dirac-flat bands). Until now, although a few artificial Lieb lattices have been discovered in experiments, the realization of a Lieb lattice in a real material is still unachievable. In this article, based on tight-binding modeling and first-principles calculations, we predict that the two covalent organic frameworks (COFs), i.e., sp 2 C-COF and sp 2 N-COF, which have been synthesized in the recent experiments, are actually the first two material realizations of organic-ligand-based Lieb lattice. It is found that the lattice distortion can govern the bandwidth of the Dirac-flat bands and in turn determine its electronic instability against spontaneous spin-polarization during carrier doping. The spin-orbit coupling effects could drive these Dirac-flat bands in a distorted Lieb lattice presenting nontrivial topological properties, which depend on the position of Fermi level. Interestingly, as the hole doping concentration increases, the sp 2 C-COF can experience the phase transitions from a paramagnetic state to a ferromagnetic one and then to a Néel antiferromagnetic one. Our findings not only confirm the first material realization of Lieb lattice in COFs, but also offer a possible way to achieve tunable topology and magnetism in d-(f-) orbital-free organic lattices. The electronic properties of a crystal are determined by its crystalline lattice symmetry. Lieb lattice, a two-dimensional (2D) edge-depleted square lattice (Fig. Although it is found that the Lieb lattice is extremely difficult to be realized in an inorganic material, it is still possible to realize such a lattice in an organic one, as the structural flexibility allows an organic system exhibiting diverse crystalline symmetries In this article, using tight-binding (TB) modeling and first-principles density-functional theory (DFT) calculations, we find that the electronic and topological properties of a Lieb lattice can be effectively modulated by its lattice distortions. Interestingly, we discover that sp 2 C-COF and sp 2 N-COFs, which are synthesized in recent experiments Three-band Lieb Lattice Models. We begin with the three-band tight-binding Hamiltonian of Lieb lattice (without SOC effects), including one corner and two edge sites in a 2D line-centered square lattice unitcell: hopping integrals, respectively, as shown in Fig. For an ideal Lieb lattice, the on-site energy of the three sites are identical, i.e., E , = dE 2 ⁄ = 0 and E 4 = E 5 = -dE 2 ⁄ = 0. Then, we can calculate the (three-band) electronic structure of an ideal Lieb lattice. When the NNN hopping is not included, as shown in Fig. where λ is the SOC constant and d &W (d W-) denotes the unit vector from edge (corner) site i (k) to corner (edge) site k (j) (see Fig. For dE = 0 (Fig. When dE = dE `, Δ , = 0, as shown in Fig. When dE > dE ` (Fig. The topological properties of each band can be characterized by its spin Chern number, due to the spin degeneracy and conservation of Sz. The spin Chern number for the nth band is defined as C R S = (C R↑ -C R↓ )/2, and C Re is Chern number for the spin-σ (σ =↑, ↓) of the nth band, which can be calculated from the integral of the Berry curvature over the whole BZ Here, we mainly pay our attention to the band edges, especially for the top three valence bands, i.e., VB1-VB3 marked in Figs. The wavefunction distributions of energy bands can be better understood by the ligand-based MOs than AOs in a COF. Generally, the band edges in a ligand lattice are formed by the HOMOs and LUMOs of the ligands, respectively Since VB1-VB3 in these two COFs are similar to that of three-band distorted Lieb lattice model, we can further understand the band dispersions of VB1-VB3 using TB band fitting of DFT calculations. Overall, we find that the differences of VB1-VB3 band dispersions in these two COFs are mainly determined by the difference of dE between the HOMOs of corner and edge sites in these two systems. It is found that dE determines the size of ∆ , , i.e., the larger the dE, the larger the ∆ , will be (without SOC effects). Meanwhile, ∆ , can in turn determine the band dispersion of VB1, i.e., the larger the ∆ , , the flatter the VB1 will be. In addition, the interfacial torsion angle between the corner and edge ligands in the sp 2 C-COF is larger than that in the sp 2 N-COF (see Figs. S3b and S3e in the Supplementary Materials). The larger torsion angle can reduce the conjugation in a larger degree in the COF and lead to a smaller t , . Therefore, the larger dE and torsion angles in sp 2 C-COF than in sp 2 N-COF can give rise to a flatter VB1 in sp 2 C-COF, agreeing well with the DFT results. On the other hand, our understandings suggest a possible way to design flat bands in organic lattices, as the flat bands could have great importance for realizing many novel physical phenomena. Similarly, the bottom three conduction bands (CB1-CB3), formed by the LUMOs of the edge and corner ligands, can also be understood by the MOs-based Lieb lattice model. The TB band fitting of CB1-CB3 within Lieb lattice model is shown in Fig. Figure According to the Stoner model 32 , the FM of iterative carriers can arise from partially occupied (except for the case of half-filling Although the magnetism originates from the many-body effects, which are usually underestimated by the mean-field approximation (MFA) within the DFT methods, the spin-polarized ground states of similar weakly-correlated systems have been correctly evaluated To estimate the FM transition temperature (Tc), we have performed Monte Carlo (MC) simulations within the 2D anisotropic Heisenberg model (See Method section for details), which is successfully applied to simulate the Tc of many 2D systems Employing the Monte Carlo simulations within the 2D anisotropic Heisenberg model, we further show nh dependent magnetic phase diagram of sp 2 C-COF in Fig. In conclusion, based on TB modeling and first-principles calculations, we predict that the sp 2 C-COF and sp 2 N-COF, which have been synthesized in the recent experiments, are actually the first two material realizations of organic-ligand-based Lieb lattices. The lattice distortion and inequivalent corner and edge sites make the electronic structures of these two systems deviate from the ideal Dirac-flat bands in a Lieb lattice. Interestingly, these two COF systems can be converted to the FM and AFM states at certain nh due to the less dispersive top valence bands, which can explain the experimental observations of FM phases in the two COFs during iodine oxidization. Our discovery not only can extend our understanding on the electronic and topological properties of distorted Lieb lattices, but also offers a possible way to realize exotic magnetic states in frustrated organic lattices, which opens the possibility to design the novel organic spintronic devices. DFT calculations. Our ab initio calculations for the electronic structures of periodic structures were carried out within the framework of the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof generalized gradient approximation (PBE-GGA) The Berry curvature Ω R (k) of the nth band can be determined as where ψ R (k) and ε Rk are the spinor Bloch wave function and eigenvalue of the nth band at k point, and v ˆ(•) is the velocity operator. The total Chern number 