Magnetic skyrmions are nanoscale spin configurations that are efficiently created and manipulated. They hold great promises for next-generation spintronics applications. In parallel, the interplay of magnetism, superconductivity and spin-orbit coupling has proved to be a versatile platform for engineering topological superconductivity predicted to host non-abelian excitations, Majorana zero modes. We show that topological superconductivity can be induced by proximitizing skyrmions and conventional superconductors, without need for additional ingredients. Apart from a previously reported Majorana zero mode in the core of the skyrmion, we find a more universal chiral band of Majorana modes on the edge of the skyrmion. We show that the chiral Majorana band is effectively flat in the physically relevant parameter regime, leading to interesting robustness and scaling properties. In particular, the number of Majorana modes in the (nearly-)flat band scales with the perimeter length of the system, while being robust to local disorder. Magnetic skyrmions are nano-or meso-scale whirling spin configurations of topological nature which gives them some stability and long lifetime. Magnetic skyrmions have been found in a variety of non-centrosymmetric magnets 1 , in ultrathin magnetic films Evidence that magnetic skyrmions can be driven by ultralow electric current densities In parallel to these developments, the search for Majorana modes in condensed-matter systems has been the focus of great attention, motivated by their potential application in quantum computation. Various systems have been considered as hosts for topological superconductivity and Majorana modes, based on the paradigm of combining ferromagnetic order with strong spin-orbit coupling and conventional superconductivity. The paradigm led to successes in predicting An alternative approach to engineering topological superconductors while circumventing these two challenges could be to remove the spin-orbit coupling ingredient, and instead consider a non-collinear magnetic texture proximitized by a conventional superconductor In fact, our results are relevant for a broader class of skyrmion-like textures, such as magnetic bubbles For systems with translational symmetry there is a theoretical classification of topological superconducting phases, and predictions for a corresponding CMEM along a given edge of the system In our case, the skyrmion is an inhomogeneous texture so these methods cannot be directly used to explain the observed robustness and near-flatness of the CMEM. We however deduce the underlying topological protection of the skyrmion's CMEM by a mapping to a cylinder geometry. Although this construction requires rotational symmetry of the skyrmion, the CMEM by its nature provides robustness against small deformations of the shape of the system. Further, we identify the chiral symmetry that would protect a strict MFB (instead of a CMEM), and show that this symmetry is only weakly broken by the skyrmion texture, leading to a nearly flat CMEM and providing further protection against low-energy perturbations. Finally, we will discuss potential material realizations, and possibilities for manipulation of Majorana states within the nearly-flat CMEM. Consider a two-dimensional (2D) magnetic thin film hosting a skyrmion, which is represented by a classical magnetization texture written in polar coordinates r = (r, θ), where f (r) is a radial profile that we will specify shortly. We study such a thin film proximitized by a conventional s-wave superconductor (Fig. , where ψ σ (r) annihilates an electron with spin σ at position r in 2D, the total Hamiltonian H can be written as H = 1 2 dr Ψ † (r) H (r) Ψ (r), with the Bogoliubov-de-Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian H (r) defined as where the s-wave superconducting order parameter ∆ 0 is taken real without loss of generality, the electron effective mass is m and the chemical potential is μ. We set = 1 unless explicitly written otherwise. The σ α and τ α (α = x, y, z) are Pauli matrices acting in spin and particle-hole space, respectively. We thus assume that the skyrmion affects the electrons only through the exchange field, which is justified in the limit of strong local exchange interaction. We further consider the limit where the effective spin-orbit coupling is dominated by the one induced by the skyrmion exchange field. This is justified if both intrinsic and Rashba spin-orbit couplings are relatively weak, which we argue in the discussion section to be the case in a typical superconducting material such as aluminium. The inclusion of intrinsic and Rashba spinorbit couplings would require another in-depth study due to the loss of rotational symmetry, and due to the non-trivial interplay of different effective spin-triplet pairings introduced by these couplings. In the limit that we consider in this work, in absence of skyrmion the spinorbit length in the superconductor l so = 1/(mα), with α a spin-orbit amplitude, is much larger than the typical lengthscale of the skyrmion, so that the magnetoelectric coupling and appearance of vortices can also be neglected The skyrmion is parametrized by three numbers: the radial winding number p, which counts the number of spin flips as one moves radially away from the core of the skyrmion; the azimuthal winding number q, which counts the number of spin flips as one winds around the origin; and finally the skyrmion radius R sk , which determines its size. We consider a hard-wall boundary condition at the edge i.e. at r = R sk . Formally this can be realized by having the exchange J = 0 in the magnetic insulator outside the edge, which might be experimentally unattainable. However a simple alternative is to deposit the superconductor in form of an island, whose edge would naturally become the edge in our model. In such a setup it is natural to consider various geometrical shapes of the edge given a fixed underlying magnetic texture. For simplicity, the function f (r) is chosen to be linear, defining a straightforward skyrmion texture as in Fig. We first solve the model in Eq. ( We further clarify the edge states and topological superconductivity by looking at the spectrum ε(m J ), in which edge states form a seemingly flat band in a range of m J values, see Fig. Note that in contrast, we find a single Majorana zero mode at the core of the skyrmion only if the skyrmion's azimuthal winding number q is even 26 . This is easily understood since the zero mode must appear in the self-conjugate angular momentum m J = 0 sector, while m J is quantized to be integer (resp. half-odd-integer) when q is even (odd) due to the single-valuedness of the wavefunction. The existence of edge states indicates that skyrmions of any q induce topological superconductivity. In order to explain the origin of the edge states we use a procedure introduced by Wu et al. Explicitly, we use the rotation symmetry, i.e. the total angular momentum m J basis (see Methods Radial tight-binding model), then we apply the unitary transformation U (r) = exp(iσ y f (r)/2) to align the exchange field with the z-axis at each point of radial distance r, and finally we apply the mapping to the cylinder. The resulting Hamiltonian H cyl m J (r) can be written as the sum of three parts, , where: For our purpose it is sufficient to show that the edge modes and the effective gap (the energy gap in the m J = 0 sector) of the original model Eq. ( / (2mR 2 sk ). (Note however that the skyrmion-induced effective spin-orbit coupling in 2D is not of a simple Rashba type.) At each m J the superconducting wire Hamiltonian H wire m J (r) is well known to be in a trivial state (J < ∆ 2 0 + μ(m J ) 2 ) or in a topological state 49,50 (J > ∆ 2 0 + μ(m J ) 2 ). For each topological wire there is a single Majorana zero mode localized at the end of the wire, i. radius R sk /a = 200, the chemical potential μ/t = 0, the s-wave pairing amplitude ∆ 0 /t = 0.1, the exchange interaction strength J/t = 0.2, radial winding number p = 6 and azimuthal winding number q = 2 for b. For c, the cylinder radius and height are both 200 a while μ/t = 0, ∆ 0 /t = 0.1, J/∆ 0 = 2, p = 6 and q = 2. where where all energies are in units of the bandwidth t, all distances are in units of the lattice spacing a (see Supplementary Note 1 and Supplementary Figure the wire is at the topological transition and has a gapless spectrum, giving our model a bulk-gap-closing point as shown in Fig. The MFB found here has a protection by a chiral symmetry, as MFB's were found to have in models with translational symmetries that anticommutes with the Hamiltonian (see Eq. ( We can now proceed to the relevant model for a skyrmion with arbitrary q = 0: The single term H slope m J (r) breaks the chiral symmetry Ξ, and there are no other chiral operators. The term H slope m J (r) exactly contributes an energy ε edgestate (m J ) ∼ m J to an MFB state at m J , making the flat MFB into a linearly dispersing chiral Majorana edge mode (CMEM) of the q = 0 skyrmion (Fig. The number of states in the single CMEM of a perfectly rotationally symmetric system is given simply by the highest angular momentum that is reached by the edge states, i.e. m * J , and therefore scales linearly with the perimeter of a disk-shaped system centered on the rotationally symmetric skyrmion (see Eq. ( We substantiate the perimeter hypothesis with an extensive analysis of a 2D square-lattice tight-binding discretization of the skyrmion model Eq. ( Next we consider two more geometries where the edge of the system is far from a circle and count their edge states as the overall system size is varied (see Supplementary Note 4 Defining the geometries and edge state counting and Supplementary Figure The results for the number of edge states vs. the perimeter of the edge are displayed in Fig. To further investigate the robustness of the states forming the single nearly-flat CMEM, we notice that the states in the CMEM seem to locally hybridize where the shape of the edge has sharp features. Sharp features in the edge shape allow the edge-state wavefunctions to overlap as they decay perpendicularly to the edge. Therefore the "elastic perimeter law" demonstrated in Fig. In summary, we have shown that a system composed of a magnetic skyrmion coupled to a conventional s-wave superconductor realizes a topological superconducting phase with a nearly dispersionless chiral Majorana mode at its edge. Deforming the edge of the skyrmion away from a circular shape shows that the number of edge states can be tuned and scales linearly with the perimeter of the edge. As skyrmions usually appear in ferromagnetic thin films, we also considered the effect of (see Supplementary Note 4 Defining the geometries and edge state counting). In all geometries, the underlying skyrmion texture has azimuthal winding number q = 1. The other model parameters are the spin-flip length λ/a = 16, the s-wave order parameter ∆ 0 /t = 0.1, the chemical potential μ/t = 0 and the exchange interaction strength J/t = 0.2. For geometry 1, the radial winding number is p = 9 while for geometry 2 and 3, the skyrmion has p = 6 and p = 9, respectively. The graphic for black disks (geometry 1) shows the real-space image of the local density of states of one typical low-energy state. Graphics for red triangles and blue squares (geometry 2 and 3, respectively) show the local density of states averaged over the 30 lowest-energy states. The colorbar represents the local density of states from low (black) to high (red) values with different scales for the three geometries. Top inset: linear slope extracted for each geometry. The gray shading indicates error bars from the fitting procedure. The black horizontal line is the average slope estimated to be 0.12(1) a -1 where a is the lattice spacing. a ferromagnetic background on the edge states. For this purpose, in the radial tight-binding model we move the boundary of the system farther than the edge of the skyrmion, filling the added space with a ferromagnetic exchange field without changing the strength of the interaction J. We find that the edge states initially localized at the edge of the skyrmion delocalize in the background, as seen in Supplementary Note 6 and Supplementary Figure This can be understood rather simply because the superconductor is gapless in that region. The delocalization of the edge states is consistent with the analytical treatment of Yang et al 26 . Our analysis is carried out in the Bogoliubov-de Gennes formalism without self-consistency. We believe that a self-consistent calculation would not change our main conclusions since self-consistent calculations 52,53 on similar systems related to one-dimensional wire Hamiltonians, to which we map the skyrmion, didn't show any qualitative change of the physics. The only effects would then be expected near the topological phase transition where the gap is small. In our case, this may for example slightly shift the value of m * J defined in Eq. ( The chirality of our CMEM is determined by the azimuthal winding number q, so the questions arise whether the CMEM appears in other textures that have azimuthal winding, and whether chiral materials are necessary. First, note that our texture definition in Eq. ( The realization of topological superconductivity and the edge states in our system puts constraints on the parameter values. We consider three requirements for successful realization: (i) A substantial effective p-wave gap in the m J = 0 sector, e.g. ∆ eff /∆ 0 > 5%. An estimate of the effective gap 47 based on the skyrmion-induced spin-orbit coupling and chemical potential μ (m J ) = μm 2 J + q 2 4 /R 2 sk ≈ μ when R sk large, is given by where λ = R sk /p is the spin-flip length. In this formula, all energy scales are in units of hopping energy t which determines the bandwidth and we take it to be t ∼ 1 eV; the unit lengthscale in the formula is the lattice spacing a whose dimensionful value should correspond to the microscopic electron lengthscale, so we take a ∼ 0.1 nm. The requirement (i) now says that the exchange strength cannot be too large, i.e. J/t < 600 a/R sk , assuming p 10. Since in materials generically J ∼ 1 -10 meV, the skyrmion size is allowed to reach micrometers. The second requirement is that: (ii) The topological regime is reached, so that the exchange scale J surpasses the superconducting pairing ∆ 0 . This means ∆ 0 is below the 1 -10 meV range, or the coherence length is in the range 10 -100 nm, which is generally realistic. The final requirement is that: (iii) The CMEM is localized at the edge, i.e., the localization length of the edge-state wavefunctions (estimated to be a • t/∆ eff ) has to be an order of magnitude smaller than the skyrmion radius R sk . From Eq. ( For the superconducting part of our setup, we propose aluminum which is a known superconductor and has negligible atomic spin-orbit coupling, in accord with our general assumption that Rashba and intrinsic spin-orbit couplings are sufficiently weak. First of all, disordered thin films of aluminium have a critical temperature of the order of 3K with a coherence length of around 50 nm 54,55 or less, which is within our theoretically relevant range. Second, direct measurements of the Rashba spin-orbit coupling in such thin films are hard to come by, but we find an estimate of E so /∆ 0 = 5% for the ratio of energy scale E so of spin-orbit scattering to the energy scale ∆ 0 of s-wave pairing in thin-film aluminum 56 . The skyrmion-induced spin-orbit energy scale E so = (π 2 /2m) • (p 2 /R 2 ) [cf. derivation of the wire model, Eq. ( For the experimental realization of our findings we propose that the magnetic material be insulating so as to protect the CMEM. From the materials perspective, there are currently two known insulators hosting skyrmions, Cu 2 OSeO 3 and BaFe 12-x-0.05 Sc x Mg 0.05 O 19 (x = 1.6) We note that in BaFe 12-x-0.05 Sc x Mg 0.05 O 19 (x = 1.6) the skyrmions are larger, but could be within the upper limit of the tens-of-nanometers range we consider for this parameter. If these magnetic insulators could be grown on a metallic substrate, then one may consider a finite superconducting island deposited on top of the system making the system suitable for Scanning Tunneling Microscopy/Spectroscopy (STM/STS) experiments. Additionally, our model might also apply to the case of a metallic magnet, although feedback effects between the texture and the electrons (not considered here) can be important The biggest challenge in the experimental verification of our findings lies in the choice of the materials. Indeed, both ingredients (skyrmions and superconductivity) are separately well-controlled and well-understood, but little is known about their combination. In particular, we expect that the strength of the exchange field will depend on the achieved interfacing between the magnetic and superconducting materials, which is hard to predict. Recent works aiming at engineering topological superconductivity by using magnetic adatoms or external magnetic fields have shown interesting possibilities, which means that bringing together the magnetism/spintronics and topological superconductivity communities holds great promises. Acknowledgement: The rotational symmetry of the problem can be exploited by defining the total angular momentum operator J z around the z axis perpendicular to the plane of motion of the electrons. In polar coordinates (r, θ), it is defined as J z = L z + q 2 σ z where L z = -i∂ θ is the orbital angular momentum. Denoting the eigenvalues of J z as m J , we can expand the electronic field operators as The Nambu spinor Ψ (r) can thus be expanded as where T . We conveniently rescale the spinor by √ r so that the rdrdθ measure simplifies to drdθ. After all these transformations, the BdG Hamiltonian is block-diagonal in angular momentum space and a single block H m J (r) reads We discretize the remaining polar r variable by introducing a lattice spacing a so that r → r j = ja, and in numerical calculations we set a = 1. The nearest-neighbor tightbinding Hamiltonian uses the Nambu basis . We parametrize the tight-binding Hamiltonian as Now, we Taylor expand Eq. ( The tight-binding hopping energy t = 1/ (2ma 2 ) in terms of the effective electron mass m. We exactly diagonalize the Hamiltonian in the form of Eq. ( On the square lattice r = (xa, ya) where a ≡ 1 is the lattice spacing, and x, y are integers labelling the sites of the lattice, the two-dimensional tight-binding Hamiltonian is where the parameters are the same as in the main text, and t is the hopping amplitude, μ the chemical potential measured from the bottom of the band, ∆ 0 the s-wave gap and J the exchange coupling with the texture. The unit vector in the x (resp. y) direction is denoted as x (resp. ŷ). Exact diagonalization is then performed without implementing the self-consistency inherent to the Bogoliubov-de-Gennes formalism. Consistently with the radial model, in the regime of J/∆ 0 large enough (estimated as ) and for any q we find weakly-dispersing states extended around the edge and localized in the radial direction near R sk , while only for q even there is a zero energy state localized at the skyrmion center. As in Wu et al 48 , consider a cone of half-opening angle φ and base radius R sk where the coordinates r and θ respectively denote the distance measured from the tip of the cone and the usual polar angle. Denoting by r and θ the unit vectors on the cone, the gradient and Laplace operators read The cylinder limit is φ = 0, r → ∞ while keeping r sin φ = const = R sk . Under the transformation from the disk to the cylinder via the cone, the surface element varies like r dr dθ → r sin φ dr dθ → R sk dr dθ. of radius R sk /a = 100 and azimuthal winding number q = 2 with parameters ∆ 0 /t = 0.1, J/t = 0.2. For these parameters μ * /t = J 2 -∆ 2 0 = 0.17(32). a μ/t = 0 < μ * /t, b μ/t = μ * /t and c μ/t = 0.2 > μ * /t. The gray areas show the topologically non-trivial momentum ranges while the vertical dashed orange lines mark the gap-closing momenta. Supplementary Figure The effective p-wave gap ∆ eff being estimated by Eq. ( where all energies are in units of the bandwidth t. We next compare this estimate to the numerical results in the radial tight-binding skyrmion model, see Supplementary Figure First, we have calculated numerically the expectation value σ z τ z MFBstate and indeed found typical values ≈ 0.44 of order unity. Supplementary Figure In the case of non-circular edge shape, we straightforwardly generalize the edge state counting . Note that our geometries 2 and 3 are formed by adding an outward bulge to the circular edge of geometry 1. Therefore for simplicity we define as an edge state any state that satisfies R max ≥ R skl. This criterion is less precise and may slightly overestimate the number of edge states. For simplicity we examine only the eigenstates whose energy is below ∆ eff /4, recalling that the highest edge state energy is expected to be ε * ≈ ∆ eff /10. In all studied cases the energy cutoff is ≈ 0.05∆ 0 . In all geometries presented here (1, 2 and 3), the variation of the perimeter was achieved by changing the overall spatial scale while keeping the number of sites per spin-flip the same. The elliptic geometry is defined simply by replacing the two-disk construction of Supplementary Figure The selection criterion for edge states is a simple generalization of the circular case (geometry 1) since the location of points on the edge of the ellipse is simply defined in cartesian coordinates. The perimeter is increased by changing the aspect ratio of the ellipse while keeping its surface area constant, starting from p = 16, q = 2 and λ/a = 12. The results and linear fits for different edge state selection criteria l/a = 3, 4, 5 (l/λ = 0.25, 0.33, 0.42) are shown in Supplementary Figure The fit results are: • l/λ = 0.25: 0.31(36) ± 0.05(35) a -1 • l/λ = 0.33: 0.30(95) ± 0.13(74) a -1 • l/λ = 0.42: 0.56(93) ± 0.21(87) a -1 .