We present a method to obtain quantitative profiles of surface state charge density and monitor its dynamics under various stress conditions in high electron mobility transistor (HEMT) devices. The method employs an optical spectroscopy of the channel current at various bias conditions. We test the method on a classical AlGaN/GaN HEMT structure. To analyze the results, we propose a model, according to which the energy distribution of the surface charge density may be obtained from the derivative of the channel photocurrent. The proposed method is applied to fully fabricated transistors and can be measured under any device bias combination. This way, it is possible to explore the effect of device operating conditions on the surface state charge. This feature should be especially useful in studies of the various surface charge migration effects in nitride HEMTs. An important byproduct of the method is a quantitative assessment of the energy position of the surface Fermi level and its dynamics under various bias conditions. Surface states are known to constitute the origin of the two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) charge in the nitride high electron mobility transistor (HEMT). 1,2 However, the same surface states are also held responsible for several adverse effects on device performance. Under certain operational conditions, charge originating at the surface undesirably migrates to various locations in the transistor, thereby changing its characteristics. value on methods to characterize HEMT surface states. To date, several methods have been proposed for surface state characterization in HEMTs. Higashiwaki et al. used series of AlGaN layer thicknesses as well as a series of Al compositions to show that the density of surface states is generally low while their profile is distributed. In this study, we present a simple method to measure the energetic distribution of charge trapped in surface states. We show how a set of surface charge profiles acquired under different gate stress 12 conditions reveal the dynamics of the surface trapping mechanisms. The same method also reveals the exact position of the Fermi level at the surface along with the total trapped charge, both as a function of the gate voltage. A standard AlGaN/GaN HEMT structure was grown on c-plane sapphire by metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) with the following layer sequence: an AlN nucleation layer, 2 μm GaN, 11 nm Al0.3Ga0.7N, and 2 nm of GaN cap-layer. Shallow mesas were dry-etched in chlorine- ArXiv based 100 nm of Si3N4 passivation layer was deposited using plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD), followed by dry etch of contact pads and gate trenches. Source and drain Ohmic contacts made of Ti(30 nm)/Al(70 nm)/Ni(30 nm)/Au(100 nm) were deposited by e-beam thermal evaporation, followed by thermal anneal at 900 oC for 1 min in N2 ambient. Gate Schottky Ni(30 nm)/Au(100 nm) contacts were deposited by e-beam thermal evaporation. All electro-optical measurements were carried out in a dark Faraday box under ambient conditions. Closed loop control was employed to maintain a constant photon flux throughout the spectral acquisition. Transconductance was obtained from the drain current, measured by sweeping the gate voltage at 10 mV steps in the dark. Figure To analyze quantitatively the photo-induced changes in the photocurrent spectrum, one should take into account the concurrent effect of the gate bias. During the illumination, part of the trapped surface charge is photo-emitted over the AlGaN into the channel. This increases the drain current and simultaneously slightly decreases the built-in voltage in the AlGaN. As long as these changes are small compared to the values in the dark, we can write: where g m is the transconductance at the applied gate voltage, ΔI DS (hν) is the photocurrent (I ph (hν)), and ΔV GS (hν) is the photo-induced change in the built-in voltage across the AlGaN layer. Since the AlGaN layer may be described as a parallel-plate capacitor, the photo-induced change in the built-in voltage is given by: where Q(hν) is the total areal charge photo-emitted over the AlGaN up to a specific photon energy, and C AlGaN -the AlGaN areal capacitance, given by ε 0 ε r , where ε 0 -absolute permittivity, ε r -relative permittivity, and t AlGaN is the thickness of the AlGaN layer. Substituting Eq. (2) into Eq. ( To calculate how much charge migrates over the AlGaN at each photon energy, we need to differentiate the total charge with respect to photon energy. This derivative is directly proportional to the charge density in the occupied surface states as a function of photon energy with respect to the CBM: where q is the electron charge. To quantitatively approximate the total charge density at the surface, the photon flux should be sufficient to excite most of ArXiv the surface charge. However, in this case, charge migration will significantly change the photo-induced voltage across the AlGaN, ΔV GS (hν), causing a major change in the transconductance during the measurement. Fortunately, the effect of this change can be easily taken into account by measuring the transconductance characteristics in the dark, and using the transconductance as a function of ΔV GS (hν) instead of a constant value. 16 The surface charge profiles we thus obtain drop to zero around the Fermi level. This enables us to extract the surface Fermi level position from the charge profiles. The transition between the occupied and unoccupied states is described by Fermi-Dirac distribution function. Thus, the surface charge density may be described by the following expression: where N SS (E CBM -hν) is the surface states density at an offset of hν below the CBM. Therefore, the Fermi level can be found by fitting the low-energy edge of the surface charge profile using a Fermi function. Since the process of surface charge migration during application of gate stress shifts the Fermi level on the surface to a new position relative to the CBM, the dynamics of the Fermi level as a function of gate stress voltage can be measured and monitored. Figure Figure The shape of the Fermi function was obtained by a division of N OC by NSS (Eq. ( The resulting Fermi functions are shown in Fermi to be positioned 2.8 eV below the CBM. Over the range of our measurements, the position varied from 2.88 eV to 2.74 eV for gate voltages of -5 V and 1 V, respectively. The total surface charge (green triangles in the inset of Fig. The proposed method provides invaluable information on the profile of the charged surface state distribution as well as a tool to evaluate the dynamics of the surface Fermi level in actual devices. The method may turn out useful for the surface state engineering that is required in order to control the properties of the 2DEG in nitride HEMTs. See supplementary material for further detail of the procedure used to obtain the illumination-modified transconductance values, and procedure to remove the Fabry-Perot fringes. 