High entropy alloys (HEAs) are the new class of materials with an attractive combination of tunable mechanical and physicochemical properties. They crystallize mainly in cubic structures, however, for practical applications, HEAs with hexagonal close-packed (hcp) structure are highly desirable in connection to their in general high hardness. Herein, we report the synthesis, structure and detailed superconducting properties of Re0.56Nb0.11Ti0.11Zr0.11Hf0.11-the first hexagonal superconducting high entropy alloy (HEA) composed of five randomly distributed transition-metals. Combination of room temperature precession electron diffraction, precession electron diffraction tomography and powder X-ray diffraction is utilized to determine the room temperature crystal structure. Transport, magnetic and heat capacity measurements show that the material is a type-II superconductor with the bulk superconducting transition at Tc = 4.4 K, lower critical field Hc1(0) = 2.3 mT and upper critical field Hc2(0) = 3.6 T. Low-temperature specific heat measurement indicates that Re0.56Nb0.11Ti0.11Zr0.11Hf0.11 is a phonon-mediated superconductor in the weak electron-phonon coupling limit with a normalized specific heat jump ∆C el γnTc = 1.32. Further, hexagonal to cubic structural transition is observed by lowering the valence electron counts and Tc follows crystalline-like behaviour. Alloys with superior functional and mechanical properties are among the most germane materials for modern technologies. In this context, the advent of a new class of materials termed as high entropy alloys (HEAs) have drawn intense interest in recent times and has initiated a fascinating interdisciplinary research topic To date, a majority of the HEAs are reported to possess one of two simple crystal structures: face-centered cubic (fcc) or body-centered cubic. Nevertheless, such cubic HEAs prepared, to date, suffer from poor ductility at room temperature, and this limits their practical applications. On the other hand, HEAs with the hexagonal closed packed (hcp) structure, which is rare among HEAs is desirable for practical use in connection with their in general high hardness. Most of the reported hcp HEAs are composed of rare earth elements and contrary to the transition metal HEAs, these materials, due to the size and electronic structure mismatches among component elements lack the solid solution strengthening effect In this paper, we not only report new HEA su-arXiv:1904.06203v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 11 Apr 2019 perconductors with cubic structure but also report the first hexagonal HEA superconductor, Re 0.56 Nb 0.11 Ti 0.11 Zr 0.11 Hf 0.11 , exhibiting spectacular type-II superconductivity at T c =4.4 K. The material is a mixed 4d 5d system and a rare example of transition metal only hexagonal high entropy alloy. Detailed structural and superconducting properties are described as determined by powder X-ray diffraction, electron microscopy, resistivity, magnetization, and specific heat measurements. Synthesis. Polycrystalline samples of nominal composition [Nb 0.67-x Re x ][TiZrHf] 0.33 were synthesized using the standard arc-melting technique. Stoichiometric amounts of Nb (purity 99.8 %), Re (purity 99.99 %), Zr (purity 99.95 %), Hf (purity 99.7 %) and Ti (purity 99.99 %) pieces were taken on a water cooled copper hearth under the flow of high purity argon gas. They were melted in high current (T>2500) to make a single button, then flipped and re-melted several times for the sample homogeneity. The samples formed were hard with insignificant weight loss. X-ray Powder Diffraction and Scanning Electron Microscopy. Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) was carried out at room temperature (RT) on a PANalytical diffractometer equipped with Cu-K α radiation (λ = 1.54056 Å). Rietveld refinements were performed using the JANA2006 program Precession electron diffraction (PED) and precession electron diffraction tomography (PEDT). RT PED and PEDT were performed with a JEOL 2010 electron microscope (200 kV, LaB6 cathode) equipped with a nanomegas DigiStar precession module and a Gatan Orius 200D CCD camera. PED patterns and PEDT datasets were recorded at room temperature on several crystals. The precession angle was set to 1.5 with a goniometer tilt step below 1 degree. Crystal symmetry and the diffraction data were analyzed using the PETS Physical Property Measurements. DC magnetization and ac susceptibility measurements were performed using a Quantum Design superconducting quantum interference device (MPMS 3, Quantum Design). The electrical resistivity measurements were performed on the physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design, Inc.) by using a conventional fourprobe ac technique at frequency 17 Hz and excitation current 10 mA. The measurements were carried out under the presence of different magnetic fields. Specific heat measurement was performed by the two tau time- relaxation method using the PPMS in zero magnetic field. Structural characterization and superconducting behaviour of [Nb 0.67-x Re x ][TiZrHf ] 0.33 compounds. Fig. The magnetic field variation of magnetization (M-H) highlights the type-II superconductivity in hexagonal Re 0.56 Nb 0.11 Ti 0.11 Zr 0.11 Hf 0.11 . Lower critical field, H c1 (T), which is defined as the field deviating from the linear line for initial slope in the M-H curve is found to be 2.3 mT at zero temperature by the Ginzburg-Landau approximation. Detailed study on the superconducting (SC) state for the Re 0.56 Nb 0.11 Ti 0.11 Zr 0.11 Hf 0.11 material was carried out by measuring the resistivity under various applied magnetic fields. The critical temperatures are derived from the midpoint values of the superconducting transition in the resistivity measurements. The In comparison, crystalline 4d metals The solid line represents the Ginzburg-Landau fitting, yielding a Hc2(0) of 3.6 T. temperature variation of the upper critical field (H c2 ) is shown in Fig. The estimated value of the upper limit for the upper critical field, H c2 (0) is 3.6 T, and this is well below the BCS weak coupling Pauli limit (H p c2 (0) = 1.84T c , T c = 4.5 K gives H p c2 (0) 8.3 T). The Ginzburg-Landau coherence length ξ GL (0), estimated from the following relation To analyze the phonon properties, electronic density of C el /γT vs. T plot for the hexagonal Re0.56Nb0.11Ti0.11Zr0.11Hf0.11. The ratio ∆C el γnTc = 1.32 is highlighted in the figure . states and the nature of the superconducting state (BCS or unconventional) in this new material, we have performed the heat capacity measurement. The superconducting transition (a jump in the heat capacity data) is observed at 4.4K, confirming the bulk superconductivity. The low-temperature normal state specific heat can be well fitted using the equation C P /T = γ+βT 2 (γ = Sommerfeld coefficient and β is the lattice contribution to the specific heat) yields γ = 2.77 mJ/mol K 2 and β = 0.0648 mJ/mol K 4 . The Debye temperature θ D is obtained using the formula θ D = 12π 4 RN/5β 1/3 (4) where R is the molar gas constant (=8.314 J mol -1 K -1 ). Using N = the number of atoms per formula unit = 1, it gives θ D = 310 K. The density of states values at Fermi level ] is calculated as 1.17 states eV -1 f.u. -1 . The strength of the attraction between the electron and phonon, i.e., electron-phonon coupling constant can be calculated using the McMillan formula By considering the Coulomb pseudopotential μ * = 0.13, commonly used for many intermetallic superconductors 