In this work, we investigated tensile and compression forces effect on the thermal conductivity of silicon. We used equilibrium molecular dynamics approach for the evaluation of thermal conductivity considering different interatomic potentials. More specifically, we tested Stillinger-Weber, Tersoff, Environment-Dependent Interatomic Potential and Modified Embedded Atom Method potentials for the description of silicon atom motion under different strain and temperature conditions. It was shown that Tersoff potential gives a correct trend of thermal conductivity with hydrostatic strain, while other potentials fails, especially when compression strain is applied. Additionally, we extracted phonon density of states and dispersion curves from molecular dynamics simulations. These data were used for direct calculations of thermal conductivity considering the kinetic theory approach. Comparison of molecular dynamics and kinetic theory simulations results as a function of strain and temperature allowed us to investigate the different factors affecting the thermal conductivity of strained silicon. Tuning of thermal properties of various materials is one of the key demand in material research Strain is an effective method for tuning the thermal property of various materials due to its flexibility. Strain can affect the thermal properties of a material by shifting its phonon frequencies Besides, in addition to the control and the modification of material properties that can be expected, elasa) Electronic mail: mykola.isaiev@univ-lorraine.fr tic stresses often arise as a result of technological processing of a crystalline solid, like: porous network formation For these reasons a particular emphasis on the understanding of the role of strain on thermal transport properties at the nanoscale is an urgent need. As a first step in elucidating this issue, one needs more physical insight regarding phonon transport in strained materials and silicon is a good starting point to link theory and experimentation. Silicon is a material of choice in nowadays micro-and nanoelectronics. Particularly, strained silicon is one of the best candidate for implementation in metal oxide semiconductors devices Molecular dynamic (MD) is an important tool for predicting the thermal properties of bulk semiconductors and nanostructures, including silicon. The accuracy of the results delivered by MD simulations depends critically on the reliability of interatomic potentials. Several semi-empirical potentials have been developed for Si. The most popular Si potentials were proposed by Stillinger and Weber (SW) In this study, we used equilibrium molecular dynamics (EMD) approach for simulation of thermal conductivity of strained silicon. Since thermal conductivity evaluated with molecular dynamics is sensitive to the interatomic interactions All MD simulations were carried out with Largescale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS). The initial system was set as a single crystal silicon with a diamond lattice structure. The initial lattice parameter was set to be equal to 5.43 Å. The x, y and z dimensions of the silicon slab as well as the simulation domain was set to be equal to 10 lattice cells. It has been shown that with these cell sizes, the system-size effects can be eliminated Then, the pristine systems were slowly hydrostatically deformed in compression or tension. The rate of strain was set to be equal to 10 -3 ps -1 . After each 0.1 ps of deformation procedure the information regarding strain and induced stress in the system was collected. Such deformation was performed during 200 ps, and the final deformation was equal to ±20% to achieve stress-strain curve visualization. Additionally, for the strains equal to ±1%, ±2%, ±3%, ±4%, and ±5% the re-start files with atoms positions and velocities were collected. These files were used for further thermal conductivity evaluation. Fig. For the thermal conductivity evaluation, we used the Equilibrium Molecular Dynamics (EMD) approach, which is based on Green-Kubo formalism. In this framework, thermal conductivity can be evaluated from auto-correlation of heat flux as follows where V is the volume of the system, k B is Boltzmann's constant, and J i (t)J j (0) is the heat current autocorrelation function. In general, the conductivity is averaged across all three directions to obtain the scalar conductivity. Since EMD is based on numerical simulations, the integration time as well as the averaging time in Eq. 1 were limited to finite values. Additionally, the thermal conductivity was averaged in different directions. Thus, Eq. 1 was used in the following form: where J is the heat flux vector, t c is a finite correlation time for which the integration is carried out, and t s is the sampling time over which the autocorrelation function is accumulated for averaging. The atom structure input files of EMD calculation of pristine and strained samples are the ones described above. For thermal conductivity calculation, the systems were equilibrated again according to Nosé-Hoover thermostat during 1 ns, but with the use of canonical (NVT) ensemble. After equilibrium, we performed NVE integration during 25 ns. During this integration, the heat fluxes in different directions were collected and recorded. Thermal conductivities were extracted with the Eq. 2. The correlation time was chosen to be equal 10 ps, and the sampling time was 50 ps. It should be noted that we tested also sampling time equal to 100 ps to check stability of calculations. In this case, duration of NVE integration was equal to 100 ns. Particularly, thermal conductivity for Tersoff potential under 300 K with longer sampling time (100 ps) was found to be equal κ = 229±8 W/(m K), and for shorter sampling time (50 ps) κ = 222 ± 8 W/(m K)). Thus, both values are in good agreement, and therefore for further calculation we used only the shorter sampling time equal to 50 ps. Since, thermal conductivity calculated based on Green-Kubo formalism is sensitive to initial conditions, the simulations were carried for 10 different seeds. The final value of thermal conductivity for each potential, strain and temperature was averaged among these seeds. To get more details about strain effect on the silicon thermal conductivity, the phonon density of states (DOS) and the phonon dispersions of silicon were calculated. Those calculations were performed using the FixPhonon module of LAMMPS. With this tool, dispersion curves can be obtained from the Green's function formalism where N UC is the total number of unit cells in the crystal, r l is the equilibrium positions of l th unit cell, α is the component of the atomic displacement of the k th atom in Cartesian coordinates, and q is the wave vector. The Green's function in reciprocal space given by : where superscript * denotes the complex conjugate and . . . denotes the ensemble average. With the Green's function method, the dynamical matrix can be expressed as: Here M is the mass of Si atom. By solving the eigenvalues of dynamical matrix D, we can get the frequencies of all phonon modes: where ω is the phonon frequency. Hence, the relations between q and ω are obtained. The phonon DOS curve is computed from the phonon dispersion by dividing the frequency range into many small segments and counting the number of states in each segment. In this work, the dynamic matrix calculations were performed in the NVE ensemble with a Langevin thermostat. The systems were equilibrated for 0.5 • 10 6 time steps, and then system is run in the NVE ensemble for 6 • 10 6 time steps to record the atomic displacements and velocities. Using the eigenvalues of the dynamical matrices, the phonon DOS and the phonon dispersions were then calculated using the auxiliary post-processing code phana 55 . The vibrational lifetime was estimated from the recently developed method based on the Monte Carlobased moments approximation Calculations of phonon relaxation times were carried out with Jazz python wrapper for LAMMPS In this section, we will describe elements of kinetic theory approach for phonons propagation to calculate the thermal conductivity of strained Si. For the calculation, we use the analytical model developed previously by P. Chantrenne et al where q is the wave vector, p its polarization, and v the group velocity determined from the dispersion curves: with v the angular velocity, τ (q, p) is the phonon relaxation time due to the phonon-scattering phenomena, θ z (q) is the angle between the wave vector q and the direction z, and C(q, p) is the specific heat per unit volume. The total thermal conductivity is the sum of the individual contributions due to all the wave vectors q and polarizations p: In our case, the system is isotropic and the size of it can be considered infinite. Thus, the sum in Eq. 12 becomes an integral. It is expressed in terms of angular frequency: where 6 is the number of polarizations, a In order to theoretically assess thermal conductivity, the last needed parameter is the phonon relaxation time. In general, several scattering mechanism are at play. According to Mathiessen rule, the resulting relaxation time (RT) is where τ -1 U (ω, p) is RT due to Umklapp scattering, τ -1 BC (ω, p) is RT due to the presence of system boundaries and τ -1 d (ω, p) is RT due to defect or impurity scattering. In our case, the system is considered as infinite (periodic boundary conditions set in EMD), so τ -1 BC (ω, p) = 0 , and the lattice is supposed to be perfect, so it has no defects. Thus, Besides, it should be mentioned that the implemented approach for calculations of relaxation times only gives a global relaxation time. Decomposition of different contribution is a challenging issue and is not the purpose of this work. Therefore, we fitted numerical data evaluated with Eq.7 by the following equation for all polarizations: The fitting was performed to overcome issues arised because of the significant scattering of data evaluated by MD (see Fig. In this section, the results of calculations of the thermal conductivity κ of Si under hydrostatic strain ε h using SW, EDIP, 2NN MEAM and Tersoff III potentials at T = 300K will be discussed. The strain-dependencies of the thermal conductivity predicted with the use of these potentials are plotted in Fig. Next, the value of κ resulting from the EDIP calculations for unstrained silicon was found to be about 174 W/(m•K). This potential gives also non-physical trends κ(ε h ): the thermal conductivity increases continuously from compression strain to tensile hydrostatic strain, which is in a sharp contrast to the expected dependence. Despite, 2NN MEAM potential (see Fig. Finally, the calculated value of κ for unstrained silicon with Tersoff III potential is about 229 W/(m•K). This is in a good agreement with other MD results The first possible explanation for the differences between the potentials in a predicting the κ(ε h ) dependencies of silicon under hydrostatic compression is the wide range of cutoff radius r c of each potential. The corresponding value r c is 3.77 Å for SW potential, 3.12 Å for EDIP potential, 4.3 Å for 2NN MEAM potential, and 3.0 Å for Tersoff III potential. Since these empirical potentials are optimized for a particular local environment of atomic configurations, they are generally not designed for conditions where the number of interacting neighbors can change abruptly. In fact, when the atomic structure is strongly compressed, the the number of neighboring atoms taken into account in the energy calculation may drastically change, leading to sharp energy variation. The fact that the Tersoff III potential is applicable over a relatively wide range of compressive strain is due to its short cutoff range. Additionally, different functional forms and the number of fitted parameters also lead to various thermal conductivity behavior when modifying strain. For example, the SW potential is a linear combination of two-and three-body interaction terms that stabilize the diamond cubic structure of crystalline silicon. It has only eight independent parameters and it is fitted to reproduce few experimental properties of both crystallized and liquid silicon. The Tersoff III functional form includes manybody interactions thanks to a bond order term. This potential has 13 adjustable parameters, which are determined by heat of formation, cohesive energy, bulk modulus and the relative stability of various Si polytypes obtained from calculations and experiments. The EDIP potential has a functional form similar to that of Tersoff but slightly more complicated. Thirteen parameters are determined by fitting to a fairly small ab-initio database. MEAM is an angle dependent functional form that evolved out of the simpler embedded atom method. Because parameter values of Tersoff III potential were determined by fitting the elastic constants Figure Eventually, we present further analysis of the thermal conductivity variation with hydrostatic strain and temperature based on the Eq. 13. From this equation, we can consider the changes in phonon density of states, phonon group velocity, and phonon relaxation time to understand the effect of hydrostatic strain on the thermal conductivity of Si. Moreover Eq. 13 takes into account the energy distribution on the phonon mode as a function of the temperature level. First, Fig. Consequently, optical phonons will have a lower or higher energy in comparison to the unstrained case when strain is applied. There are similar peak shifts for longitudinal acoustic (LA) phonons, indicating that the hydrostatic strain has a significant effect on them as well. In particular, the frequency shift for LA phonons peak in DOS is ∆ω=-0.9 THz (from 10.6 THz to 9.7 THz) and ∆ω=1.0 THz for 3% tensile and compressive hydrostatic strains, respectively. On the other hand, variations in transverse acoustic (TA) phonons are not significant compared to the LA and optical phonons. It is known that optical phonons contribute little to heat transfer In addition, our calculations show that temperature has little effect on the phonon DOS (not presented in Fig. The changes in phonon group velocity can be obtained from the dispersion curves, which are plotted in Fig. The dispersion curves for unstrained Si are compared to experimental results, adopted from work The evaluated phonon group velocities are plotted in Fig. The comparison of MD data calculated with Tersoff III potential with the results of analytical simulation can be made from the Fig. The quantitative correlations is observed only in the temperature range from 500 to 900 K. Some mismatch in the low temperature range (below Debye temperature) can be explained by classical nature of MD simulations; i.e., the mean number of phonons does not depend on their vibration frequency in this case. Using quantum correction (see Appendix D) mostly give general trends. However, thermal conductivity could not be fully corrected with the latter approach 71 . Thus, for low temperature range, simulations approaches based on the KT simulations are more reliable. Some mismatches occurring at higher temperatures correspond to the increasing role of higher-order inharmonic phenomena in the strained silicon, because we get close to the melting temperature. In this study, we considered thermal transport in crystalline silicon under different magnitude of hydrostatic strains. Particularly, we considered Tersoff III, Stillinger-Weber (SW), Environment-Dependent Interatomic Potential (EDIP), and Second Nearest Neighbour (2NN) Modified Embedded Atom Method (MEAM) potentials for thermal conductivity evaluation of strained silicon with the use of equilibrium molecular dynamics approach. Firstly, the systems were created by expanding and compression of the crystalline silicon, during this step strain-stress curves were extracted for all potentials. All potentials give the similar value of the bulk modulus (slope of the strain-stress curve). However, only Tersoff potential gives dependence of the thermal conductivity on the strain, which corresponds well with experimental data. Thus, this potential was used further for calculation of dispersion curves, density of states and relaxation time for obtaining physical insight regarding the thermal conductivity behavior of strained silicon. In addition, these data were used in analytic model based on the kinetic theory. In such way, the dependence of thermal conductivity on the temperature were calculated from analytical relations and correlated with the ones evaluated with equilibrium molecular dynamics approach. Both dependencies revealed good qualitative agreement. Nevertheless, some quantitative mismatches were observed for low and high temperatures. Mismatch at low temperatures may arise because quantum corrections (see Appendix D for more details on the latter correction). At the same time the discrepancies for high temperatures may arise as we get close to the melting temperature. This results bring new insights about strained silicon thermal properties. In future work, the modeling of nanostructures, which exhibits such stained area could be of great interest to tailor phonon transport properties. the temperature, and T MD is the classical temperature, which can be calculated as follows: where T D is the Debye temperature. The Fig. On the right scale of Fig. Finally, we should note that the use of the quantum correction in the presented above form is only illustrative, and thermal conductivity could not be fully cor- rected, see for example results of quantum and classical lattice dynamics simulations presented by Turney et al 