The main interest of group-III nitride nanophotonic circuits is the integration of active structures and laser sources. A photonic platform of group-III nitride microdisk lasers integrated on silicon (Si) and emitting in the blue spectral range is demonstrated. The active microdisks are side-coupled to suspended bus waveguides and the coupled emission is guided and outcoupled to free space using grating couplers. A small gap size of less than 100 nm between the disk and the waveguide is required in the blue spectral range for optimal evanescent coupling. To avoid reabsorption of the microdisk emission in the waveguide, the quantum wells (QWs) are etched away from the waveguide. Under continuous-wave (cw) excitation, loaded quality (Q) factors greater than 2000 are observed for the whispering gallery modes (WGMs) for devices with small gaps and large waveguide bending angles. Under pulsed excitation conditions, lasing is evidenced for 3 μm diameter microdisks integrated in a full photonic circuit. We thus present a first demonstration of a III-nitride microlaser coupled to a nanophotonic circuit. In recent years, group-III nitride on silicon nanophotonics has been a field of considerable interest as this material system poses a promising platform for photonics. The first asset of III-nitrides is the large transparency window from the near-infrared to the blue and ultraviolet (UV) spectral range So far, photonic circuits using light emitting diodes (LEDs) The investigated sample was grown on a 2 inch silicon (111) substrate using molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). First a buffer layer consisting of 100 nm AlN, 100 nm of n-doped GaN (silicon concentration of 5 • 10 19 cm -3 ), and 200 nm of undoped GaN was deposited. Then the active region was grown consisting of 10 pairs of 2.2 nm 12% indium gallium nitride (In 0.12 Ga 0.88 N) QWs and 9 nm GaN barriers. We hereafter present our technological approach to couple a III-nitride microlaser to an integrated photonic circuit on a silicon platform. Microdisk photonic circuits were fabricated using three levels of electron beam lithography with UV3 resist (diluted 1:1 with EC solvent) and inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etching using boron trichloride (BCl 3 ) and chlorine (Cl 2 ) gases. For each level, plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) silicon dioxide (SiO 2 ) was used as a hard mask during ICP etching. In the first level the microdisk and bus waveguide are defined and the surrounding area is etched to the substrate (a non-continuous thin AlN layer remains around the microdisks). The QWs are removed selectively from the waveguide in the second level by opening the area containing the previously defined waveguide and etching to a depth of 120 nm. In the third level, the gratings are defined at both ends of the waveguide and etched 200 nm deep. Subsequently, the devices are isotropically underetched by xenon difluoride (XeF 2 ) in principal leaving the disk with a silicon pedestal and the waveguide and grating suspended. Some of the 3 μm disks are suspended without a pedestal through a thin layer of AlN at the foot of the disk. The total device length is 60 μm with about 20 μm between the edge of the disk and the beginning of the grating. The microdisks are 3 μm and 5 μm in diameter. The bending angle of the waveguide around the disk has been varied between 0 • and 90 • , where 0 • corresponds to a straight waveguide and 90 • corresponds to the waveguide being bent around one quarter of the disk's circumference. The gap size g was varied between 80 nm and 120 nm and the grating period between 170 nm and 210 nm. Figure We performed micro-photoluminescence (μ-PL) measurements on these devices using a low-power cw pump laser at 244 nm and a charged couple device (CCD) as the detector in a top-collection setup. Figure μ-PL measurements for different gap sizes and bending angles are shown in figure The loaded Q factor for a disk and side-coupled waveguide is 1/Q loaded = 1/Q int + 1/Q c , where Q int is the intrinsic Q factor of the disk and Q c is the coupling Q factor. Q c depends on the mode overlap between the WGM and the waveguide mode, the interaction length and the phase mismatch. It is thus dependent on several parameters including the gap distance, the microdisk radius and the waveguide width. The spatial overlap of the first order radial mode with the waveguide mode is smaller than the one of higher-order radial modes. As shown by As the gap distance increases, Q c will increase exponentially and the fraction of the light transmitted through the waveguide drops very rapidly to zero. According to FDTD modeling (see figure Using a 266 nm laser under pulsed conditions (400 ps, 4 kHz), lasing was observed from devices with 3 μm diam- eter disks, straight waveguides and 100 to 120 nm gaps. Figure We do not observe lasing from any 5 μm diameter disks, which can be explained by an increase in threshold with increasing disk diameter and a decentralized pedestal near the disk edge causing additional losses. Furthermore, we also do not observe lasing from the devices with 3 μm diameter and 90 • bent waveguides due to losses in the pedestal, which is decentralized and near the disks edge in this case. Based on FDTD simulations, we estimate the grating out-coupling efficiency to be 3-7% (as shown in figure An interesting feature is that the lasing observed here is mono-mode, whereas we previously observed multimode lasing for single uncoupled microdisks Under low-power cw excitation we did not observe any modes from devices with straight waveguides, as seen in figure We have demonstrated the first blue microlaser integrated into a photonic circuit using III-nitride on silicon. Large loaded Q factors greater than 2000 were observed at the outcoupling grating for devices with small gaps and large waveguide bending angles. Pulsed lasing was observed for devices with large gaps and straight waveg-uides with a threshold of 15 mJ/cm 2 per pulse. Further work needs to be done on reducing the lasing threshold, increasing the coupling efficiency, and measuring / lowering transmission losses. The here presented results are an important step in demonstrating the viability of the IIInitride on silicon nanophotonic platform for real-world applications at short wavelength. A further challenge in making this photonic circuit platform on silicon viable for application is efficient electrical injection in III-nitride microdisks. minimum, and at 30 nm it is overcoupled. Figure The simulation were performed for devices with a bending angle of 90 • but the results are similar at smaller angles and for straight waveguides. With decreasing waveguide bending angle the phase matching condition becomes less critical due to the reduced coupling length. Experimentally we are far away from critical coupling with gap sizes between 80 and 120 nm. Consequently, there is only a small degradation of the loaded Q factor, which is close to the intrinsic one. In this undercoupled regime the effect of phase matching on the Q factor is also minor, which allows us to observe lasing. Figure An FDTD simulation of an outcoupling grating is shown in figure Spectra of devices with 3 μm diameter disks, 90 • bent waveguides and a gap of 90 nm are shown in figure Using the same setup as described in the manuscript, we performed pulsed measurements for a 4 μm diameter disk without a waveguide with a lasing wavelength of 416.5 nm and a threshold of 2.6 mJ/cm 2 per pulse. Figure Figure The pedestal shape varies based on the device geometry, due to the first ICP etch leaving a thin layer of AlN remaining. For devices with a 3 μm diameter disk (shown in figure Close-up SEM images of various components of the photonic circuit are shown in figure S10 a)-d). All components are showing some roughness from the processing. 