Magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene (MA-tBLG) has appeared as a tunable testing ground to investigate the conspiracy of electronic interactions, band structure, and lattice degrees of freedom to yield exotic quantum many-body ground states in a two-dimensional Dirac material framework. While the impact of external parameters such as doping or magnetic field can be conveniently modified and analyzed, the all-surface nature of the quasi-2D electron gas combined with its intricate internal properties pose a challenging task to characterize the quintessential nature of the different insulating and superconducting states found in experiments. We analyze the interplay of internal screening and dielectric environment on the intrinsic electronic interaction profile of MA-tBLG. We find that interlayer coupling generically enhances the internal screening. The influence of the dielectric environment on the effective interaction strength depends decisively on the electronic state of MA-tBLG. Thus, we propose the experimental tailoring of the dielectric environment, e.g. by varying the capping layer composition and thickness, as a promising pursuit to provide further evidence for resolving the hidden nature of the quantum many-body states in MA-tBLG. Introduction. Stacking two graphene layers at a twist angle θ on top of each other leads to twisted bilayer graphene (tBLG) featuring a moiré pattern with an intricate emergent low-energy electronic structure. For small twist angles θ < 2 • , the resulting superlattices host several thousand atoms per unit cell. In this situation, the electronic bands around the charge neutrality point (CNP) become very flat Electronic correlations in ultrathin systems such as MA-tBLG depend decisively on the effective electronelectron interaction profile, which is determined by a delicate interplay of screening processes taking place in the dielectric environment and the material itself In this Letter, we provide a quantitative study of the internal polarizability and effects of the dielectric environment on the effective electron-electron interaction in MA-tBLG. We consider MA-tBLG in dielectric surroundings, see Fig. Internal screening. As a first step, we calculate the intrinsic polarization function of MA-tBLG in the random phase approximation (RPA) using the low-energy continuum model for the electronic bands of tBLG from Refs. . MA-tBLG is then realized when the twisting angle is set to 1.05 • . In reciprocal space, the polarization operator Π 0 is a function of the scattering vector q and a matrix indexed by reciprocal lattice vectors G and G . At zero transferred frequency, Π 0 takes the form (1) Here, g s = g v = 2 are the spin and valley degeneracy factors, S M = √ 3λ 2 /2 is the moiré unit cell area, where λ ≈ 134 Å is the moiré lattice constant, N = 100 is the number of k points, α and β encode the sublattice (A 1 , B 1 , A 2 and B 2 ) and band indices We then study the internal screening in MA-tBLG for two possible scenarios: first, screening according to the RPA, which assumes MA-tBLG to be in a conventional metallic state; second, a scenario resembling insulating states which are modeled within the so-called constrained RPA (cRPA) The results presented in the following are obtained at charge neutrality with the continuum model from Ref. [8] at a twist angle of θ = 1.05 • . We show in the supplemental material Fig. where v F is the Fermi velocity. For q < G M , the intrinsic polarization functions of MA-tBLG, both in RPA and cRPA, systematically exceed the uncoupled tBLG model. Intrinsic screening is, thus, significantly larger in MA-tBLG than previously assumed In the RPA model, i.e. in the metallic case, the enhancement of screening for q < G M is due to the high density of states (DOS) around the Fermi level originating from the flat bands. In the cRPA screening processes inside flat bands are excluded, which explains why the polarization function is smaller than in the RPA case. Still, the cRPA polarizability is clearly enhanced as compared to the uncoupled case for q < G M . This can be understood as follows: While polarization processes taking place entirely inside the flat band manifold are excluded in cRPA, gapped transitions between states associated with peaks in the DOS, e.g. between the flat bands and higher energy states with corresponding peaks in the MA-tBLG DOS around E ≈ ±20 meV and ±60 meV 2 5 Fig. While screening in MA-tBLG has been often approximated in terms of uncoupled tBLG Dielectric engineering. We now assess the possibilities for dielectric engineering of MA-tBLG in experimental setups as shown in Fig. where V (q) = 2πe 2 /q is the bare interaction and ε(q) = ε env (q) + V (q)Π 0 (q) is the dielectric function where we approximated ε 1 ≈ 4 To illustrate the influence of the dielectric surrounding on the effective interaction in MA-tBLG in terms of a single descriptor, we consider an effective local interaction U obtained by Fourier transformation of W (q): Here, the cutoff q c relates to the 2D radial spread r W F of the Wannier functions (WF) constructed from the MA-tBLG low-energy bands: q c ≈ π/r W F . We choose r W F to be half of the moiré lattice constant λ, hence q c ≈ 0.047 Å-1 . Fig. On the other hand, the cRPA estimated U varies from 40 meV to ≈ 20 meV when ε 2 increases. Interestingly, 40 meV is approximately the splitting of the upper and lower Hubbard bands when a gap is opened at the CNP, as recently measured in scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) The influence of the metallic gate (ε 2 → ∞) at a distance d from MA-tBLG (c.f. Fig. Additionally to the RPA and cRPA numerics according to Eq. ( Summary. We have shown that the sensitivity of the interaction profile in MA-tBLG to the dielectric environment depends decisively on the quantum state of the electrons in the low-energy flat-band manifold. Currently, the nature of the insulating states at half-filling, of superconductivity near half-filling, and of the gaps measured in STS at charge neutrality are major open problems in the understanding of MA-tBLG. What would an experimentally detected significant influence of the dielectric surrounding on spectral, thermodynamic, or transport properties in any of these phases imply? Based on our results any strong influence of the external dielectric means that charge screening in the low-energy bands is substantially suppressed as compared to a conventional metallic state as assumed in RPA. That is hardly possible for insulating or any kind of ordered states resulting from a weak coupling instability, which affect only a small sector of states in the vicinity of the non-interacting Fermi surface. Thus, significant impact of external dielectrics on correlated insulating states implies that they are at strong coupling in the sense that states from the entire mini-BZ contribute significantly. Similarly, any impact of the dielectric surrounding on superconductivity implies strong coupling physics at work, and possibly hints at an unconventional origin. Currently, there are arguments in favor and against strong coupling physics governing different parts of the MA-tBLG phase diagram. On the pro side, is the ratio of effective interactions and bandwidth: in case of partial screening as described in cRPA, the effective interaction largely exceeds the bandwidth, which is suggestive of strong coupling. In line with a strong coupling scenario, close to charge neutrality, STS further measured "gaps" on the scale of several 10 meV In section A of this Supplemental Material, we give a short description of the low-energy continuum model developed in Refs. We outline here the low-energy continuum model which we used for the description of the electronic band structure of MA-tBLG. The model has been introduced in where H ξ , ξ = ±, describe the two valleys separately. The intravalley blocks are written in the space of the sublattices (A, B) and layer (1, 2) degrees of freedom, where h l with l = 1, 2 are the intralayer terms, and h θ the interlayer ones. Then, following derivations in where ± stands for l = 1 and 2, respectively, v F /a = 2.1354 eV, R(θ) is the 2D rotation matrix, σ x and σ y are the 2D Pauli matrices and K ξ l are the rotated graphene K points of each layer l in each valley ξ. For the interlayer term we use with ω = e i2π/3 , the AA interlayer coupling u = 0.0797 eV and the AB interlayer coupling u = 0.0975 eV. The inequality u = u accounts for possible corrugation effects in MA-tBLG The diagonalization of H + is performed in the k-space. Then, there is a coupling between Dirac electron states at each k vector in one layer with states at k + G in the other layer, where G = mG M 1 + nG M 2 is the reciprocal vector associated with the moiré superlattice, m and n are integers, and G M 1 and G M 2 span the reciprocal lattice of tBLG. The electronic states are where α encodes the sublattice / layer X = A 1 , B 1 , A 2 , B 2 and band n indices In cRPA, polarization processes taking place inside the flat band manifold are excluded. However, gapped transitions between states associated with peaks in the DOS, e.g. between the flat bands and higher energy DOS peaks around, are still possible. These gapped transitions are reminiscent of the atomic systems such as the hydrogen atom. The q-dependent polarizability from transitions between hydrogen s and p-orbitals reads where b is an effective inverse orbital radius. Superimposing this quasi-atomic model with a Dirac electron model capturing all higher energy processes leads to the ansatz of Eq. ( Fig. The screening of Coulomb interactions is encoded in the dielectric function ε(q) = ε env (q) + V (q)Π(q), where ε env (q) as given in Eq. ( In the RPA case, the intrinsic screening is strong. Hence, the dielectric environment has a small effect, as seen in Fig. Fig. We assess in the following the robustness of the conclusions drawn in the main text with respect to variations in the experimental conditions (twist angle and doping) and details of the model employed (interlayer coupling parameters). We study the polarization function of tBLG for twist angles away from the first magic angle 1.05 • , finite doping, and different ratios of AA to AB interlayer coupling u/u , which corresponds to different assumptions on vertical relaxations The twist angle dependence of the internal screening in tBLG can be understood from Fig. 927 and v * F (θ = 6 • )/v F ≈ 0.958. In the cRPA case (Fig. In Fig. In Fig. The continuum model employed, here, depends sensitively on the ratios of AA to AB interlayer coupling u/u , which encodes vertical relaxation effects. Different u/u ratios have been employed in the literature Taken together, we have shown that the conclusions drawn on the interplay of internal and external screening in MA-tBLG are robust against variations of system parameters like twist angle, doping, and details of the model parametrization. In the experiments of Refs. This formula reduces to Eq. (1) from the main text for ∆ → 0 and corresponds to a flavor of cRPA, where all states from a certain energy window ±∆ are assumed to form the correlated subspace. In this flavor of RPA, f α k denote the non-modified Fermi functions belonging to band α at crystal momentum k. In Fig. 