We demonstrate tunable perfect anomalous reflection with metasurfaces incorporating lumped elements. The tunable capacitance of each element provides continuous control over the local surface reactance, allowing for controlling the evanescent field distribution and efficiently tilting the reflected wavefront away from the specular direction. The performance of the metasurface is evaluated for both TE and TM polarization and for reflection to the first and second diffraction order. Metasurfaces are ultrathin periodic structures with subwavelength unit cells made of purposefully designed materials and geometries that control the overall electromagnetic (EM) properties and hence their response to impinging fields Here we target tunable perfect anomalous reflection by incorporating in the unit cell a tunable lumped element providing variable capacitance. We require continuous control of C The metasurface unit cell under study is depicted in Fig. according to momentum conservation. By imposing a linear phase profile along the supercell 0 ( ) for steering in the yz plane) we can promote a single diffraction order over the remaining leakage channels. In order to specify the required capacitances, we need a "look-up table" relating the reflection phase with the capacitance. We construct it by illuminating the uniform metasurface with a normally-incident plane wave at an operating frequency of 5 GHz [Fig. We first focus on incidence in the xz plane and TE polarization (E=E y y), as shown in Fig. Although the optimization goal was set for normal incidence (S 31 >-0.4 dB), we also get improved performance for incidence from ports 2 and 3. This is also verified by the field plots in Fig. We next examine incidence in the yz plane and TM polarization (H=H x x) [Fig. Re{ } E y Re{ } E y _ 0.8 +0.8 Re{ } E y The corresponding capacitances are [1.0399, 1.4561, 1.6681, 1.9494, 4.1861] pF and [1.0016, 1.6745, 1.5373, 2.1722, 3.5616] pF, respectively. The efficiencies for excitation from all three ports are exceptionally high: 99.5%, 98.6%, and 98.7%, highlighting the robustness of the proposed design for the TM polarization as well. IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION We have numerically demonstrated tunable perfect anomalous reflection in metasurfaces that incorporate lumped loads for continuous control over the meta-atoms. Starting from the prescription of a linear phase gradient and subsequently using optimization, we have achieved high efficiencies for anomalous reflection towards the first and second diffraction order for both TE and TM polarizations. The same unit cell design can be used for achieving tunable perfect absorption for impinging waves of different polarizations, incidence angles and frequencies by controlling the capacitance and resistance of the lumped elements (in contrast to anomalous reflection, perfect absorption can be realized using a uniform configuration of all the unit cells). For example, at 5 GHz for TE polarization and normal incidence the required values are C=1.6965 pF and R=3.4406 Ω, respectively. In all cases considered here the required RC values are realistic and can be supplied by voltagecontrolled varactor and varistor elements. The tuning mechanism can be easily realized with software, thus paving the way for software-driven intelligent metasurfaces supporting reconfigurable functionalities 