Related to the electronic structure of cuprate high-Tc superconductors there are two prevailing views: In one view, Pines and collaborators argue that cuprates consist of two electronic subsystems: one with localized spins and the other having itinerant character. Contrary to that, Phil Anderson has argued for one-component or one-band model for cuprates. Thus, a very natural question arrises: What is the actual electronic system in cuprates? Are these two-component or one-component systems? After a careful consideration of both the views, we argue in favor of one-component or Andersonian view. The key lies in the dual character of electrons in narrow d bands, and we put forward a semiclassical model using which we could quantitatively account for oxygen NMR shift data in La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 within the single component view. At the foundation of the problem of high-T c superconductivity in Cuprates is the nature of their electronic structure. More specifically the question is: in which hybrid orbitals the magnetic degrees of freedom reside and where do the mobile carriers reside? For this fundamental question, there are two prevailing views in the literature: In one view Pines and collaborators argue Contrary to that, right from the beginning, Phil Anderson has argued for one-component or one-band model for cuprates as far as low energy physics is concerned With zeroth approximation, crystal fields are of cubic symmetry i and these split the five d orbitals into two-sub-groups: e g and t 2g . Three orbitals (xy, yz, zx) form t 2g set and these have lower energy as their lobs do not directly point towards negatively charged four planner oxygen atoms and two negatively charged apical oxygen atoms of the cage. This leads to reduced Coulomb repulsion between electrons in these orbitals and six negatively charged oxygen atoms at the corners of the octahedron. Thus they will fill first, accommodating six electrons in total. Now we have three electrons remaining out of nine. The two orbitals 3d x 2 -y 2 and 3d 3z 2 -r 2 of the set e g can accommodate four electrons and are both "un-happy" as their lobs point directly towards negatively charged oxygen atoms. Question is which one is more "un-happy" and which one is less "unhappy". Here come's Anderson's crucial insight. The most "un-happy" orbital is 3d x -y 2 as its four lobs point directly towards negatively charged four planner oxygen atoms (figure What will happen when the system is hole doped i.e., when electrons are removed? The lone electron in 3dx 2y 2 remains "un-happy" as it still has to face Coulomb repulsion from four negatively charged planner oxygen atoms. Thus on hole doping, it is THIS electron which is removed. Therefore we only have one-component and one-band system. The other topic of Mott insulating behaviour of a lattice of un-paired electrons localized in 3d x 2 -y 2 orbitals is well understood Here, H 0 is the unscreened external magnetic field. S k is the average value of the spin due to kth un-paired electron. A n,k is the hyperfine coefficient for nth nuclear site and kth electron. C n is the temperature independent part of the shift that comes from the orbital effects etc. Let us assume, along with the supporters of the one component view, that there is one single temperature dependent susceptibility χ(T) which can be written as iv For other technical details of NMR shift experiments, reader is referred to dedicated literature where M e f f is the effective magnetization. With this, one can express the relative frequency shift in terms of a single temperature dependent susceptibility: Here, ω 0 is the NMR resonance frequency without any shielding. Thus one concludes that K s ∝ χ(T). This means that shift must decreases with decrease in temperature. Thus it is clear that it cannot be rationalized within a single temperature dependent susceptibility scenario. It can be understood as arising from two two fluids, one having more or less temperature independent susceptibility that is effective at Cu sites, and the other fluid having a temperature dependent susceptibility that is acting on O sites. This motivates the two component view (for more details refer to However, we argue differently. Next section presents our argument. V. An attempt to settle the So, both types of the carriers can "emerge" in a vi This is not entirely new. Similar thermal activation ideas has been put forward in One-component versus two-component debate single narrow band where localization tendencies are present due to Coulomb interactions, and mobile states are separated from localized states via a "spin gap". This is some sort of remanent of the zero doping Mott physics when the system is hole doped (figure The time evolution of the populations can be written as In the steady state Using the constraint (equation 4) and little algebra viii , we get and viii Notice that if n v → 1, that is all sites vacant (100 percent hole doping), n loc → 0. Here, η is defined as That is, the local to itinerant transition rate divided by itinerant to local transition rate. To get the feel for numbers, let us assume that themselves. Thus we observe that a two component system does emerge from a one band and one component system. To test the model we need to compute some observable from it and compare that with experiment. To this end, we will compute Knight shift from this model. But before we do that we need to compute the transition rates. This is done using the thermodynamical argument. Let E loc be the energy of temporally localized ix In fact η will be less than one, as the tendency of local to itinerant transition is suppressed as compared to the tendency of itinerant electron going local. This is due to short range antiferromagnetic correlations in localized electrons which tries to "hold them up" into the lattice (that is magnetic energy lowering while on localization). This energy is denoted by "an effective spin gap" in our model. electrons and E iti (n iti ) be the energy of the itinerant electrons which is a function of the itinerant electron number density (n iti ). Let ∆ sg be the spin gap. Populations obey the thermodynamic relations (refer to figure Their ratio gives Here n is the number of electrons per unit area and n iti is the fraction of itinerant electrons. If a is the Cu-Cu bond length, then n = 2/a 2 with one 3d x 2 -y 2 electron per Cu atom. Collecting all this, and writing n loc in terms of n iti using the constraint (equation 4 ) we get Consider the magnetic susceptibility of itinerant electrons. In simple metals it is the Pauli susceptibility which is temperature independent. Temperature independence of the Pauli susceptibility in metals comes form the well known relation μ B H << k B T << E F . In systems where Fermi energy is small and is comparable of k B T, and/or there is a gap in the excitation spectrum, the "Pauli susceptibility" will depend on temperature. In the next paragraph we compute the magnetic susceptibility due to the itinerant part in our "one-level and one-band" model, in which number density (n iti (T)), and thus Fermi energy are temperature dependent quantities! Magnetic susceptibility can be written as Where g(ǫ) is electron density of states ( 4πm h2 ) in 2D. f (ǫ) is the Fermi function and H is the external magnetic field. A straightforward calculation leads to Here E F iti (T) = h2 2πma 2 n iti (T). This is our main result. For the computation of Knight shift we assume that Knight shift at oxygen site is affected mainly by this component. There will be some effect on oxygen shift due to temporally localized spins on Cu atoms (transferred interactions). We assume that this effect is sub-dominant and oxygen shifts are mainly affected by the above computed susceptibility due to the itinerant part. Thus we set K 17 ⊥ (T) ∝ χ iti (T). ⊥ (T) ∝ χ iti (T) is normalized to the experimental data at the maximum temperature (T ≃ 220 K). We used ∆ sg as fitting parameter and best fit value gives ∆ sg ≃ 9.3 meV. This is in reasonable agreement with that found through other methods The pseudogap temperature T * deduced is about 125 K at x = 0.15 (figures 5 and 10 in Theoretical modeling of the temperature dependence of the Cu Knight shift is beyond the scope of this investigation. The contribution in this case comes mainly from temporally localized electrons which have dynamically fluctuating antiferromagnetic correlations. As can be seen from figure However, we offer a qualitative understanding of it in the following way. There are two opposing tendencies acting at the Cu sites. The spin gap leads to lowering of Cu Knight shift on reducing temperature (as in figure x The shift when magnetic field is parallel to c-axis (that is K 63 // ) shows large variations with temperature even within a given system. Thus it is less reliable than K 63 ⊥ (magnetic field perpendicular to the c-axis or in the abplane). Whereas temporally localized spins of Cu sites leads to susceptibility that may scale like 1 T (Langevin-Curie type). This tends to increase with lowering temperature. Thus these two opposing tendencies may cancel each other and may lead to more or less temperature independent Knight shift at Cu site as seen in figure In this way a qualitative understanding can be obtained. However, a quantitative theory is much needed. We conclude that un-paired electrons in Cu 3d x 2 -y 2 --O 2p hybrid orbitals and a narrow band formed by them are responsible for both the localized behaviour and the itinerant behaviour The author would like to thank B. Sriram Shastry for helpful comments. i→l n iti (1n loc ) + P l→i n loc . cal spins and 10 vacant sites. If we switch on the time evolution, 55 electrons become itinerant and 35 remain localized. This equilibrium is not static, it is dynamic, localized and itinerant electrons keep on exchanging between