Graphene and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) share the same atomic structure of hexagonal carbon lattice. Yet, their synthesis differs in many aspects, including the shape and size of the catalyst. Here, we demonstrate a floating-catalyst chemical vapor deposition (FCCVD) technique for substrate-free, single-step growth of CNT-graphene heterostructures (CNT-G-H) using ethylene as a carbon source. The formation of CNT-G-H is directly evidenced by lattice-resolved (scanning) transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and electron diffraction experiments, corroborated by atomic force microscopy (AFM). Our experiments show the relative number density of graphene-nanoflakes can be tuned by optimizing the synthesis conditions. Since in the applied process the formation of the structures take place in gas-suspension, the as-synthesized CNT-G-H films can be deposited on any surface in ambient temperature with an arbitrary thickness. Moreover, this process of CNT-G-H synthesis with strong universality has also been realized in multiple systems of ethylene-based FCCVD with various catalysts and set-ups. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene as the typical nanocarbon materials have great potential in a wide variety of applications. CNTs, one-dimensional (1D) tubular nanomaterial have structure dependent electronic properties. 1 Depending on their cutting direction and size of the graphene sheet from which they are constructed, they can be either semiconducting or metallic. Interestingly, a combination of 1D-CNT and 2D-graphene heterostructure (CNT-G-H), due to synergistic effects, has shown the unique properties and even superior functional properties compared to their individual counterparts One of the major drawbacks of these multi-step synthesis processes is that they are highly time and resource consuming and are batch process. Moreover, the techniques involving separated growth of graphene and CNTs and then their solely physical mixing cannot provide covalent C-C bonding in between graphene and CNTs. Herein, we report a novel, scalable, gas-phase method for the substrate-free, continuous, single-step, and in-situ growth of CNT-G-H using a floating-catalyst CVD (FC-CVD) technique. It's worth noting that our technique provides a direct route for dry-deposition of as-produced CNT-G-H on substrates kept at ambient temperature for different applications or we can collect directly CNT-G-H films of desired thickness on low-adhesion membrane filter, which can be transferred on the targeted substrate through well-established, room temperature, dry-press transfer technique. CNT-G-H was synthesized in the FC-CVD reactor using spark-produced pre-made Fe catalyst nanoparticles with 0.1sccm (200 ppm) of ethylene (C2H4) (99.999%, AGA) as a carbon source. The relative amounts of graphene and CNTs in the sample were controlled by tuning H2 (99.999%, AGA) in the range 50-120 sccm at a set furnace temperature of 1050 o C. 0.01% diluted H2S (99.999%, AGA) mixed with N2 having flow rate 10 sccm (corresponding to 2 ppm H2S concentration) was employed as a growth promoter. However, it's worth mentioning that the synthesis of CNT-G-H is even possible without introducing H2S but our experimental results showed that H2S has some effect on the wall conditions of the FC-CVD reactor and is helpful for maintaining long-term stability of the synthesis reactor. The residence time in the typical growth region (800-1050 o C) of the FC-CVD reactor is approximately 10 seconds and was kept constant at various H2 conditions by tuning N2 flow from SDG and keeping total flow 500 sccm constant inside the FC-CVD reactor. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of as-produced CNT-G-H revealed that we have graphene-nanoflakes attached with the CNTs as shown in Fig. The more direct evidence of CNT-G-H formation was obtained by atomic-resolution scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM). Fig. The crystallographic structure of CNT-G-H was investigated by selected area electron diffraction technique. Some of the representative CNT-G-H in Fig. The CNT-G-H synthesis is unexpected here, compared with SWCNT synthesis via FCCVD. As we known, the substrate is essential in existing methods of graphene synthesis, e.g. CVD synthesis on Cu foils Moreover, UV-Vis-NIR and Raman spectroscopy techniques were used for optical characterizations of CNT-G-H. Optical absorption spectra (OAS) in the wavelength range of 200-2500 nm and transmittance (%) (at 550 nm wavelength) were measured from UV-Vis-NIR spectrometer (Agilent Carry 5000; Agilent Technologies, Inc.). Raman spectrometer (Horiba Labram-HR 800; Horiba Jobin-Yvon) was employed to acquire Raman spectra of graphene-SWCNTs by the excitation wavelength of 633 nm. Although the relative abundance of graphene-nanoflakes is very sensitive to the H2 amount, but no obvious difference was found in optical characterizations as shown in Fig. Moreover, the synthesis of CNT-G-H also has been realized in other ethylene-based FCCVD system with various catalysts including Co, Co-Ni catalysts from spark discharge 