We reported the first spin potentiometric measurement to electrically detect spin polarization arising from spin-momentum locking in topological insulator (TI) surface states using ferromagnet/tunnel barrier contacts Reply is that the model as presented is incapable of doing so because it fails to include separate physical contributions which independently effect the sign of the spin polarization measured. In our recent paper [9], as stated therein, we adopted the generic framework of Tian et al. [4] which postulates parallel spin dependent potentials in the TI channel, to be consistent with literature discussions. The issue raised by Tian et al. is the specific ordering of the spin-up and spin-down electrochemical potentials within their original model. We had placed the spin-up (majority) electrochemical potential level further from zero due to its greater magnitude [9], which may be inconsistent with their original model. We subsequently realized that this model neglects Left Au electrode Right Au electrode Au/Al 2 O 3 /TI interface TI/Al 2 O 3 /Au interface TI channel R Au,L R int,L Spin-up Spin-up Spin-down Spin-down electron flow Low interface R for spin up e, R int,↑ High interface R for spin down e, R int,↓ High R for spin down e R TI,↓ s e R int,R↑ << R int,R↓ , I ↑ ≥ I ↓ V int,R↓ V int,R↑ V L V R Left Au electrode Right Au electrode Right Au/Al 2 O 3 /TI interface Left TI/Al 2 O 3 /Au interface TI channel critical spin dependent parameters such as interface and channel resistances, and believe that this model is too simplistic to accurately account for the real experimental systems under study. Specifically, the potential profiles include vertical drops at the contact interface to the TI channel, which would indicate a current discontinuity (i.e., an infinite current), and therefore is fundamentally unphysical. It is this inadequacy which has resulted in apparent contradictory results from different groups. We have developed a more realistic model that includes experimental parameters such as interface and spin-dependent channel resistances. We find that such considerations can cause a crossing of the spin-up and spin-down voltage levels within the TI channel, which can lead to measured spin voltages of either sign depending upon the magnitude of the spin dependent resistances at interfaces and in the channel Any practical system will have contacts for experimental access, and these interfaces are crucial to electrical transport when current is converted from one type of charge carrier to another. The interface resistances at the current injecting contacts may be nonlinear or larger than that of the TI channel, perhaps due to oxidation of the TI surface or a blanket layer of tunnel barrier material such as Al2O3 often deposited for capping purposes and/or to simplify fabrication For electrons traveling from the right Au electrode, the resistance of the Au electrode is low for both spin-up and spin-down electrons. However, the interface resistance for spin-up and spin-down electrons entering into the TI channel may be different depending upon their alignment with the states in the TI. A steady state electron current flowing through the TI surface states from right to left creates a spontaneous spin-up orientation on the top TI surface due to spin momentum locking. Hence for spin-up electrons, this interface resistance will be lower since they align with those in the TI surface states Finally, as these electrons enter into the left Au electrode, the interface resistance will be similar for both spins since there are equal number of spin-up and spin-down states in the Au, i.e., the interface resistance here will be spin independent, i.e., Rint,L↑=Rint,L↓. Given that the overall voltage drop for both the spin-up and down channels must be the same across the left and right Au electrodes, and that the spin-up channel is clearly a lower resistance channel, the current flowing through the spin-up channel (I↑) will be greater than that for the spin-down channel (I↓), or I↑>I↓. At the left TI/Al2O3/Au interface that is spin independent, or Rint,L↑=Rint,L↓, the voltage drop at the interfaces is greater for the spin-up (Vint,L↑) than the spin-down (Vint,L↓) channel because I↑>I↓, as depicted by the steeper slope for the spin-up (blue) lines within the left TI/ Al2O3/Au interface region in Fig. Conversely, at the right Au/Al2O3/TI interface that is spin-dependent, the voltage drop for the spin-up and spin-down electrons (Vint,R↑ and Vint,R↓, respectively) can have two different outcomes: Vint,R↑<Vint,R↓ or Vint,R↑>Vint,R↓, as shown in Fig. However, in the case that Vint,R↑>Vint,R↓, due to for example I↑>>I↓ and Rint,↑≤Rint,↓, connecting the end points of the voltage profiles for spin-up and spin-down channels creates a crossing (Fig. This results in the splitting of the spin-up and spin-down levels near the interface in the TI. However, the spin coherence length in the TI is very large and typically greater than the TI channel length. Hence the equilibrium conditions that would be expected for an isolated TI are not reached, which allows for a current to exist where the chemical potentials overlap. Thus different voltage profiles and relative energies of the spin-up and spin-down levels can be created depending on the relative magnitudes of the spin-dependent resistances at interfaces and within the channel. Figures The probing of the voltage profiles for the spin-up and spin-down electrons by a ferromagnet/tunnel barrier contact via potentiometric measurement is the same as described originally As noted above, the resistances at the left TI/Al2O3/Au and right Au/Al2O3/TI interfaces are not symmetric, because they are spin dependent when entering the TI channel, and spinindependent when entering the Au electrode. The metal/TI current injecting contacts are typically non-ohmic and/or rectifying, due to TI surface oxidation or inclusion of a tunnel barrier Regarding the experiments on (Bi,Sb)2Te3 by Lee et al. In summary, the original model 