Plasmonic resonators have drawn more attention due to the ability to confine light into subwavelength scale. However, they always suffer from a low quality (Q) factor owing to the intrinsic loss of metal. Here, we numerically propose a plasmonic resonator with ultra-high Q factor based on plasmonic metalinsulator-metal (MIM) waveguide structures. The resonator consists of a disk cavity surrounded by a concentric ring cavity, possessing an ultra-small volume. Arising from the plasmon hybridization between plasmon modes in the disk and ring cavity, the induced bonding hybridized modes have ultra-narrow full wave at half maximum (FWHM) as well as ultra-high Q factors. The FWHM can be nearly 1 nm and Q factor can be more than 400. Furthermore, such device can act as a refractive index sensor with ultra-high figure of merit (FOM). This work provides a novel approach to design plasmonic high-Q-factor resonators, and has potential on-chip applications such as filters, sensors and nanolasers. In the past few decades, optical resonators have been playing an important role in photonic research. For fundamental research, they provide ideal platforms to study light-matter interaction Towards ultra-small volume devices, plasmonics is introduced to optical systems. Surface plasmons can confine visible and near-infrared light on subwavelength scales, thus bringing plasmonic resonators into nanoscales In this work, we introduce a resonator comprised of a concentric ring and disk cavity based on MIM waveguides. Due to the plasmon hybridization, there is an interaction between plasmon modes both in ring and disk cavity. As a result, the induced bonding hybridized modes possess ultra-narrow full wave at half maximum (FWHM) and ultra-high Q factors in visible band. The influences of gap widths are also studied. After structural optimization, this resonator can obtain a FWHM nearly 1 nm and a Q factor more than 400. As a sensor, this device has considerable sensitivity and ultra-high figure of merit (FOM). Such resonator has an ultra-small volume and can find on-chip applications on sensing, filtering, lasing and nonlinear enhancement. The 2D schematic of proposed structure is shown in Fig. Where is the permittivity of infinite frequency, is bulk plasma frequency, is electron oscillation damping frequency, and is angular frequency of incident light. The parameters of Ag are as follows: =3.7, = 1.38×10 Hz, and = 2.73×10 Hz. There is only transverse-magnetic (TM) mode in the MIM waveguide Here, is incident wavelength in vacuum, and are dielectric and metal constant, respectively. is propagation constant of surface plasmons, is effective refractive index of MIM waveguide, and = 2 ⁄ is wave number. 2D Finite-Difference Time-Domain (FDTD) method is adapted to do the simulation since it has the same result as 3D simulation when the height (in the z-direction) of this structure is set as 1 um (1)' ' For the disk, r is the disk radius, " and are the wave vectors in the disk and metal, # ( ) and are the first kind Hankle function with order m and its derivative, ' and ' & are the first kind Bessel function with order m and its derivative, respectively. For the ring, ( is effective perimeter of the ring, which is the average of the inner and outer perimeters, λ is the resonant wavelength. Both m and n are integer mode numbers. The corresponding transmission spectra are shown in Fig. Secondly, bonding modes have ultra-narrow FWHM and ultra-high Q factors. We believe this is due to the special mode distributions of bonding modes. The energy of such modes is mainly trapped in the inner disk nanocavity, so the outer ring nanocavity can suppress the dissipation rate of photons confined to the disk nanocavity. In this case, FWHM and Q factor for mode I are 1.1 nm and 417.3, and for mode II are 1.4 nm and 418.9, respectively. Such values are better than previous similar works In consideration of the balance between Q factor and contraction ratio, we adopt the structure with Here, S represents the wavelength shift induced by unit change of surrounding refractive index, FOM indicates the optical resolution of the sensor. The resonant wavelengths and FWHM of mode I and II under different surrounding refractive index are shown in Fig. In summary, we propose a plasmonic hybrid ring-disk nano resonator with high Q factors and small footprint based on MIM waveguides. Due to plasmon hybridization, bonding and antibonding hybridized plasmon modes are generated, and ultra-narrow FWHM and ultra-high Q factors can be supported by bonding modes. The performance as a sensor with ultra-high FOM is also investigated. This work provides a way to improve the Q factor by using hybridized modes, and can be applied on light-matter interaction, sensing and nanolasers on chipscales.