We measure the dispersion of the Cu-O bond-stretching phonon mode in the high-temperature superconducting parent compound Ca 2 CuO 2 Cl 2 . Our density functional theory calculations predict a cosine-shaped bending of the dispersion along both the (ξ00) and (ξξ0) directions, while comparison with previous results on Ca 1.84 CuO 2 Cl 2 show it only along (ξ00), suggesting an anisotropic effect which is not reproduced in calculation at optimal doping. Comparison with isostructural La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 suggests that these calculations reproduce well the overdoped regime, however they overestimate the doping effect on the Cu-O bond-stretching mode at optimal doping. The role of electron-phonon coupling in high-temperature superconducting (HTS) cuprates has been debated since their discovery In this Letter, we present inelastic x-ray scattering (IXS) measurements of the parent compound Ca 2 CuO 2 Cl 2 Single crystals of Ca 2 CuO 2 Cl 2 were grown by the flux method as described in Ref. The main monochromator was set to the Si(999) Bragg reflection giving a wavelength of 0.6968 Å (17.7935 eV) and the beam size at the sample was 0.09 × 0.09 mm 2 FWHM (see Ref. DFT calculations of the phonon dispersion for Ca 2 CuO 2 Cl 2 and La 2 CuO 4 were car-ried out using the linear response or density-functional perturbation theory implemented in the framework of the mixed-basis pseudopotential method In Fig. Except for a slight shift, the higher optic mode along ∆ 3 agrees well with shell calculations. The DFT calculations predict a softening along Σ 1 similar to that along ∆ 1 . We found however that near optimal doping DFT calculations fail in both compounds along Σ 1 . The difference near the zone center is small, however it grows larger near the zone boundary since DFT predicts a strong downward dispersion towards the zone boundary. We find the opposite trend in Ca 1.84 CuO 2 Cl 2 which actually has an upward dispersion, while La 1.85 Sr 0.15 CuO 4 does disperse downwards but quite weakly. The apparent contradiction between theory and experiment is resolved by considering the overdoped HTS cuprates. As shown in the right panel of Fig, Unfortunately, a similar comparison cannot be made with Ca 2 CuO 2 Cl 2 since it has never been overdoped, neither with sodium Moreover, their calculated frequencies were shifted since they used an idealized tetragonal structure for undoped La 2 CuO 4 . On the contrary, our present calculations shown in Fig. In conclusion, we show that the softening of the Cu-O bond-stretching mode induced by doping in Ca 2-x CuO 2 Cl 2 is anisotropic near optimal doping, with a marked difference along ∆ 1 and Σ 1 , i.e. full-and half-breathing modes. This is in striking disagreement with DFT calculations which we show actually reproduces the modes in overdoped cuprates, using La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 as an example. This in turn could explain a smaller calculated effect on the ARPES extracted self-energy in DFT. An anisotropic electron-phonon coupling could be relevant to understanding the physics of cuprate superconductivity as pointed out by 