Scattering of spin-up and spin-down electrons while passing through a ferromagnetic domain wall leads to an additional resistance for transport current, usually observed prominently in constricted magnetic structures. In this report we use the resistance of the domain wall as a probe to find an indirect signatures of the theoretically predicted spin-singlet supercurrent to spin-triplet supercurrent conversion effect of ferromagnetic domain walls. Here we examine the domain wall induced resistance in Ni stripe in a bilayer Ni/Nb geometry in the normal state and in the superconducting state of Nb. By making a 6μm wide gap in the top Nb layer we routed the transport current through the Ni layer in the normal state and in the supercondcuting state of Nb. In the normal state of Nb, in-field transport measurements showed a clear domain wall magneto-resistance (DWMR) peak near the coercive field, where the domain wall density is expected to be maximum. Interestingly, however, below the superconducting transition temperature of Nb, the DWMR peak of the Ni layer showed a sharp drop in the field range where the number of domain walls become maximum. This observation may be a possible signature of magnetic domain wall induced spin-triplet correlations in the Ni layer due to the direct injection of spinsinglet Cooper pairs from Nb into the magnetic domain walls. Introduction of magnetization non-collinearity at the S-F interface leads to spin rotation In this direction, a long range supercurrent was reported in Josephson junctions with half metallic ferromagnetic CrO 2 barriers 5 . However, the results were less reproducible due to the random nature of inhomogeneous magnetic states at the SF interface. Later on, a series of experiments were reported demonstrating the generation of triplet supercurrent in SFS Josephson junctions by carefully engineering the SF interface to be magnetically inhomogeneous In order to utilize the domain wall as a singlet to triplet converter, singlet Cooper pairs need to be passed from one side of the domain wall to the other side, whereas the ferromagnetic exchange field in the domains forbids the presence of spin-singlet Cooper pairs. In this report, we have tried to inject spin-singlet Cooper pairs directly into the domain walls of a ferromagnetic layer from a superconducting layer deposited on top of the ferromagnetic layer in a bilayer stripe geometry as shown in Fig. Nb-Ni thin films with thickness of 55 nm and 100 nm were prepared at room temperature using dc-magnetron sputtering of high purity(99.999%) niobium and nickel targets on cleaned Si-SiO 2 substrates. Deposition of the films was carried out at a base pressure of 1 × 10 -9 mBar in an ultra high vacuum chamber. Optical lithography and reactive ion etching techniques were used to fabricate the Nb-Ni-Nb planar structures as shown in Fig A. Domain wall magneto-resistance in Nb/Ni stripes in the normal state of Nb: We have lithographically patterned stripes of width 6 μm from Ni/Nb bilayer thin films as shown in the schematic of Fig. In Fig. . Since this measurement was done very close to the superconducting transition, the Nb layer is expected to respond to domain wall stray fields very sensitively. Therefore, the origin of MR peaks observed at this temperature is the usual suppression of superconductivity due to the out of plane component of domain walls present in nickel as observed in earlier reports This is what we observe in the MR data measured at 7 K, as shown in Fig. A/cm 2 ). Therefore, the possibility of magnetic domain wall motion is excluded in the present work. We observe that the DWMR at 6 K is more compared to that at 7 K. Earlier report on Nb/Garnet bilayer has shown that superconductivity shrinks the domains In order to understand the suppressed DWMR effect in certain field range, in Fig. Due to the long-range nature, the triplet Cooper pairs may reduce the effective resistance observed in Fig. In an earlier report In conclusion, we have studied DWMR for temperatures above and below the superconducting transition in a Ni/Nb planar structure. In the Ni/Nb bilayer stripe geometry, by carving a gap in the Nb layer, we are able to measure the DWMR of the Ni layer below T c . In the conventional S-F bilayer geometries, used in the earlier reports, current is pre-dominantly confined to the superconducting layers and the intrinsic DWMR property would not be possible to measure. We observed unconventional drop in DWMR of Ni layer at temperatures below the superconducting transition of Nb layer, which was not present in the normal state of the Nb layer. We believe that our measurement geometry allowed for direct injection of singlet Cooper pairs into the domain walls which resulted in singlet-triplet conversion leading to a decrease in the domain resistance. Since this process is dependent on the number of domain walls, the effect was apparent in the magnetic field range where number of domain walls maximized. We have excluded other possibilities leading to the observation of similar drop in MR, such as domain and domain wall superconductivity and vortex locking-unlocking effects. Although the triplet super-current generated by domain walls is not directly accessible, our experiment provides a possible indirect signature of the theoretically predicted singlet-triplet conversion effect of domain walls. This experiment may motivate measurement of planar Josephson junctions with a magnetic gap which accommodates a single pinned domain wall which would be useful for the field of superconducting spintronics. and R 02 . The value of parameter F (ξ) has been considered as 0.3 based on the previous reports 2, We have calculated DWMR using the above equation. The number of domain walls is maximum near the coercive field (H c ) and hence the DWMR is maximum at this field. This fact is evidenced in Kerr microscope images of patterned nickel stripes shown in Fig. Here we plot the current dependence of domain wall magnetoresistance in the superconducting state (6K) of the Nb layer. With increasing current the Lorentz force on any nucleating vortices in the Nb layer would increase. Therefore, if a vortex locking-unlocking effect is the cause of the observed unconventional decrease in the DWMR then then the field at which the drop in DWMR happens would be different. However, this measurement (Fig. 