The g-factor anisotropy of the heavy quasiparticles in the hidden order state of URu2Si2 has been determined from the superconducting upper critical field and microscopically from Shubnikov-de Haas (SdH) oscillations. We present a detailed analysis of the g-factor for the α, β and γ Fermisurface pockets. Our results suggest a strong g-factor anisotropy between the c axis and the basal plane for all observed Fermi surface pockets. The observed anisotropy of the g-factor from the quantum oscillations is in good agreement with the anisotropy of the superconducting upper critical field at low temperatures, which is strongly limited by the paramagnetic pair breaking along the easy magnetization axis c. However, the anisotropy of the initial slope of the upper critical field near Tc cannot be explained by the anisotropy of the effective masses and Fermi velocities derived from quantum oscillations. The "hidden order" state in the heavy-fermion compound URu 2 Si 2 that develops below T 0 = 17.5 K is still under debate despite several decades of research after its discovery. In the present article, we study in detail the g-factor anisotropy for three different Fermi surface pockets in this tetragonal system. The orientation of the sample was tuned to study field directions between [001] and [100] and between [001] and [110], as well as within the basal plane for the quantum oscillation and the upper critical field measurements. So we could determine the g-factor anisotropy for different Fermi surface pockets in this multiband system. We compare the Fermi-surface selective g-factor from the quantum oscillations to the effective g-factor determined from the anisotropy of the upper critical field. The g-factors determined for each Fermi surface show an anisotropy between the c-axis and the basal plane. In addition we show that the observed g-factor of branch β is field dependent. The analysis of the spin slitting zero of the α branch is more delicate, as we observe 17 spin-splitting zero in the (010) plane and only 12 zeros in the (110) plane. This implies either a non-monotonously varying g-factor in the (010) plane, or the observation of spin-splitting zeros in the basal plane, which could not be resolved in the present experiment. Our results strongly suggest that the Fermi surface pockets with strongly anisotropic g-factor determine the superconducting upper critical field at low temperature. The superconducting pairing is known (from the large specific heat jump or the high orbital limitation) to be dominantly governed by the heaviest quasiparticle pockets with an strongly anisotropic Fermi velocities. In the present state of band-structure calculations in heavyfermion compounds, there is no derivation of the g-factor right at the Fermi level nor of its link with the bulk Pauli susceptibility. The interest of this study is to give an experimental framework for future theoretical developments. The Fermi surface of URu 2 Si 2 has been previously studied in detail by magnetic quantum oscillations, The Ising-type characteristics of the quasiparticles forming the Fermi surface in URu 2 Si 2 has been supported from the analysis 46 of old quantum oscillation experiments. when the quantum oscillation frequencies and effective masses m ⋆ for the spin-up and spin-down electrons are equal. The prefactor a 0 (θ) contains the other factors of the Lifshitz-Kosevich formula and is expected to vary slowly with angle. The effective mass m ⋆ can be determined independently from the temperature dependence of the oscillations amplitude. Spin-splitting zeros in quantum oscillations were observed in many systems such as copper or gold and have been used to determine the angular dependence of the g-factor in simple metals (see e.g. Ref. 48). It is also reported for quasi-two-dimensional metals with strongly anisotropic effective masses, In URu 2 Si 2 the observation of the spin-splitting zero has been reported only for the α branch in the (010) plane. over the orbit perpendicular to the applied magnetic field. μB g which is given by the superconducting gap ∆ and the effective g-factor for a single band isotropic superconductor. Here we report the observation of the spin-splitting zero for all observed Fermi surface pockets and extend previous work also to the (110) plane. URu 2 Si 2 crystallizes in the body-centered tetragonal ThCr 2 Si 2 -type crystal structure with space group I4/mmm. In the hidden order phase, the symmetry is lowered and the simple tetragonal unit cell volume below 17.5 K is twice that of the paramagnetic state. The space group of the hidden order state is still under discussion as it depends on the symmetry of the hidden order state. The temperature dependence of the resistance of the two crystals studied in Grenoble is shown in Fig. The relative amplitude of the different FFT frequencies changes between samples S1 and S2. While the β frequency has the highest amplitude for S1, the α frequency dominates the spectrum of S2. Figure Figure ) which is given by (v [001] F and v [100] F are the average Fermi velocity of the quasiparticles in the plane perpendicular to the direction of the magnetic field along [001] and [100], respectively. The temperature dependence of H c2 has been calculated numerically based on the Werthamer, Helfand and Hohenberg (WHH) model within the weak coupling and clean limit The angular dependence of the g-factor extracted from these calculations of H c2 is represented in Fig. The angular dependence of the quantum oscillation frequencies determined at 22 mK is plotted in Fig. The β Fermi surface consists of four pockets. As function of angle from [001] to [100] it splits into two branches: the β-branch and the heavy branch β ′ . [100] proves that the pockets are located between the Γ and X points of the simple tetragonal Brillouin zone. Furthermore, the β Fermi surface depends strongly on magnetic field. The angular dependence of the γ and η branches is similar to the previous report. In addition, we have been able to determine the angular dependence of two light branches λ 1 and λ 2 at temperatures above 600 mK (see Fig. The effect of this spin splitting is equivalent to a phase difference of φ = 2∆E = πg m ⋆ m0 between the oscillations coming from the spin up and spin down electrons and can give rise to interferences, leading to modulations of the amplitude of the quantum oscillations. This simple approach for free electrons neglects all field dependences of the cyclotron orbits, the effective mass and also the effective spin splitting g factor. The quantum oscillation frequencies F are related to the extremal cross-section A of the Fermi surface by the Onsager relation F = ( /2πe)A. However, the frequency F obs , which is measured in the experiment at a finite field, is related to the true quantum oscillation frequency by F obs (H) = F true -dFtrue dH . The amplitude of the quantum oscillations vanishes when the spin-splitting damping factor cos(πgm ⋆ /2m 0 ) is zero, i.e. when g(m ⋆ /m 0 ) = 2n -1 is an odd integer. However, if the observed frequency F obs is field dependent, F true has a non-linear field response. In this case the observed frequencies F ↑ and F ↓ of spin-up and spin-down Fermi surfaces are not identical and the damping factor does not vanish. Due to the non-linear response, the back-projected frequencies for spin-up and spin-down are not identical and two frequencies are observed. Generally, in heavy fermion systems the effective mass of the quasiparticles is expected to be spin dependent Figure In this color plot the appearance of spin zero is clearly observed for the α and β branches. Next we will discuss the oscillation of the amplitude for the different branches in detail. , both samples in our measurements show 17 zeros. This difference can be explained by a slight misalignment in the previous experiment As discussed above, in the basal plane the α branch splits in different frequencies The amplitude of the β ′ orbit quantum oscillations is represented as a function of angle between [001] and [100] in Fig. The γ Fermi-surface pocket is a small ellipsoid with F γ = 200 T along [001] and F γ = 70 T in plane. According to Eq. ( For the α Fermi surface the effective mass m ⋆ is rather isotropic. We have determined the effective mass m ⋆ for different directions and find m ⋆ [001] = 13.3m 0 , m ⋆ [100] = 9.7m 0 , and m ⋆ [110] = 11.3m 0 for fields applied along [001], [100], and [110], respectively. As discussed above, in the basal plane the α branch is splitted in at least three branches. The effective mass evolves smoothly between these principal axes [see Fig. Different solutions exist for g and the determination is not unique. Figure [110] and H [110]. This domain formation suggests to explain the observed breaking the tetragonal symmetry in the basal plane. The g-factor analysis is performed for the field values and directions, where the splitting of branch β is not resolved. The effective mass used for the analysis was measured and the same field interval and is thus an average mass of spin-up and spin-down electrons. The obtained effective g factor is defined as ) and is thus an average effective g factor of both spins. The effective g factor may depend of the spin in the vicinity of the c β (12T -15T) [100] axis as both spin shows different field dependence of the quantum oscillations frequencies. Near to [001] we could not determine the g-factor from the spin-splitting zeros due to the non-linear splitting of the β branch with field, and the observation of two different frequencies (β ↑ and β ↓ ) for H [001]. As discussed above, the number of spinsplitting zeros for the β branch is reduced under magnetic field. This field dependence is a consequence of the polarization of the small and heavy electron Fermi-surface pockets β under magnetic field along the easy magnetization c-axis. [001] β -g [100] β ≈ 2.4. Between [001] and [110], the oscillation could not be detected in the field interval 6 T-9 T. The variation of the g-factor for β ′ branch in the field interval 12 T-15 T with angle from [001] to [100] is also represented in Fig. By quantum oscillation experiments we have been able to investigate the conduction electron g-factor of URu 2 Si 2 selectively for different Fermi-surface pockets. For the α Fermi pocket our results are compatible with a rather large g-factor ansisotropy. We could show that the angular dependence is not universal between [001] and the basal plane, resulting for the α-branch, to an unexplained anisotropy in the basal plane. From the present experimental situation, it is not possible to make definite conclusions on the values of the g-factor of the α Fermi surface pocket. The set of values: g ≈ 1 is only a possible solution, under the assumption of a monotonously varying g-factor from the c axis to the basal plane (see Fig. The g-factor for the β Fermi-surface pocket is also highly anisotropic. The analysis in the field range from 6 T to 9 T suggests that g β is varying from g β = 0 in the plane to g β = 2.4 for H [001]. Interestingly, the determination of the g-factor seems dependent on the magnetic field. From the analysis of the spin-splitting zeros in the field range from 12 T to 15 T, a possible solution is a vanishing g-factor in the basal plane and g β = 1.5 along the c axis. This field dependence of the measured g factor may be an experimental artefact coming from the field and spin dependence of the effective mass of the β branch, which could not be precisely determined in this study and was neglected in the extraction of the g factor. Under these conditions the most reliable value for the g factor of the β branch would be the one extracted on the field interval 6 T -9 T. In this field range the g-factor variation for the β branch is similar to the variation of g α and one possible solution for g γ in the same plane. We point out that even the angular dependence of g for the heavy branch β′ show the same anisotropy. Thus we can conclude that the g-factor of all Fermi surfaces show a strong angular dependence. However this variation of g is slightly bigger to that determined from the weak coupling analysis of the upper critical field g A relativistic DFT calculation predicted an Ising behavior for the band-like 5f electrons in URu 2 Si 2 with magnetic moments along the c axis and no anisotropy in the basal plane. A different theoretical approach claims that the Ising quasiparticles in URu 2 Si 2 result from the hybridization of the conduction electrons with Ising non-Kramers 5f 2 doublet states of the uranium atoms This localized approach has been discussed in Ref. 46 and the authors have fitted the g-factor anisotropy of the α pocket in the angular range from [001] to [100] and get cos θ = 0.8. As mentioned above, the g-factor determined by quantum oscillations is Fermi surface selective, and results from an average of the g-factor of electrons on the orbit perpendicular to the applied magnetic field. We have shown that the g-factor for all detected Fermi surfaces are consistent with a strong g-factor anisotropy. The determination of the g-factor in heavy-fermion systems is rare. A standard method to determine the g-factor in magnetic insulators is electron spin resonance (ESR). However, a narrow ESR line in Kondo lattices have been only reported in some Yb-or Ce-based compounds which show very strong ferromagnetic fluctuations such as e.g. YbRh 2 Si 2 or CeRuPO. As pointed out in Ref. 107, the strong uniaxial g-factor anisotropy is also compatible with a non-conventional commensurate charge density wave. Recently a chiralitydensity wave has been proposed as order parameter of the hidden-order state from Raman-scattering experiments, where a particular inelastic excitation with A 2g symmetry has been observed. This would also explain why almost the same anisotropy of the electronic g-factor is observed on the different Fermi-surface pockets. The remaining differences are due to differences in the effective mass and to details in the band structure, which results in a momentum dependent spin-orbit coupling. Finally, we want to compare the g factor anisotropy determined from quantum oscillations with that deduced from the anisotropy of the upper critical field. The gfactor determined from the paramagnetic limitation of the upper critical field H c2 gives an average over all the Fermi-surface pockets contributing to the superconducting state. Near T c , the observed initial slope of the upper critical field near T sc for a clean superconductor, , where v F is an average Fermi velocity perpendicular to the applied field. The Fermi velocities can be determined from the quantum oscillation experiments and are given in Tab. I for different Fermi surface pockets. It is obvious that the strong anisotropic initial slope of the upper critical field cannot be explained by the anisotropy of the observed Fermi velocities. Indeed, to explain the factor 2.2 of anisotropy between H c2 for H c or H ⊥ , a factor 1.5 is required on the corresponding Fermi velocities. For theβ branch, which has the smallest Fermi velocity observed, the values of v F ⊥ H are of the right order to explain the measured value of H c2 ≈ (-11T/K), applying formulas for a spherical Fermi surface and s-wave superconductivity (v F = 6050m/s). But then, a value of 8900 m/s would be required for H c, much larger than the actual value. This points out the difficulty of precise quantitative comparisons between measured normal state properties and H c2 measurements: already for s-wave superconductors, it is known that the average v F determining H c2 involves an average over all Fermi sheets weighted by the pairing potential We have determined selectively the electronic g-factor and its anisotropy for the α, β, and γ Fermi surface pockets of URu 2 Si 2 between [001] and the basal plane. For all detected Fermi surface pockets, our results are consistent with a strongly anisotropic g-factor. For the β and γ branches, possible solutions exist with vanishing in plane g-factor. For the α branch, we observed different numbers of spin-splitting zeros in the (010) and (110) planes, which indicate either a non-monotonous variation of the g factor in one of these planes or an additional anisotropy in the basal plane. Future experiments in high magnetic fields have to be performed to clarify the g-factor anisotropy of the α branch. The determined anisotropy of the g-factor by quantum oscillations is in good agreement with that from the superconducting upper critical field. However, the anisotropy of the initial slope of the upper critical field cannot be explained simply by the observed Fermi surface pockets. An anisotropic heavy Fermi surface pocket still has not been detected in quantum oscillations. The reported determination of the anisotropy of the g-factor by quantum oscillations is an important reference for other heavy fermion systems, showing that itinerant quasiparticles in a metal can have a very strongly anisotropic g-factor (Ising-like). Moreover, we hope that our results will stimulate calculations of the g-factor from the electronic band structure.