Nanostructuring hard optical crystals has so far been exclusively feasible at their surface, as stress induced crack formation and propagation has rendered high precision volume processes ineffective. We show that the inner chemical etching reactivity of a crystal can be enhanced at the nanoscale by more than five orders of magnitude by means of direct laser writing. The process allows to produce cm-scale arbitrary three-dimensional nanostructures with 100 nm feature sizes inside large crystals in absence of brittle fracture. To showcase the unique potential of the technique, we fabricate photonic structures such as sub-wavelength diffraction gratings and nanostructured optical waveguides capable of sustaining sub-wavelength propagating modes inside yttrium aluminum garnet crystals. This technique could enable the transfer of concepts from nanophotonics to the fields of solid state lasers and crystal optics. The optical properties of a material are known to depend not only on its chemistry but also on its sub-wavelength structure. With the inception of the photonic crystal (1, 2) and metamaterial Laser lithography as developed by the semiconductor industry is an intrinsic surface processing technique where a photoresist is two-dimensionally (2D) nanostructured with UV light, and, followed by various subtractive and additive processes, enables the mass production of highquality nanophotonic planar devices Departing from prevailing approaches, we propose that the inner chemical reactivity of a crystal, given by its wet etch rate, can be locally modified at the nanometer scale by means of multiphoton 3D laser writing (3DLW) in absence of amorphization and crack formation. We show that cmlong empty pore lattices with arbitrary feature sizes at the 100-nm level can be created inside some of the most used crystals in the laser industry (yttrium aluminum garnet and sapphire), in absence of brittle fracture. An etching selectivity larger than 10 5 , never observed before in a photoirradiated material, is achieved between the modified and pristine crystalline states. This allows the design and fabrication of nanophotonic elements inside a crystal that provide optical responses determined by their sub-wavelength structure. To achieve volume nanostructuring of crystals at large scale it is necessary to arrange nanopores in arbitrary close-packed structures for macroscopic lengths (mm to cm scale) without causing brittle fracture of the crystal due to excessive stress accumulation. In addition, pores have to be written in arbitrary directions, their size must be controlled with at least ~10 nm reproducibility to achieve functional nanophotonic devices, and the pore cross-sectional shape must be tailorable. We show that all these features (pore direction, size, shape, filling fraction, and length) can be controlled by combining 3DLW and wet etching of YAG crystal. Figure The creation of air pores photonic lattices makes it possible to achieve nanophotonic structures inside the crystal with a spatial resolution equivalent to state-of-the-art multiphoton polymerization lithography As shown in Figure Figure A different route to achieve larger air filling fractions is by etching larger pores. Large air filling fraction structures are also essential for tailoring the properties of microstructured optical waveguides (MOWs) such as the dispersion, mode size and nonlinear coefficient Reaching a high air filling fraction inside a crystal requires the fabrication of extended thin crystalline nanolayers without crystal fracture. The creation of such lattices was validated by fabricating a centered orthogonal lattice with in-plane pore spacing of 700 nm and pore crosssections of 276x972 nm 2 (see Fig. Having established the etching rates and achievable features sizes of the crystalline nanostructures inside YAG, we sought to determine whether: (1) the crystal nanopores are indeed void millimeters away from the entrant wet etching surface, and (2) functional sub-wavelength nanophotonics elements on the large scale can indeed be successfully realized. To test the first question, a nanograting with sub-wavelength pitch (700 nm) was fabricated to be tested at 1070 nm wavelength (see Fig. Calculations (20) assuming air filled pores are shown in Fig. To further evaluate the quality and potential of the crystal 3D nanolithography technique, the fabrication of MOWs with different lattice spacings and cavity sizes was studied (see Fig. Figure Figure Besides the novel applications on crystalline 3D nanophotonics and nonlinear optics, to which this technique gives a large impetus, the 3D structuring of YAG laser crystals also opens up new ways to overcome current limitations in the design of compact solid-state rare-earth-doped lasers, such as for the integration of traditional cavity elements (e.g. mirrors, dispersion control elements, microfluidic cooling channels) directly in the gain media itself with expected improvements in compactness, robustness and performance of the devices. The possibility of fabricating large nanostructured YAG laser crystals with reduced surface defects due to the wet etching process also opens up potential for new applications in ultra-strong deformable laser nanofibers Commercial yttrium aluminum garnet (YAG) (FOCtek Photonics, Inc) with sizes 20x10x2 mm 3 and crystal orientation <111>, and c-plane <0001> sapphire substrates, were processed by means of standard three-dimensional laser writing (3DLW) with an ytterbium mode-locked ultrafast fiber laser with 1030 nm wavelength, 350 fs pulse duration, and linear polarization (Satsuma, Amplitude Systemes). The laser repetition rate for all the experiments here presented was set at 500 kHz, however trials at 1 MHz were found to yield qualitatively equal results, not shown here for the sake of brevity. A half-wave plate in combination with a linear polarizer were used to control the laser power, and a quarter-wave plate was used to convert linear polarization to circular. A 1.4 numerical aperture (NA) oil-immersion Olympus objective was used to tightly focus the laser pulses inside the crystals. The working distance of the used objective was of 0.15 mm which limits to around 0.2 mm the maximum depth at which the material can be processed considering the refractive index of the crystal. Three dimensional nanopositioning of the sample was done by means of computer controlled XYZ linear stages (ANT-series, Aerotech, Inc). Line scanning speeds were always of 1 mm/s (2 mm/s in the case of 1 MHz repetition rate). After laser irradiation, crystals were laterally polished to expose irradiated structures and perform wet chemical etching. YAG crystals were etched in phosphoric acid 44 wt.% solution in deionized water. Etching was performed in a magnetic stirrer with a digital ceramic heating plate at 350 K (IKA C-MAG HS 4). Sapphire crystals were etched in 20 wt.% HF solution in deionized water, at 308 K in ultrasonic bath. After etching, samples were cleaned in three consecutive ultrasonic baths with deionized water, acetone, and methanol, respectively. In the case of YAG, no dependence on the crystalline axis was found for the pore size and wet etching rate within our experimental resolution, so an arbitrary reference frame was set where x and y axes define the pore's cross-sectional plane, and z defines the pore length axis. Writing laser direction was along -y axis in all figures. In the case of sapphire, only one laser fabrication experiment was performed with pores within the <0001> c-plane at an arbitrary direction. Back-scattered scanning electron microscopy (BSD-SEM) was performed with a compact tabletop SEM on uncoated crystals at 10 kV (Phenom Pro, Phenom World). All images of air pore lattices were digitally processed with the open-source Fiji image processing package Fabricated sub-wavelength diffraction gratings were characterized at 1070 nm with a fiber laser. A linear polarizer was used to set the polarization to transversal electric (TE) with respect to the grating and a photodiode (PD300, OPHIR) was used to measure the power of the incoming, reflected, zero order and -1 diffracted order beams, respectively. Microstructured optical waveguides (MOWs) were characterized at 1310 nm and 1550 nm with laser diodes and linear polarizers, and the imaging of the MOWs output modes was performed on an InGaAs focal plane array camera with 640x512 pixels (Bobcat-640-GigE, Xenics). Free space light in-and outcoupling from the MOWs was performed with 0.68 and 0.55 NA aspheric lenses respectively, which had anti-reflection coating (1050-1600nm) (C330TM-C, Thorlabs). The theoretical design of the sub-wavelength gratings was performed following the two-mode interference model developed by Clausnitzer et al. Nanostructuring of transparent solids by means of laser techniques has been a topic of research for many decades. A relevant example has been the fabrication of embedded nanograting structures in glass, first demonstrated by Shimotsuma et al. Previous works exploiting 3DLW in YAG crystals to achieve 3D photonic structures where based on the micro-explosion method (31) (i.e. optical breakdown) and resulting structures had excess stress, often cracked if the in-plane pore spacing was lower than 2 μm and had vanishing photonic properties due to the very low refractive index contrast between photo-modified and unirradiated volumes. The nonlinear photo-modification process in femtosecond-pulse 3DLW in YAG crystals has recently been assigned to a multiphoton ionization process corresponding to a five-photon absorption In this work, the laser power dependence of the diameter of etched nanopores was studied for both linear and circular laser beam polarizations. Circular polarization was always used for fabrication of photonic structures (such as gratings or microstructured optical waveguides) since that polarization state allows to reproducibly fabricate air pores in the nanoscale region below 200 nm with close to circular cross-section, as well as because it decouples the laser scanning and electric field polarization directions. The laser power was measured before the focusing lens and the transparency of the lens at 1030 nm (45%) was taken into account to obtain an estimate of the laser power at the focus. Figure Multiscan in 3DLW of solids, i.e. the possibility to write closely spaced features, requires that written features do not scatter light excessively. In the case here reported, material is not removed with the irradiation but a faint modification is performed that appears to not affect significantly subsequent irradiations. Fig. Wet etching of garnets and other oxide crystals in hot phosphoric acid is well known since the 60's, see for example Y3Al5O12 + 8 H3PO4 → 3YPO4 + 5 AlPO4 + 12 H2O At this stage, we do not know which exact mechanism produces the observed etching selectivity at the molecular level within photo-modified and pristine YAG. However, due to the fact that very dense pore lattices can be fabricated in absence of brittle fracture of samples (see Fig. Since other garnets than YAG are known to etch well in H3PO4 acid Nanopores with mm-scale lengths. To achieve practical devices, nanophotonic lattices should have footprints from the micrometric to the cm scale. This implies that pores should have length to diameter ratios on the order of 10 5 , a feature currently unachievable by any fabrication technique in brittle materials. We tested the etching of long pores on the sub-cm scale: long (3.1 mm along z reference axis) nanopores were fabricated with both facets polished so that wet etching could evolve from both sides. Pores had cross-sections of 368 x 726 nm 2 and were separated by 10 μm so that they can be optically distinguished under microscope inspection. Figure Nanopores with arbitrarily long lengths. The main limitation in the etching length of 3DLW lines is the difficulty in refreshing the exhausted acid inside the nanopores. When lattices need to have footprints beyond the mm scale, a strategy for etching arbitrarily long structures was developed profiting from the 3D capability of the lithography method: auxiliary vertical etching pores (VEPs) were designed and successfully implemented to provide additional access points for the acid beside the end facets, or even without them. This approach allows to fabricate complex 3D nanostructures with arbitrary lengths. Figure The theoretical properties of fabricated MOWs were evaluated through FEM computation. The effective indices of the fundamental modes of all MOWs were computed from the UV region (250 nm) to the mid-IR (5500nm). From this data the wavelength dependent dispersion parameter of the MOWs was evaluated, obtaining similar results to those observed in microstructured optical fibers (MOFs) and photonic crystal fibers (PCFs) made of glass. The appearance of two zerodispersion wavelengths for MOWs with micron and sub-micron lattice parameters is found to be a characteristic of these waveguides (see Fig. Laser structuring of sapphire crystals has been a subject of research since more than a decade now. Important seminal work was done by Juodkazis et al Under the same 3DLW conditions as in YAG and circular laser polarization, nanopores of ~200 nm cross-section and mm-scale lengths were observed to form in c-axis cut sapphire substrates (sere Fig. In contrast with YAG, in sapphire the appearance of multiple pores along the writing direction was observed, which we ascribe to birefringence-induced focus splitting in sapphire in contrast to the case of YAG for which this aberration is absent due to its index isotropy. Birefringence-induced focus splitting in 3DLW of crystals has been previously studied, and occurs when focusing is performed at high numerical aperture along the optical c-axis of the birefringent crystal To etch laser-written sapphire crystals, both H3PO4 and HF acid solutions were tested and only the latter produced observable etching of pores. The etching rate of nanopores was observed to be maximal for pores written at ~10 mW, for which an etching rate of 78.8 ±0.7 μm/h was measured during the first hour of etching. The etching rate of un-modified sapphire was determined by measuring the difference in width and height of different pores etched for 40 hours, and determined to be of <1 nm/h (0.34 ±0.25 nm/h) in average. These different etching rates yield a selectivity of ~10 5 (2.3 ±1.7 x10 5 ), similar to that found for nanopores in YAG (3.6 ±2.5 x10 5 ), and more than one order of magnitude larger than that previously observed for etching amorphous microchannels in sapphire 