We develop an electrokinetic technique that continuously manipulates colloidal particles to concentrate into patterned particulate groups in an energy efficient way, by exclusive harnessing of the intrinsic Joule heating effects. Our technique exploits the alternating current electrothermal flow phenomenon which is generated due to the interaction between non-uniform electric and thermal fields. Highly non-uniform electric field generates sharp temperature gradients by generating spatially-varying Joule heat that varies along radial direction from a concentrated point hotspot. Sharp temperature gradients induce local variation in electric properties which, in turn, generate strong electrothermal vortex. The imposed fluid flow brings the colloidal particles at the centre of the hotspot and enables particle aggregation. Further, manoeuvering structures of the Joule heating spots, different patterns of particle clustering may be formed in a low power budget, thus, opening up a new realm of on-chip particle manipulation process without necessitating highly focused laser beam which is much complicated and demands higher power budget. This technique can find its use in Lab-on-a-chip devices to manipulate particle groups, including biological cells. Manipulation and assembly of colloidal particles including biological cells are essential in colloidal crystals, biological assays, bioengineered tissues, and engineered Laboratory-ona-chip (LOC) devices. Because of several advantages such as, absence moving parts, easy integration with other components, target specific control etc dielectrophoresis (DEP) is one of popular technique for the manipulation of molecules and bio-particles in LOC devices. Recently, a new technique, known as rapid electrokinetic patterning (REP) have emerged as an alternative method for concentration, patterning and sorting of colloidal particles. An alternating electric field is applied between the electrodes with appropriate AC frequency. The hot-spot causes local gradient in electrical properties (conductivity and permittivity) which generate an electrokinetic force, commonly known as electrothermal forces. Toroidal vortex motion caused by electrothermal forces brings the particles at the illuminated spot. Using this technique nanoparticles are also manipulated on the electrode surface. Electrokinetic mechanisms often involve Joule heating, which is generated due to flow of electric current through the electrolyte. The present work reports an alternative method of electrothermal flow, to manipulate and concentrate colloidal particles, which use internally evoked Joule heating to generate sharp temperature gradients, and thus, may be named as Joule heating-induced REP. To generate the temperature gradient towards a hotspot, optically-induced REP uses expensive infrared laser. Only 15% of the total power of the laser reaches the illuminated spot, The schematic of the complete set up is shown in the Fig. In The bottom electrode gets in contact with top electrode through the electrolyte placed on drilled portion of the insulating material. A highly non-uniform electric field is generated on activation of the AC signal. The non-uniformity depends on the diameter of the hole. A larger diameter passes the electric field across a large volume of the fluid and a uniform electric field will be imposed. However, electrothermal motion is governed by a sharp temperature gradient which is caused by a non-uniform electric field. We adopt a very small hole into the insulating layer to generate a non-uniform electric field and a sharp temperature gradient imposed from the non-uniform electric field. The strong thermal field introduces local variation in dielectric properties of the solution. To maintain the charge neutrality, free charges are induced into the bulk liquid, which causes electrothermal vortex. where Alternating current electrothermal fluid flow is the coupled effect of electrical, thermal and velocity fields. Application of electric field induces temperature gradient in the media. Temperature gradients and electric field, combined together, impose bulk body force on the fluid. Under quasi-electrostatic condition (i.e., negligible magnetic field effect is governed by where  is the voltage. For small temperature changes, variation in dielectric properties can be expressed as 67 where T is the local temperature and 0 T denotes the reference temperature. For aqueous solution, the gradients of dielectric properties are The non-uniform electric field generates thermal field through the induction of spatiallyvarying Joule heat into the medium. The energy equation which governs the temperature variation reads where  is the mass density of the fluid. p C is the specific heat and k is the thermal conductivity. The Joule heat where  is the fluid viscosity. p is the pressure. V is the fluid velocity. The vortex motion to carry the colloidal particles towards the trapped region is controlled by the electrothermal forces ( ) The schematic of the physical system and boundary conditions are shown in the Fig. insulator-electrode, and fluid-electrode interfaces. For velocity field, standard no slip and no-penetration boundary conditions are imposed on the electrode and insulator surfaces. Three-dimensional simulations are performed using the commercial software package COMSOL Multiphysics to obtain the temperature distribution and velocity field. We consider only the electrothermal forces to play a leading role in colloidal clustering as it is the dominating force over other electrokinetic forces. The effect of buoyancy force can be neglected compared to other forces at reduced volume (characteristics length of the chamber 100μm  ). Power budget is estimated and shown in the inset of Fig. Electrode spacing also affects the particle concentration process. Channel between the electrodes was made by fixing double-sided adhesive tape at the edge of the insulating layer. So far, all the experiments were performed fixing a single tape between the electrodes, which builds a electrode gap of 75 μm, (=35+40, 40 μm for inslulating layer). Experiments were also performed changing the Electrode gap i.e., height of the channel placing more number of tapes between the electrodes. For one tape, the velocity of the fluid shows a magnitude of 0.88 mm/s (applied voltage 8.75 V). However, for two tapes (thickness of 110 μm ) velocity drops to 0.17 mm/s. As mentioned before that power law dependence of fluid velocity on electric field strength is between voltage, gap and electric field is ~/ E g  , g is the electrode gap. Therefore, for a given applied voltage electric field strength decreases with decreasing electrode spacing. Hence, fluid velocity also decreases with decreased electrode spacing. The particles are concentrated at lower rate for 110 μm g  . When we added one more tape between the electrode ( 145μm g  ) the rate of particle aggregation almost becomes negligible. Particle aggregation process further depends on the shape of the hole on the bottom electrode. Accordingly, Joule heat pattern will be generated resembling the shape of the opened portion on the bottom electrode. Fig. We have experimentally demonstrated AC electrokinetic technique based on generating non-uniform Joule heating for particle aggregation and pattern formation of particle groups. The coupling between electric and thermal fields generates toroidal vortex motion where surrounding fluid approaches a targeted hotspot location and particles are carried into that spot to form a particle cluster. Our designed microfluidic chip for particle manipulation process is highly energy saving compared to laser-induced particle manipulation. Further, patterning the heat generation distribution, different structures of accumulated particles can be formed. See supplementary material for Movies of particle accumulation (Movie1) and no particle accumulation (Movie2) scenarios at voltage rms 7 V . ũ E . On the other hand, relation