In this paper, we present a plasmonic refractometric sensor that works under normal incidence; allowing its integration on a fiber tip. The sensor's material and geometry exploit the large scattering cross-section given by high-contrast of the index of refraction subwavelength dielectric gratings. Our design generates a hybrid plasmonic-Fano resonance due to the interference between the surface plasmon resonance and the grating response. We optimize the sensor with a merit function that combines the quality parameter of the resonance and the field enhancement at the interaction volume where the plasmon propagates. Our device shows a high sensitivity (1000 nm/RIU) and a high Figure of Merit (775 RIU -1 ). Degradation in performance is negligible through a wide dynamic range up to 0.7 RIU. These quantitative parameters overperform compared to similar plasmonic sensors. Photonic nanostructures control light propagation through optical media. They can function as perfect absorbers The performance parameters of a SPR sensor are: sensitivity, Figure of Merit (FOM), resolution, linearity, dynamic range, and reproducibility Many approaches enhance performance of SPR optical sensors with bi-metals The operation of a spectrally-interrogated plasmonic sensor relies on the precise measurement of the spectral location of the minimum (or maximum) of its response. A narrow spectral peak improves the accuracy of the sensor. In practice, Fano resonances are an option where the SPR combines coherently with a continuous spectral response Another contribution demonstrates a SPR sensor that maximizes the electromagnetic energy at the metal/dielectric interface (where surface plasmon are generated) The paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the Fano resonance parameterizing the SPR, the background spectrum, and the coherent superposition with an analytical model which is applicable to photonic nanostructures. In subsection II-A, we describe the material and geometry of our structure. Then, we analyze the hybrid Fano resonances due to subwavelength dielectric gratings that scatter radiation towards a metal/dielectric interface (where the SPR is generated). We use COMSOL Multiphysics (COMSOL Inc., Burlington, MA 018013, USA, www.comsol.com) to calculate the spectral response, near-field maps, scattering efficiency, and several relevant device parameters. We also evaluate and fit the reflectance of the sensor to the model. Previous contributions show a very good agreement with experimental results and validate this method Fano resonances manifest when a discrete state interferes with a continuum of states where r bk,j represents the coefficients of the polynomial expansion. Our model considers a Lorentzian shape for the plasmon response, and a linear variation for the continuous spectrum. The linear response is valid as long as the spectral range is narrow enough compared with the width of the SPR and the spectral range considered in the analysis. Therefore, under the linear approach of the continuous spectral contribution, the spectral reflectivity can be described as: The term in square brackets is the first order polynomial approximation to the broad spectral response of the system. This linearization works because the analyzed spectral range, ∆ω, is quite narrow around the central frequency of the resonance (in our case ∆ω 0.03ω 0 ). The second term is a Lorentzian line-shape centered at ω 0 , with a width γ. Both responses are considered in amplitude and are coupled through the complex coefficient f , that describes their interference. We can interpret the coefficients of our model as: r bk,0 describes the mean reflectivity for frequencies out of the resonance, and r bk,1 is associated with the slope of this spectral reflectivity. The modulus of f describes the interaction of the plasmon resonance with the broad spectral response. If the plasmon resonance produces a dip in reflectance, the phase of f takes values around π denoting a minus sign, i.e., a decrease in reflectivity. More generally speaking, f is related to the asymmetry of a Fano resonance profile. The plasmon resonance is then defined by its central frequency, ω 0 , and its width, γ. Finally, a combination of the two defines the quality factor of the resonance: that we use in this paper to optimize the analyzed structures. We analyze the Fano resonance in a structure with a 2D periodic dielectric grating embedded in a dielectric layer. In a practical realization, radiation can be delivered and extracted through a fiber probe (see Fig. The device is built on a glass substrate (SiO 2 ). The first structure is a 2D grating of GaP rectangles with period p, width GW, and thickness (height) GH. The grating relief is spin-coated with MgF 2 We analyze our design with COMSOL Multiphysics to extract information about the spectral reflectivity. The structure is excited with a plane-parallel monochromatic TM wave (the magnetic field, H, has Z component only) with an input amplitude of 1 A/m. Also, we map the electromagnetic field generated by the structure to identify the locations where it is enhanced and where the system sustains plasmon resonances at the desired interface (device/analyte). From a physical point of view, two components combine to generate a Fano line-shape: (i) the wide spectral response generated by the subwavelength dielectric grating, and (ii) the SPR produced at the metal/dielectric interface. This combination is responsible for the observed Fano resonance that disturbs the SPR and generates symmetric or asymmetric lineshapes depending on their mutual interaction (parameterized with f in Eq. ( Figure We optimize the performance of the device as a plasmonic sensor by combining two parameters that describe both the sharpness of the resonance, and the amount of light that interacts with the analyte. These two parameters are the quality factor of the resonance, Q (see Eq. ( We choose this merit function after evaluating other combinations of these two parameters, including the arithmetic mean, and the root mean squared. All of them produced the same output for the geometric parameters (GW and GH) of the structure where the Merit Function is maximized. We present the results of the optimization process for different parameters in Fig. Once the shape of the grating is fixed, we analyze other geometrical parameters. The thickness of the metallic layer, t m , affects the surface plasmon generated at the metal dielectric interface and its longitudinal range. Through further optimization, we find a value of t m = 50 nm. This evaluation is represented in Fig. In this section, we discuss the device's performance compared with alternative designs, including the classical Kretschmann configuration. A previous contribution optimized the material setup of a subwavelength metallic grating to maximize the amount of energy transferred to the metal surface for SPR generation The interaction volume describes the portion in the analyte that is exposed to a large value of electromagnetic field due to the generation and propagation of the plasmon resonance. This interaction volume increases with an optimized geometry that gives a large value of FE. In figure where H z,0 is the maximum amplitude obtained at the metal/analyte interface. The enhancement factor amplitude of the maximum field is ×277, ×183, and ×116 for our structure (i), the Kretschmann setup (ii), and metallic grating case (iii), respectively. Figure To validate our proposal as a refractometric sensor, we evaluate sensitivity, S B,λ , and Figure of Merit, FOM, which are defined as and where λ M denotes the location of the minimum (or maximum) of the reflectivity (transmisivity) of the retrieved spectrum, and FWHM refers to the full-width-at-half-maximum (width of the spectral feature). For a system that performs with a maximized Merit Function (see Eq. ( Table The sensing community has defined sensitivity and Figure of Merit as quality parameters to compare refractometric sensors. These performance parameters can be evaluated from the spectral line-shape of the resonance when the system monitors and measures the change in the spectral response. A hybrid plasmonic-Fano resonance can be created when a narrow SPR coherently combines with a continuous spectrum. Moreover, a Fano resonance may show a narrower spectral response along with an asymmetric behavior, making it a good candidate for improved performance plasmonic sensors. In this contribution, we show a physical model of the Fano resonance, and test it through simulation. The model superimposes a smooth spectral variation (approximated as a linear spectrum) with a Lorentzian shape (characteristic of a SPR). We have interpreted and related the parameters of our model with the elements that define both sensitivity and Figure of Merit. Furthermore, we parameterize the Lorentzian contribution with the central frequency, ω 0 , and width, γ; which we then use to evaluate S B,λ , and FOM (after the corresponding transformation into wavelengths). Based on previous results, we propose a simple plasmonic device that generates Fano resonances using a dielectric subwavelength grating. The resonance occurs at the metal/analyte interface due to the scattering originated from a high-contrast index of refraction structure modeled as a 2D extruded grating. We chose dielectric materials to reduce absorption and avoid ineffective resonances that propagate as guiding modes in metallic structures. This structure operates at normal incidence and outperforms previously reported metallic subwavelength gratings by doubling the field enhancement at the region of interest while FOM is also increased by 26%. We optimized the device adjusting its geometrical parameters: shape of the grating, thicknesses of the metallic layer supporting the SPR, and the planarization dielectric layer. Moreover, the design includes a 10 nm-thick passivization layer to exploit the plasmonic response of silver and preserve the analyte biocompatibility. To optimize the sensor, we have defined a Merit Function that combines the quality factor of the SPR and the field enhancement at the measurement interface. Afterwards, we numerically tested the proposed device to calculate both the sensitivity and the Figure of Merit of the sensor. From our results, our design has the following characteristics: (i) operates linearly for n ∈ [1.3, 2]; (ii) sensitivity remains between 980 and 1000 nm/RIU, and (iii) FOM varies between 667 and 775 RIU -1 . In summary, our design uses hybrid plasmonic-Fano resonances to improve the performance of refractometric sensors. This device can be integrated at the end of an optical fiber and also works under normal incidence illumination. It takes advantage of the non-absorbing properties of the high-contrast index of refraction subwavelength dielectric gratings. Also, the geometry and dimensions consider fabrication constraints. It provides a large sensitivity and figure of merit within a wide range in the index of refraction of the analyte, thus suitable for multifunctional sensing. This makes our system very competitive compared to previously reported results.