We studied the diffusion coefficient of hot electrons of GaN crystals in moderate electric (1...10 kV/cm) and magnetic (1...4 T) fields. Two configurations, parallel and crossed fields, are analysed. The study was carried out for compensated bulk-like GaN samples at different lattice temperatures (30...300 K) and impurity concentrations (10 16 ...10 17 cm -3 ). We found that at low lattice temperatures and low impurity concentrations, electric-field dependencies of the transverse-to-current components of the diffusion tensor are non-monotonic for both configurations, while the diffusion processes are greatly controlled by the magnetic field. With an increase of the lattice temperature or the impurity concentration, the behaviour of the diffusion tensor becomes more monotonous and less affected by the magnetic field. We showed that such behaviour of the diffusion processes is due to the distinct kinetics of the hot electrons in polar semiconductors with strong electron-optical phonon coupling. We suggest that measurements of the diffusion coefficient of the electrons subjected to electric and magnetic fields facilitate the identification of features of different electron transport regimes and the development of more efficient devices and practical applications. The results of intensive investigations of wide-bandgap semiconductor compounds, in the particular, group-III nitrides, such as GaN, InN, AlN and related quantum heterostructures, can find various applications in the modern high-power and high-frequency microelectronics and optoelectronics In contrast to conventional A III B V materials, such as GaAs, InSb or InP, the widebandgap nitrides (for GaN the bandgap is 3.2 eV) are described by the large separation between the lower Г-valley and upper valleys separation (~1.2...1.5 eV for GaN), the high optical phonon energy, ћω0 (for GaN, ћω0 ≈ 92 meV), the strong electron-optical-phonon coupling (the Fröhlich constant is ~0. In papers Additional useful information about the streaming-like transport regime can be obtained investigating the galvano-magnetic characteristics at different configurations of the electric, E, and magnetic, H, fields. For compensated GaN, in crossed configuration of E and H, it was found the strong effect of the magnetic field on the streaming-like electron distribution function. In particular, it was shown that in the range of the moderate electric (3...10 kV/cm) and magnetic (1.5...5 T) fields, the electron transport occurs in the form of a vortex-like motion in the momentum space. At higher magnetic fields, the effect of a collapse of the dissipative current occurs due to the strong suppression of the electron-optical phonon emission This paper continues investigations of the hot electron transport in compensated GaN with a focus on the diffusion processes of the electrons in the real space. These processes are actual for systems with nonuniform electron concentrations and are described by the Fick law: where Ji is i-projection of the diffusion flux density, Dij is the diffusion coefficient tensor. Below we will study the E-and H-field dependences of Dij. It is well-known that under equilibrium conditions (E = 0, H = 0) in cubic crystals, the diffusion processes are characterized by a scalar diffusion coefficient, D, which obeys to Einstein relationship where μ is the low-field electron mobility and e is an elementary charge. This relationship is valid for non-degenerate electrons. For the case of the weak applied electric fields, when the electron distribution function remains quasi-isotropic, the diffusion coefficient can be obtained by solving the Boltzmann transport equation and can be expressed through the integrals of a steady-state distribution function in the momentum space The experimental techniques of the diffusion coefficient measurements are based on the electro-gradient measurements of the thermo-electric force The mentioned above theoretical and experimental studies of diffusion properties of the non-equilibrium electron gas are dated by 1970-1980-th and were concentrated to conventional semiconductors such as Si, Ge, GaAs, etc. In the past decades, the theoretical studies of the diffusion properties of the hot electrons were oriented on the nitride compounds, GaN The present interest to the study of the diffusion processes in a non-equilibrium electron gas is inspired, in the particular, by the development recent pure all-optical pump-probe techniques, known as the light-induced transient grating (LITG) technique The aim of this paper is the theoretical study of the diffusion processes of the hot electrons in compensated GaN subjected to the electric and magnetic fields of moderate magnitudes. The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we briefly describe the model of the electron transport and the Monte Carlo method which used for the determination of the diffusion tensor. In section III, we discuss the steady-state electric characteristics for different samples of GaN at zero magnetic field. Then, the effect of the magnetic field on the diffusion coefficient are considered for the parallel and crossed configurations of electric and magnetic fields sections IV and V, respectively. In Section VI, we summarize the main results of these investigations. We consider the electron transport in the samples of GaN of cubic modification under the parallel and crossed configurations of electric, E, and magnetic, H, fields. At E || H, we assume that E and H are directed along z-axis (Fig. For calculations of electron transport characteristics we used the single-particle algorithm of the Monte Carlo procedure The standard single-particle Monte Carlo algorithm is based on the stochastic simulation of the electron trajectories in the momentum and coordinate spaces including the scattering processes (for details, see In the case of the parallel configuration of E and H, the equations of the electron motion in momentum space are following: For the crossed configuration, they read as: Here px, py, pz are the components of the electron momentum, ωc is the cyclotron frequency, , m * and c are the effective electron mass and light velocity, respectively. At the end of a free flight, the electron velocity is calculated by the following equations for parallel Here t0 and t are respectively initial and final moments of a free flight. The calculation of the electron coordinates are easily incorporated in the Monte Carlo scheme. The following equations are used in our Monte Carlo procedure for the simulation of the electron trajectory in the coordinate space: For the calculation of components of the diffusion tensor, Dij, we used the following equation In this section we discuss the electron transport characteristics including the drift velocity, Vd, the average energy, <ε>, as well the diagonal components, Dxx = Dyy, of the diffusion tensor, all as functions of the electric field at the absence of the magnetic field. The parameters Dxx and Dyy describe the electron diffusion transversal to the applied field. We present the electric characteristics for three particular examples, which differ by the lattice temperature, T0, the concentration of ionized impurities, Ni, and the electron concentration, Ne. For the case I we assume the following parameters: Ni = 10 16 cm -3 Ne = 10 15 cm -3 and T0 = 30 K, for the case II -Ni = 10 17 cm -3 Ne = 10 16 cm -3 and T0 = 30 K, and for the case III -Ni = 10 16 cm -3 Ne = 10 15 cm -3 and T0 = 300 K. The features of the streaming transport regime are expected to be wellpronounced for the case I. Fig. The field dependencies of the drift velocity, Vd(E), the average electron energy, <ε>, the average energy correspondent to the transversal electron motion, , and the transverse component of the diffusion coefficient, Dxx(E), are shown in Fig. and the average energy approaches to ћω0 / 3, respectively. As seen, for sample II with larger impurity concentration, a well-developed streaming regime is not formed. At the room temperature, in the range of E = 3...10 kV/cm, electron gas remains almost quasi-equilibrium, so Vd(E) shows linear behaviour and <ε>(E) is close to its equilibrium value of 3/2•kBT0. The emergence of the streaming regime can be clearly identified by the strong nonmonotonic field dependence of the transverse component of the average electron energy, > < ⊥ ε (see Fig. The field dependences of the transverse-to-E component of the diffusion coefficient, Dxx(E), (shown on Fig. The effect of the magnetic field on the behaviour of the diffusion coefficient is analyzed in the next sections. It should be noted, that for electrons with parabolic dispersion law the application of the magnetic field along electric one has no affect on transport characteristics Vd(E) and ) (E > ε < The magnetic field effect on the electron diffusion is more essential for the sample I, for which the streaming regime is realized. Even at weak magnetic fields, it is observed a strong suppression of the maximum of diffusion coefficient, which decreases from value ~250 cm 2 /s at H = 0 to ≈ 60 cm 2 /s at H = 1.1 T. With further increasing of the magnetic field, the maximum of Dxx progressively decreases and has the values of ≈ 30 cm 2 /s at H = 2.3 T and ≈ 15 cm 2 /s at H = 3.4 T. The position of the maximum of the diffusion coefficient correspond to the electric fields of 0.5, 1.5, 3 and 5.5 kV/cm for H = 0, 1.1, 2.3 and 3.4 T, respectively. For the samples II and III, for which the streaming regime does not occurs, the magnetic field more weakly modifies the diffusion coefficient. For example, the maximum of Dxx decreases only twice from ~60 cm 2 /s at H = 0 T to ~30 cm 2 /s at H = 3.4 T. Fig. The results of our modelling of the diffusion processes in compensated GaN show that the largest variations of Dxx(E) with the magnetic field occur in the samples, for which the streaming electron transport is formed. Both the electro-gradient and optical measurements (using LITG techniques) of the diffusion coefficient can provide additional experimental tools for identification of the streaming transport regime and hot electron parameters for GaN crystals. In this section we consider the field dependencies of the components of the diffusion tensor corresponding to the transverse motion with respect to the electric field directions. In case assuming that E and H are oriented along z-axis and y-axis respectively (see Fig. As discussed previously In case H E ⊥ as well as E || H, the behavior of Dxx(E) depends on material parameters of the samples and the relation between the magnitudes of E and H. The behavior of the component Dxx has the same general features (i)-(iii), which are listed in previous section. As well seen from Fig. In Fig. The well-pronounced maximum of the Dxx-component of the diffusion tensor is realized for the sample I. It should be noted that the maximum arises in such fields E and H at which the formation of the specific form of steady-state distribution function in the momentum space occurs. This distribution function describes the magneto-transport regime with co-existence of two separated electron groups (for details see In contrast to the parallel configuration of E and H, in the crossed configuration, components Dxx and Dyy are not equal. The Dyy component describes a diffusion current along the magnetic field. The electric field dependencies of Dyy at several values of H are shown in Fig. We found that general behaviour of galvano-magnetic properties of the Dyy-component of the diffusion tensor correlates with behavior of the average energy of the electron motion in ydirection, <εy>. The results of our calculations of the electric field dependencies, <εy>, for the three samples are shown in Fig. We have studied the diffusion properties of the hot electrons in bulk-like GaN samples for parallel and crossed configurations of the applied electric and magnetic fields. It has been analyzed the field dependencies of the transverse components of the diffusion tensor which correspond to the electron motion in the directions perpendicular to the electric field. These results have been obtained by the Monte Carlo method of calculations. It was analyzed three types of GaN sample with a degree of the compensation of 90 %. It was assuming T0 = 30 K, Ni = 10 16 cm -3 for a sample I, T0 = 30 K, Ni = 10 17 cm -3 for a sample II and T0 = 300 K, Ni = 10 16 cm -3 for a sample III). Parameters of the sample I satisfy the requirements of the realization of the streaming transport regime. We found that a strong impact of the magnetic fields on diffusion properties of the electron gas takes place for the sample I. In the parallel configuration of E and H, the electric field dependencies of the transverse-to-current components of the diffusion tensor have nonmonotonous behavior with a maximum. The amplitude and the position of the maxima depend on the magnitudes of the magnetic field and are changed with the increasing of the magnetic field: the maximum is decreased and its position is shifted to the higher electric fields. In the crossed configuration of E and H, the transversal-to-fields component of the diffusion tensor has similar behaviour. However, the positions of the maximum are more sensitive to the variation of H. The suppression of the electron diffusion in transversal direction to H with the increase of the magnetic field is a general phenomenon, which is observed in both configurations. However, in the crossed configuration, the magnetic field enhances the electron diffusion along H direction. The electric field dependences of the longitudinal-to-H component of the diffusion tensor also have the maximum. Both position and amplitude of the maximum weakly depend on the magnitudes of H. The parameters of the samples II and III prevent the formation of the streaming transport regime. This is the main reason of a weak affect of electric and magnetic fields on diffusion properties of the electrons in these samples. However, the main peculiarities observed in the field dependencies of the diffusion processes for sample I take place as well for the samples II and III. We suggest that streaming transport regime and related magneto-transport effects can be investigated by measurements of the diffusion effects of the hot electrons in the electric and magnetic fields. Both the electro-gradient and optical measurements (using LITG techniques) of the diffusion coefficient can be used for this purpose. Also, the knowledge of high-field dependencies of the diffusion coefficient is important for the modeling of micron-scale electronic devices operated at strong electric and magnetic fields. 