Filling the large voids in the crystal structure of the skutterudite CoSb 3 with rattler atoms R provides an avenue for both increasing carrier concentration and disrupting lattice heat transport, leading to impressive thermoelectric performance. While the influence of R on the lattice dynamics of skutterudite materials has been well studied, the phase stability of Rfilled skutterudite materials and the influence of the presence and ordering of R on the electronic structure remain unclear. Here, focusing on the Yb-filled skutterudite Yb x Co 4 Sb 12 , we employ first-principles methods to compute the phase stability and electronic structure. Ybfilled CoSb 3 exhibits (1) a mild tendency for phase separation into Yb-rich and Yb-poor regions and (2) a strong tendency for chemical decomposition into Co-Sb and Yb-Sb binaries (i.e., CoSb 3 , CoSb 2 , and YbSb 2 ). We find that, at reasonable synthesis temperatures, configurational entropy stabilizes single-phase solid solutions with limited Yb solubility, in agreement with experiments. Filling CoSb 3 with Yb increases the band gap, enhances the carrier effective masses, and generates new low-energy "emergent" conduction band minima, which is distinct from the traditional band convergence picture of aligning the energies of existing band extrema. The explicit presence of R is necessary to achieve the emergent conduction band minima, though the rattler ordering does not strongly influence the electronic structure. The emergent conduction bands are spatially localized in the Yb-rich regions, unlike the delocalized electronic states at the Brillouin zone center that form the unfilled skutterudite band edges. In thermoelectric heat-to-electricity conversion, the figure of merit is ZT = σS 2 T /κ, where σ is the electrical conductivity, S is the thermopower, κ is the thermal conductivity, and T is the temperature. Therefore, efficient thermoelectric materials must exhibit a rare combination of electronic and thermal transport properties: large σ, large S, and small κ. In order to (1) understand the ability of existing thermoelectric materials, typically heavily doped semiconductors, to satisfy this set of rare physical properties and (2) design improved thermoelectric materials, a detailed understanding of the electronic structure, lattice dynamics, and phase stability is critically important. One famous class of thermoelectric materials is the skutterudite CoSb 3 , a covalent semiconductor satisfying the 18-electron rule. As can be observed in Fig. to explicitly indicate an empty void, the formula becomes 1-x R x Co 4 Sb 12 . We note that the upper limit of x, i.e., the filling fraction limit (FFL), is lower than 1 in practice, Plane-wave density functional theory (DFT) The convex hull is constructed from the Open Quantum Materials Database (OQMD), The SQS exhibit DFT-computed formation energies (6-15 meV) similar to the formation energies of the ordered structures, which is reflective of the relatively weak interaction between the rattlers. Therefore, given the small magnitude of the formation energy, we expect configurational entropy to easily overcome the phase separation tendency at reasonable synthesis temperatures and enable single-phase solid solutions of Yb x Co 4 Sb 12 . For example, the ideal configurational entropy contribution to the mixing free energy, where k B is the Boltzmann constant, is ≈ -44 meV for x = 1/4 at 900 K, which is significantly larger in magnitude than the mixing energy (≈ 10 meV). The thermodynamic driving force for chemical decomposition into binaries, on the other hand, is much stronger than the phase separation tendency. As shown by the steep negatively sloped lines in Fig. In contrast to the past theoretical works, we correctly find a vanishing solubility at low temperature, which is consistent with the third law and agrees with experiment. With Co contributing 9 e -and Sb 3 contributing 9 e -, CoSb 3 satisfies the 18 e -rule 3 and forms a semiconductor with a small experimental band gap on the order of 35-50 meV. Filling the voids of CoSb 3 with Yb leads to two major effects. First of all, it can be seen that adding Yb increases the magnitude of the band gap. Secondly, the Yb rattlers lead to the emergence of additional conduction band minima close in energy to the band edge at Γ. We observe such bands, which we refer to as "emergent bands" for reasons discussed in the next section, at four locations along the highsymmetry k-path shown in Fig. Here, we discuss the band gap trends in more detail. Although semilocal DFT is well known to exhibit errors in band gaps, The band gap increases further to 0.239 eV if we fix to CoSb 3 structural parameters; this indicates the gap opening is a chemical, not structural, effect. In order to understand the role of the Yb atoms, we also artificially dope CoSb 3 by increasing the electron chemical potential of CoSb 3 and adding compensating homogeneous background charge to retain charge neutrality, rather than including Yb atoms. In such artificially doped CoSb 3 , we find a substantial band gap of 0.315 eV, which indicates that gap opening upon doping is not specifically tied to the presence of Yb as the rattler. Similar behavior was found in a previous study of Ba-filled skutterudite CoSb 3 , 88 which suggests the effect is largely invariant to the nature of the rattler. In contrast to the band gap opening behavior, the emergence of new, low-energy conduction band minima is not found for the artificially-doped x = 1 case, whose band structure is shown in the Supporting Information. This indicates that the presence of the rattler atoms is responsible for the emergent conduction band minima. Filling the voids with Yb also impacts the carrier effective masses m * determined via a quadratic fit of the band structure near the band extrema. The effective masses become larger (corresponding to less dispersive bands) for x = 1 as compared to x = 0. For example, for the valence band at Γ along the P direction, the effective mass is 0.06 m e for x = 0 as compared to 0.09 m e for x = 1. Along this direction, there are two heavy and one light conduction band. For x = 0, the corresponding effective masses are 0.19 m e and 0.07 m e , appreciably smaller than the 0.21 m e and 0.11 m e for x = 1, respectively. The same qualitative trend is found for the Γ valence and conduction bands along each of the k-space directions along the computed high-symmetry path in the Brillouin zone, as is discussed in the Supporting Information. The decrease in carrier mobility (∼ 1/m * ) for larger x is consistent with experiments. In order to probe the electronic properties of Yb x Co 4 Sb 12 with intermediate x (0 < x < 1), we compute the effective band structures for structures with partial Yb filling, as shown in Fig. In order to investigate the nature of the electronic states in the partially-filled skutterudite material, we compute for the superlattice structures the projections of the wavefunctions (1) on all atoms corresponding to the Ybrich region (which we call p Yb-rich ) and ( The factors of 1/x and 1/(1 -x) are included to normalize for the differing sizes of the Ybrich and Yb-poor regions when x = 1/2. A spatial polarization value of 1/2 indicates the wavefunction exhibits an equal preference for localization on an atom in the Yb-rich region as that in the Yb-poor region, whereas a ξ value of 1 (0) indicates a 100% preference for localization on an atom in the Yb-rich (Yb-poor) region. The spatial polarization of the superlattice electronic states is shown via the color of the points in Fig. Finally, we discuss our use of the term "emergent bands" and put our results in the context of the concept of band convergence. The behavior we find is quite distinct from typical band convergence (such as in PbTe 1-x Se x , 90 Mg 2 Si 1-x Sn x , 91 Pb 1-x Mg x Te, For example, as can be seen in Fig. The band convergence previously discussed in the literature for skutterudites Using first-principles calculations, we provide a detailed understanding of the phase stability and electronic properties of filled skutterudite CoSb 3 . The Yb-filled skutterudite Yb x Co 4 Sb 12 exhibits a mild tendency to phase separate into the Yb-rich and Yb-poor endmembers, as well as a strong tendency for chemical decomposition into Co-Sb and Yb-Sb binaries. Singlephase solid solutions with a limited Yb solubility, observed in experiment, are stabilized by configurational entropy. In addition to enhancing the band gap and effective masses, the pres-ence of Yb leads to two distinct types of electronic carriers: (1) new emergent conduction band minima whose electronic states are localized near the rattler atoms and (2) the delocalized electronic states at the Brillouin zone center.