The single-layer FeSe films grown on SrTiO 3 (STO) substrates have attracted much attention because of its record high superconducting critical temperature (T C ). It is usually believed that the composition of the epitaxially grown single-layer FeSe/STO films is stoichiometric, i.e., the ratio of Fe and Se is 1:1. Here we report the identification of a large amount of excess Fe in the superconducting single-layer FeSe/STO films. By depositing Se onto the superconducting single-layer FeSe/STO films, we find by in situ scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) the formation of the second-layer FeSe islands on the top of the first layer during the annealing process at a surprisingly low temperature (∼150°C) which is much lower than the usual growth temperature (∼490°C). This observation is used to detect excess Fe and estimate its quantity in the single-layer FeSe/STO films. The amount of excess Fe detected is at least 20% that is surprisingly high for the superconducting single-layer FeSe/STO films. The discovery of such a large amount of excess Fe should be taken into account in understanding the high-T C superconductivity and points to a likely route to further enhance T C in the superconducting single-layer FeSe/STO films. The discovery of high-temperature superconductivity in single-layer FeSe films epitaxially grown on SrTiO 3 (STO) substrates continues to attract intense attention It has been found that superconductivity in bulk FeSe is extremely sensitive to its stoichiometry; superconductivity can be completely suppressed by the presence of a tiny amount of excess Fe above δ = 0.03 in bulk Fe 1+δ Se FeSe films with different thicknesses [0.45, 0.75, 1, and 1.5 monolayers (ML)] in this study were grown by MBE on high-quality single-crystal 0.5 wt % Nb-doped SrTiO 3 substrates (Shinkosha STEP substrates), similar to a procedure reported before We first start with the preparation of single-layer FeSe/STO films. Figure We also carried out angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy measurements on singlelayer FeSe/STO films [Fig. Next we deposited Se on top of the perfect single-layer FeSe/STO film [Fig. 3(a2)-3(a5)]; they eventually completely disappear, and the sample returns to the original perfect single-layer FeSe film [Fig. After getting the perfect single-layer FeSe/STO [Fig. In surface science, deposition of amorphous Se onto the prepared films is a common method to protect the surface from being exposed to air and getting degraded One immediate question to ask is the source of this excess Fe in single-layer FeSe films. Is it possible that it comes from the leftover Fe of the second layer that decomposes during post-annealing at high temperature? It is true that in some as-grown FeSe films, we can observe the second-layer FeSe islands near the steps [Fig. Figure The next question that arises is where this excess Fe may be located in single-layer FeSe/STO films. There are three possible locations of the excess Fe in 1-ML FeSe/STO films: inside the FeSe layer, on the sample surface, and at the interface between the FeSe layer and the STO substrate. It is possible that some excess Fe may be accommodated inside the single FeSe layer; excess Fe can be located at the interstitial sites as detected in bulk Fe 1+δ (Se,Te) Our results indicate that there is a large amount of excess Fe above 20% present in the single-layer FeSe/STO films and the inherent part (∼20%) is most likely located at the interface between the single-layer FeSe film and STO substrate. A distinct electronic structure and signature of superconductivity at about 65 K were observed on 1-ML FeSe/STO films In summary, by depositing Se onto the single-layer FeSe/STO films, we found the formation of second-layer FeSe islands on top of the first layer during the annealing process at a surprisingly low temperature (∼150 °C) which is much lower than the usual growth temperature (∼490 °C). This observation allows us to develop a reliable method to detect excess Fe and estimate its quantity in single-layer FeSe/STO films. We find that there is at least 20% excess Fe present that is surprisingly high for the superconducting single-layer FeSe/STO films. Our present work provides in-sights into understanding hightemperature superconductivity in single-layer FeSe/STO films. In establishing reasonable models for the FeSe/STO system, in addition to the STO substrate and single FeSe layer, the presence of a large quantity of excess Fe at the interface should be taken into account. Since magnetism is usually detrimental to superconductivity 