Superconductivity in cuprates is achieved by doping holes into a correlated charge-transfer insulator. While the correlated character of the parent insulator is now understood, there is no accepted theory for the "normal" state of the doped insulator. I present a mostly empirical analysis of a large range of experimental characterizations, making the case for two pseudogaps: (1) a large pseudogap resulting from the competition between the energy of superexchange-coupled local Cu moments and the kinetic energy of doped holes; (2) a small pseudogap that results from dopant disorder and consequent variations in local charge density, leading to a distribution of local superconducting onset temperatures. The large pseudogap closes as hole kinetic energy dominates at higher doping and the dynamic antiferromagnetic correlations become overdamped. Establishing spatially-homogeneous d-wave superconductivity is limited by those regions with the weakest superconducting phase coherence, which tends to be limited by low-energy spin fluctuations. The magnitude of the small pseudogap is correlated with the doping-dependent energy Ecross associated with the neck of the hour-glass dispersion of spin excitations. The consequences of this picture are discussed. It is now well established that the parent compounds of cuprate superconductors are charge-transfer Mott-Hubbard insulators Analysis often begins at finite doping. Starting from a weak-coupling perspective, the depression of the measured density of charge carriers compared to the expectation for a model with no Coulomb repulsion has been characterized in terms of a pseudogap From an alternative perspective, the pseudogap phenomena are a consequence of competing energies, rather than orders. Following Anderson's lead I will present the case that we need two pseudogaps The small pseudogap involves spatial variation in the local hole density, local development of superconducting arXiv:1904.10473v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 23 Apr 2019 coherence, and inhibition of long-range phase order due to regions with low-energy AF fluctuations. The spatial disorder has long been clear from local probes such as scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) I begin by considering the measured excitations of the lightly-doped Mott insulator, followed by a simpleminded theoretical analysis in Sec. III. The large pseudogap and its doping dependence are described in Sec. IV. The analysis of the small pseudogap is presented in Sec. V. Finally, the implications of this analysis are discussed in Sec. V, with a brief summary in Sec. VI. Three decades of experiments have taught us quite a bit about cuprates. The undoped parent compounds, such as La 2 CuO 4 , are antiferromagnetic (AF) insulators Recent STM measurements on lightly doped Bi 2 Sr 2-x La x CuO 6+δ (Bi2201) confirm some of the earlier results and provide important new clues The variation in the local weight of the mid-gap states suggests a significant role for the long-range Coulomb interaction. In the present case, a hole is introduced by replacing a La 3+ ion with a Sr 2+ . The hole goes into a neighboring CuO 2 plane, but it is not free to move away. It feels a substantial Coulomb attraction to the dopant site, and in the limit of very small doping, the screening comes mainly from phonons It is interesting to compare the magnetic energies with the electronic dispersion measured by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) in another insulator, Ca 2 CuO 2 Cl 2 , as shown in Fig. To make a connection with the STM measurements, representative tunneling conductance curves for Bi 2 Sr 2-x La x CuO 6+δ with p ∼ 0.03 are shown in Fig. To appreciate how the different results in Fig. The schematic wave functions at two of these points [indicated by circles in Fig. In order to realize the state shown in Fig. We can also use this picture to interpret the STM conductance curves. In terms of density of states, the noninteracting band dispersion in Fig. Another factor for the STM concerns the nature of the tunneling process from the probe tip to the sample surface and along the c axis, typically through an apical O site, to a Cu site in the CuO 2 plane nearest the surface. The 2p orbital on the apical site has s symmetry relative to the Cu, so that it cannot couple to the 3d x 2 -y 2 but may couple to the in-plane O 2p σ states. From Fig. It is important to note that the competition between AF correlations and kinetic energy at the AN point does not depend on static order of the spins. What matters is the strength of local, instantaneous correlations, and these can survive to very high temperatures Based on the comparison of magnetic and electronic spectra in undoped to very lightly hole-doped cuprates, it seems reasonable to associate the large pseudogap in the AN region with AF correlations. In this section, we will follow how these energies change with doping and see how they are correlated. Hole doping as low as p = 0.02 is enough to destroy long-range AF order in cuprates Figure I argued in the last section that the energy scale of the distribution of mid-gap states detected by STM in lightly doped cuprates is associated with AF correlations. Another measure of these states is given by optical conductivity, σ 1 (ω). At energies below that of the chargetransfer gap, optical measurements largely probe transitions from filled to empty mid-gap states. For moderately underdoped cuprates, it is possible at low temperature to distinguish the broad "mid-IR" conductivity from the more coherent Drude peak, centered at zero energy The variation of the effective carrier concentration is considered more quantitatively in Fig. larger than the Drude weight alone, and approaches 1 for LSCO at p ≈ 0.18; however, it never seems to reach the level of 1 + p that one would expect in the absence of correlations. In a complementary fashion, one can obtain the superfluid density p s from measurements of the magnetic penetration depth λ at T T c , using Two ways to measure λ are by muon spin relaxation (μSR) in an applied magnetic field The hole concentration p H measured by the Hall effect shows temperature dependence. Figure The large pseudogap effectively closes near p c ∼ 0.2 From the earliest spectroscopic imaging with STM on Bi2212 at T T c , a common point of emphasis has been the spatial variation and disorder in apparent superconducting coherence peaks with energies in the range of 20-50 meV The scale of the disorder in the coherence peaks of Bi2212 is tens of Å On warming to T ∼ T c , ARPES measurements on underdoped Bi2212 and Bi2201 find that the gap closes only along a finite arc, centered on the nodal point, with a gap remaining in the AN region The energy scale associated with the antinodal coherence peaks is smaller than that of the big pseudogap, and hence it seems reasonable to label it the small pseudogap. As with the big pseudogap, it is appropriate to consider the connection with antiferromagnetic correlations. Figure At the same time, downwardly-dispersing excitations are also present, and these are predicted to be bad for pairing Several analyses of ARPES data on Bi2212 conclude that the closing of the superconducting gap along a finite arc is associated with the electronic scattering rate exceeding the gap size in the near nodal region To test the correlation between E cross and the AN SC gap energies, it is useful to look at the doping dependence of these quantities. Figure In (a) Ecross from neutron scattering studies of La2-xSrxCuO4 parison with measurements of ∆ c and the small AN pseudogap ∆ AN determined by Raman scattering in Bi2212 Figure The interpretations presented above have implications for various other features observed in cuprates, as discussed below. If the energies associated with superexchange among Cu spins and the delocalization of doped holes are competing, then one must eventually confront the issue of how correlated local moments and mobile holes are instantaneously distributed in real space. This topic is the subject of intertwined orders, which has been reviewed elsewhere In the extreme experimental case, one observes static charge and spin stripe order, as in La 2-x Ba x CuO 4 Charge-density-wave order has now been observed in most cuprate families, where, in contrast to La 2-x Ba x CuO 4 , it develops only in the absence of spin order Further evidence of superconducting correlations above T c is provided by studies of c-axis optical conductivity. A transverse bilayer plasmon associated with interlayer Josephson coupling There is disorder in this system associated with imperfect Cu-O chain ordering. X-ray scattering studies of chain order in high-purity, underdoped samples find finite correlation lengths along all directions It seems likely that all of these phenomena are connected. The evidence for local pairing correlations in a landscape of finite disorder could lead to a spatial modulation of the pair density. Indeed, it has been proposed that local PDW order underlies the CDW correlations Detailed studies of quantum oscillations (QO) have been performed on YBCO at high magnetic fields Finite QO gradually appear at fields greater than 20 T. The most relevant quantity to consider would be the cyclotron radius, but this requires quantitative knowledge of the relevant Fermi velocity. As an alternative, one can evaluate the vortex lattice spacing at the onset of QO. Assuming a square vortex lattice Within a given family, T c varies with the number of consecutive CuO 2 layers, showing a maximum for three layers One must acknowledge that not all researchers are in agreement on the magnitude and relevance of disorder. For example, there has been an analysis of charge disorder in LSCO, based on an analysis of x-ray diffraction peak widths and superconducting transition widths, which concludes that the range of superconducting fluctuations above T c is no more than 10% of T c for a significant range of doping These studies demonstrate that, to the extent that superconducting correlations survive well above T c , they do not occur uniformly across a sample. That observation can still be consistent with local patches that have a high transition temperature, provided that these patches do not percolate until the temperature gets close to T c . Regarding disorder, one must give significant weight to local probe studies. For example, a scanning probe study of an LSCO film (x ≈ 0.1, T c ≈ 18 K) found a disordered distribution of diamagnetism that was detectable to T ∼ 3T c There are certainly interesting behaviors such as nematic order An analysis of specific heat measurements on Y 0.8 Ca 0.2 Ba 2 Cu 3 O 6+x found that the superconducting condensation energy gained below T c shows a sharp peak at p = p c A recent study of the low-temperature electronic heat capacity in Nd-and Eu-doped LSCO, with superconductivity suppressed by a magnetic field of up to 18 T, finds a sharp peak at p c = 0.23 A broad range of experimental characterizations of cuprates can be reconciled with a few simple concepts. There is a large pseudogap that results from the competition between local antiferromagnetic correlations, involving superexchange-coupled Cu moments, and the doped holes that would like to lower their kinetic energy by delocalizing. The relative strength of the AF correlations decreases with doping, and the AF correlations become overdamped for p > p c . There is also a small pseudogap that results from the dependence of the pairing scale on p and the local variation in p due to disorder and the long-range-Coulomb interaction. This energy scale appears to be limited by the doping-dependent spin fluctuation spectrum, and in particular the energy E cross , corresponding to the neck of the hourglass dispersion. The onset of bulk superconductivity is limited by regions with low-energy AF fluctuations; the magnitude of the spin gap established in the superconducting state corresponds to the energy scale for spatially-uniform superconductivity.