Among the hybrid metal-organic perovskites for photovoltaic applications FAPbI 3 (FAPI) has the best performance regarding efficiency and the worst regarding stability, even though the reports on its stability are highly contradictory. In particular, since at room temperature the cubic α phase, black and with high photovoltaic efficiency, is metastable against the yellow hexagonal δ phase, it is believed that α-FAPI spontaneously transform into δ-FAPI within a relatively short time. We performed X-ray diffraction and thermogravimetric measurements on loose powder of FAPI, and present the first complete dielectric and anelastic spectra of compacted FAPI samples under various conditions. We found that α-FAPI is perfectly stable for at least 100 days, the duration of the experiments, unless extrinsic factors induce its degradation. In our tests, degradation was detected after exposure to humidity, strongly accelerated by grain boundaries and the presence of δ phase, but it was not noticeable on the loose powder kept in air under normal laboratory illumination. These findings have strong implications on the strategies for improving the stability of FAPI without diminishing its photovoltaic efficiency through modifications of its composition. Although MAPbI 3 (MAPI, MA = methylammonium CH 3 NH 3 ) is the most studied hybrid metal-organic perovskite for photovoltaic applications, We will show that a loose micrometric powder of FAPI, prepared by slightly modifying the known procedures can remain exposed in air at normal laboratory illumination for at least 100 days without any sign of degradation and pressed pellets can likewise remain in the α phase for at least one month after being thoroughly dried in high vacuum. This observations suggest that the kinetic trapping of the α phase of FAPI at room temperature lasts for much longer than previously thought, and the transformation to the δ phase, itself highly hygroscopic, is catalyzed by humidity together with other extrinsic factors, such as grain boundaries. FAPI samples were obtained following an already reported procedure We performed four types of experiments on two types of samples: X-ray diffraction (XRD) in air at room temperature on loose powder and also on the compacted samples; complex Young's modulus versus temperature in high vacuum on a compacted thin bar (FAPI-b) and dielectric permittivity versus temperature in a small closed volume on compacted discs (FAPI-d1 and FAPI-d2). The results on the stability of α-FAPI turned out to be strongly dependent on the different experimental conditions. In order to test whether traces of water or other solvents were present in the freshly prepared powders, we performed Thermo Gravimetric Analysis (TGA) and Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) on 20 -30 mg batches of δ-FAPI-before and after its conversion to α-FAPI. The results are shown in Fig. On the other hand, the small part of powder that remained attached to the walls of the glass bottle rapidly became yellow (SI). The pressures at which we compacted the discs and the bars were 0.62 and 0.2 GPa respectively, in the range of structural transitions of α-FAPI reported in the literature, notably to the δ phase, The anelastic measurements were performed in a vacuum of < 10 -5 mbar at high temperature or in < 0.2 mbar He at low temperature, and the system was left in static vacuum between the experiments. Details on the technique and sample conditions are found in SI. The anelastic spectrum of FAPI has been measured here for the first time, similarly to the complete dielectric spectrum, and both are used here for the specific task of evaluating the fraction of α phase in our samples. The conclusions that can be drawn from these spectra on the nature of the structural transitions that α-FAPI undergoes are left for future work. Figure ∼ 390 K must correspond to the transformation of the δ phase induced by pressure back to the α phase, after which the sample remains in the α phase for all the subsequent temperature cycles and agings at room temperature. When cooling, the α phase transforms into β at 280 K 26 and then into γ at 141 K. The interesting point in the present context is that, after the initial δ → α transformation, the E (T ) curves remain perfectly stable for 1 month, and this excludes that any transformation to the δ phase or degradation occurs over the month time scale in vacuum. A minor degradation, indicated by 1%, decrease of E, occurred during a total of 9 days in air between curves 4 and 6, during which the dielectric permittivity was also measured. Details are found in the SI. Few days after completing the cycle of anelastic measurements, the XRD spectra showed that a rapid degradation processes had started. The α phase was still present but the dominant peak was (001) of PbI 2 (Fig. The complex dielectric permittivity was measured in a Linkam stage with modified Examina Probe having a sealed volume of ∼ 100 cm 3 . The standard procedure for removing humidity is flushing the probe with a dry gas evaporated from liquid nitrogen or air, for few minutes at 40 • C, then the probe volume is sealed and the measurement starts. The permittivity (T ) curves measured two hours after pressing the powder into disc are shown in Fig. If humidity was removed with the standard procedure described above, after one day the permittivity dropped again to values even lower than the initial one of mixed α and δ phase. This is shown in Fig. Figure Then the sample was annealed for 5 min in a vacuum of 10 -4 mbar at 200 • C and immediately mounted in the dielectric probe with the standard procedure for flushing out the humidity. This time the initial permittivity was high (5), and remained so when repeating the experiment the following day (6). During all these temperature runs there was a progressive overall decrease of the (T ) curves in the α, β and γ sequence of phases, indicating that some irreversible damage to the sample occurred after each cycle. There is also a small step when cooling through 350 K, whose amplitude increases at every cycle; it is tentatively indicated as partial α → δ transition. These results strongly suggest that humidity is stored in the sample, cannot be removed by the standard purging procedure at 40 • C and is responsible for the degradation of the α phase, though initially without full conversion to the δ phase. Above the δ → α transition temperature, most of the water is expelled by the sample, but remains trapped into the closed volume of the probe, so promoting again the degradation of the α phase already during the hours following the measurement. Water was instead removed by the short treatment at high temperature in vacuum be-fore measuring the last curves 5 and 6. In order to confirm this hypothesis, we repeated the measurement of sample FAPI-d2 with an improved drying procedure. Figure The experimental results described above can be summarized as follows: 1) According to XRD the loose powder remains stable in the α phase in normally humid air at room temperature for at least 100 days. 2) Pressing the powder of pure α-FAPI into bars or discs at 0.2 -0.6 GPa for few minutes induces a partial transformation to the δ phase and rapid absorption of humidity. The partially degraded phase reverts to α during the first heating above 400 K, but the subsequent results on the pressed samples depend on whether the measurements are carried out in dynamic high vacuum or in a small closed volume. 3) According to the anelastic experiments in high vacuum, the compacted powder remains stable in the α phase for at least one month, including one week in air, but after further exposure to air it rapidly degrades. 4) According to the dielectric experiments in a small closed volume purged from humidity before each experiment at 313 K, most of the compacted powder remains stable in the α phase during the full temperature run from 450 K down to 100 K and heating again to above room temperature. However, already after half day the dielectric permittivity drops back to the original state of partially degraded α phase, with a seeming saturation of the degradation process after few days. Yet, repeating the full temperature cycles reproduces the first experiment, and the whole process of transformation into α phase and partial degradation can be repeated several times. The stability of the α phase is enhanced after purging from humidity is made more effectively at higher temperature. 5) the yellow δ phase is an advanced stage in the paths to degradation in the presence of humidity and the dielectric constant and elastic modulus are strongly sensitive also to the ini-tial and partly reversible stages of degradation, without visible formation of yellow phases. At first these observations may seem to add puzzling information to the already rich known phenomenology, but they can all be easily explained and harmonized with the existing literature. The first strong conclusion that can be drawn from 1) and 3) is that α-FAPI, although metastable at room temperature, is much more stable than previously thought, over a time scale of months and possibly more, depending on the extrinsic factors that induce the α → δ transformation and/or degradation into PbI 2 with loss of the organic part. The nature of these extrinsic factors can be deduced form the above observations and finds confirmation in the literature. The discs and bars were pressed at 0.6 and 0.2 GPa, respectively, and the observation of diffraction peaks of the δ phase and of yellow grains is in accordance with the recent report that pressure induces the α → δ transition at room temperature already at < 0.1 GPa. Humidity is perhaps the most acknowledged cause of degradation of the metal-organic perovskites, Both types of degradation under humidity described above, reversible intercalation of H 2 O and subsequent decomposition, considerably lower the elastic moduli and dielectric constant, because they break the network of Pb-I bonds and eliminate the polyhedral spaces between octahedra, where the organic molecules are free to reorient. It is therefore impossible to distinguish among the various stages of hydration and occurrence of partial α → δ transformation from sets of curves like those of Figs. The conclusion drawn from this discussion is that, although α-FAPI is metastable at room temperature, having δ-FAPI a lower energy, the energy barrier for converting the α into the δ phase is so high that no measurable conversion occurs at room temperature for at least 100 days (results from XRD on powder). The α → δ reaction is probably catalyzed by water, together with other degradation pathways, which include hydration and decomposition; the latter has been found to occur even spontaneously in vacuum at the surface of MAPI. The picture presented here is also in agreement with the previous observation It would also be interesting to reconsider the experiments where the stability is found to be highly enhanced in nanocrystalline FAPI. The observations include stable photoluminescence of colloidal nanocrystals with protected surface, Our observations show that, even if the α phase of FAPI is metastable with respect to the yellow δ phase, its kinetic trapping at room temperature lasts for much longer than previously thought. The present data set the period of perfect stability of α-FAPI to at least 100 days, corresponding to the duration of our tests, but this time range exceeds seven months if previous experiments on FAPI embedded in alumina nanotubes It appears that by far the most important factor inducing degradation of α-FAPI is humidity at grain boundaries, and that the procedures used for dehydrating the material are often insufficient. Since grain boundaries are also present in films, these findings should help in devising strategies for improving the stability of α-FAPI without modifying its composition, particularly by improving the initial dehydration process and subsequent surface protection. This is especially true in the cases of intentional exposure to moisture during preparation in order to improve the grain morphology through solvent annealing. 