The thermal properties of an epoxy-based binary composites comprised of graphene and copper nanoparticles are reported. It is found that the "synergistic" filler effect, revealed as a strong enhancement of the thermal conductivity of composites with the size-dissimilar fillers, has a welldefined filler loading threshold. The thermal conductivity of composites with a moderate graphene concentration of ff gg = 15 wt% exhibits an abrupt increase as the loading of copper nanoparticles approaches ff CCCC ~40 wt%, followed by saturation. The effect is attributed to intercalation of spherical copper nanoparticles between the large graphene flakes, resulting in formation of the highly thermally conductive percolation network. In contrast, in composites with a high graphene concentration, ff gg = 40 wt%, the thermal conductivity increases linearly with addition of copper nanoparticles. The electrical percolation is observed at low graphene loading, ff gg < 7 wt. %, owing to the large aspect ratio of graphene. At all concentrations of the fillers, below and above the electrical percolation threshold, the thermal transport is dominated by phonons. The obtained results shed light on the interaction between graphene fillers and copper nanoparticles in the composites and demonstrate potential of such hybrid epoxy composites for practical applications in thermal interface materials and adhesives. The growth in power densities in electronic, optoelectronic and microwave devices makes efficient thermal management a critical issue [1-3] . The development of the next generation of thermal interface materials (TIMs) with substantially higher thermal conductivity is essential for various device technologies. The state-of-the-art light emitting diodes [4] , lithium-ion batteries [5,6] , and solar cells [7] suffer from the inadequate heat conduction properties of commercial TIMs, which include thermal greases, adhesives and thermal phase-change materials. The polymer-based TIMs, applied between heat sources and heat sinks, are vital components of passive heat management in electronic systems. Polymers, in general, due to their amorphous structure, possess low thermal conductivity in the range of 0.2 -0.5 Wm -1 K -1 [8] . The conventional approach for producing TIMs is incorporation of microscale and nanoscale particles into the polymer matrix in order to enhance the overall heat conduction properties of the resulting composites [9] . The filler particle can be metallic or electrically insulating. In some applications, one desires to increase thermal conductivity while preserving electrical insulation, in other applications, one benefits from increasing both thermal and electrical conductivity. The commercially available TIMs, with complex preparation recipes, have the "bulk" thermal conductivities in the range of 0.5 -5 Wm -1 K -1 , achieved at high filler loading fractions of φφ~50 vol% [10] . To satisfy the industry needs one need to develop novel TIMs, including cured epoxies and non-cured thermal greases, with the "bulk" thermal conductivity in the range of 15-25 Wm -1 K -1 near room temperature (RT). Substantial increase in the heat conduction properties of composites requires detailed investigation of the alternative heat conduction fillers and better understanding of the filler -filler and filler -matrix interactions. Graphene has attracted a lot of attention owing to its extraordinary electrical [11,12] , optical [13] , and thermal properties [14-20] . The intrinsic thermal conductivity of a large sheet of single-layer graphene (SLG) can exceed than that of the basal planes of high quality graphite, which by itself is high: ~2000 Wm -1 K -1 at RT [10,14,21-23] . Although the few-layer graphene (FLG) sheets have lower intrinsic thermal conductivity than SLG, they are more technologically feasible for practical applications [10,24] . The FLG fillers preserve the high thermal conductivity, close to that of graphite, and possess mechanical flexibility, facilitating coupling to the matrix material. It is known that FLG can be mass produced at low cost, which is an important factor for any fillers in TIMs, composites, and coatings [2,5,7,10,24-29] . The sheets of FLG are also less vulnerable to defects induced by processing, mechanical stresses, rolling, and folding, which happens often during the mixing of fillers with the polymer matrix [10,24,25] . The first study of graphene composites reported an enhancement of the thermal conductivity of epoxy from 0.2 Wm -1 K -1 to ~5 Wm -1 K -1 at the low graphene loading of ~10 vol% [10] . The results have been independently confirmed and improved by other research groups, which obtained similar enhancement factors at lower graphene concentrations [30,31] . The first graphene-based composites have been prepared using raw graphite as the source material to produce SLG and FLG fillers via liquid phase exfoliation (LPE). The preparation method includes chemical processing, sonication and centrifugation [10] . These procedures do not allow for an accurate control of the lateral dimensions and thicknesses of the resulting graphene fillers. However, a certain range in the size distribution of FLG fillers turned out to be even beneficial. The size distribution of the fillers can result in the "synergistic" effect, characteristic for the fillers of different dimensions [31-39] . The "synergistic" effects constitutes a stronger enhancement of the thermal conductivity of the composites with the size-dissimilar binary fillers than with the individual fillers of the same total concentration [31-39] . Recent technological advancements made it possible to produce FLG fillers of different sizes and thicknesses using liquid-phase exfoliation (LPE) [40,41] or graphene oxide reduction methods [42-45] . These developments open up a possibility of industrial production of composites with the high loading of graphene [24] . Here and below, in the thermal context, we use the term graphene to indicate a mixture of SLG and FLG. The physical nature of heat transport is different in metallic and non-metallic fillers. In nonmagnetic solid materials, heat is carried by electrons and phononsquanta of the ion-core crystal lattice vibrations. The thermal conductivity of solid materials is described as λλ = λλ pp + λλ ee where λλ pp and λλ ee are the phonon and electron contributions, respectively. In electrical insulators and semiconductors, heat is mostly transferred by acoustic phonons with long mean free paths (MFP) [16] . The same is true for graphene and other carbon allotropes [16] . An equation for λλ pp , based on the gas kinetics, is λλ pp = (1 3 ⁄ )cc pp υυΛ, where cc pp is the specific heat, υυ is the phonon's average group velocity, which in many solids can be approximated by the sound velocity, and Λ is the phonon MFP, respectively. The average grey MFP of acoustic phonons in graphene is ~750 nm at RT [16,22] . For this reason, in thermal applications, it is favorable to use graphene fillers with comparable or large lateral dimensions, exceeding the phonon MFP in order to avoid degradation of the intrinsic thermal conductivity of the fillers due to the phonon -filler edge scattering. It should be noted that using excessively large graphene fillers can lead to the agglomeration of the fillers during mixing as well as filler bending and rolling. There exists optimum lateral size and thickness ranges for FLG fillers for each specific matrix material and desired characteristics of the composites. In metals, the heat conduction is dominated by electrons due to their high concentration. For example, pure copper has thermal conductivity of ~400 Wm -1 K -1 in which electrons contribute ~98% of the total thermal conductivity at RT [16] . Electrons have much shorter average MFP compared to acoustic phonons. In pure copper, the electron MFP is ~40 nm [46] . For this reason, one can envision using metallic fillers of much smaller dimensions without degrading their intrinsic heat conduction properties. Here, we report the results of the investigation of the thermal conductivity of the epoxy composites with hybrid fillers comprised of FLG with the large lateral size (few μm) and copper nanoparticles (Cu-NP) with the small lateral size (few nm). In the high-loading composites with FLG and Cu-NP fractions of ff gg = 40 wt% and ff CCCC = 35 wt%, we achieved 13.5 ± 1.6 Wm -1 K -1 thermal conductivity, which translates into ~6750% enhancement of the polymer's thermal conductivity. It has been established that the increase in the Cu-NP loading, at constant graphene concentration, results in incorporation of copper nanoparticles between the large graphene flakes, with the corresponding formation of the thermally conductive network of fillers. The thermal transport in the thermal percolation regime is characterized by a significant enhancement in thermal conductivity. Our results show that a combination of graphene fillers (high-aspect ratio and μmscale lateral dimensions) with the phonon-dominated heat conduction and metallic fillers (small aspect ratio and nm-scale dimensions) with the electronic heat conduction is promising for TIM applications. In Figure Commercially available copper nanoparticles (US Research Nanomaterials, Inc.) with the average diameter of 100 nm are mixed with the resin in pre-calculated proportions inside a glove box in the argon gas atmosphere (Figure , where mm ii and ρρ ii are the mass and density of the composite constituents (epoxy, graphene, and copper nanoparticles). The excellent agreement between the experimental data and theoretical dashed lines confirms that our composites have a negligible fraction of air gaps. In contrast to the density, the specific heat of the composites decreases linearly with the addition of Cu-NP due to the fact that the specific heat of Cu is smaller than that of both graphene (cc pp,CCCC /cc pp,gg ~ 0.53 ) and pure epoxy (cc pp,CCCC /cc pp,ee ~ 0.25). In Figure We now turn to the composites with the medium graphene loading fraction, ff gg = 15 wt%. Even before adding Cu-NP fillers, the thermal conductivity of such composite is relatively high, ~3 Wm -1 K -1 , which surpasses the thermal conductivity of many commercial TIMs with higher filler loadings. Addition of Cu-NP fillers to the samples, before reaching to the thermal percolation threshold, results in slow increase in the thermal conductivity, at a rate similar to the one in low graphene loading samples. At the Cu-NP loading of ~ff ccCC ~40 wt%, the thermal conductivity reveals an abrupt increase due to reaching the thermal percolation threshold (Figure In the high graphene loading composites, ff gg = 40 wt%, the thermal conductivity increases approximately linearly with addition of the Cu-NP fillers, and reaches λλ~13.5 ± 1.6 Wm -1 K -1 at ff CCCC = 35 wt%. The rate of the thermal conductivity increase with Cu-NP loading is larger compared to the samples with the lower graphene loadings. This can be explained in the following way. The composites with the 40 wt% loading of large graphene fillers are already in the thermal percolation transport regime or close to it. Adding the Cu-NP fillers helps to connects the graphene fillers more effectively and thus, enhances the overall heat transport. Note that larger thermal conductivity data scatter is a signature of the thermal percolation regime as reported in the studies with other types of fillers [55] . Table The electrical percolation in the composites with various carbon fillers has been investigated extensively, and the values derived in this study agree well with the prior reports [45,88-90] . In the epoxy composites with a single type of filler, the loading fraction at which the thermal percolation is achieved is usually larger than that of the filler loading required to obtain the electrical percolation i.e. thermal percolation happens after electrical percolation. In a few studies, the thermal conductivity of the composites did not exhibit changes expected at the percolation [91] . This is because matrix materials such as epoxy, while being completely electrically insulating, still conduct heat. The intrinsic electrical conductivity of the fillers is usually ~15 orders of magnitude larger than that of the polymer matrix while the thermal conductivity is ~2 -5 orders of magnitude larger than that of the matrix. Because of the high contrast in the electrical conductivity of the fillers and the base polymer matrix, the formation of even a few electrically conductive percolation networks of attached fillers leads to a strong enhancement of the composite electrical conductivity. The formation of a few electrically and thermally conductive pathways does not necessarily result in a major change in the thermal conductivity. Surprisingly, in this specific case, the electrical percolation threshold is achieved after the thermal percolation threshold, which happens at ff ccCC ~40 wt% (see Figure It is interesting to estimate the contribution of electrons and phonons to thermal transport in the low, medium, and high graphene loading composites, at various Cu-NP concentrations. In Cu-NP, like other metals, λλ ee is the dominant contribution to heat conduction owning to the large concentration of the free electrons. The average diameter of Cu-NPs utilized in this study is ~100 nm, which is larger than the electron MFP, which is ~40 nm. One can assume that the thermal conductivity of the metal particles does not degrade substantially due to the electron -boundary scattering, and remains close to ~400 Wm -1 K -1 at RT. In graphene, on the other hand, heat conduction is dominated by phonons [16] . In a complex system of epoxy with metallic and graphene fillers, both types of heat carriers can potentially contribute to thermal transport. We extract λλ ee from the Wiedemann -Franz law, λλ ee /(σσσσ) = (ππ 2 3 ⁄ )(kk BB ee ⁄ ) 2 , where σσ is the absolute temperature, kk BB is the Boltzmann constant, and ee is the charge of an electron, respectively. The highest electrical conductivity of the samples was measured to be σσ~100 Sm -1 for the composite with ff gg = 40 wt% and ff CCCC ~8 wt%. From the Wiedemann-Franz law, one finds the electronic thermal conductivity to be λλ ee ~0.0007 Wm -1 K -1 . The obtained value is negligible compared to the total thermal conductivity, confirming that the heat is carried primarily by phonons. Strictly speaking, the concept of phonons breaks apart in the disordered material systems. However, one can argue that it is still can be used for acoustic phonons in the elastic medium in the context of heat conduction. We reported thermal properties of the epoxy-based hybrid composites with graphene and copper nanoparticle fillers. It was found that the thermal conductivity of composites with a moderate graphene concentration of ff gg = 15 wt% exhibits an abrupt increase as the loading of copper nanoparticles approaches ff CCCC ~40 wt. %, followed by saturation. In contrast, in composites with a high graphene concentration, ff gg = 40 wt%, the thermal conductivity increases linearly with addition of copper nanoparticles. At all concentrations of the fillers, below and above the electrical percolation threshold, the thermal transport is dominated by phonons. The obtained results shed light on the interaction between graphene fillers and copper nanoparticles in the composites, and demonstrate potential of such hybrid epoxy composites for practical applications in the thermal interface materials and adhesives. Sample Preparation: The composites samples were prepared by mixing commercially available few-layer graphene (xGnP graphene nanoplatelets, grade H, XG-Sciences), copper nanoparticles (US Research Nanomaterials, Inc.), and off-the-shelf epoxy set (Allied High Tech Products, Inc.). Based on the final composite graphene and copper nanoparticle concentrations, the base resin and Cu-NP were weighed and mixed inside a vacuum box in argon gas atmosphere in order to prevent oxidation of Cu particles. The resin and Cu-NP were stirred manually inside the vacuum box in order to be certain that the nanoparticles are well-dispersed inside the polymer. Afterwards, the mixture was mixed outside the glove box using the highshear speed mixer (Flacktek Inc.) at 1000 rpm for several minutes. Afterwards, graphene was weighed and added to the homogeneous resin-Cu-NP mixture in 3 or 4 steps. At each step, the solution was mixed with the speed mixer at ~1000 rpm, then mixed with a home-made needle like mixer in order to prevent agglomeration and vacuumed in order to obtain an air-bubble free mixture. The curing agent (Allied High Tech Products, Inc.) was then added in the prescribed mass ratio of 1:12 with respect to the epoxy resin. The mixture was poured inside a mold with 25.6 mm diameter and 1 mm thickness and pressed gently. The samples were left in the oven for ~2 hours at 70 oC to cure and solidify. Specific heat of the sample is calculated based on comparison of the temperature rise of the sample with that of the known reference sample. The thermal diffusivity and heat capacity are used to determine the thermal conductivity via the equation λλ = ρρ cc cc pp αα where ρρ cc , cc pp , and αα are the mass density, specific heat, and thermal diffusivity of the samples, respectively. More details on the measurement procedures can be found in our prior reports on other material systems 9,11,80,81 . In order to measure the cross-plane electrical resistivity (ζζ), two circular large area Ti/Au contacts (15/150 nm thick) were created on both top and bottom sides of the sample. Resistance (RR) was measured following the standard twoprobe measurements using a digital multimeter (Fluke Corp.) as well as a semiconductor device analyzer (Agilent technology B1500A). The contact resistance was negligible, and the total resistance was dominated by the sample. This is partially due to the large surface area and ohmic contact between Ti/Au and the surface of the composite. Resistivity was calculated via the equation ζζ = RRRR/tt where RR, RR, and tt are the resistance, contact area, and thickness of the composites, respectively. Finally, conductivity was calculated via the equation σσ = 1 ζζ ⁄ and plotted as a function of filler loadings for different composites. Thermal Properties of the Binary-Filler Composites with Few-Layer Graphene and Copper Nanoparticles -UC Riverside, 2019