In this article, we report emergence of topological phase in XMR material TmSb under hydrostatic pressure using first principles calculations. We find that TmSb, a topologically trivial semimetal, undergoes a topological phase transition with band inversion at X point without breaking any symmetry under a hydrostatic pressure of 12 GPa. At 15 GPa, it again becomes topologically trivial with band inversion at Γ as well as X point. We find that the pressures corresponding to the topological phase transitions are far below the pressure corresponding to structural phase transition at 25.5 GPa. The reentrant behaviour of topological quantum phase with hydrostatic pressure would help in finding a correlation between topology and XMR effect through experiments. Recently, the family of rare earth monopnictides LnX (where, Ln is a rare earth element and X = As, Sb, Bi) have attracted great attention in the scientific community Recent experimental reports have shown XMR in TmSb, which is topologically trivial semi-metal First principles calculations are performed within the framework of density functional theory (DFT) with projected augmented wave (PAW) formalism To investigate a topological phase as a function of pressure in TmSb, we first checked stability of the crystal structure under pressures of 0-30 GPa. At ambient pressure, TmSb has NaCl-type rocksalt structure having space group Fm 3m (225) with Tm atom at the origin (0, 0, 0) and Sb atom at (0.5, 0.5, 0.5) (figure For the investigation of topological phase in TmSb under hydrostatic pressure, first we calculated its band structure at ambient pressure using GGA and HSE06 functionals including the SOC effect. Band structure is plotted along the high symmetry points in the BZ, i.e., L to Γ, Γ to X, and X to W, where we have excluded other high symmetry time-reversal variant points of K (0.375, 0.75, 0.375) and U (0.25, 0.625, 0.625), since we are interested only in topological phase transitions. Band structure plots for TmSb with SOC using GGA and HSE06 functionals are shown in figure It can be seen from the figure 2 that valence band and conduction band near the Fermi level mainly have contributions from p-orbitals of Sb (shown by blue spheres) and d -orbitals of Tm (shown by red spheres) atoms, respectively, and a finite overlap is observed between the two using both GGA and HSE06 functionals. From its corresponding DOS plot (supplementary material), it is found to be semi-metallic, which is in agreement with the previous experimental reports In order to explore topological phase in TmSb under pressure, we calculated its band structures from 0 to 16 GPa using HSE06 functionals including the SOC effect. To check non-trivial topological phase as a function of hydrostatic pressures, band inversion is checked at all the time-reversal invariant momenta (TRIM) points. Band inversion is found to be absent from 0 to 11 GPa. However, on increasing the pressure from 12-14 GPa, single band inversion is found at X point; but from 15 GPa onwards, two band inversions are observed at Γ as well as X point. It is to be noted that both of the pressures corresponding to topological quantum phase transitions are far below the pressure of SPT at 25.5 GPa (figure It is observed that at ambient pressure, the valence band at X point mainly has a contribution from the p-orbitals of Sb atom, while the conduction band mainly has a contribution from the d -orbitals of Tm atom. However, at X point a small contribution from d -orbitals of Tm atom and p-orbitals of Sb atom arise in the valence and conduction band, respectively, at 12 GPa, indicating a band inversion and the system becomes topologically non-trivial. At 15 GPa, two band inversions are observed at Γ as well as X point (figure where i δ i denotes the product of the parities of all the filled bands at all TRIM points. In the three-dimensional BZ, there exists eight TRIM points. The value of first topological index ν 0 = 1 corresponds to a strong topological phase and ν 0 = 0 corresponds to either a weak topological phase or trivial insulator, which can be determined by the value of other three indices (ν 1 , ν 2 , ν 3 ). The detailed parities of all the filled bands of TmSb at ambient pressure, 12 GPa, and 15 GPa are shown in table 2, 3, and 4, respectively. Table Since, there is no band inversion at ambient pressure, and its first Z 2 index (ν 0 ) calculated from equation (1) turns out to be zero, indicates that it is topologically trivial. At 12 GPa, band inversion at X point is observed and ν 0 becomes 1, which indicates a topologically non-trivial phase. At 15 GPa, two band inversions are observed at Γ as well as X points, turning ν 0 to zero. The change in the value of ν 0 from 1 to 0 shows that the system is converted either into a weak topological phase or topologically trivial phase. In order to ensure the topological phase at 15 GPa, we calculated the other three topological indices (ν 1 , ν 2 , ν 3 ), which comes out to be (0, 0, 0) as the parity at four L and three X points are the same (table On the basis of first principles calculations, it is summarised that XMR material TmSb undergoes a topological phase transition from trivial to non-trivial under a hydrostatic pressure of 12 GPa. On further increasing the pressure, it again becomes topologically trivial at 15 GPa. The studies indicate a reentrant topological quantum phase transitions in TmSb as a function of hydrostatic pressure, which may help to understand the correlation between topology and XMR effect through experiments.