Single-photon sources are of great interest because they are key elements in different promising applications of quantum technologies. Here we demonstrate a highly efficient tunable on-demand microwave single-photon source based on a transmon qubit with the intrinsic emission efficiency above 98%. The high efficiency ensures a negligible pure dephasing rate and the necessary condition for generation of indistinguishable photons. We provide an extended discussion and analysis of the efficiency of the photon generation. To further experimentally confirm the single-photon property of the source, correlation functions of the emission field are also measured using linear detectors with a GPU-enhanced signal processing technique. Our results experimentally demonstrate that frequency tunability and negligible pure dephasing rate can be achieved simultaneously and show that such a tunable single-photon source can be good for various practical applications in quantum communication, simulations and information processing in the microwave regime. Controllable single photons are an important tool to study fundamental quantum mechanics and also for practical applications in quantum communication However, for many practical applications, such as boson sampling Our single-photon source, see Fig. Here the control and emission lines are coupled through a capacitance network, which includes the shunt capacitor of the transmon qubit and capacitances from the qubit electrodes to the ground. The effective attenuation is estimated using a EM simulator to be more than 80 dB at 7 GHz and the measured attenuation in off-resonance is more than 50 dB with the probe power of -140 dBm. The sample is fabricated using a standard fabrication technique for superconducting quantum circuits. The transmission line is made of the 50 nm thick Nb film on an undoped sillicon wafer. The qubit consisting of a dc-SQUID is fabricated with a standard Al/AlOx/Al shadow evaporation technique using an electron beam evaporation system. From the measured spectrum, the Josephson energy in maximum is E max J /h ≈ 16.8 GHz and the charging energy E C /h ≈ 415 MHz, where E C = e 2 /2C q with an effective qubit capacitance C q ≈ 47 fF. The qubit energy is controlled by an external magnetic field. To study the single-photon source, the sample is cooled down to a temperature of about 20 mK in a dilution refrigerator with a microwave circuit shown in Fig. The sample is screened against external magnetic fields by two-layer μ-metal and one-layer Al shield (see the area of magnetic shield in Fig. For the time-domain and correlation function measurements, we use the single-sideband (SSB) modulation technique with a single microwave source to stabilize the phase in the long-lasting experiment. The single-photon emission after linear amplification is down-converted to 25 MHz and digitized with an ADC at a sampling rate of 250 MS/s, then further processed by a CPU with a GPU-enhanced signal processing technique to extract the quadrature amplitude S a/b (t) and calculate correlation functions efficiently. Note, we use the linear detectors to carry out the correlation function measurements Similar to Ref. In the observed spectrum corresponding to the system resonance frequency ω 01 (transition between |0 and |1 states), there are two avoided-crossings due to the coupling to two-level system (TLS) defects. The large offset in flux bias is caused by the residual magnetism in cables inside the magnetic shield which have been replaced in the later experiments. The linewidth (-3 dB in amplitude) at the sweet-point with ω m /2π = 7.062 GHz (maximal ω 01 ) is ∆ω/2π ≈ 7 MHz. Next, we characterize the efficiency of the emission from the transmon qubit to the emission line. The efficiency η = Γ e 1 /Γ 1 can be defined as the ratio of the emission rate Γ e 1 over the total relaxation rate Γ where Γ c 1 is the relaxation rate through the emission into the control line and Γ n 1 is the non-radiative relaxation rate. We simulated our metallic structure and found from the capacitance network that the ratio of the relaxation rates to the lines Γ c 1 /Γ e 1 is (1.0 ± 0.3) × 10 -2 , taking into account the accuracy of derived capacitances. This means that ideally about 99% of radiation can be emitted to the emission line. As described in Refs. Here δω = ω d -ω 01 is the detuning of the drive, Ω is the Rabi frequency and Γ 2 = Γ 1 /2 + γ is the dephasing rate, which includes pure dephasing rate γ. We can further find the reflection in the emission line r e as At the weak driving limit Ω (Γ 1 , Γ 2 ), it is simplified to and represents a circle with a radius of Γ e 1 /2Γ 2 . Importantly, in the ideal case with Γ c 1 = Γ n 1 = γ = 0, the radius becomes equal to one and η = 1. As shown in Fig. 1 and Γ n 1 together with the possible pure dephasing γ are very weak. In that conditions, the linewidth is defined by the relaxation into the emission line Γ e 1 /2π ≈ 7 MHz and the relaxation time T e 1 = 1/Γ e 1 ≈ 23 ns. Such high emission efficiency also indicates that the qubit intrinsic (non-radiative) relaxation time is much higher than 2.3 μs. For example, if the qubit intrinsic (non-radiative) relaxation time is 10 μs, it will reduce the efficiency by 23 ns/10 μs ≈ 2 × 10 -3 . Such a relaxation time or even higher is reasonable for the transmon qubit on silicon wafer with the currently used fabrication techniques. Here we briefly discuss some limitations on the maximal achievable photon generation efficiency. The efficiency is affected by several factors and the coupling efficiency discussed above is important but only one of them. In order to reach (1 -α p ) (where α p 1) efficiency of preparing the excited state |1 , one needs to drive the qubit within time ∆t, satisfying the condition Γ e 1 ∆t ≈ α p and the required driving amplitude is Ω ≈ π/∆t = πΓ e 1 /α p . We also assume that the ratio of the couplings to two lines is The corresponding applied power to the control line is . There is another obvious limitation on the minimal time ∆t m allowed to prepare the excited state |1 by either the bandwidth of the equipment or the anharmonicity of the qubit, thus α p ≥ Γ e 1 ∆t m . Obviously the coupling efficiency discussed above can be presented as ). If we assume realistic parameters α 2 c = 0.01, α p = 0.01 and ∆t m = 2 ns, then one should make Γ e 1 ≤ (0.2 μs) -1 and Γ n 1 μs) -1 to realize η ≈ 0.99, which can be achieved with the typical high quality qubit lifetime and proper engineering of the capacitance network. The total single-photon generation efficiency is then (1 -α 2 c )(1 -α p ) ≈ 0.98, which includes both state preparation and emission efficiency. Substituting the parameters, we find the necessary power within the pulse to generate the photons, which is W ≈ 2×10 -10 Watt at 7 GHz, however the total energy is only W ∆t m ≈ 4 × 10 -19 J. To further improve the efficiency (decrease of α p and α 2 c ), the power still can be increased by about 4 -6 orders. Another factor to be taken into account is a direct leakage of the coherent radiation from the control to the emission line due to the possible small stray capacitive coupling β between two lines. The factor is very weak, less than 0.01, in our current device. Compared with our previous work Furthermore, we also derive the emission efficiency η over a wide frequency range for different ω 01 , as shown with the left y-axis in Fig. + γ. The derived γ eqv is shown with the right y-axis in Fig. The pure dephasing rate γ due to 1/f flux noise with the flux noise spectral density ∂Φ | Apart from the TLS defects, we achieve emission efficiency η ≥ 90% over 1 GHz frequency range. Further improvement of the device to approach the pure dephasing limit could be better shielding in both low and high frequency regime or an improved design with less sensitivity to the flux-dependent dephasing, such as an asymmetrical design of the dc-SQUID To further study the emission dynamics we utilize an approach similar to the one used in Ref. We apply a truncated Gaussian pulse A exp(-t 2 /2σ 2 ) of σ = 2 ns and controlled amplitude A at the control line to coherently control the transmon qubit. We can prepare the qubit in the state cos(θ r /2)|0 + sin(θ r /2)|1 , where θ r is an angle acquired in the Rabi oscillation process (Rabi angle). As shown in Fig. As expected, the quadrature amplitude a(t) shows (sin θ r )/2 dependence (see Fig. To obtain the dephasing rate Γ 2 To theoretically model the dynamics of our system, we take the Lindblad master equation approach. We consider the system as a pulse driven, ladder-type three-level (|0 , |1 &|2 ) system coupled to a transmission line. The time-dependent system Hamiltonian in a rotatingframe at drive frequency ω d and after rotating-wave approximation (h ≡ 1): where δ = ω 01 -ω d , α = ω 12 -ω 01 , λ = √ 2 The time-dependent Lindblad master equation for the density matrix ρ is where C n = √ γ n A n are collapse operators, and A n are the operators through which the system couples to environment modes. Specifically, here we take: where σ jk = |j k| with {|j , |k } = {|0 , |1 , |2 }. Now we have only modeled our system using internal system operators which are not straightforwardly related to the photon emission. Then input-output theory For correlation functions, there are We numerically solve the Lindblad master equation described above with real experimental parameters using QuTip For correlation functions, we can also quickly calculate the two-time correlation of different operators using QuTip built-in functions which uses quantum regression theorem Furthermore, we measure the correlation functions of the emitted photons using linear detectors We generate a train of 16 single-photon pulses (θ r = π) with a separation of t p = 512 ns (t p 1/Γ 1 ) between two adjacent pulses. This ensures that the transmon qubit always returns to its ground state before being excited again. The emitted photons are split into two channels by the hybrid coupler and then are amplified at both 4K and RT stages. Next, the signals from two channels are down-converted to IF signals at 25 MHz and filtered by 48 MHz low-pass filter. Finally the IF signals are digitized by two ADCs and further processed by the CPU with a GPU-enhanced signal processing technique to calculate the correlations between two quadrature amplitudes S a (t) and S b (t). For calculation of correlation functions, we follow the same way as in Ref. which measures the first-order cross-correlation of signal S a (t) and S b (t). Γ (2) (τ ) = S * a (t)S * a (t + τ )S b (t + τ )S b (t) dt , To remove the correlated noise background (Γ bg (τ ) and Γ (2) bg (τ )), each signal trace is immediately followed by a trace of noise background, when the photon source is not excited. Signal traces and noise background traces are calculated and averaged in the same way to get the correlation function. Then, we can obtain the correlation function of emitted photons by bg (τ ) . For G (1) (τ ), the trace (dots) shown in Fig. For G (2) (τ ), the measurement in the microwave regime is technically difficult due to the very poor SNR, which needs extremely large averaging (> 10 9 ) to achieve a reasonable confidence in experimental data. Instead of using FPGA to realize real-time signal processing To further confirm our experimental results, we carry out another experiment for comparison. We direct generate a short coherent Gaussian pulse with σ = 8 ns and the power is calibrated to make sure that the average photon number inside the pulse is approximately one. Then we measure the second-order correlation function G (2) (τ ) of this coherent state |α ≈ 1 with 4 × 10 9 averages. As expected, we observe G (2) (0) ≈ 0.9 at τ = 0, which is in significant contrast to the Fock state |1 . The red line is the theoretical calculation with a real pulse temporal shape and a finite detection bandwidth. The noise background is slightly higher than Fig. Note here, we demonstrate the antibunching of photons emitted from our source. In further experiments, we can also demonstrate indistinguishability of photons, using Hong-Ou-Mandel (HOM) effect In conclusion, we have demonstrated a highly efficient tunable microwave single-photon source based on a transmon qubit with the intrinsic emission efficiency of ∼ 0.99 ± 0.01. Considering the state preparation efficiency of ∼ 0.87, the total single-photon generation effi-ciency is ∼ 0.86±0.01. The single-photon emission of our source is also confirmed by correlation functions measurement using a GPU-enhanced signal processing technique. In this work, we have substantially improved the performance of a tunable microwave single-photon source. The achieved above 98% emission efficiency is a result of the negligible pure dephasing rate, which is a strong evidence that the emitted photons are indistinguishable. Further analysis also shows that the state preparation efficiency can be further improved with better intrinsic coherence time (e.g. T n 1 ∼ 20 μs) and smaller coupling to emission line (e.g. T e 1 ∼ 0.2 μs). Our result shows that such a tunable microwave single-photon source using waveguide scheme can be good for various practical applications in quantum communication, simulation and information processing in the microwave regime. The dependence of a center peak G (1) (0) and a side-peak G (1) (ntp) on the prepared Rabi angle θr. (c) The measured second-order correlation function G (2) (τ ) for the state |1 . (d) The measured second-order correlation function G (2) (τ ) for the coherent state |α ≈ 1 . All the dots are experimental data, and solid lines are theoretical calculations including the effect of limited detection bandwidth in experiment.