We present the concept of a passive spin-wave device which is able to distinguish different radio-frequency pulse trains and validate its functionality using micromagnetic simulations. The information is coded in the phase of the individual pulses which are transformed into spin-wave packets. The device splits every incoming packet into two arms, one of which is coupled to a magnonic ring which introduces a well-defined time delay and phase shift. Since the time delay is matched to the pulse repetition rate, adjacent packets interfere in a combiner which makes it possible to distinguish simple pulse train patterns by the read-out of the time-integrated spin-wave intensity in the output. Due to its passive construction, this device may serve as an energy-efficient wake-up receiver used to activate the main receiver circuit in power critical IoT applications. An ultra-low power wireless communication capability is needed to realize wireless sensor networks in the real-world scenarios. The most efficient way to reduce energy consumption is to leave the device off and wake it up asynchronously only when it is really needed. For this task, one needs a wake-up receiver which continuously monitors a channel, listens for a wake-up signal from other nodes and activates the device on stimulus A prominent example for the advantages of wave-based data processing is the majority gate, whose output state represents the majority of the input states In this Letter, we design a magnonic wake-up receiver based on spin-wave interference. The basic concept of the magnonic wake-up receiver consists of Y-shaped splitter, a combiner and a coupled magnonic circular ring structure, as depicted in Fig. Figure To determine the optimal parameters for the wake-up receiver, we first simulate the spin-wave dispersion in a single straight waveguide with the same parameters. A sinc function oscillation magnetic field by = b0sinc(2pfct) (in y-direction) was applied in the center of waveguide over an area of 20 nm in length, with a maximum oscillation amplitude b0 = 1 mT and a cut-off frequency of fc = 10 GHz. Figure The color map was obtained by micromagnetic simulations and the white dashed line for the lowest width mode was calculated using the analytic theory for fully unpinned boundary conditions As we mentioned above, the phase of the spin waves coupled back from the ring in the red channel in Fig. To study the delay time caused by the coupled magnonic ring, a single spin-wave pulse of 5 ns duration (td = 5 ns) is applied. Figure Since the induced time delay ∆t of the second pulse train (red wave in Fig. 