We perform hybrid functional and quasi-particle band structure calculations with spin-orbit interaction to investigate the band structures of Mg2Si, Mg2Ge, and Mg2Sn. For all Mg2X materials, where X = Si, Ge, and Sn, the characteristics of band edge states, i.e., band and valley degeneracies, and orbital characters, are found to be conserved, independent of the computational schemes such as density functional generalized gradient approximation, hybrid functionals, or quasi-particle calculations. However, the magnitude of the calculated band gap varies significantly with the computational schemes. Within density-functional calculations, the one-particle band gaps of Mg2Si, Mg2Ge, and Mg2Sn are 0.191, 0.090, and -0.346 eV, respectively, and thus severely underestimated compared to the experimental gaps, due to the band gap error in the density functional theory and the significant relativistic effect on the low-energy band structures. By employing hybrid-functional calculations with a 35% fraction of the exact Hartree-Fock exchange energy (HSE-35%), we overcame the negative band gap issue in Mg2Sn. Finally, in quasi-particle calculations on top of the HSE-35% Hamiltonians, we obtained band gaps of 0.835, 0.759, and 0.244 eV for Mg2Si, Mg2Ge, and Mg2Sn, respectively, consistent with the experimental band gaps of 0.77, 0.74, and 0.36 eV, respectively. unused or waste heat into electricity Mg-based binary silicides, i.e., Mg2X (X = Si, Ge, Sn) compounds and their alloys are eco-friendly thermoelectric materials, as they consist of nontoxic and earthabundant materials, unlike tellurides or other heavy-element-based compounds. Mgbased silicides crystallize in the antifluorite structure with a chemical formula of Mg2Si The Si atoms form an fcc sublattice with lattice parameter a, while the Mg atoms form a simple cubic sublattice with lattice parameter a/2. By mixing Mg2Si with Mg2Ge or Mg2Sn, Mg2Si-based alloys can exhibit a relatively high n-type ZT exceeding 1 at a temperature from 600 to 800 K Mg2X-based alloys exhibit low thermal conductivity, owing to their complex microstructures. In these materials, thermal energy is primarily transferred by phonons that are bosons. Thus, all phonon modes contribute to thermal conduction The recent theoretical and computational investigations on quantum transport have revealed the importance of nanostructuring on charge and heat transport. Nanostructuring can be effective in increasing electrical conductivity and PF, in addition to suppressing bipolar thermal conductivity, especially for bipolar or narrow gap materials with interface-rich structures, and this results in enhanced thermoelectric performance However, to optimize thermoelectric materials for better thermoelectric performance, it is essential to correlate experimental results with theoretical studies. Thus, it is important to understand the atomic and electronic structures of Mg2X compounds and their alloys thoroughly. The electronic structure of Mg2X compounds has been investigated for the further understanding of Mg2Si-related alloy systems using first-principles density-functional theory (DFT) pseudopotential calculations The band gap is critical for thermoelectric transport, especially at higher temperatures where the thermal energy can overcome the band gap energy or the band offset potentials between materials. For example, a small gap results in a smaller Seebeck coefficient and a larger value of thermal conductivity owing to enhanced bipolar conduction wavefunctions and wrong band occupations, we perform hybrid functional and quasi-particle calculations of the band structures of Mg2X, where X = Si, Ge, and Sn. Using hybrid-functional calculations, we overcome the negative band gap problem in Mg2Sn and correct the incorrect band occupation near the negative band gap. Using the one-shot GW calculations on top of the hybrid-functionals, we finally obtain reliable band gap values for Mg2X, which are consistent to the measured values. We performed the DFT [71,72], hybrid-functional For the band structure calculations of the primitive cell of Mg2X containing two Mg and one X atoms, we used the 6 × 6 × 6 MP k-point mesh Subsequently, the self-energy was computed from G and W, and the quasi-particle band structure was calculated. In GW calculations, the number unoccupied bands are important to obtain the reliable converged band gap. Here, in total, we used the 240, 360, and 360 bands while there are 10, 10, and 15 occupied bands for Mg2Si, Mg2Ge, and Mg2Sn, respectively. For GW with SOI calculations, the numbers of bands are doubled. For the GW on top of the PBE Hamiltonian, we used four different schemes for the GW calculations: one-shot G0W0 approximation with one-shot G and W; GW0 approximation with updated G with fixed W; self-consistent GW0 (scGW0) including an off-diagonal component with updated G and fixed W; fully self-consistent GW (scGW), where G and W are updated. For the GW on top of the HSE Hamiltonian, we only considered the G0W0 calculations with HSE-25, HSE-30, and HSE-35. To observe the effect of SOI on the band structure, we performed the GW calculations with and without SOI. Figure Three VBM band states are degenerated at the Γ point if SOI effects are not taken into account. The CBM states of Mg2X are found at point X with a valley degeneracy of three, thus exhibiting an indirect band gap nature. With SOI, the three VBM bands the Γ point are split into 4 and 2 bands at, while the CBM bands at the L point are not. Note that, as going from X = Si to Sn, the spin-orbit splitting becomes larger. Table Similarly, in Table In DFT-PBE calculations, the band gaps are severely underestimated, i.e., 0.202, 0.151, and -0.190 eV, for Mg2Si, Mg2Ge, and Mg2Sn, respectively. With SOI effect, the band gaps are reduced to 0.191, 0.090, and -0.346 eV, respectively (see Figure Furthermore, Mg2Sn has a negative band gap energy. To overcome the band gap underestimation of Mg2X, we employed hybrid-functional and quasi-particle GW calculations. Mg2Si using DFT-PBE, hybrid-functional, and quasi-particle GW calculations. The band edges are computed with respect to the average of the electrostatic local potential over the unit cell, which can be used for band alignment using the reference potential method Table If we consider the SOI correction on the band gap, the self-consistent quasi-particle band gap might be smaller than 0.7 eV. This implies that the self-consistent band gap will be smaller than the experimental gap, owing to poor starting wavefunctions for Mg2Ge. Therefore, by conducting quasi-particle GW calculations on top of the HSE-35, we corrected the initial wavefunctoins compared to density-functoinal calculations, and finally obtained the band gap of 0.759 eV with relativistic effects. Table Table We estimated the band edge positions of VBM, X1, and X3 for a ternary solid solution Mg2(Si(1-x)Snx) and subsequently computed its band gap (see Figure Consequently, the X1 and X3 states are converged and the band gap becomes smaller. In DFT-PBE with SOI calculations, the X1 and X3 states converged at approximately x = 0.357, which is inconsistent with the experimental reports. In the quasi-particle GW calculations, the X1 and X3 conduction bands converged at x = 0.525. Similarly, as shown in Figure In conclusion, the band structures of Mg2X (X = Si, Ge, and Sn) were investigated using DFT-PBE, hybrid-functionals, and quasi-particle GW calculations. Severe band gap underestimations occurred owing to DFT band gap errors and strong spin-orbit interactions. By correcting the initial wavefunctions and Kohn-Sham eigenvalues from the hybrid-functional calculations, we obtained a reliable quasi-particle band gap for Mg2X that was consistent to the experimental ones. Finally, the quasi-particle band structures of Mg2X well predict the compositions of the conduction band convergences in Mg2(Si,Sn) and Mg2(Ge,Sn) solid solutions. Ta ble 1 For given lattice parameters, real space characteristics of band edge states of Mg2Si, Mg2Ge, and Mg2Sn are described without and with strain. For VBM, CBM, and C+1 states, the main contributions are written. [48] 