Graphyne nanotubes (GNTs) are nanostructures obtained from rolled up graphyne sheets, in the same way carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are obtained from graphene ones. Graphynes are 2D carbon-allotropes composed of atoms in sp and sp 2 hybridized states. Similarly to conventional CNTs, GNTs can present different chiralities and electronic properties. Because of the acetylenic groups (triple bonds), GNTs exhibit large sidewall pores that influence their mechanical properties. In this work, we studied the mechanical response of GNTs under tensile stress using fully atomistic molecular dynamics simulations and density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Our results show that GNTs mechanical failure (fracture) occurs at larger strain values in comparison to corresponding CNTs, but paradoxically with smaller ultimate strength and Young's modulus values. This is a consequence of the combined effects of the existence of triple bonds and increased porosity/flexibility due to the presence of acetylenic groups. Graphene became one of the most studied structures in materials science since its first experimental realization in 2004 Similarly to 2D, quasi-1D carbon structures have also received special attention in the last decades. For example, CNTs have been used as field-emission electron sources Although there is a great interest in the properties of GNTs, a fully comprehensive investigation of their mechanical properties has not been yet fully carried out and it is one the objectives of the present work. In this work we have investigated the behavior of GNTs under mechanical tensile stress using fully atomistic reactive molecular dynamics (MD) and density functional theory (DFT) simulations. Fully atomistic reactive molecular dynamics simulations were carried out to predict the tensile stress/strain behavior of CNTs, α-GNTs, and γ-GNTs (Fig. Before starting the tube stretch (tensile) processes, in order to eliminate any residual stress present on the structures, we carried out an energy minimization followed by a NPT thermalization was carried. Then, the tensile tests were performed by stretching the nanotubes until fracture within NVT ensemble at room temperature (300 K). A chain of three Nosé-Hoover thermostats was used to control initial oscillations of the temperature We considered 8 nanotubes of each type (CNT, α-GNT, and γ-GNT), equally distributed between armchair and zigzag geometries. We also calculated the mechanical properties of CNTs with similar geometrical characteristics of the studied GNTs for comparison purposes. The selected CNTs (n, 0), and (n, n) cases were n = 11, 14, 25, 50. In order to have GNTs with similar diameters, we chose (n, 0) and (n, n) with n = 4, 5, 9, 18, for both α-GNTs and γ-GNTs (Table During the stretching process we calculated the virial stress along the stretching direction z (σ z ), as defined by where V = Ah = L 0 πd t h is the volume (considering a hollow cylinder) of the nanotube with d t being its diameter, N the number of atoms, m k the mass, v the velocity, r the position, f the force per atom, respectively. We adopted the standard graphene thickness value of h = 3.34 Å (graphite interlayer distance) in all our calculations. From the linear regime of each stress-strain curve we obtained the Young's modulus values, which are defined as: where ε z = (L -L 0 )/L 0 is the strain along the z-direction (nanotube periodic axis) and σ z is the tensor component of the virial stress along the z-direction. We also calculated the normalized Young's modulus values (Y ρ = Y /ρ) accordingly to the density of each structure (ρ = m/(L 0 πd t h)). The spatial distribution of the stress during the stretching was calculated using the von Mises stress σ k v , defined as: (3) In order to test the reliability of the MD results and also to validate them, we also carried out a systematic study of α-and γ-GNTs under uniaxial strain using DFT methods Periodic boundary conditions were imposed, with perpendicular lattice vectors a x and a y large enough (∼40 Å) to simulate vacuum and avoid spurious interactions between periodic images. Similar to MD methodology, each strain level is defined as ε z = (L -L 0 )/L 0 , where L 0 and L hold for the relaxed and strained nanotube length, respectively. Again, the graphyne nanotube was treated as a rolled membrane with thickness h equal to 3.34 Å and area equals to πd t L 0 , where d t is the nanotube diameter. In the DFT study, the axial stress component σ z is related to the strain component ε z with the static relation σ z = (1/V )(∂U/∂ε z ), where V = Lπd t h is the volume of the strained nanotube membrane. The obtained critical strain (ε c ) and the ultimate strength (US) MD values for the studied nanotubes are presented in Table Similar results were also observed for armchair/zigzag γ-GNTs (Fig. The stress-strain curves for α-GNTs, γ-GNTs, and CNTs with similar diameters (Fig. The normalized Young's modulus Y ρ are presented in Table τ (GJ/m 3 ) α-GNT (4,0) 7.68 α-GNT In Fig. The α-GNTs are predicted to have the lowest Young's modulus value when compared to γ-GNTs and the corresponding CNTs. We also obtained similar fracture patterns from both MD and DFT methods. Interestingly, α-GNTs become stiffer as they are stretched. The values of Young's modulus for α-GNTs are almost twice from the unstrained configuration (171 GPa and 80 GPa for In Fig. We investigated the structural and mechanical properties of graphyne tubes (GNTs) of different diameters and chiralities, through fully atomistic reactive molecular dynamics and DFT calculations. We also considered conventional carbon nanotubes (CNTs), for comparison purposes. Our results show that the complete structural failure (fracture) of both zigzag-alligned CNTs and γ-GNTs occurred around similar critical strain values ((ε c )), but quite distinctly for armchair CNTs and γ-GNTs. In particular, α-GNTs showed the highest (ε c ) values for both zigzag and armchair nanotubes. With relation to the fracture patterns, under stretch the stress accumulation occur along lines of covalent bonds parallel to the externally applied strain direction. These lines are composed of single and triple bonds in the armchair α-GNTs and only by double bonds in the zigzag α-GNTs. Similar results were obtained for γ-GNTs. The stress-strain curves for α-GNTs, γ-GNTs, and CNTs with similar diameters are characterized by the existence of linear (elastic) and plastic regimes, where the bonds start to break and propagate until reaching a complete fracture. But in contrast to CNTs, graphyne nanotubes exhibit significant diameter-dependent structural transitions after threshold (ε c ). With relation to the Young's modulus values, as expected CNTs exhibit larger values than graphyne nanotubes, but when these values are density normalized (Y ρ ), the graphyne and CNTs values are comparable, indicating that in spite of their porosity, it is still possible to have graphyne structures with relative high Y ρ values. ρ ) values for CNTs, α-and γ-GNTs.