In this paper, we report on the use of tantalum and iridium as adhesion layers for platinum electrodes used in high temperature SAW devices based on langasite substrates (LGS). Unlike iridium, tantalum exhibits a great adhesive strength, and a very low mobility through the Pt film, ensuring a device lifetime of at least half an hour at 1000°C. The latter is limited by morphological modifications of platinum, starting by the apparition of crystallites on the surface, and followed by important terracing and breaking of the film continuity. SNMS and XRD measurements allowed us to show that these phenomena are likely intrinsic to platinum film, whatever be the nature of the adhesion layer. Finally, after having outlined a possible scenario leading to this deterioration, we consider some solutions that could replace platinum in order to increase the lifetime of LGS-based SAW devices in high temperatures conditions. It is now well established that SAW devices can be used as pressure, gas or temperature sensors. Those devices are particularly interesting for applications in harsh environments where no electronics can survive. Indeed, because they can be remotely powered and interrogated, embedded electronic is not required for wireless applications. Many industrial sectors, such as aeronautics, metallurgy, automotive, are looking forward those small, robust and wireless devices Regarding to the substrate, several studies have shown that langasite (La 3 Ga 5 SiO 14 ) is well suited for this kind of applications Up to now, most of the studies have been conducted on platinum electrodes Several studies have shown the limitations of titanium as adhesion layer at temperatures above 600°C Pt/Zr combination has shown far better performances until 700°C. In particular, AES (Auger electron spectroscopy) measurements have highlighted that Zr has not diffused at all through Pt after 8h of annealing at 700°C More recently, Da Cunha et al. have studied alternative solutions, replacing platinum by a Pt/10%Rh alloy, while maintaining the adhesion layer of zirconium Our purpose in this work is to study new adhesion layers for platinum, not studied yet in high temperature SAW applications, to reach better results than the ones with zirconium, and then to ensure a device lifetime of at least 30 minutes at 1000°C. We will focus our efforts on two potential candidates : tantalum and iridium. Tantalum as adhesion layer for platinum has already been studied in other fields than SAW applications. Maeder et al., in particular, have noted that its performance is very close to that of zirconium after an annealing of 10 minutes in a low pressure O 2 atmosphere at 620°C Platinum and tantalum thin films were deposited on YX langasite substrates by sputtering method, while iridium was evaporated in electron beam system. The thickness of the adhesion layers was systematically 10 nm, while that of platinum film was 100 nm. SAW delay lines operating at 167 MHz were then processed combining photolithography and ion beam etching (IBE). All devices were then electrically characterized with a probe station before and after annealing. These were performed in a tube furnace under air atmosphere at temperatures from 900°C to 1000°C and for a duration varying between 30 minutes and 2 hours. The samples were quickly inserted in the pre-heated furnace, and pulled out of the hot zone as fast as possible. Langasite substrates showed great resistance to this thermal shock treatment. The morphology of the thin metal films was studied by Xray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Second neutral mass spectroscopy (SNMS) was used to obtain their compositional depth profiles. If the adhesion strength of the as-deposited Pt/Ir films seemed good, the lithography process revealed that it was actually poor. In fact, after this phase, approximately 70 % of the achieved devices were unusable, because of the presence of numerous scratches on the IDTs. We can suppose that their origin is related to a poor adhesion of the Pt/Ir film on the substrate, making the devices particularly delicate. This fragility also appeared when the prober tips come into contact with the IDT pads during electrical characterization. Significant scratches were then systematically observed. This behavior was confirmed after the high temperature annealing. SEM images revealed the formation of numerous blisters as well as delamination, leading to a strong thinning of the IDTs fingers, threatening their continuity (see Fig. Unlike Pt/Ir combination, Pt/Ta films showed very good adhesion to the substrate at room temperature, but also after annealing. The frequency response shows no deterioration after annealing at 1000°C for 30 minutes (see Fig. To study the limitations of this kind of device at high temperature, we made it undergo a new annealing process at 900°C for 2 hours. The result was no appeal : the SAW signal vanished while SEM images revealed that the crystallites have disappeared, leaving a substantial terracing and breaking of the IDTs fingers, which explains the loss of the SAW signal (see Fig. On SNMS depth profile curve, the atomic concentration of several elements is plotted versus the time of abrasion, which is related to the depth inside the sample. The two vertical lines symbolize the approximate interfaces Pt/Ta and Ta/LGS. One can see that there has not been massive diffusion of tantalum through the Pt film during annealing, and a slight one into the LGS substrate. This result, coupled with the excellent adhesive strength of the Pt/Ta films, shows how tantalum is a good adhesion layer for platinum thin films and for high temperature applications. Moreover, tantalum will probably play no role in the development of the crystallites on the surface of the Pt layer, implying that this phenomenon is intrinsic to platinum. XRD measurements allow confirming this hypothesis. θ-2θ scan pointed out a strong [111] orientation of the platinum films, which is a conventional result for FCC metals, like Pt As our metal thin films are polycrystalline, grain boundaries are very numerous and the total surface of grains is large, which implies that interface diffusion phenomena are probably predominant under bulk ones, and govern the recrystallization process. Moreover, the onset of surface diffusion is about the Hüttig temperature (which is defined as 0,3T m with T m the melting temperature in K, i.e. for Pt about 340°C), whereas lattice mobility becomes significant over the Tammann temperature (defined as 0,5T m , i.e. for Pt about 750°C) To summarize, we have shown that tantalum has the required properties to be used as an adhesion layer for platinum IDTs. The limitation of 30 min at 1000 °C is attributed to platinum and not to the layer of tantalum. The deterioration of Pt/Ta electrode is explained by a strong recrystallization of platinum as evidenced by the results of Xray diffraction.