Contents 1. Introduction 2. Ballistic effects 2.1 Cut-off of cyclotron resonance. 2.2 Radio-frequency size effect (Gantmakher effect) in a parallel magnetic field; 2.3 Studies of the Femi surface in Cu and Ag: 2.4; Time-of-flight effect in Ag; 2.5; Studies of the Fermi surface of transition metals Mo and W; 2.6. Radio-frequency size effect in tilted and perpendicular magnetic fields; 2.7.Multichannel radio-frequency size effect in W; 2.8 Nonlinear radio-frequency size effect in Bi. 3. De Haas-van Alphen effect. 3.1; Quantum oscillation in ZrB 12 ; Quantum oscillations in YBa 2 CuO 2-x . 4. Angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy 5. Conclusion The Fermi surfaces (FSs) of the majority of pure metals have been widely investigated since the 1960s The results of these studies are presented in a number of reviews Subsequently, however, primary attention was given to analysis of the mechanism of electron scattering of pure metals with the aid of ballistic effects The main purpose of this review consists in drawing the attention of physicists to very simple methods that makes possible to investigate the FSs of metals with a high precision. Notice that on the experiments on (HFSE) the caliper dimensions of the FSs are measured directly, which substantially simplifies the restoration of the FSs. At the same time, in the case of effects based on quantum oscillations (de Haas-van (dHvA), effect and Shubnikov -de Haas (ShdH effect), it is the area of extremal section of the FSs that is measured. Furthermore, no very large magnetic fields or very low temperatures are required for HFSE, contrary to measurements of quantum oscillations. At the same time, recent experiments with quantum oscillations in high-temperature superconductors have shown the large potential of these effects for restoring the FSs of metals, so it will be given special attention in these papers. In recent years, there have been widely developed studies of FSs with the aid of -angle resolved photoelectron spectroscopy (ARPES). These experiments and study procedures have been presented in a whole series of reviews To illustrate the HFSE phenomenon, let us examine a plane parallel single crystal-plate (Fig1) of a metal of thickness d with a large mean free path l at the liquid helium temperature in a magnetic field H parallel to the surface of the plate Here m* is the effective mass of electrons (on the extremal sections of the FS), and n=1,2,3, are integer numbers. As a result of CR, resonances appear in the absorption spectrum of the microwave field in the magnetic fields H n =m*ωc/ne with a period ΔH -1 =e/m*cω (Fig. As can be seen from Fig. A true breakthrough in studies of the FSs in metals with the aid of HFSE was made by V.F. Gantmakher it can easily be shown (2) Figure In further experiments, it was discovered, that besides the basic line of RFSE in the field H 0, additional lines are observed in the fields that are multiples of H 0 i.e., 2H 0 , 3H 0 , etc. In the multiple magnetic fields, the electrons excite the skin layer deeply in the metal at a distance that is a multiple of the diameter 2ħk F of the orbits, when the component vz of the velocity of elections changes its sign upon reaching the bottom of the orbit Here n, is the number of field's splashes in a plate of thickness d, ẟo, ẟ 1 , and ẟ 2 are the depth of the initial skin layer, of the nth splashes and the splash near the boundary z=d, respectively (see Fig 4 The amplitude of the basic RFSE line in the field Ho is determined by the probability of electron scattering during orbital movements. Under the condition of the extremal anomalous skin effect (l<<d), the contribution to the amplitude comes from an exponentially small number of electrons. This makes it possible to study different mechanisms of electrons scattering rate ̅ (T) (electron-phonon, electron-electron, etc.) based on the temperature dependence of the amplitude of RFSE line Here ̅ is the electro-phonon, electron-electron scattering rate of electron averaged along the orbit, and Ω is the cyclotron frequency: A review of these experiments is published in The value of the field H 0 in Eq. ( As an example of the potential of the RFSE in a parallel magnetic field for restorations of the FSs, let us examine some results of investigations of this effect in Cu and noble metals (Ag), where the potential of the RFSE for determination the sizes of the FSs manifest itself with high precision. The Fermi surface of the noble metals is presented schematically in Fig. This surface is open along the axis <111> and occupies half of the BZ, whereas in the model of free electrons it takes the form of the sphere inscribed in the BZ. The anisotropy of the position of the RFSE lines in a parallel magnetic field in the planes (100) and (110) in Ag is illustrated in Fig. There is a large amount of works in which an attempt was made to describe the FS of noble metals from the first principles calculations Comparatively, little attention has been given to another HFSEthe time of flight effect (TFE) In these experiments, one side excitation of the Ag plane-parallel plate was used under conditions of cyclotron resonance. As can be seen from Fig. A theory of this effect was developed in the paper The amplitude of the TFE oscillations is proportional to the number of electrons having passed without scattering along orbit 2, and takes on the same form as amplitude of the RFSE line in the parallel magnetic field (formula 5), with the difference being that ̅ has been averaged over a segment of orbit 2, rather than over the entire orbit, as in the case of the RFSE In fact, only a change in the phase Δφ(H) is measured in experiments, where the phase φ= πH c /H 0 is determined by the cyclotron mass known from the CR (H c =ωm*c/e), H 0 is the field of TFE cut-off, and D is the diameter of the orbit in the momentum space. As a result we obtain (10) Equation ( In reality, however, the accuracy of this calculations procedure for the inversion frequency of e-p scattering v(k) and for the velocity υ(k) is somewhat limited because the presence of different corrections Another example of the successful application of the RFSE for restoring the FSs of metals are studies of the metals of the chromium group (Mo, W) The hole sheet, consists of an octahedron at the point H and six ellipsoids at the points N (green points in Fig. 1. Hole octahedron at the point H. As can be seen from Fig. Angular range of the existence of lines b and their anisotropy makes it possible to relate them to the orbits on the neck of the jack connecting the octahedral part of the jack body with the spheroids. An empirical model of the FSs in Mo and W As was already noted above, the RFSE in parallel magnetic field is due to "effective electrons", which move in the skin layer parallel to the surface with a velocity υ z =0. Another example of RFSE on "effective electrons" is the RFSE at the limiting point or at the section of the FS with an extremal derivative of the surface area of the section with respect to the momentum, Here K is the Gaussian curvature of the FS at the limiting point of the FS. For an arbitrary FS, such extrema can occur at the no central sections of the FS with an extremum of Fig. where, S(k z ) is the area of the cross section of the FS with the plane k z =const. The electron motion in such an orbit in a parallel magnetic field leads to a shift of the position of the RFSE lines according to the law: for the RFSE from the orbits at the noncentral section of the FS Here, D is a diameter, and h is spiral orbit pitch on the non-centrally section of the FS. The period ΔH in the position of these lines made it possible to determine the Gaussian curvature K of the FS in In at the limiting point of the FS The RFSE in the case of limiting point orbits or on the non-centrally section of the FS take place at those values H n of the magnetic field for which the number n of rotations along the path from one side of the sample to the other side is an integer. As a result, RFSE lines were observed at the limiting point in In for the direction of the magnetic field along The RFSE in the case of the non-centrally sections on octahedron sheet of the FS in Mo and W were observed as well This feature leads to a harmonic distribution of the RF field in a metal, contrary to the case of geometrical resonances considered above for the cases of parallel and tilted magnetic fields. In the harmonic case, the metal becomes transparent to the electromagnetic excitation. The period of Gantmakher-Kaner oscillations (GKOs) is determined by the extremum of the displacement u , just as in the case of RFSE in a tilted magnetic field Up to now, we have considered the RFSE in the case of a "normal" scattering of electrons from the surface of the metal, when the electrons remain on the same sheet of the FS of the metal after surface scattering. However, the law of momentum conversation upon surface scattering requires the conversation only of the tangent component k // k n of the wave vector of electrons, where n is normal to the surface of the sample. Therefore, as follows from Fig. If the plane of the orbit lies near the limiting point of the sheet of the FS, then the electron moving along the jumping trajectories from A to B on the electron jack (see Fig. Here, ɑ BC depends on the wave functions of electrons at the points B and C and v B and v C , are the normal components of the electron velocities at these points. As can be seen from Fig. The decrease in the sample thickness lead to the displacementn of these lines into the range of larger fields together with the basic RFSE lines (dashed cuves in Fig. As can be seen from Fig. So far we have considered the RFSE effect under linear conditions, when the amplitude of RF field H ω of the radio-frequency field on the surface of a sample is small compared to an external DC magnetic field H 0 . In this case, the electron orbits are not distorted in the skin layer. The situation changes substantially in the case of the reverse limit, when H ω ≥ H 0 The amplitude of the splashes diminishes with the order number n according to the law n -2/3 , almost just as the splashes of the HF field dumping [(Eq. 3)]. The magnetic field of the rectified current acts on the orbits of electrons together with an external magnetic field. As the external field reaches the strength H n =2nvmcled, where d is the thickness of the plate, and n is an integer, the splashes of the direct current go into the opposite surface of the sample and can be detected from the dependence of magnetic moment of the sample on the external magnetic field As has been noted in the Introduction, the other most popular effect for the study of FSs in metals are quantum oscillations of magnetic susceptibility (de Haasvan Alphen effect), and of the conductivity of metals (Shubnikovde Haas effect). In these effects, the area of the extremal sections of the FSs is measured, which substantionally complicates the restoration of the FSs. Nevertheless, we consider below a number of results obtained recently in the case of hightemperature superconductors, without claiming the information available on this enormouse subject is complete The frequency of the oscillations of the parallel magnetisation M || is proportional to the surface area S F of the corresponding sheet of the FS: F=(S F c)/2πe. In metals, the amplitde of oscillations (A(T,H) is described by the Lifsits-Kosevich formula ( ) Here, m* c =(∂ 2 E F /∂k 2 ) is the cyclotron effective mass of electrons, and T D is the Dingle temperature, which is inversely proportional to the scattering rate of electrons. Notice that β and ε peaks in Fourier expansion of these oscillations (Fig. Equation ( Some discrepancy between the experiment and calculations is caused by imperfection of the theoretical model, just as, strictly speaking, in the case of the FS of Ag The dHvA effect in the extreme case when 4π|(dM/dH-1|≤1, leads to the formation of diamagnetic domains Another example of recently very successful studies of FSs in superconductors is quantum oscillations in single crystals of the high-temperature superconductor YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-x (YBCO) and HgBa 2 Cu 4+x (HBCO) As a result of the investigations with TDO, quantum oscillations were observed up to 30 K, with a frequency oscillations which corresponds to small pockets on the FS of the YBCO, with a rather small effective mass m*=0.45 m 0 (see Fig. The ARPES method is based on the phenomenon of the photo effect. Upon irradiation of the surface of a metal by ultraviolet radiation the emission of electrons of different energies occurs, which is registered in the form of a photoemission spectrum, and if using a sweeping over the angle, is recorded as an angle-resolved photoemission spectrum (Fig. The ARPES method is based on a not-entirely substantiated assumption that an electron, when being emitted from a crystal into a vacuum, preserves its momentum and energy, i.e. it is assumed that on leaving the metal the quasi-momentum ħk of electron passes into real momentum in a free space p= ħk+ħG, where G is the vector of the reciprocal lattice of the crystal. In this case, the energy of the electron is retained: E kin =ħ ν-φ-|E b |, where E b is the electron binding energy in the metal. The intensity of the photocurrent is proportional to the special function multiplied by the Fermi distribution function: I(k,ω) = A(kω) f(ω). Without taking into account the interaction, we have: A(k,ω) ẟ[ω-ε(k)], and the electronic spectrum is determined by the law of the energy-band distribution ε(k) in the metal. Allowance for the interaction strongly complicates the behavior of the special function: , Here Σ'ω+iΣ''is the quasiparticle self-energy, which reflects the interaction in the metal. Generally speaking, there has been no such substantiation of the effect of ARPES to date; therefore, as a rule, different approximations are used In these experiments, it was possible to localize the position of surface and bulk states in the YBCO, where the CuO 2 layer nearest to the surface is considered to be localized, and the next bilayer is considered as lying in the bulk. At present, apparently, there is a fundamental discrepancy between ARPES data for FSs and the results of quantum oscillations Summarizing the results of investigations of quantum oscillations and ARPES in YBCO, note the following problems Note in conclusions that investigations of the FS of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-x are beyond the scope of this review, which is devoted to the Fermi ology of pure metals. In this review, we tried to gather together the results of studies of the Fermi surface of pure metals performed with the aid of high-frequency size effects. We have shown, that the high accuracy of these methods using examples of studies that did not enter into other reviews. We have shown that high-frequency size effects are very sensitive and efficient methods for studying FSs and mechanisms of electron scattering and excitation of electromagnetic waves in metals. Unfortunately, such studies are presently very rare because of nesessity of using high purity metals with large mean-free path of electrons. At the same time the, application of HFSE for studies of the FSs of nanostructured objects with a thickness of several micrometers can prove to be very efficient and useful. It has been shown with the examples of the electronic structure of high-temperature superconductors, that the investigations of the FSs of metals are very important and fascinating problem in the study of the electronic structure of metals.