In this study, we present a theoretical interpretation of the experimental results that the anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) effect has a four-fold symmetric component, c 4 , in cubic ferromagnetic metals. The theoretical model that we employ is based on the Anderson impurity model that includes a four-fold symmetric crystalline electric field, and we assume that the impurities have 3d electron orbitals and spinorbit interaction (SOI). We describe the DC conductivity on the basis of the Kubo formula, and we investigate c 4 by analyzing the magnetization direction dependence of the resultant AMR ratio. Analytical and numerical calculations are performed; the analytical calculation reveals that c 4 arises from the fourth-order contribution of the SOI, and the numerical calculation provides the parameter dependencies of c 4 in our model. From the calculation results, we observe that the splitting of impurity 3d levels due to SOI is responsible for the existence of c 4 in cubic ferromagnetic metals. The anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) effect has been known to be a special magnetoresistance effect that occurs in ferromagnetic metals and has had applications in magnetic sensors. Owing the theoretical research conducted in the 1960s and 1970s, it is widely believed that this is a spin-dependent transport property of ferromagnets. The efficiency of AMR is referred using the AMR ratio defined as with ρ ⊥ = ρ( π 2 ). Usually, in experiments on bulk polycrystalline ferromagnetic metals, the angular dependence of resistivity is phenomenologically written as AMR(φ) = c 0 + c 2 cos 2φ, where c n denotes the coefficient of the cos nφ component. Theoretically, the AMR effect has been successfully explained using an s-d impurity scattering model considering spin-orbit interactions (SOIs). Recently, interesting behaviors have been noticed in some single-crystal ferromagnets such as Fe 4 N 7-10 and Co 2 MnSi 11 wherein the AMR ratio exhibits four-fold symmetry in the form of AMR(φ) = c 0 + c 2 cos 2φ + c 4 cos 4φ. In 2015, Kokado and Tsunoda proposed a theory for explaining the origin of four-fold term, wherein tetragonal symmetric crystal fields are responsible for the c 4 term from the second-order perturbation expansion in terms of SOI. Assuming planar or uniaxial lattice distortions on films, the above explanation may be applied to account for the presence of c 4 because such distortions change crystal symmetry from cubic to tetragonal. However, symmetry transitions have not been directly observed even when a finite c 4 appears. Therefore, for understanding the four-fold AMR effects, it is worth further focusing on cubic systems. In this study, we show the presence of not only c 2 but also c 4 on cubic single-crystal ferromagnetic 3d alloys. Inspired by the Kokado model, In this section, we present the model Hamiltonian H and formulation for AMRs. Assuming a cubic single-crystal ferromagnetic 3d alloy system, AMR is described by using the impurity scattering model. Here, the 3d-electrons are relatively localized and are then assumed contribute little to conduction. Therefore, we regard the 3d-band to act only as a ferromagnetic background. In this situation, only the 4s-electrons contribute to conduction and resistivity is governed by s-d impurity scattering. We regard the impurity atoms to have a magnetic 3d character. Thus, we adopt the multi-orbital d-impurity Anderson model to describe the above situation as follows: where H s (φ) is the 4s-conduction electron Hamiltonian, H imp (φ) represents the impurity 3d states, and H hyb denotes the s-d hybridization term. The conduction electrons are treated within the electron-gas model with exchange splitting from a ferromagnetic background sustained by the 3d-bands where ) are the spinor-represented operators creating and annihilating the conduction electron state with the wave vector k, and σ μ is the μcomponent of the Pauli matrix. The first term represents the kinetic energy tk 2 and the bottom energy E 0 , and ∆ s is the strength of the exchange splitting on conduction band. Impurity 3d states are treated as localized 3d atomic orbitals with exchange splitting, SOIs, and crystal fields of cubic symmetry reflecting the 3d host matrix. with where the suffix i indicates the site index of the impurity position. ) are the spinor-represented operators creating and annihilating the impurity 3d state with the site i and the orbital m. ∆ d is the strength of the exchange splitting on impurity states with the polarization direction of M (φ). E ε(γ) is the energy level of dε(dγ) state. l = (l x , l y , l z ) is the angular momentum operator of l = 2 and λ is the coupling constant of SOI. We note that Eqs.( where r i is the position of impurity center, Ω is the volume of the system, f (k) is the isotropic coefficient originating from the radial part of the 3d orbital, and X l,m (θ k , φ k ) is the cubic harmonics in k-space given by The difference between our model and Kokado To describe AMR, we investigate the conductivity changes of the system in a microscopic manner. The longitudinal conductivity σ xx (φ)(= 1/ρ(φ)) at zero temperature is given by the Kubo-Greenwood formula where G ± s (φ) is the conduction electron's Green's function (+: retarded, -: advanced) at the Fermi level E F and • • • conf indicates the configuration average for impurities. The charge current operators J x are expressed by where e denotes the elementary charge. The anomalous currents from the s-d hybridizations are neglected because its contribution seems much smaller than that from normal currents. To perform practical calculations, we employ the first Born approximation, and G ± s (φ) is replaced by impurity averaged Green's function: where η ss is a positive parameter representing the self-energy from the s-s scattering and Σ sd,± (φ) is the self-energy from the s-d scattering. Σ sd,± (φ) is written as where n imp ≡ N imp /Ω, and G ± imp (φ) is the impurity Green's function at E F , In this expression, the finite energy width Γ 0 is phenomenologically introduced as reflecting the hybridization with the host 3d bands. As we consider the random impurities, the variables in Eqs. ( In this case, there is no contribution from vertex correction because δΣ/δG s = 0. We perform analytical calculations to extract a mechanism and the numerical calculations to see the detailed trend of AMR on cubic symmetry. We herein show the results that finite c 4 can be obtained from the fourth-order perturbation with respect to the SOI. For the analytical calculations, we first take the following three approximations: (1) two-current model as where ρ + (ρ -) indicates the majority (minority) spin resistor; (2) Matthiessen's rule as where ρ ss (ρ sd ) is the resistivity originating from s-s (s-d) scattering; (3) Lifetime approximation for s-d scattering as where m * denotes the effective mass of electron and n σ is the electron concentration of σ spin at E F . Incidentally, ρ ss σ is treated as the constant parameter. We next take the higher-order perturbation expansion with respect to the SOI in G + imp : where owing to the paper savings. In the cubic system, the relations of g xy,σ = g yz,σ = g zx,σ ≡ g ε,σ and g x 2 -y 2 ,σ = g 3z 2 -r 2 ,σ ≡ g γ,σ are satisfied. Here, we have ρ sd σ (φ) = ρ sd 0,σ + ρ ′ σ (φ) where ρ sd 0,σ and ρ ′ σ (φ) are the unperturbed term and the perturbed term is (ρ sd 0,σ ≫ ρ ′ σ (φ)). Then, ρ(φ) is derived as with ρ 0 ≡ (ρ -1 0,+ + ρ -1 0,-) -1 , ρ 0,σ ≡ ρ ss σ + ρ sd 0,σ , and α ≡ ρ 0,+ /ρ 0,-. For simplicity, we make the assumption that spin splitting is large and E F lies in the dε states of + spin level (E F ∼ E ε -∆ d ). In this configuration, the relation Holds; then, we can neglect the term including g m,-. Subsequently, ρ ′ -(φ) in Eq.( We observe that the finite c 4 in cubic symmetry can be obtained from the fourth-order perturbation term of SOI (see Appendix) as Next, we discuss how c 4 originates as a fourth-order perturbation of SOI in cubic symmetry. According to Kokado's study, In the present case, we see that the second-order effect of SOI among the fourth-order perturbation terms of SOI plays a role to split the dε states even in the cubic system. Then, spin-orbit splitting due to the λ 2 is responsible for the c 4 term; In conjunction with the λ 2 contribution that causes conventional AMR, c 4 originates the from fourth-order λ. Equation ( The intensity of c 4 increases with increasing λ and is well-fitted by the λ 4 curve. The results indicate that the c 4 appears as a fourth-order perturbation effect of SOI, supporting the analytical calculation results. Fig. In summary, we investigate the four-fold AMR ratio in cubic single-crystal ferromagnetic 3d alloys within the s-d scattering model in the presence of the SOI and the cubic symmetric crystal field from a microscopic viewpoint. The analytical and numerical results indicate that the c 4 term appears as a fourth-order perturbation effect of SOI and is sensitive to the PDOSs of 3d states at the Fermi level. As a result, we observe that the c 4 in the cubic system can be understood as the same scheme as that in the tetragonal system 12 by substituting tetragonal splitting with spin-orbit splitting. To explain the material dependence of c 4 , we need to take into account the material's d-bands structure in a future work. {xy, yz, zx} into that of {ε + , ε 0 , ε -} as The unitary transformation is obtained from the block-diagonalization of H so on {xy, yz, zx} subspace, which means that we solve the secular equation in advance. Therefore, we obtain the unperturbed eigenenergies and matrix represented H so as Table . I. Next, we derive the T (φ) from Eq. ( because otherwise the terms finally become zero due to X 2,m ( x) becoming zero. The oddorder terms in T γ,+;γ ′ ,+ (φ) will be cancelled due to the equivalence of both positive and negative contribution. The second-order term T (2) where g ε,+ ≡ (E F -E ε,+ -ıΓ 0 ) -1 , ε = ε ± , ε 0 . Substituting it into Eq. ( Therefore, consistent with previous studies, conventional AMR behavior is described by the second-order perturbation theory with respect to the SOI. The fourth-order term T Consequently, we obtain the expression of AMR including cos 4φ and its coefficient as 