Inelastic mechanical responses in solids, such as plasticity, damage and crack initiation, are typically modeled in constitutive ways that display microstructural and loading dependence. Nevertheless, linear elasticity at infinitesimal deformations is used for microstructural properties. We demonstrate a framework that builds on sequences of microstructural images to develop fingerprints of inelastic tendencies, and then use them for data-rich predictions of mechanical responses up to failure. In analogy to common fingerprints, we show that these two-dimensional instability-precursor signatures may be used to reconstruct the full mechanical response of unknown sample microstructures; this feat is achieved by reconstructing appropriate average behaviors with the assistance of a deep convolutional neural network that is fine-tuned for image recognition. We demonstrate basic aspects of microstructural fingerprinting in a toy model of dislocation plasticity and then, we illustrate the method's scalability and robustness in phase field simulations of model binary alloys under mode-I fracture loading. A critical bottleneck in the systematic material discovery, optimization and deployment is the lack of consistent and robust microstructure-property relationships that hold across environmental conditions and material classes. A major reason for this deficiency lies in the fact that the inelastic mechanical response of solids does not always originate in visible defects of the microstructure, but requires additional dynamical insights, not always accessible or/and comprehensible Consequently, available modeling approaches for mechanical applications, such as discrete or continuum models of molecular or continuum microstructural dynamics In this paper, we propose that small-deformation elastic strain image sequences (up to 2% strain), readily produced experimentally The role of SEA is two-fold: First, to characterize in a concrete way the progression of local mechanical instabilities in a material by the understanding of EIMs in experiments and modeling. Second, to store EIMs as classification tools in a data library, labeled as lib Ψ , together with any tested mechanical responses of interest (eg. uniaxial loading data at 30% strain), and then use them as microstructural "fingerprints" for producing mechanical predictions by reconstructing them through deep convolutional neural networks (dCNN) The usefulness of SEA lies in the development of material design strategies proaches have been recently proposed for materials and mechanics The physical key to the dimensional hyper-reduction method presented in this work is the understanding that in many practical situations, solids can be considered as initially stable elastic media that are then, mechanically loaded. If the loading scale is perceived as time (ie. assuming that viscous solid effects are negligible , which provides the fixedpoint dynamical evolution Ẋ = JX where X = {x i }. Away from the stable elasticity fixed point, a solid may be unstable to necking, buckling, plasticity, crack initiation, damage In practical situations, LEs' calculation is numerical, with various available approaches The core principle behind this work lies in the ability to characterize defected microstructures in terms of the elastic fields generated when small, consecutive loads are applied on them. This principle has been traditionally used towards qualitative insights and understanding of mechanical failure in materials. Possible examples could be the insightful calculation of size effects in notched and disordered specimens Here, without loss of generality, we consider a scalar field φ (r) at applied strain (t), that will represent an observable field of interest on N 2 possible surface locations (φ j ), assumed to have a spatial resolution down to a characteristic scale that defines a square N ×N grid [49], controlled either by practical means (eg. image/camera resolution) or theoretical ones (eg. interatomic distances). The field φ may either be a direct elastic field, such as elastic strain or stress, or a field that is strongly correlated to elastic fields, such as the plastic distortion or damage Assuming the loading of a sample location through an imposed strain profile (t), then φ's evolution infinitesimally away from the initially elastic fixed point ought to resemble the equation: where Φ = { φ j }, and C represents a function of the elastic coefficients. As loading progresses, it is natural to assume a generic leading-order perturbation J Φ to the right side of Eq. 1, with J a N 2 × N 2 matrix. If one also proceeds with subtracting the mean response φ ≡ φ -Ct [52], then one has the normal form: where J is typically an unknown matrix. J is a matrix that controls the most singular LEs. Analogous considerations may be made for other observables such as damage, stress or strain fields. The pursuit in understanding instabilities of elasticity requires the precise identification of J (see also Fig. The numerical estimation of modes that solve Eq. 2 proceeds by identifying a sequence of images at T consecutive equidistant strains The testing strain t is assumed to be less than 2% and defines the maximum deformation imposed on a sample for SEA testing and identification purposes. In the case of equidistant strains in the sequence, Eq. 2 may be rewritten in its discrete form: with J ≡ J ∆ + I. Then, the predominant EIMs may be identified by solving Eq. 3 for J by using the Arnoldi algorithm and Then, the optimal solution for J is where X † is the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse of X. The numerically identified operator JN is the leastsquares/minimum-norm solution to the potentially over or under-constrained problem J X = Y. That is, the choice J N minimizes the Frobenius norm || JN X -Y||. The eigenvectors and eigenvalues of JN can be calculated exactly through an exact diagonalization where U ∈ C N 2 ×r , Σ ∈ C r×r and V ∈ C T ×r with r the rank of X. In this work, we maintain r = 8. Clearly, the singular value amplitudes ς j of the SVD modes capture the variability in the microstructural evolution, as it is seen through the spatial correlations of the Φ-field. The eigen-decomposition of U * YVΣ -1 can be then exactly calculated, giving a set of eigenvectors w and eigenvalues μ. Then, the operator J has eigenvalues μ and eigenvec-tors labeled as EIMs. This low-rank approximation of eigenvalues and eigenvectors of J allows for the approximate reconstruction of the time evolution as: The resolution scale of the φ-field shall be at the characteristic scale of the elastic fluctuations (eg. at the scale of a Representative Volume Element (RVE)) The analogy of eigenmodes Ψ to fingerprints is insightful: The sought experimentally relevant strain deformation data sets In order to demonstrate how microstructural fingerprinting applies in crystal plasticity, we consider a toy example of edge dislocation dynamics. We consider the case of a single slip system, with cores along the z-axis and the Burgers' vector in the positive x-direction, b = bx with dislocations solely gliding under shear stress along the x-direction Dislocation motion is assumed to be overdamped, so equation of motion of discrete dislocations can be written as: where is the solution for infinite boundary conditions Analytically, for an independent dislocation at (0,0), and given D = Gb/(2π(1 -ν)) one has, and the dislocation pressure is: If one tracks the strain components of this 2D system, then the first strain invariant of an edge dislocation is just, I (r) = i ii (r). Since zz = 0 in a 2D system dominated by edge dislocations, then we can use the fact that for isotropic solids we have σ zz = 2G zz + λ i ii (with λ = 2 1-2ν G), thus giving: where + denotes the result for a positive dislocation ( b = bx). For a dislocation pinned at an obstacle that starts gliding after the external stress increases beyond a threshold σ thr in a non-linear, but differentiable manner (so that (t) = f (t)), it is straightforward to estimate the evolution of the strain invariant I ± (r): Given the simplicity of the problem, the J operator is diagonal, thus it is straightforward to infer its properties. It is worth noting that it is non-zero only when dislocations are in motion, and it has a characteristic left-right asymmetry, with respect to the original pinning point location. For a negative dislocation SEA manifests its usefulness in identifying distinguishable signatures of characteristic events (dislocation glide vs. pair nucleation) through a parameter-free, experimentally tractable and automatic manner. Binary Alloy While toy examples are insightful in showing the origin and potential usefulness of SEA, it is natural to inquire its applicability in realistic situations where plasticity, damage, as well as fracture are plausible instabilities. In such complex cases, there are strong spatial and temporal correlations that make analytical calculations of the J matrix impossible. However, SEA may efficiently estimate the predominant EIMs in numerical fashion. To explicitly illustrate the method, we consider an exemplary test case If SEA is applied on the data shown in Fig. The main idea behind microstructural fingerprinting is that the EIMs (irrespective of which φ-field they are based on) may be directly compared to any superposition of other modes Ψ i that have been similarly calculated from other microstructures. The EIMs Ψ i are stored in the library lib Ψ , together with all tested mechanical responses for the sample in question (φ i = H i ( )) (cf. Fig. Namely, various different microstructures, tested at total strain 0 ≤ 2% with identical boundary conditions may exactly model the mechanical response of an unknown microstructure, using appropriately weighted sums. For making accurate, data-rich predictions of damage and plasticity we utilize a library of EIMs Ψ i and complete responses up to failure H i ( ). Major understanding of elastic instabilities originates in the fundamental works by Eshelby The numerically approximate character of SEA enforces the use of advanced approaches that may efficiently compare, classify and reconstruct fingerprints. The data sets {Ψ, H} are produced for different microstructures but same loading and boundary conditions for precise comparison purposes, so that weights are identified that provide the following equality, The identification of probability weights w i requires a projection of the library EIMs on the new EIM Ψ 0 . For estimating the probability weights w i , we utilize a dCNN. The implementation is straight-forward in that mode identification is treated as a face-recognition problem. While there are multiple approaches towards identifying appropriate mode projections on the emerging basis The interpretation of the weights w i should be made in terms of the identification of an appropriate combined set of defects that provide similar modes to the sample of interest. Testing a large variety of microstructures in advance, may allow for the identification of EIMs for a completely unknown microstructure that may include completely different compounds through cooperation of different types of microstructures. The success of SEA for predictions of mechanical prop-erties can be estimated by the accuracy (fraction of correctly classified samples) for different number of available library microstructures (different number/length of inclusions in sample), number of initial random realizations but with same qualitative behavior (same number of inclusions, different random locations/orientations), different small deformation testing strain (where EIMs are calculated). The results are summarized in Fig. In this work, we demonstrated a parameter-free approach, labeled as SEA, that is focused on characterizing the stability of elasticity, towards understanding and predicting mechanical properties of solids that may deform towards plasticity or/and damage. The main outcome of this analysis are dynamical modes (EIMs) that characterize spatial instabilities of elasticity. EIMs can be considered as microstructural fingerprints. We presented the theory of the approach and then we demonstrated it in a toy example of crystal plasticity that provided analytical insights for EIMs' origin and character. Using the developed methodology, we applied SEA to a realistic model of plasticity and damage for a model binary alloy. Through this investigation, and with help from dCNNs, we showed that the use of EIMs as fingerprints can lead to successful mechanical predictions for microstructures that are only tested at small deformations. The usefulness of SEA can be either towards a supplementation multiscale materials modeling or for producing data-rich predictions of mechanical properties in untested microstructures. Multiscale materials modeling requires a variety of signatures/tests that may provide verifiable links across scales towards modeling accuracy; EIMs may provide such signatures. In addition, SEA's implementation may be solely focused on experimental settings, where microscopy may contribute spatially resolved information that may be used towards identifying and classifying EIMs. Future studies will explore SEA's efficacy in both experimental and modeling fronts.