Two-dimensional ferromagnetic materials with strong ferromagnetism and high Curie temperature are significantly desired for the applications of nanoscale devices. Here, based on first-principles computations, we report hydrogenated/oxygenated Mn 2 C monolayer is a such material with strong room-temperature ferromagnetism. The bare Mn 2 C monolayer is an antiferromagnetic metal with the local magnetic moment of Mn ~ 3μ B . However, the antiferromagnetic coupling of Mn atoms can transform into the ferromagnetic order under hydrogenation/oxygenation. Especially, the magnetic moments in hydrogenated/oxygenated Mn 2 C monolayer can be as large as 6 μ B per unit cell, and the Curie temperatures are above 290K. Beside the potential applications in spintronic devices, our work suggests that Mn 2 C monolayer is also promising to be used in hydrogen/oxygen detection and removal devices. Since the discovery of graphene, a large number of two dimensional (2D) materials including transition-metal dichalcogenides, silicene, transition metal carbide, nitride, and carboniborides (known as MXenes), and borophene have been synthesized. Fortunately, it has been demonstrated recently that MXenes can provide an excellent platform to realize strong ferromagnetism. For example, Cr 2 C monolayer intrinsically shows ferromagnetism with the magnetic moment as high as 8 μ B per unit cell; In this work, the computations are performed based on density functional theory (DFT), realized by the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP). MXenes can crystallize in different structure configurations such as 2H, 1T, and 1T'. We first investigate the most energetically stable structure for Mn 2 C monolayer. Our calculations find the 2H structure has the lowest energy among these structures, which is consistent with former computations. Then we construct a 2 × 2 supercell of Mn 2 C monolayer to investigate its ground magnetic state. Herein, different magnetic states including NM, FM, and AFM are considered. According to the crystal symmetry, there exist three possible AFM coupling configurations (AFM1, AFM2, and AFM3, see Fig. To investigate the hydrogenation/oxygenation process on Mn 2 C, we need first determine the most favorable adsorption site for H/O atom. We use a 4 × 4 supercell of Mn 2 C monolayer as the substrate and first assign an isolate H/O atom on its surface. Considering the crystal symmetry, there exist four typical H/O adsorption sites on Mn 2 C monolayer. These adsorption sites are shown in Fig. In equation ( where I is the effective Stoner exchange parameter, and D(E F ) is the total DOS at the Fermi level for the NM state. If the value of I *D(E F ) is larger than 1, FM state is more likely to form to lower the total energy. The exchange parameter I can be calculated by using the following equation: whereΔE is the exchange splitting between the bands in spin-up and spin-down, and μ is the local magnetic moment on the atom. Our calculations show the value of I is similar for Mn 2 C monolayer before and after hydrogenation/oxygenation, which is calculated to be in the range of 0.72-0.76. Therefore, the D(E F ) plays the decisive role in the stability of FM state. Figure where J ij represents the nearest-neighboring exchange parameter, and M is the spin magnetic moment on Mn atom. Based on the energy difference between AFM and FM states, the exchange parameter J is estimated to be 6.8 meV and 7.6 meV for hydrogenated and oxygenated Mn 2 C monolayer, respectively. In our MC simulation, a 100 × 100 size of supercell is used, which is large enough to ensure credible results. As monolayer is promising to be used in spintronic and electronic devices working in room temperature. Beside potential applications in spintronic devices, the novel magnetic properties make Mn 2 C monolayer also promising to be used in H/O detection and removal devices. In summary, based on first-principles calculations, we investigate the feasibility of inducing ferromagnetism in Mn 2 C monolayer by hydrogenation/oxygenation. Our calculations show both H and O can be stably bonded to the Mn atom in Mn 2 C, and the hydrogenation/oxygenation is systematically studied. We find the antiferromagnetic Mn 2 C monolayer becomes ferromagnetic under fully hydrogenation/oxygenation, which can be well described by the Stoner criterion. The hydrogenated/oxygenated Mn 2 C monolayer shows strong ferromagnetism with magnetic moments higher than 6 μ B per unit cell. By using Monte Carlo simulations, the Curie temperature is calculated to be 293K and for 323K for hydrogenated and oxygenated Mn 2 C monolayer, respectively. The novel magnetic properties in Mn 2 C monolayer make it promising for variable applications ranging from spintronic devices, to hydrogen/oxygen detection and removal devices. 