We propose and demonstrate a hybrid silicon and lithium niobate Michelson Interferometer Modulator (MIM) with enhanced modulation efficiency compared to a Mach-Zehnder modulator. The modulator is based on seamless integration of a high-contrast waveguide based on lithium niobate-a popular modulator material-with compact, low-loss silicon circuitry. The present device demonstrates a modulation efficiency as high as 1.2 V•cm and a low insertion loss of 3.3 dB. The 3dB electro-optic bandwidth is approximately 17.5 GHz. The optical eye diagrams, operating at 32 Gbit/s and 40 Gbit/s, with measured dynamic extinction ratios at 8 dB and 6.6 dB respectively. The present device avoids absorption loss and nonlinearity in conventional silicon modulators and demonstrates highest modulation efficiency in LN modulators, showing potential in future optical interconnects. Silicon photonics on the silicon-on-insulator (SOI) platform has emerged as the leading technology for optical interconnect due to the possibility of low-cost and high-volume production of photonic integrated circuits (PICs) in CMOS foundries Lithium niobate on insulator (LNOI) has been reported as a promising platform for photonic integrated devices In this letter, we propose and demonstrate a Michelson interferometer modulator (MIM) based on the heterogeneous silicon/LN platform (Fig. The device fabrication process is shown in Fig. Figure where ne is the LN refractive index and r33 is the highest EO coefficient of LN. Then we use an optical FDE solver (Lumerical Mode Solution 24 ) to solve the Δnef f for the fundamental TE mode. The single arm phase change of MIM in push-pull configuration is calculated by where V is the fixed applied voltage of 1V, L is the EO interaction length in the MIM (twice the length of single modulation arm), ββ is Au the propagation constant, λλ 0 is the operating wavelength of 1550 nm. Therefore, we can calculate the value of Vπ•L through solving Δnef f for TE0 mode at a wavelength of 1550 nm. Figure We then use a vector network analyzer (VNA, Agilent N5227A) to characterize the small signal EO bandwidth (S21 parameter) of our MIM and MZM device. Losses of RF cables and microwave probes (GGB 67A) are subtracted by using short-open-load-thru (SOLT) calibration standard with calibration substrates (GGB CS-5). The optical modulated signal is pre-amplified by an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA, Amonics AEDFA-PKT-DWDM-15-8-FA) and detected by a 70 GHz EO bandwidth photodiode (PD, FINISAR XPDV3120R). The electrode termination is loaded with 50 Ω. The EO bandwidth of our modulators are obtained by deducting the know EO S21 of the PD. Figure To obtain the performance of our MIM in high-speed digital data transmission, we performed on-off keying (OOK) modulation measurements. Figure In summary, we demonstrate a heterogeneous silicon and LN MIM in compact footprint (0.1 mm 2 ) with doubled modulation efficiency compare to a MZM. The highest modulation efficiency Vπ•L in LN platform of 1.2 V•cm is achieved. In the high-speed data transmission experiment, we have shown an open optical eye diagram data rates up to 40 Gbit/s with 6.6 dB extinction ratio, which is comparative to that of silicon modulators. The present device demonstrate an appealing insertion loss of around 3 dB. This hybrid platform can also avoids some disadvantages in conventional silicon modulators, such as absorption loss and nonlinearity. It should be noted that the present MIM showed a limited EO bandwidth, which is due to the velocities matching cannot be achieved for both propagation synchronously. Gbit/s ER= 8.0 dB 10 ps/div 40 Gbit/s ER= 6.6 dB 10 ps/div (a) (b)