Control of the crystallization process is central to developing novel materials with atomic precision to meet the demands of electronic and quantum technology applications. Semiconductor nanowires grown by the vapor-liquid-solid process are a promising material system in which the ability to form components with structure and composition not achievable in bulk is well-established. Here we use in situ TEM imaging of GaAs nanowire growth to understand the processes by which the growth dynamics are connected to the experimental parameters. We find that two sequential steps in the crystallization processnucleation and layer growthcan occur on similar time scales and can be controlled independently using different growth parameters. Importantly, the layer growth process contributes significantly to the growth time for all conditions, and will play a major role in determining material properties. The results are understood through theoretical simulations correlating the growth dynamics, liquid droplet and experimental parameters. A central challenge in crystal growth is to understand the dynamic and transient processes underlying the nucleation and growth steps. The ability to independently control these two steps would greatly expand the potential to design the structure, morphology and properties of the resulting material. Understanding the steps in crystallization is particularly important in the emerging fields of nanoscale and confined crystal growth, where a large interface-tovolume ratio enables new degrees of freedom in designing crystal properties The VLS process is understood to occur by dissolution of semiconductor precursor species (or their derivatives) in a liquid metal (often Au-based), followed by precipitation of the solid semiconductor after the liquid becomes supersaturated After the growth of a complete layer following the nucleation, there typically is an 'incubation' (waiting) period before the nucleation of the next layer In this work we demonstrate using in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) imaging of GaAs nanowire growth that nucleation and layer growth can be controlled independently. By correlating the incubation time and layer growth time to the partial pressures of Ga and As precursors, we observe that the time scales for the two steps are of similar magnitude but follow entirely different trends. For most of the studied parameter space, incubation can be tuned by varying the Ga precursor partial pressure, while the layer growth can be independently controlled using the flow of the As precursor. Towards the edges of the parameter space, interactions between these species lead to more complicated trends. Simulations of the growth show that the observed effects can be understood by considering the very different steady-state compositions of the two species in the catalyst droplet during growth. Since this effect is fundamental in nature, it can be directly extrapolated to other growth conditions, growth methods and other binary semiconductor materials. GaAs nanowires were grown in a Hitachi HF-3300S environmental TEM, on SiNx-coated heating chips on which Au aerosol nanoparticles (~30 nm diameter) had been deposited. Trimethylgallium (TMGa) and arsine (AsH3) were used as the precursors as in a typical ex situ metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) system. These precursors were supplied via capillary tubes fed through the sample holder such that the gases entered the microscope within 4 mm of the sample area. Gas flows were controlled by mass flow controllers and pressure valves, and monitored during growth with a residual gas analyzer in the exhaust gas which had been calibrated to give partial pressures at the sample. Gas flows were chosen to give AsH3 partial pressure in the same range as typical ex situ MOCVD nanowire growth, with slightly lower TMGa flows giving average nanowire growth rates in the range of 0.1 -1 nm/s (comparable to typical ex situ GaAs nanowire growth rates of about 0.5 -5 nm/s) In order to understand the mechanisms controlling the incubation and layer growth, we first discuss the dependence of growth kinetics on the AsH3 flow at 420 o C and TMGa pressure of 13x10 -5 Pa (Fig. Next we discuss the effect of TMGa pressure while keeping the AsH3 constant (1 Pa) at the same temperature of 420 o C (Fig. The observations show that under typical growth conditions nucleation of a new layer is controlled by the Ga species, while the arrival of As species controls the layer formation. To understand this better, we conducted Monte Carlo simulations of the nanowire growth based on mass transport and nucleation theory (details are found in Methods and Supplementary Information section 1). An illustrative example of the simulated growth is shown in Fig. nucleation barrier as determined by the supersaturation of Ga and As in the droplet relative to the GaAs crystal. When the As concentration has equilibrated with the vapor, the probability of overcoming this barrier is typically low enough to prevent nucleation. While the As concentration remains flat, the Ga concentration continues to increase (Fig. Monte Carlo simulations were performed for about 35 cycles of growth for each precursor flow to find the average layer completion and incubation times (Fig. The results here show that the time scales for incubation and layer completion are comparable, and hence nanowire growth cannot be completely understood by considering only one species or only one process. Overall growth rate depends more strongly on the Ga species than As species for most of the accessible parameter space (in our experiments and in comparable ex situ growths). However, the observation that incubation/nucleation and layer growth are primarily controlled by different experimental parameters (Ga and As precursor partial pressures, respectively) means that under appropriate conditions it is possible to independently control the two steps. The evolution of the droplet composition during the two steps will control such properties as composition, uniformity and crystal structure; clearly understanding the time scales for the two events thus provides a greater freedom to design the material properties. Crystal structure for instance is generally controlled by nucleation, assuming the absence of structural defects during layer growth or post-growth structural transformations. On the other hand, compositional uniformity and impurity/dopant incorporation can also strongly depend on the layer growth step. For example, incorporation of impurities by step trapping, which can result in very high concentrations of dopants or other trace elements, is directly proportional to the layerpropagation rate rather than overall growth rate As noted earlier, parameters in this study were chosen to give nanowire growth rates comparable to the lower end of typical growth rates observed for ex situ MOCVD, achieved by using similar AsH3 pressures and lower TMGa pressures. This indicates that ex situ incubation times will tend to be slightly shorter than observed here, while layer completion times will be similartogether suggesting that the similar time scales and distinct trends observed for these events will also be applicable for most ex situ MOCVD nanowire growth. Since the effects are not related to the types of precursors used, they should apply equally well to other growth techniques (such as molecular beam epitaxy). Moreover, although this study focuses on gold-seeded GaAs nanowire growth, the key insights are not restricted to this system. The fact that Ga readily alloys with the metallic catalyst while As incorporation into the catalyst is minimal is the underlying reason why Ga and As control growth in very distinct ways. Most other III-V and II-VI binary semiconductors are also composed of one metallic (group II or III) element and one nonmetallic (group V or VI) element, which in most cases exhibit similar alloying trends with gold or other typical transition metal catalyst Understanding the mechanistic processes controlling nucleation and crystal growth is key to designing materials with desired properties. In particular, interface-dominated, nanoscale systems offer new opportunities to control the crystallization process and resulting properties. In this study we have investigated in situ the nucleation and layer growth processes in VLS growth of GaAs nanowires. We observe that the nucleation (controlled by an incubation process) and layer growth processes can be independent, occur on similar time scales and are controlled by different parameters for most of the growth parameter space. This is a consequence of the confined multi-phase nature of the VLS process: Although material is supplied via the gas phase, the kinetics of the process are controlled by the catalyst droplet, which is very small. This means that the nucleation and initial layer growth can significantly change the composition of the droplet, depleting it of supersaturating atoms. For binary materials composed of two species that interact very differently with the catalyst droplet material, this opens up a broad parameter space in which nucleation and layer growth are independently controlled. Specifically, nucleation can be controlled by the species that easily alloys with the catalyst (such that each atom changes the chemical potential very little) while layer growth is controlled by the other species, for which very few atoms are required to supersaturate the droplet. The similar time scales of these two steps indicate that both must be considered in order to understand the nanowire growth process and to control the material properties. Controlling the parameters dominating the independent steps offers an opportunity to engineer devices with controlled properties, such as crystal structure, composition and impurity incorporation. In situ growth: GaAs nanowires were grown in a Hitachi HF-3300S environmental transmission electron microscope (ETEM) with a cold field emission gun and a CEOS B-COR-aberration-corrector. The wires grew along the <111> direction (cubic notation, or equivalent <0001> direction in hexagonal notation). Blaze software supplied by Hitachi was used to control the local sample temperature using Joule heating in a constant resistance mode. The heating chips used had thin SiNx windows on which nanowire growth could be followed; some contained holes so that growth could be viewed without SiNx in the background. The ETEM was connected to a gas handling system with the MOCVD gases. Further details of the experimental setup can be found in Ref. Precursor supply: AsH3 and TMGa were used as the precursors. The AsH3 flow was controlled exclusively by the mass flow controller. The TMGa was supplied via a bubbler maintained at -10 o C with H2 bubbled through it. A portion of the TMGa/H2 flow passing the mass flow controller was bypassed to the vent line to restrict the TMGa pressure reaching the microscope. The precursor fluxes sent to the ETEM were monitored with a residual gas analyzer (SRS RGA 300) using mass spectrometry. The precursor flows were calibrated to find the partial pressure at the sample. More details on the calibration methodology is given in Ref. The AsH3 flow was varied at constant TMGa pressure (13.1x10 The TMGa partial pressure was varied at a fixed AsH3 supply (~1 Pa) and temperature (420 o C). This experiment was started at a TMGa pressure of 11x10 Ref. The layer completion time and incubation time are thus obtained for each cycle. The values shown in Fig. The model used for the simulation is based on the work of Mårtensson et al. The net vapor-liquid flow (Jnet) is calculated using: Here, m is the atomic mass of the species, kB is Boltzmann's constant, T is the growth temperature, Pin is the pressure of the impinging growth species (chosen at the start of a simulation), Pout is the vapor pressure of the species in the seed particle, η is a factor describing the efficiency of the evaporation set to 2x10 -4 after fitting, and N is the number of atoms per evaporation event (here 4 for As4 and 1 for Ga). The vapor pressure is calculated as: The pressure at which the element boils, Pb, is first scaled from the boiling temperature (Tb) to the current temperature (420 o C) using the enthalpy of vaporization (ΔH vap ), and the Clausius-Clapeyron relation. The vapor pressure is then adjusted to take the environment into consideration using the difference between the chemical potential of a pure species (μ 0 ) and that of the species in the seed particle (μ). Values for Pb, Tb and ΔHvap for Ga are easily found; however, since As sublimates under normal circumstances the values found in literature vary. Here, we used the lowest enthalpy of forming As4 in Ref. The chemical potentials needed are calculated from the molar Gibbs free energy (g) of a ternary alloy described by: The first term sums the unary chemical potentials based on the molar fraction of each species (Xi), the second term is the entropy of mixing (with R being the gas constant), and the third term takes binary interactions into account in the form of the Redlich-Kister expansion. For the As-Au-Ga system, no ternary interaction parameter was found in literature, and for this reason it was not considered here. The temperature-dependent interaction parameters Li,j,v are taken from literature (As-Au 3,4 , As-Ga 5 , Au-Ga 6 ), and so are the expressions for the unary chemical potentials Here, Ni represents the number of atoms of each component in the seed particle and NAv is Avogadro's constant. This framework allows us to calculate the chemical potential for each species, which is needed for the vapor-liquid transfer. Next, we can evaluate the energy barrier of forming a stable nucleus. From previous experiments Because of the small radius of the nanowire (measured to be 16 nm), we chose to include the energy of the liquid phase into the nucleation model. The motivation to take the energy of the liquid seed into consideration is the depletion effect, as presented by in Dubrovskii. To describe the liquid to solid transition, we consider the Gibbs free energy (Gsys) of the liquid seed particle and a nucleus or a layer consisting of i WZ pairs, which we describe as: G sys (N As , N Ga , i) = N As μ As + N Au μ Au + N Ga μ Ga + i(μ GaAs + ψ) + √iφ The first three terms give the energy of the liquid phase, with NAu set to an estimated value of 600000 atoms and NAs, NGa dynamically changing over time. The last two terms give the energy of the nucleus or incomplete layer of the WZ phase. The chemical potential of the solid WZ phase is calculated by first calculating the chemical potential of ZB, μ GaAs , using the data in Ref. With the energy of the system described above, the change in Gibbs free energy of adding a new GaAs pair is given by: ΔG +1 (N As , N Ga , i) = G sys (N As -1, N Ga -1, i + 1) -G sys (N As , N Ga , i) We note here that many variables used to calculate Gsys depend on the number of Ga and As atoms in the seed particle (such as the chemical potentials), and these variables are recalculated after removing a Ga-As pair from the liquid. In the incubation periods, we are interested in the rate at which a stable nucleus is formed, which depends on the size at which it is favorable for a nucleus to grow. The critical size of the nucleus (i * ) is defined as the smallest i where ΔG +1 (N As -i, N Ga -i, i) < 0. This gives the effective nucleation barrier as: From this, the nucleation rate is calculated as per the classical nucleation theory as: where ω0 is the pre-exponential factor which was set to 10 9 s -1 . The value for the preexponential factor was fitted to give a variance of the incubation times in the As series of a similar scale as measured in the experiments. For determining whether or not a successful nucleation occurred in the current time step, the rates were converted to probabilities using the cumulative exponential distribution function, and the outcome was chosen using random numbers as described in Ref. The simulation changes to layer-growth mode once a stable nucleus has formed. At this stage, we assume that the liquid is always in equilibrium with the nucleus, meaning that the attachment rate of GaAs pairs to the nucleus is not limited by kinetic considerations in the liquid. In each time interval, the composition of the seed is first updated based on the impingement as before. Then, to find how much the layer grows, the inequality ΔG +1 (N As , N Ga , i) < 0 is considered. If this inequality holds, it is energetically favorable for the layer to grow, and one Ga-As pair is removed from the liquid (N As/Ga → N As/Ga -1) and added to the nucleus (i → i + 1), which lowers the supersaturation of the liquid seed particle. This layer growth is repeated until the inequality no longer holds, at which point the system moves on to the next time interval. This iterative process is carried out until a complete layer has formed. Once the layer is completed, the time is noted and the simulation resets (i → 0) and goes back to incubation mode and tries to grow the next layer. The times at which nucleations occurred and layers were completed were then used to calculate the mean and standard deviation of the incubation and layer completion times presented in the main text. Experimental reports typically refer to 'V-limited' and 'III-limited' growth, assuming that if one species is in excess, the growth is controlled by the other species. The observation that incubation/nucleation and layer growth can be controlled by different species means however that the overall picture is more complex. On the basis of our understanding we identify the following regimes (summarized in Table (i) As-limited regime: At low AsH3 flow and low V/III ratio, As limits both incubation (which will be very short, approaching zero) and layer-growth (which can become very long) and hence growth becomes V-limited. In this regime Ga will rapidly accumulate in the droplet, and so the parameter space for stable growth is very narrow Arsenic pressures of over 40 Pa would be a minimum requirement according to rough estimates from these simulations to have more As atoms in the seed particle than in one complete bilayer and thus form a complete layer instantly (at 420 o C). AsH3 partial pressures close to 40 Pa is possible in ex situ MOCVD but would be rarely used for GaAs nanowire growth In the experiments reported in this paper the growth was never observed to be either exclusively group V-limited or group III-limited. V-limited growth is achievable experimentally, but since Ga accumulates in the droplet with time, nanowire stability is limited and the parameter range for successful growth is very small. True III-limited growth would necessarily require much higher absolute AsH3 pressure, so that the concentration of As atoms in the droplet at nucleation would be sufficient to form one complete layer of GaAs. A true III-limited growth might be achievable for certain conditions in ex situ MOCVD.