Applied magnetic fields underlie exotic quantum states, such as the fractional quantum Hall effect 1 and Bose-Einstein condensation of spin excitations 2 . Superconductivity, on the other hand, is inherently antagonistic towards magnetic fields. Only in rare cases 3-5 can these effects be mitigated over limited fields, leading to reentrant superconductivity. Here, we report the unprecedented coexistence of multiple high-field reentrant superconducting phases in the spin-triplet superconductor UTe 2 6 . Strikingly, we observe superconductivity in the highest magnetic field range identified for any reentrant superconductor, beyond 65 T. These extreme properties reflect a new kind of exotic superconductivity rooted in magnetic fluctuations 7 and boosted by a quantum dimensional crossover 8 . It is a basic fact that magnetic fields are destructive to superconductivity. The maximum magnetic field in which superconductivity survives, the upper critical field H c2 , is restricted by both the paramagnetic and orbital pair-breaking effects: electron spin polarization due to the Zeeman effect, and electron cyclotron motion due to the Lorentz force, respectively. In a few very rare cases, however, magnetic fields can do the opposite and actually stabilize superconductivity Here we report the presence of two independent high-field superconducting phases in the recently discovered triplet superconductor UTe 2 UTe 2 crystallizes in an anisotropic orthorhombic structure, with the a-axis being the magnetic easy axis along which spins prefer to align in low magnetic fields. The superconducting upper critical field H c2 is strongly direction-dependent, and exceedingly large along the b-axis, with an unusual upturn in its temperature dependence above 15 T. The H c2 is extraordinarily sensitive to the alignment of the magnetic field along the b-axis Our measurements show that this reentrant phase does not persist beyond misalignment greater than 7 • . Although UTe 2 is closely related to the ferromagnetic triplet superconductors 6 , the observation of reentrant superconductivity in UTe 2 resembles neither that of URhGe We discuss the magnetic interactions that stabilize this unusual behavior after an excursion to even higher field. The upper field limit of SC RE of 35 T coincides with a dramatic magnetic transition into a field polarized phase (Fig. The abrupt change in moment direction is accompanied by a jump in magnetoresistance and a sudden change of frequency in the proximity detector oscillator (PDO) circuit (Fig. The critical field H m of this magnetic transition has little temperature dependence up to 10 K, but increases as magnetic field rotates away from the b-axis to either the a or c-axis (Fig. As H m limits the SC RE phase, it gives rise to an even more startling form of superconductivity. Sweeping magnetic fields through the angular range of θ = 20 -40 • from the b towards the c-axis reveals an unprecedented high-field superconducting phase, SC FP (Fig. Having established the field limits and angle dependence of the SC FP phase, we turn to its temperature stability (Fig. Such a large magnetic field and temperature stability of the SC FP phase begs the question of what the mechanism is. A natural candidate is the Jaccarino-Peter effect used to describe other reentrant superconductors The temperature dependence of the SC FP phase, as well as its close relation to the magnetic transition, is reminiscent of the field induced superconducting phase in URhGe, which has been attributed to ferromagnetic spin fluctuations associated with the competition of spin alignment between two weakly anisotropic axes. In URhGe, a magnetic field transverse to the direction of the ordered magnetic moments leads to the collapse of the Ising ferromagnetism and this instability enhances ferromagnetic fluctuations, which in turn induce superconductivity UTe 2 , however, is not ferromagnetic. Nevertheless, the overall similarities between UTe 2 and the ferromagnetic superconductors, with regard to the relationship between the preferred magnetic axis and the direction of high H c2 6 , suggest that strong transverse spin fluctuations play a central role in these superconducting phases This ferromagnetic fluctuation scenario is qualitatively consistent with the whole picture of field-induced superconducting phases in UTe 2 , yet a very important distinction exists between the SC FP phase and the field induced superconducting phase in URhGe: the SC FP phase only exists in the field polarized state. This greatly challenges the current theory proposed for URhGe, which allows superconductivity to exist on both sides of the phase boundary A compelling resolution to this conundrum is that the SC FP phase is the realization of a spin-triplet superconductor in the 1-dimensional quantum limit The exclusive existence of the SC FP phase in the field polarized state, and in such high magnetic field, guarantees that the superconducting state has odd parity, with time reversal symmetry breaking. Odd parity is the cornerstone of topological superconductivity 21 , and it is certain that the SC FP phase has non-trivial topology. Since time reversal symmetry is also broken, a special topological superconducting state, such as chiral superconductivity 22 , is highly likely, which hosts Majorana zero modes, the building block for topological quantum computing Single crystals of UTe 2 were synthesized by the chemical vapor transport method using iodine as the transport agent. Crystal orientation was determined by Laue x-ray diffraction performed with a Photonic Science x-ray measurement system. Magnetoresistance measurements were performed at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL), Tallahassee, using the 35-T DC magnet, and at the NHMFL, Los Alamos, using the 65-T short-pulse magnet. Proximity Detector Oscillator and magnetization measurements were performed at the NHMFL, Los Alamos, using the 65-T short-pulse magnet In order to perfectly align the magnetic field along the b-axis in the DC magnet, a single crystal of UTe 2 was fixed to a home-made sample mount on top of an Attocube ANR31 piezoactuated rotation platform (Fig. All three measurements were performed using a conventional four-terminal transport setup with Lake Shore Cryotronics 372 AC resistance bridges. Adjustments to the θ angle were made using a low friction apparatus 25 to find the center of the range where the sample resistance was zero at B = 25.5 T. With a lower field of 0.5 T, small changes were then made to the φ orientation while monitoring the Hall sensors. With the field aligned near to the b-axis, the magnetic field was swept to 34.5 T. The contactless-conductivity was measured using the proximity detector oscillator (PDO) circuit described in Refs. The pulsed field magnetization experiments used a 1.5 mm bore, 1.5 mm long, 1500-turn compensated-coil susceptometer, constructed from 50 gauge high-purity copper wire 29 . When a sample is within the coil, the signal is proportional to dM/dt. Numerical integration is used to evaluate magnetization M. The sample is mounted within a 1.3 mm diameter ampoule that can be moved in and out of the coil. Accurate values of M are obtained by subtracting empty coil data from that measured under identical conditions with the sample present. These results were calibrated against results from Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System. The data that support the results presented in this paper and other findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request. Identification of commercial equipment does not imply recommendation or endorsement by NIST. We acknowledge Fedor Balakirev for assistance with the experiments in the pulsed field facility. We also acknowledge helpful discussions with Andrei Lebed and Victor Yakovenko. [Competing Interests] The authors declare no competing interests. [Correspondence] Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.R. (email: sran@umd.edu) and N.P.B. (nbutch@umd.edu). N. P. Butch directed the project. S. Ran, W. T. Fuhrman and S. R. Saha synthesized the single crystalline samples. S. Ran, I. Liu, and J. Singleton performed the magnetoresistance, with the magnetic field applied along the b-axis. For the measurements in pulsed field, the two-axis rotator is not compatible. There is likely a slight angle offset along the perpendicular direction. The field induced superconducting phase SC RE is not observed in these measurements. 1 . R ( a r b . u n i t s ) Most of the hysteresis is known to be caused by heating due to dissipative vortex motion in the mixed state during the rapid up-sweep of the field. The rise time to peak field upon the up-sweep is about 9 ms, and the down-sweep time is about 90 ms, hence dB/dt is much larger as the field increases. Therefore, the sample is relatively hot upon up-sweep as it exits the vortex state. Based on the temperature dependence of the SC F P phase, it turns into field polarized state above the critical temperature. In such a scenario, what we observed upon up-sweep and down-sweep corresponds to the magnetic transition and superconducting reentrance, respectively. However, once the samples are in the normal state, there is known to be little heating due to the changing field. This is consistent with the fact that the hysteresis is only observed for the superconducting phase, not the field polarized phase. Sample sizes are kept (i) small to present very little cross-sectional area to the field (thereby minimizing eddy-current heating) and (ii) thin to provide a large surface area-tovolume ratio to maximize cooling. In addition, rapid thermalization is assisted by using a relatively high pressure of 4 He exchange gas. Finally, as mentioned above, during the downsweep, dB/dt is significantly smaller than during the up-sweep, further reducing any residual eddy-current heating. Hence, the sample is essentially in equilibrium with the thermometer when it enters the vortex state on the way down, leading to an accurate measurement of the transition. Therefore, we use the down-sweep data for determining the phase diagrams. There are other possible sources for the hysteresis. It might be that the SC F P phase is unusual, and that the magnetic susceptibility, rather than the conductivity, dominates the PDO response. The hysteresis loop we observed can be due to the irreversibility field of superconductivity. Also, the vortices in the SC F P phase can cause high-frequency dissipation during the up-sweep, which is distinct from the heating mentioned above. Finally, the spatial distribution of the screening currents within the sample could be different on the up-sweep and down-sweep. This could affect the samples ability to screen radio frequency fields, leading to hysteresis in the PDO measurement. In PDO measurements, we also observed hysteresis for θ = 0 • . It is not clear whether the increase in frequency upon the up-sweep is related to the SC RE phase or the magnetic transition. In order to construct the phase diagram with consistent critical field values, the following criteria are used to extrapolate the critical fields of various phases: for magnetoresistance measurements, we use the field at which the maximum slope of the resistance data that goes to zero resistance extrapolates to zero resistance (Fig. The magnetization measurement was performed with the magnetic field applied at θ = 35 • from b towards c-axis, where the SC F P phase was observed in magnetoresistance and PDO measurements. Similar to what seen for field along b-axis, the magnetic moment jumps from 0.4 to 0.7 μ B , indicating a field polarized state in the high magnetic field. u p s w e e p d o w n s w e e p q = 14.5 ο q = 19 ο q = 24 ο q = 22 ο q = 29 ο q = 34 ο 