We investigate the variation of the band gap across the Ruddlesden-Popper (RP) series (An+1BnX3n+1) in model chalcogenide, oxide, and halide materials to understand the factors influencing band gap evolution. In contrast to the oxides and halides, we find the band gap of the chalcogenides evolve differently with the thickness of the perovskite blocks in these natural superlattices. We show that octahedral rotations (i.e. deviation of the B-X-B bond angles from 180 • ) and quantum confinement effects compete to decide the band gap evolution of RP phases. The insights gained here will allow us to rationally design layered perovskite phases for electronics and optoelectronics. Perovskites host a variety of emergent phenomena such as colossal magnetoresistance Perovskite oxides containing early transition metals such as Ti, Zr, and main group elements such as Sn are wide band gap semiconductors, but the corresponding chalcogenides possess band gap in the visible-infrared energies. Our ability to control and modify the band gap of such semiconductors would vastly expand their range of applications, especially as heterostructures. Alloying is a common approach to tune the band gap of such semiconductors, yet the accompanying disorder has the undesirable effect of lowering carrier mobility To motivate our study, we summarize the band The first-principles calculations were performed using density functional theory Polycrystalline and single crystal samples of the three Ba-Zr-S RP series compounds were synthesized by solidstate reaction and salt flux growth, respectively, using methods similar to those reported earlier As noted earlier, the RP phases of the Sr-Ti-O and (BA,MA)-Pb-I systems follow the trend of increasing band gap with decreasing number of ABX 3 perovskite layers that are separated by an AX layer. In contrast, we find that for the Ba-Zr-S system, the band gap of BaZrS 3 is significantly larger than the gaps of Ba 3 Zr 2 S 7 and Ba 2 ZrS 4 , as shown in Fig. First, we compare the calculated orbital-projected density of states of BaZrS 3 in the orthorhombic P nma structure (stable at room temperature) with the hypothetical cubic structure where we removed the octahedral tilt and rotation yet keeping the same equilibrium volume per formula unit. Orthorhombic BaZrS 3 displays an in-plane Zr-S-Zr bond angle of 156.6 • and out-of-plane Zr-S-Zr bond angle of 160.0 • , with in-plane Zr-S bond lengths of 2.527 Å and 2.538 Å, and out-of-plane Zr-S bond lengths of 2.521 Å, thus featuring a small distortion of the octahedra. By removing the octahedral tilting and rotation the band gap is significantly reduced, by as much as 0.65 eV, as shown in Fig. On the other hand, Ba 2 ZrS 4 (n=1) compound crystallizes in one stable structure with all the Zr-S-Zr angles at 180 • , i.e. there are no octahedral rotations, only octahedral distortion (four in-plane Zr-S bonds of 2.56 Å and two out-of-plane bonds of 2.47 Å) and a Ba/S (antiferroelectric) displacement(0.35 Å). This high symmetry phase is stable up to the room temperature. The calculated band gap of the relaxed Ba 2 ZrS 4 is 1.33 eV, compared to 1.19 for a hypothetical structure where the Ba/S displacement is removed, and 1.30 eV for another hypothetical structure, where the Ba/S displacement is removed and the octahedron is made perfect, i.e., all Zr-S bond lengths are equal and Zr-S-Zr angles are 180 • . The relatively small differences in the band gap for these three Ba 2 ZrS 4 structures indicate that the Ba/S displacement or octahedral distortion have negligible effects on the band gap compared to the octahedral rotations, similar to BaZrS 3 (n=∞) and Ba 3 Zr 2 S 7 (n = 2). We quantify the effects of octahedral tilting and rotations and quantum confinement on the band gap for the Ba-Zr-S system in Fig. We found that other chalcogenide systems show band gap evolution similar to Ba-Zr-S. As shown in Fig. In conclusion, our study demonstrates the competition between quantum confinement and octahedral rotations to determine band gap evolution in the layered phases with octahedral coordination such as Ruddlesden Popper (RP) Perovskite phases. We demonstrate that the influence of octahedral rotations is dominant in chalcogenides, unlike oxides and halides, where quantum confinement dictates band gap evolution. We expect that this understanding will be useful to design next generation semiconductors based on such layered phases for electronic and photonic applications. 