We have performed angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy on a heterostructure consisting of topological insulator Bi2Te3 and iron chalcogenide FeTe fabricated on SrTiO3 substrate by molecular-beam-epitaxy technique. This system was recently found to show superconductivity albeit non-superconducting nature of each constituent material. Upon interfacing FeTe with two quintuple layers of Bi2Te3, we found that the Dirac-cone surface state of Bi2Te3 is shifted toward higher binding energy, while the holelike band at the Fermi level originating from FeTe moves toward lower binding energy. This suggests that electron charge transfer takes place from FeTe to Bi2Te3 through the interface. The present result points to importance of hole-doped FeTe interface for the occurrence of unconventional superconductivity. Superconductivity associated with an interface of two parent materials is recently attracting tremendous attention because it often becomes a platform of unconventional superconductivity owing to the peculiar characteristic of interface that has circumstances different from bulk. One such example is a charge accumulation at the interface and the resultant emergence of metallicity and superconductivity, as highlighted by the observation of superconductivity at the interface of insulating LaAlO 3 (LAO) and SrTiO 3 (STO) Recently, it has been reported that a heterostructure consisting of topological insulator Bi 2 Te 3 and a parent compound of iron-chalcogenide superconductors FeTe hosts interfacial superconductivity In this paper, we report angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) study on Bi 2 Te 3 /FeTe heterostructure grown by molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE). We directly observed the evolution of the electronic states upon interfacing Bi 2 Te 3 with FeTe. We found the occurrence of a charge transfer through the interface and the presence of a topological Dirac-cone band derived from Bi 2 Te 3 . We discuss the implications of the present results for the origin of interfacial superconductivity and the topological property in Bi 2 Te 3 /FeTe. Heterostructures of Bi 2 Te 3 and FeTe films were fabricated on a Nb (0.05 wt%)-doped STO substrate with the MBE method. The substrate was first degassed at 600 • C for 5 h and then heated at 900 • C for 30 min. Next, a 10-monolayer (ML) FeTe film was grown by coevaporating Fe and Te in a Te-rich condition while keeping the substrate temperature at 270 • C. Finally, we fabricated n-QL Bi 2 Te 3 film (n = 2 and 6) on the FeTe film by co-evaporating Bi and Te at the substrate temperature of 270 • C. We also fabricated a 6-QL Bi 2 Te 3 film on Si(111) as a reference. After the growth, films were annealed under ultrahigh vacuum and characterized by insitu ARPES measurements. ARPES measurements were performed using Scienta-Omicron SES2002 and MBS-A1 spectrometers with He and Xe discharge lamps (hν = 21.218 and 8.437 eV, respectively) at Tohoku University. The energy and angular resolutions were set to be 7-30 meV and 0.2 • , respectively. First, we present characterization of Bi 2 Te 3 /FeTe heterostructure. sides the (000) reflection marked by "0", there exist two types of streak patterns, marked by "1" and "2". As shown in Fig. Having established the orientation of Bi 2 Te 3 on FeTe, next we present the electronic states. Figure While the spectral intensity near E F away from the Γ point is almost zero in pristine Bi 2 Te 3 [Fig. To discuss quantitatively the observed change in the energy bands, we have estimated the energy position of FeTe-originated holelike band by tracing the peak position of energy distribution curves (EDCs), and the result is shown in Fig. Above consideration naturally favors the scenario that topological superconductivity may take place in Bi 2 Te 3 . Assuming that the FeTe interface is superconducting, it would be possible to induce a pairing gap at the Diraccone surface/interface state in the QLs of Bi 2 Te 3 by the superconducting proximity effect from FeTe, if the Bi 2 Te 3 film is thick enough to realize the Dirac-cone SSs at the top and bottom surfaces. Since the Dirac-cone band was observed even in the 2-QL-thick Bi 2 Te 3 film In conclusion, we reported ARPES study on a heterostructure of Bi 2 Te 3 and FeTe epitaxially grown on STO. By comparing the band structure among Bi 2 Te 3 /FeTe, FeTe, and Bi 2 Te 3 , we found that the electron charge transfer from FeTe to Bi 2 Te 3 takes place upon interfacing Bi 2 Te 3 with FeTe. Moreover, the influence of charge transfer was found to be more prominent for a thinner Bi 2 Te 3 film, suggesting the charge accumulation near the interface. Taking into account that electron-doped Bi 2 Te 3 is unlikely to be a superconductor, we suggested that hole-doped FeTe at the interface is responsible for the occurrence of superconductivity in the heterostructure. This points to possible topological superconductivity occurring at the Dirac-cone surface/interface states in Bi 2 Te 3 .