For electron-doped cuprates, the strong suppression of antiferromagnetic spin correlation by efficient reduction annealing by the "protect-annealing" method leads to superconductivity not only with lower Ce concentrations but also with higher transition temperatures. To reveal the nature of this superconducting state, we have performed angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy measurements on protect-annealed electron-doped superconductors Pr1.3-xLa0.7CexCuO4 and directly investigated the superconducting gap. The gap was found to be consistent with d-wave symmetry, suggesting that strong electron correlation persists and hence antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations remain a candidate that mediates Copper pairing in the protect-annealed electron-doped cuprates. The symmetry of the superconducting (SC) gap provides a clue for the origin of superconductivity. It is now firmly established that the SC gap of the hole-doped cuprate superconductors has d-wave symmetry, reflecting the fact that electrons are strongly correlated and tend to avoid double occupation The AF correlation in the electron-doped cuprates strongly depends on the post-growth annealing conducted in a reducing atmosphere Here, we report on an ARPES study of protect-annealed PLCCO (x = 0.10, 0.15) single crystals conducted to reveal the nature of the SC state with the enhanced T c and suppressed AF correlation. With special care about the surface degradation, we have succeeded in the direct observation of momentum-dependent SC gap. The obtained SC gap suggests its d-wave symmetry for both samples, suggesting that AF correlation arising from strong electron correlation remains an essential ingredient for the superconductivity in efficiently annealed electron-doped cuprates. Single crystals of PLCCO with x = 0.10 (samples #1-#4) and x = 0.15 (samples #5 and #6) were synthesized by the traveling-solvent floating-zone method and were protect-annealed for 24 hours at 800 • C 17 . After the annealing, samples with x = 0.10 and x = 0.15 showed T c values of 27 K and 22 K, respectively. Most of the ARPES measurements were performed at beamline 7U of UVSOR-III Synchrotron (samples #1-#3, #5, and #6). At UVSOR-III, linearly polarized light with hν = 16.5 eV was used for the measurements. The total energy and momentum resolutions were set at 8 meV and 0.005 Å-1 , respectively. Sample #3 was measured three times while each of the other samples was measured once. Prior to each measurement, the sample was cleaved in situ under the pressure better than 1 × 10 -10 Torr. Considering the relatively quick surface degradation of the T'-type cuprates Figure In order to examine the SC gap of protect-annealed PLCCO samples, in Fig. The ∆ LE values estimated from Fig. In order to gain more quantitative information, we attempt to apply the recently developed tomographic density of states (TDOS) method where I TDOS is the TDOS intensity, Γ is the pairbreaking scattering rate, and ∆ is the SC gap Studies on protect-annealed PLCCO samples using muon spin relaxation 27 and NMR In conclusion, we have performed ARPES measurements on protect-annealed PLCCO single crystals (x = 0.10, 0.15) and estimated the leading-edge shift ∆ LE as a measure of the SC gap. Observed momentum dependence of ∆ LE was consistent with d-wave symmetry, suggesting that superconductivity in the T'-type cuprates may be driven by AF spin fluctuations arising from strong electron correlation regardless of the doping level even after the suppression of the static short-range AF order and the strong reduction of AF spin correlation length and/or the magnitude of the magnetic moment by protect annealing.