We identified different nano-carbon species such as graphene nanoplatelets, graphite flakes and carbon nanotubes dispersed in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone using a novel sensor structure based on a "deep" silicon barrier working as a photoelectrical transducer. Each nano-carbon particle has specific signature in both 2D photocurrent distribution and photocurrent dependences on bias changing surface band-bending. Additionally, all nano-carbon particles have characteristic features in the time-dependent evolution of photocurrent. The obtained results can be explained by the influence of nano-carbon molecules' local electric field on the recombination parameters of defect centers on the silicon surface. Nowadays, synthesis and research of carbon nano-materials (CNM) are the driving force for disruptive innovations in the field of nano-electronics, photonics, sensors, biomedical applications as well as in new composites with unprecedented mechanical, thermal and conductive properties There are a lot of chemical sensors based on electrical, optical or photoluminescent conversion principles. One of the widely known possible approaches that can be used for detecting analyte with complex molecular structure is LAPS (Light Addressable Potentiometric Sensor) In previous works we consider photoelectrical sensor with a bit different structure but another transducer mechanism: the "deep" silicon barrier is illuminated by strongly absorbed light It has been successfully implemented to probe carbon nanotubes with adsorbed surfactant in an aqueous medium Three types of carbon nanostructures are explored: carbon nanotubes (CNT), graphite flakes (GF) and graphene nanoplatelets (GNP). All carbon samples were dispersed in N-methyl-2pyrrolidone (NMP). Commercially available high-pressure carbon monoxide method (HiPCO) single-walled carbon nanotubes were purchased from Unidym (Lot # P0261). The SWNTs' dispersion was prepared by placing 1 mg of HiPCO SWNTs in 10 mL NMP. The mixture was then sonicated, using a commercial ultrasonic processor for one hour at 200W and 20 kHz. Then, the resultant mixture was immediately ultracentrifuged for 2 h 30 minutes under 17 °C, using MLS 50 rotor for 45000 revolutions per minute (RPM) to remove impurities and residual bundles. After centrifugation, the top 70% of the resultant mixture was used as initial SWNTs' dispersion. Graphite flakes were produced by Sigma-Aldrich® (PubChem Substance ID 24859898). Dispersion of GF (0.5 g) in NMP (10 mL) was prepared by ultrasonication at 21 kHz and 250 W. The resulting mixture was then centrifuged at 17 °C for one hour at 30000 RPM. Graphene nanoplatelets were obtained from Acros Organics TM (Fisher Scientific UK Ltd). Dispersion of GNP (150 mg) in NMP (10 mL) was made by ultrasonication and ultracentrifugation at the same conditions as for the GF mixture. The nanomaterials concentrations were controlled by measuring the optical absorption of dispersions at 660 nm. Further analytical calculation using the Beer-Lambert law gave concentrations for CNT -0.004 mg/ml, while for GF and GNP -0.06 and 0.07 mg/ml respectively. At such concentrations, the dispersions of all the samples showed stability without visible aggregation within 3-4 months. Size characterization of the nanoparticles in NMP solvent was realized by dynamic light scattering and zeta potential measurements using Zetasizer Nano S (Malvern Instruments). The samples were irradiated with a helium-neon laser with λ = 633 nm at 25 °C. The silicon sensor structure with photoelectrical transducer principle is suggested for the detection of dispersed carbon nanomaterials in this study. The method is based on measurement of laser beam induced photoelectric signal formed on "deep" barrier of silicon wafer with the presence of a liquid analyte on its surface (fig. This can take place due to the surface tension of water and NMP. There are two measurement modes: surface scanning and surface polarization. The surface scanning is using a focused laser beam and results in surface distribution of photoelectric signal at constant surface polarization. The areas inside and outside of the cuvette are explored by this way. The surface polarization is realized by measurement of photoelectric signal with different external voltages applied to the analyte using with a fixed position of the illuminated spot (the spot size is 0.1 mm). The laser illumination area in this mode is at the center of the cuvette. The characteristic distributions of the carbon particles sizes, received from Zetasizer, are given in Fig. (d) typical photocurrent distribution for CNT and GNP dispersions, as well as pure NMP, after 90 min on the surface. The scanned area is about 1x2 cm, XY axis values represent coordinates of the scanned points. The surface polarization measurements are represented by the series of bell-shaped curves for different analytes (fig. Apparently, the samples based on NMP solvent have wider minimums and lower slope of the right branches of the bell-shaped curves in comparison with the graphs of water analyte. Moreover, the left branches on the plots of the samples based on NMP have no minimums observed on the curves corresponding for water. The measured photocurrent dependencies on surface polarization voltage for the nanocarbon dispersions differ from the plot obtained for pure NMP solvent (fig. Also, the left branches of the curves usually alter during the measurement (fig. The electrical scheme of our measurements (fig. where D p is hole diffusion coefficient. It means that change of S by one or two order of its magnitude leads to the change of photocurrent by several dozen times. This fact is illustrated in Fig. The parameter S corresponds to energy values of recombination levels, its concentration, recombination cross sections for electrons and holes and surface band bending φ s in the frame of Stevenson-Keyes theory and it more complicated modification In principle, this parameter can be different for the analytes with different molecular dipole structures. So, the first mode, measured for the analyte, is photocurrent 2D distribution (that is determined by effective surface recombination velocity for fixed initial surface band bending). On the other hand, applying voltage V with different polarity (via surface polarization circuit) allows changing the surface band bending φ s in the region of silicon wafer that is covered with analyte. The principal traits of the Stevenson-Keyes theory claim that if the concentration of non-equilibriums electrons and holes are close to each other, the S gets its maximal value, if default of electrons or holes takes place, S is strongly diminished. That is why the dependences S(φ s ) typically have bell-shaped form. As it was mentioned earlier, laser beam can be positioned in any point of the surface that contacts with analyte. Surface polarization in the scheme (fig. It is known that degradation of NMP solvent occurs during ultrasonication by way of ring opening and supplementary chemical reactions The electrostatic interaction of the analyte molecules with the silicon surface is specific for each of four investigated cases. The electrical charge formed on the surface of nano-carbon is result of adsorption of the organic compounds from the solution and/or the dissociation of the surface compounds. Thus, each type of carbon nanoparticle carries some electrical charge distributed on its surface. In that way, specific configuration of dipole structures is formed for each of nanoparticle type in the solution. This configuration strongly depends on the relative spatial orientation of charged fragments. The local electrical field of the analyte molecules is probably the main factor that determines change of the initial parameters of the recombination centers at the surface of n-Si (that allows the detection in principle). It can be either local recombination center or system of recombination centers at the surface that define photocurrent behavior in our experiments. The energy levels can be non-uniformly distributed at the silicon surface because the dipoles of the surrounding analyte molecules cause the thermal fluctuations of polarization. So, the silicon sensor structure with photoelectrical transducer principle can be applied for differentiation of the nano-carbon species in NMP. The possibility of detecting graphite flakes (GF), carbon nanotubes (CNT) and graphene nanoplatelets (GNP) in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) solvent is demonstrated. The approach is based on the analysis of the photocurrent surface distribution and the photocurrent dependences on voltage (changing surface band bending) of the "deep" silicon barrier structure. Addition of the nano-carbon dispersion on the sensor results in the increase of the photocurrent in two times comparing with free silicon surface. The dependences of photocurrent on voltage are distinctive for each analyte: the case of GNP corresponds to narrow curve; the CNT and GF are characterized with wider curves. The signal for GNP samples in saturation region is in 1.5-2 times greater than signal for CNT and GF dispersion. The additional information is also received from the time-dependent measurements of the photocurrent. The GNP dispersion is characterized with irregular in time photocurrent at negative and zero polarizing bias. The photocurrent for the GF samples decreases at zero bias. This is accompanied with widening of the I(V) curve's minimum at aging of the analyte on the surface. The relatively stable behavior is characteristic for CNT samples. These effects can be explained by the influence of the local molecular electrical field on the recombination parameters of the defect levels on the silicon surface (i.e. recombination levels energies, their concentration, recombination cross sections and pre-surface band bending). It can be either local level in the silicon band gap or system of levels continuously distributed with the energy. On the basis of the experimental results, it can be maintained that local electric field of each analyte changes the parameters of the recombination centers in its own specific way. These allow consider the proposed methods of the nano-carbon detection for further investigation and application.