Chiral-induced spin selectivity (CISS), whereby helical molecules polarize the spin of electrical current, is an intriguing effect with potential applications in nanospintronics. In this nascent field, the study of paramagnetic chiral molecules, which could introduce another degree of freedom in the control of the spin transport, remains so far unexplored. To address this challenge, herein, we propose the use of self-assembled monolayers of helical lanthanide-binding peptides. In order to elucidate the effect of the paramagnetic nuclei, monolayers of the peptide coordinating paramagnetic or diamagnetic ions are prepared. By means of spindependent electrochemistry, CISS effect is demonstrated by cyclic voltammetry and impedance measurements for both samples. Additionally, an implementation of the standard liquid-metal drop electron transport setup has been carried out, demonstrating their suitability for solid-state devices. Remarkably, the inclusion of a paramagnetic center in the peptide increases the spin polarization as independently proved by different techniques. These findings permit the inclusion of magnetic biomolecules in the CISS field, paving the way to their implementation in a new generation of spintronic nanodevices. The discovery of the giant and tunnel magnetoresistance gave rise to the field of spintronics: 1,2 the use of the electronic spin in addition to the electronic charge to transport and process information. Typically, inorganic materials had been used as active elements of such devices. However, the study of spin-related phenomena in molecular systems have garnered considerable attention in the last years, allowing the extension from inorganic into molecular spintronics. Since then, researchers have started to profit from the rich diversity of molecules that chemistry and nature can provide, to combine and improve the functional components of a spintronic device. Molecular Spintronics is young but prolific, and recent experimental advances In this scenario, chiral molecules are playing a singular role in the field since Naaman and others showed that the electronic transport along chiral diamagnetic molecules produces a net spin polarization of the current, the so-called Chiral Induced Spin Selectivity (CISS) In this context, we identified the family of helical metallopeptides known as Lanthanide Binding Tags (LBTs) as a promising system for CISS-based biospintronics. LBTs were originally designed by Imperiali et al. to achieve high affinity for lanthanoid ions, For our experiments, we selected a LBT sequence Once the possibility of assembling metalloLBTC (MLBTC) complexes onto metallic surfaces was demonstrated, their spin filtering properties were investigated by spin-dependent electrochemical measurements. For these experiments, K4Fe(CN)6/K3Fe(CN)6 was used as a redox active external probe due to the non-electroactive nature of the SAM. As expected, scan rate dependence measurements confirmed that this redox reaction is limited by a diffusion process 39 (see SI section S8). Next, the integration of a permanent magnet in the electrochemical setup permitted to perform spindependent cyclic voltammetry, which is a wellestablished technique that is useful to measure the spin-selective electron conduction (as shown in Fig. , where Jup, and Jdown stand for current density (Ji = Ii/Area) at specific potential when the Ni layer is magnetized "up", and "down", respectively. For the Ni/ Au/ TbLBTC, SP = -3.3 (± 0.2)% measured at +460 mV, and -1.9 (± 0.2)% at -70 mV (vs. Ag/AgCl) with scan rate of 20 mV•s -1 were obtained. Moreover, the anodic and catodic peak shifts -28 mV and -20 mV, respectively. The negative sign means that electrons are preferentially transported with their spin orientation antiparallel to the direction of their movement These results are consistent with the expected effect of the right-handed helicity of the molecule in our experimental setup (Fig Interestingly, when the diamagnetic Y 3+ center replaces the paramagnetic Tb 3+ , SP effect was slightly decreased, displaying SP of -0.6 (± 0.2)% measured at Epc = +515 mV, and -1.9 (± 0.2)% at Epa = -140 mV (vs. Ag/AgCl). Additionally, the anodic and catodic shift of the oxidation and reduction potential also decreases respect its paramagnetic counterpart, -21 and -11 mV respectively (Fig This experimental observation suggested an increase in the filtering of the SAM, product of the magnetic behaviour of the metallic center. Nevertheless, due to the high voltages applied to the sample during the measurements, modification in the SAM packing can occur, complicating the quantitative comparation of the SP between samples. Therefore, to confirm the reliability of this experimental observation, Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out. EIS is a powerful technique to further investigate and characterize electrochemical processes. While typical direct current voltammetry requires the application of high voltage, up to 0.5 V, potentially affecting the packing of the SAM, lower voltages are applied in EIS (voltage amplitude of 0.01V). Therefore, the structural rearrangements produced by the flow of current are minimized. For the evaluation of electron-transfer properties under the influence of an external magnetic field pointing either "up" or "down", an AC potential of 10 mV going from 10 5 to 10 0 Hz was applied at the Open Circuit Potential. Fig. Remarkably, it was found a SP of -3.6 (± 0.2) % for the TbLBTC and -2.4 (± 0.2) % for the YLBTC. This strongly points out to an active role of the metallic center in the spin selectivity. A blank measurement (i.e. without peptide and metal) was also carried out to ascertain the spin polarization effect. In Fig. Once the spin selectivity was demonstrated, to advance towards a setup that is closer to a practical solid-state device permitting direct local spintransport measurements, we investigated magnetic field dependent charge-transport through MLBTC with liquid-metal contacts using the Gallium Indium Eutectic alloy (EGaIn) as liquid-metal contacts (Fig. To estimate the energy offset (eo) between EF (Fermi energy) and the energy of the nearest conduction orbital, eo = |E -EF|, we used a single-level model with Lorentzian transmission (Newns-Anderson model) In the case of the non-chiral C18S SAM, no difference in the current density histograms for opposing directions of the external magnet were observed (Fig. Once the feasibility of the set up was proved, solid state measurements of the TbLBTC and YLBTC were carried out. It must be noticed that, similarly to Ala8 SAMs, MLBTC SAMs chirality is expected to be right-handed, and thus to provide a negative SP. We now aim at estimating the upper limit of the spin filtering effect created by a lanthanide ion (which is here assumed to be fully polarized) on the current, initially neglecting the effect of the CISS. As a first step, we carried out structural relaxation calculations using the software SIESTA We then studied the Local Density of States at E-EF = -0.3 eV, and confirmed that the nearest transmission orbital is indeed extended all over the peptide backbone (see Fig. This calculated upper limit of SP = 70% to the effect of the Tb is an obvious overestimation in this case, considering it would require the Tb 3+ ion to be fully polarized. In the opposite extreme, the effect derived from a magnetic polarization in thermal equilibrium is estimated to have a negligible effect (SP = 51%, see details in SI section S12). However, this is expected to be an underestimation. We need to recall that, as long as current is circulating, the system is out of equilibrium. In particular, since this current is spin polarized by the CISS effect, the magnetization of the Tb 3+ ion will also be out of equilibrium. The actual result will thus lie between the two extreme scenarios, coinciding with the experimental observation of a modest, but evident, effect of the lanthanoid ion reinforcing the spin polarization, which matches our experimental observation. Spin filtering enhancement induced by the encapsulated paramagnetic ion has been demonstrated in lanthanide binding peptides. The active role of the paramagnetic ion has been unambiguously confirmed by three independent experimental approaches: cyclic voltammetry, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and local transport in solid state devices using liquid-metal drop contacts. In the best conditions, a spin polarization SP = -70 ± 10 % was achieved with the contribution of complexed Tb 3+ ions. The interaction between paramagnetism and chirality in the same molecule is intriguing, since they are two fundamentally different mechanisms for spin filtering. Spin-dependent transport calculations have been performed to shed some light into the experimentally observed behavior, and confirmed an interaction between the magnetic polarizations of the current and the lanthanide ion. SAM preparation. The metallopeptide-based SAMs are prepared following a similar strategy from the typical growth in solution method used for alkanethiol on gold. Substrates made of thermally evaporated metal on a Si/SiO2 wafer are immersed during 24 h in a 0.1 mM buffered solution of LBTC in the presence of an excess of Tb 3+ . This procedure ensures formation of a monolayer with high surface coverage as observed experimentally (Supplementary Information sections S1-S5 including luminescence studies, AFM, MALDI-TOF, XPS, and QCM). Spin-dependent cyclic voltammograms and Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. LBTC grafted on 5 nm Au overlayered onto a 200 nm Ni (Ni/Au) is used as working electrode, Pt, and Ag/AgCl are used as counter and reference electrodes, respectively. Freshly prepared and deoxygenated 5 mM Fe 2+ /Fe 3+ solution in HEPES buffer are used as the redox mediator, and oxidation, reduction currents were monitored under an external magnetic field of 0.35 T applied underneath the TbLBTC modified ferromagnetic Ni. The same set up was used for EIS, but using Gamry 1000E and Gamry 5000E potentiostat/galvanostat controlled by Gamry software. An AC voltage of 10 mV in the frequency range of 10 0 -10 5 Hz at the OCP was applied. EIS data were analyzed and fitted by means of Gamry Echem Analyst v. 7.07 software. EGaIn measurements. Spin-dependence by EGaIn method. LBTC grafted on 5 nm Au overlayered onto a 200 nm Ni (Ni/Au) is used as the bottom electrode and EGaIn drop as the top contact. 6 junctions were measured with 16 I-V curves between -0.2 and 0.2 V for a magnetic field applied of 0.35 T and -0.35 T by a permanent magnet placed under the metallic surface (see details in S6). Electron transport calculations. First-principles calculations are performed using the SMEAGOL code that interfaces the non-equilibrium Green's function approach (NEGF) to electron transport with density functional theory (DFT). In our simulations, the transport junction is constructed by placing the polypeptide between two Au (111)-oriented surfaces. The exchange-correlation potential is described by the GGA (PBE) functional. The Au-valence electrons are represented over a numerical s-only single-ζ basis set that has been previously demonstrated to offer a good description of the energy region around the Fermi level. In contrast, for the other atoms we use a full-valence double-ζ basis set. Finally, the spin-dependent current flowing through the junction is calculated from Landauer-Büttiker formula. Dimethylformamide, TbCl3, YCl3, 1-octadecanethiol and Gallium Indium Eutectic (Sigma-Aldrich) and Ethanol (Honeywell), are commercially available and were used without any further purification. Poly(L-alanine) with sequence [SHCH2CH2CO-{Ala-Aib}8-COOH] was bought to Genemed Synthesis, Inc. and the lanthanide binding tag of sequence YIDTNNDGWYEGDELC (LBTC) was purchased from GenScript USA Inc. -TbLBTC SAM on Au substrates (sample 1) As support we used thermally evaporated Au on Si/SiO2 substrate activated by freshly prepared "piranha solution" (composition: H2SO4: H2O2 (7:3, v/v); Caution: piranha solution is an extremely strong oxidizing agent and should be handled with special attention), then the substrate was copiously rinsed with deionized (DI) water and dried under Ar. We followed a self-assembling method to graft TbLBTC from solution on freshly cleaned Au substrates. The substrate was incubated overnight in a buffered TbLBTC aqueous solution formed by: deoxygenated HEPES 10 mM pH 7.0, NaCl 100 mM (from now called buffer), TbCl3 0.11 mM, TCEP 0.5 mM and LBTC 0.1 mM. In order to remove nonchemisorbed material that could remain on the surface, the sample was copiously rinsed with DI water. Incubation of the substrates in a solution formed by the target molecule and the solvent is a standard approach for the formation of alkanethiol self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) on metallic surfaces. However, due to the peptidic nature of LBTC, it was also necessary to control the media pH and maintain reducing conditions to assure its stability. Thus, aqueous buffered solutions of LBTC were prepared which contained 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) as a buffer, a reducing agent and, when required, a lanthanide or yttrium chloride. One of the more common reducing agents used to avoid the oxidation of thiol groups in proteins is 2-mercaptoethanol. However, because of the possible competence of thiol groups from this reducing afent with the cysteine thiol group in the LBTC when the peptide was to form the sulfur-gold bond during the assembling process on the metallic surface, a reducing agent with no thiol groups was selected. Thus, tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) was used as reducing agent during the preparation of the LBTC solutions. This phosphine can keep the cysteine from forming disulfide bonds (oxidation problems), but it has not a special affinity for the Au surface. On the other hand, the use of TCEP can mean a different problem. When a metallic cation like Tb 3+ is added to the solution to form TbLBTC complex, the possibility of a chelating effect of the TCEP (which contains three carboxylic groups), cannot be ruled out. To guarantee that LBTC coordinates the Ln 3+ cation qualitatively in presence of TCEP, we always worked with an excess of the lanthanide and we checked the luminescence spectra of solutions containing LBTC, TCEP and Ln 3+ show distinctive signals arising from the successful formation of LnLBTC under these conditions (Fig. A similar methodology than the one used with Au substrates was carried out for substrates with 200 nm of ferromagnetic Ni covered with 5 nm of Au (both thermally evaporated on Si/SiO2 substrates). The only difference was that the piranha treatment was substituted by H2 plasma treatment (at∼0.15 mbar, 30 sccm for 2 min) to avoid the oxidation of the Ni. -YLBTC SAM on a Ni/Au substrate (sample 3) An analogous protocol to the one developed for the TbLBTC SAM on Ni/Au was carried out for the Yttrium compound. The Ni/Au substrate was cleaned by a H2 plasma treatment, followed by its immersion in a TCEP 0.5mM, HEPES 10 mM, NaCl 100 mM, Tb 0.11 mM, LBTC 0.1 mM deoxygenated water solution overnight. Finally, to remove nonchemisorbed material that could remain on the surface, the sample was copiously rinsed with DI water. -Octadecanethiol (C18S) SAM on a Ni/Au substrate (sample 4) The magnetic substrate was immersed in a 10 mM solution of C18S in ethanol overnight. Next, the substrate was copiously rinsed with ethanol. Water contact angle (WCA) measurements were carried out to evaluate the hydrophobicity of functionalized surfaces. Thus, WCA values higher than 110 ̊prove the quality of the resulting SAM (Fig. A freshly prepared Ni/Au substrate was cleaned in boiling acetone during 15 min, followed by a 15 min washing step in ethanol. Next, the substrate was plasma treated with H2 (at∼0.15 mbar, 30 sccm for 2 min) and incubated for 48 h in an Ala8 0.1mM DMF solution. Finally, the SAM modified substrate was rinsed with clean DMF and dried under a N2 stream. To prove that Tb 3+ was still coordinated by the LBTC unit when molecules are attached to the metallic surface, reflectance photoluminescence measurements were carried out in an optical microscope NIKON Eclipse LV-100, equipped with a digital camera: Nikon, D7000 AF-S DX NiKKOR 18-105mm f/3.5-5.6G ED VR. An UV lamp was used as a source of the 254 nm excitation wavelength. Photoluminescence intensity was recorded by the digital camera of the optical microscope and quantified from the integrated density of pixels through the ImageJ software. Solutions of LBTC, Tb 3+ , YLBTC, and TbLBTC were measured to validate the homemade setup. As can be observed in figure In the same way, four different substrates were evaluated for comparison: Clean Au (Au), Au incubated in Tb 3+ solution and copiously rinsed (Au/Tb), Au with a SAM of YLBTC (Au/YLBTC) and Au with a SAM of TbLBTC (Au/TbLBTC). It should be noted for these surface photoluminescence measurements, the reduced amount of material and the increased background signal coming from the light reflection on the substrate, leads to smaller differences between the baseline and the signal. However, as in the previous case only Au/YLBTC displays luminescence compared with the control samples. Supporting our claim that Tb 3+ is indeed coordinated by the LBTC peptide also on the surface, and consequently the peptide is likely to maintain the folding that allows for the lanthanide binding. The topography of the different functionalized substrates was imaged with a Digital Instruments Veeco Nanoscope IVa Atomic Force Microscope in tapping and contact mode, using silicon tips with natural resonance frequency of 300 kHz and with an equivalent constant force of ~40 N/m. AFM images of the substrates after functionalization show the absence of huge aggregates and that substrate roughness is not increased. (Fig. TbLBTC/Au samples were analyzed in a 5800 MALDI TOF instrument (ABSciex) in positive reflectron mode (3000 shots every position) in a mass range of 150-3000 m/z. Previously, the plate and the acquisition method were calibrated with a CalMix solution. The analysis was carried out at the Proteomics Unit in the SCIE of the Universitat de València. MALDI is a soft ionization technique commonly used for the mass spectrometry analysis of bio-and large organic molecules. The spectrum shows charged fragments of the macromolecule that are obtained in the gas phase after ionizing the sample. Soft interactions like electrostatic ones between LBTC and Ln are easily broken during this ionization process, and only LBTC fragments (charge +1) are expected in the mass spectra. As shown in Fig. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (K-ALPHA, Thermo Scientific) was used to analyze the surfaces of the samples. Samples were analyzed ex-situ at the X-ray Spectroscopy Service at the Universidad de Alicante. All spectra were collected using Al Kα radiation (1486.6 eV), monochromatized by a twin crystal monochromator, yielding a focused Xray spot (elliptical in shape with a major axis length of 400 μm) at 3 mA•C and 12 kV. The alpha hemispherical analyzer was operated in the constant energy mode with survey scan pass energies of 200 eV to measure the whole energy band and 50 eV in a narrow scan to selectively measure the particular elements. Spectra are referenced using the C 1s main peak (284.8 eV). XPS spectra of TbLBTC SAMs show the presence of Tb3d peaks (1277 and 1242 eV), denoting the signature of the lanthanide on the surface. Due to the extremely high affinity of the LBT series of compounds for Tb 3+ ions (KD ~ 5-10 nM) 2 it is fair enough to assume that the observed Tb ions are bounded to the LBTC. This particular point has already been addressed in section S1). The presence of the binding tag is also probed by S2p (162 eV, thiolate bonded to Au) and N1s (400 eV, amino groups) (Fig. Dynamic water contact angle measurements of the samples were performed in air using a Ramé-hart 200 standard goniometer equipped with an automated dispensing system. The initial drop volume was 0.17 μL, increased by additions of 0.08 μL and waiting times of 1500 ms for each step. The high values displayed for sample 4 (>110o) indicate the good quality of the resulting C18S SAM (See Fig. where f0 is the resonant frequency of QCM, Δf is the change in the resonant frequency of quartz microbalance due to the mass change (Δm) of electrodes, A is the active area, " is the density and μ is the shear modulus of the quartz crystal provided by the manufacturer. To calculate the theoretical coverage of the surface, two different models have been used that give rise to a range of coverage values (Fig. -Model A: the molecule is considered as a cube of 1.7 nm side in a square arrangement (maximum coverage = 1). -Model B: the molecule is considered a sphere which projection on the surface is a circle of 1.6 nm diameter, with a compact hexagonal arrangement, giving rise to a maximum coverage density of π/2√3 (ca. 0.9069). It is important to clarify that the molecular weights of the LBTC with (2065g•mol -1 ) or without Tb 3+ (1906g•mol -1 ), are not precise as the number and kind of counter ions and amount of coordinating water molecules are unknown. We have considered the simplest situation where protons compensate for negative charges of the polypeptide; this means that the final coverages estimated are the highest values that can be expected. The coverage calculated from TbLBTC experiments range between 80-116%. On the other side, in spite of the absence of lanthanide in the LBTC, its tertiary structure keeps its round shape (based on LBTC crystal structure), and the same theoretical shape can be estimated. As observed in Fig. From the analysis of these results, we believe that when Tb complex is formed in solution, the globular-like structure remains unchanged while the thiol groups are attached to the gold and almost all the surface is covered. However, the large amount of material estimated when the Tb 3+ is not present in the solution, only can be justified by two different explanations: (i) intermolecular polypeptide-polypeptide interactions are stronger than intramolecular interactions forcing a less globular shape and permitting a more compact packing at the surface, or (ii) a second layer is formed on top of the first layer. From our point of view, and in accordance with the film thickness determined in section S7, the second option is less probable as there is no reason to think that a second layer can be formed with LBTC, but it does not happen with TbLBTC, so it should be observed in both cases. S7 Film thickness estimation. Film thickness estimation was accomplished using Spectroscopic Ellipsometry and XPS. Both results agree with the formation of a layer of ca. 1.7 nm. This result agrees with the formation of a single TbLBTC monolayer, where the polypeptide keeps its globular shape (See previous Figure Ellipsometry measurements were carried on a GES5E Variable Angle Spectroscopic Ellipsometer with an incident angle of 68o and a spot size of 65 μm x 80 μm in the 1.5-5 eV range. Data was modelled using Winelli 3 software and a two layers model. Clean gold substrates (200 nm Au thermally evaporated on silicon) were modelled first and used as a reference. Next, a Cauchy model (A = 1.5) was used to model the organic film in the Au/TbLBTC sample. The simplest approach to determine overlayer thicknesses assumes that an increasing overlayer thickness causes an exponential attenuation of the photoelectron signal coming from the substrate that can be described by: Where I0 is the signal coming from the substrate in the absence of the overlayer, d is the overlayer thickness and λ the inelastic mean free path (IMFP) of the photoelectrons crossing the overlayer. I and I0 where determined using the same spectrometer model than the one described in section S4 by measuring the intensity of the Au 4f7/2 peak at 84.4 eV on a TbLBTC/Au sample before and after removing the TbLBTC SAM. To remove the SAM successive Ar ion gun (1000 eV and 30 s) etching cycles were used until and invariable Au signal was obtained. Equation 1 was then used to calculate the thickness of the TbLBTC SAM (d = 1.7 nm). A value of λ = 58.1 Å was estimated from the NIST Electron Inelastic-Mean-Free-Database, using the Greis equation, Room temperature spin-dependent electrochemical measurements were executed using an Autolab electrochemical workstation (Model Autolab-128 N potentiostat/galvanostat) which was linked to a personal computer having Nova 2.1 program. A custom-built electrochemical cell was designed such a way that a Nd permanent magnet (0.35T in direct contact) can be placed underneath the working electrode, and it can be flipped easily from "up" to "down" direction or vice-versa without affecting the setup. The cell equipped with three electrodes was used for electrochemical measurements. SAMs modified or unmodified Ni/Au, Ag/AgCl (3M KCl), and cleaned Pt wire were used as working, reference and counter electrode, respectively. As the metallo-peptide is redox inactive, we used an external redox probe to monitor the spin-dependency on the electro-chemical charge-transfer process. Prior to the voltammogram measurements, freshly prepared 5 mM K4Fe(CN)6/K3Fe(CN)6 solution in HEPES, 100 mM NaCl was deoxygenated in Ar for 30 min. The same set up was used for EIS, but using Gamry 1000E and Gamry 5000E potentiostat/galvanostat controlled by Gamry software. An AC voltage of 10 mV in the frequency range of 100-105 Hz at the OCP was applied. EIS data were analyzed and fitted by means of Gamry Echem Analyst v. 7.07 software. To demonstrate that, as expected, the redox reactions at the working electrode are controlled by a diffusion process, scan rate dependence measurements were performed. Anodic and cathodic currents as a function of the scan rates and square roots of the scan rates for TbLBTC SAM modified electrode and bare electrode are depicted in Fig. We measured the current (I) as a function of the applied bias (V) of the junction formed by bringing a Gallium-Indium eutectic liquid-metal drop into contact with the SAM, using the substrate as the bottom electrode. A Nd permanent magnet (0.35T) was placed in direct contact with the bottom part of the substrate to carry out measurement in the presence of magnetic field. EGaIn drops with diameter of around 0.015 cm was produced using a syringe. The area of the contact (A) was estimated from the diameter of the contact between the drop and the SAM using a CCD camera. Data were recorded using a Keithley 6517B electrometer controlled with LabVIEW (National Instruments) with the ground taken from the Eutectic Gallium-Indium drop. We measured 6 to 22 consecutive I-V curves for a given drop size. Next, the sample was displaced laterally with a XYZstage, we produced a new Eutectic Gallium-Indium drop, and the whole measurements were repeated all over again. We repeated this process on different parts of the film surface and collected at least 60 I-V curves for each sample. Current density, J (J = I⁄A) histograms at a given voltage were calculated from the measured |I(±V)| values and the area of the contact determined with the CCD camera. The experimental variation in J histogram for a given sample can be attributed to the presence of small local variation on thickness, roughness or structure and/or to errors on the estimation of the drop diameter. As can be seen in Figure To Kelvin Probe and Ambient Pressure Photoemission Spectroscopy (APS) were measured using an APS02 system by KP Technology. The system has a Kelvin Probe with a 2 mm metal tip enabling a work function resolution of 1-3 meV. The setup includes a dual-mode APS unit to measure the absolute work function of a material with an excitation range of 3.4 eV to 7.0 eV. The absolute work function of a cleaned bare gold (ΦAu) was estimated by linear extrapolation of a plot of the square root of the photoemission yield as a function of energy (eV), and was found to be 4.96 eV (Fig. First-principles calculations are performed using the SMEAGOL code that interfaces the non-equilibrium Green's function (NEGF) approach to electron transport with the density functional theory (DFT) package SIESTA. In our simulations, the transport junction is constructed by placing the polypeptide between two Au (111)-oriented surfaces with a 7x7 cross section. It mimics a standard transport break-junction experiment with the most used gold surface orientation. The choice of a gold electrode arises from the stability of the sulfur-gold bond that ensures the best attachment between the cysteine and the Au surface. The initial S-surface distance was set to 2.0 Å with the S atom located at the 'hollow site', the most stable absorption position discussed in the literature. Thus, the entire structure is then relaxed until the maximum atomic forces are less than 0.01 eV/Å. A real space grid with an equivalent plane wave cutoff of 200 Ry (enough to assure convergence) has been used to calculate the various matrix elements. During the calculation the total system is divided in three parts: a left-hand side leads, a central scattering region (SR) and a right-hand side lead. The scattering region contains the molecule as well as 4 atomic layers of each lead, which are necessary to relax the electrostatic potential to the bulk level of Au. Due to the internal limitations of the code, Gd 3+ derivative was used instead of Tb Additional transport calculations considering an applied bias voltage V = 0.5 V and 1.0 V (see DoS and transmission spectrum in Fig. Finally, let us comment on the participation of the magnetic orbitals of the lanthanide ion in the conduction path near Fermi Energy. In principle with this result, it is possible to probe the implication of the electrode orbitals on the conduction channels. (see Fig. In order to understand the magnetic interaction between the spin current and the, in principle, paramagnetic anisotropic Tb 3+ spin-orbit momentum, one should first consider a situation which will be explained between two opposite scenarios. In the first, we will consider a fixed momentum on the Tb 3+ , this means a strong preferential orientation and thus a noticeable filtering effect on the spin current. In the second, we will consider the lanthanoid being in completely thermal equilibrium, thus meaning that all the magnetic levels split by anisotropy are quasi equally populated and the system behaves as a paramagnet with no preferential orientation in absence of external magnetic field. In our experimental setup, the effect is seen to occur between these two extreme scenarios. In a first step we estimated the spin filtering effect created by a fully polarized lanthanide ion on the current. In this case, considering the small peak at E-EF = -0.3 eV in the transmission spectra (see Figure Allen, K. N.; Imperiali, B. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2010, 14 (2), 247-254. Tompkins, H.G.; McGahan, W.A.; Spectroscopic Ellipsometry and Reflectometry: A User's Guide Gries, W. H.(1996). A Universal Predictive Equation for the Inelastic Mean Free Pathlengths of X-ray Photoelectrons and Auger Electrons. Surface and Interface Analysis: An International Journal devoted to the development and application of techniques for the analysis of surfaces, interfaces and thin films, 24 Chiechi, R., Weiss, E., Dickey, M., Whitesides, G. Eutectic Gallium-Indium (EGaIn): A Moldable Liquid Metal for Electrical Characterization of Self-Assembled Monolayers Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2008. 47, 142 144. Ullrich, C. A. Time-Dependent Density-Functional Theory: Concepts and Applications, 2012, Oxford University Press.f L/ R μ L / R = μ o ± V /2 μ o Cardona-Serra, S.; Gaita-Ariño, A.; Stamenova, M.; Sanvito, S. Theoretical Evaluation of [V IV (α-C3S5)3] 2-as Nuclear-Spin-Sensitive Single-Molecule Spin Transistor J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2017, 8 (13), 3056-3060. Gaussian 16, Revision C.01, Frisch, M. J.; Trucks, G. W.; Schlegel, H. B.; Scuseria, G. E.; Robb, M. A.; Cheeseman, J. R.; Scalmani, G.; Barone, V.; Petersson, G. A.; Nakatsuji, H.; Li, X.; Caricato, M.; Marenich, A. V.; Bloino, J.; Janesko, B. G.; Gomperts, R.; Mennucci, B.; Hratchian, H. P.; Ortiz, J.