Usually, single-crystal material has a longer carrier diffusion length due to fewer defects. Here, we report a nano/amorphous copper oxide and selenium (COS) composite film prepared by radio frequency magnetron co-sputtering of CuO and Se and post annealing. The photo-generated carriers in the COS film can diffuse very far (3.147 mm). Additionally, the COS film can strongly absorb light over the entire solar spectrum region (250-2500 nm) (average absorptance is ~80%). These results indicate that the COS composite is an excellent material and can be used in solar cells and other photo-electric devices. For materials used in solar cells and other photo-electric devices, it is important to strongly absorb light over a broad spectrum region, which produces more photo-generated carriers, and results a larger photocurrent. For electric and photo-electric materials, the other important parameter is the carrier diffusion length (CDL); a longer CDL means more carriers can be collected and better device performance can be achieved. Usually, the CDL is longer in single-crystal materials because of reduced carrier recombination resulting from fewer defects. For example, the CDLs in single-crystal p-Si Copper (Cu) has two major oxides: cupric oxide (CuO) and cuprous oxide (Cu 2 O), both of which are native p-type semiconductors and have bandgaps of ~1.4 eV 10 and ~2.0 eV 11 , respectively. CuO has a higher light absorption coefficient (~10 6 cm -1 ). Both are promising photovoltaic materials Compared with Cu 2 O solar cells, there are fewer studies of CuO solar cells Selenium (Se) is also a p-type semiconductor material with a very high light sensitivity, its melting point is low (221 °C), and it can be prepared and processed at lower temperature. Se can be used in thermoelectric devices, photoconductors, and solar cells We propose a strategy to combine the advantages of Cu oxide and Se to prepare a Cu oxide and selenium (COS) composite film. The prepared COS film can strongly absorb light over the entire solar spectrum (average absorptance is ~80%). Additionally, although the prepared COS film is nano/amorphous, the photo-generated carriers have a very long diffusion length (3.147 mm), which is longer than the greatest value of both single-crystal p-Si and single-crystal CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 perovskite. We deposited the COS films by radio frequency magnetron co-sputtering of CuO and Se onto a 30-nm-thick compact n-type TiO 2 layer. The TiO 2 layer was prepared on transparent-conducting-fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)-coated glass or glass substrate by immersing the substrate in a 0.2 molL -1 TiCl 4 aqueous solution for 50 min at 70 °C and then washing with distilled water and ethanol. For the sample (2 cm×7 cm) used to perform the carrier diffusion length measurement, the FTO film in a 2 cm×6 cm area was first ground away, and then the sample was dipped in 10% HF solution for 2 min to undergo a chemical polishing. The COS films were deposited on the TiO 2 /FTO or glass substrates by radio frequency magnetron co-sputtering of CuO and Se. Ar was used as the sputtering gas, and the sputtering was performed at a pressure of 0.5 Pa, rf power of 60 W, and substrate temperature of 200 °C. After sputtering, the COS films were annealed at ~ 230 °C for 1 min in air. We first performed X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements to determine the material phase and crystallinity of the deposited COS films. Fig. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurement was further carried out to identify the chemical state of elements in the annealed COS film. As shown in Fig. in size) on the surface of the film. The cross-sectional SEM image shows that the film is composed of large lumps, and the thickness of the film is ~ 3.9 μm (Fig. From energy-dispersive (EDX) analysis, the atomic percentages of Cu, O, and Se in the COS film are approximately 20.9%, 30.4%, and 43.3%, respectively (Fig. These results indicate the film is a composite of crystalline and amorphous phases. During sputtering, most of the CuO and Se were directly sputtered onto the substrate, some CuO changed into Cu 2 O due to the loss of O in sputtering. Upon annealing, the Se melts and mixes with the CuO, some Se crystallizes and some Se reacts with Cu and produces CuSe 2 . Thus, the annealed film is a composite of CuO/Cu 2 O, Se, and CuSe 2 . The electrical properties of the COS composite film were studied by a Hall effect measurement. The film displays a p-type character with a Hall coefficient of 0.15 cm 3 C -1 , and its hole concentration, mobility, and resistivity are 2.05x10 19 cm -3 , 98 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , and 3.12x10 -3 Ωcm, respectively. Sufficient absorption of light is very important for solar cells and other photo-electric devices. The as-deposited COS film appears reddish-black (Fig. The annealed COS film (Fig. We have prepared a new COS film, which can strongly absorb the light over the entire solar spectrum region (average absorptance ~ 80%), and the photo-generated carriers can diffuse very far (to 3.147 mm) in the film. These excellent properties benefit from the combination of the advantages of CuO and Se, 