The motion of biological micro-robots -similar to that of swimming microorganisms such as bacteria or spermatozoa -is governed by different physical rules than what we experience in our daily life. This is particularly due to the low-Reynolds-number condition of swimmers in micron scales. The Quadroar swimmer, with three-dimensional maneuverability, has been introduced for moving in these extreme cases: either as a bio-medical micro-robot swimming in biological fluids or a mm-scale robot performing inspection missions in highly viscous fluid reservoirs. Our previous studies address the theoretical modeling of this type of swimmer system. In this work, we present the mechatronic design, fabrication, and experimental study of a mm-scale Quadroar swimmer. We describe the design methodology and component selection of the system based on the required performance. A supervisory control scheme is presented to achieve an accurate trajectory tracking for all the actuators used in the swimmer. Finally, we have conducted experiments in silicone oil (with 5000 cP viscosity) where two primary modes of swimming -forward translation and planar reorientation -have been tested and compared with the theoretical model. Although the physical laws of motion are universally governed by Newton's equation, environment plays a crucial role in developing the locomotory functions of animals and organisms. Locomotion is a result of gaining reaction forces from an environmental entity by the continuous movements of body parts. In walking or running, a reaction force is generated at the contact point with ground by pushing the Earth backwards, while in swimming and flying, animals self-propel by displacing their environmental fluid. Although the flying of birds and swimming of fish involve periodic movements of their body parts, displacing the environmental fluid becomes harder when viscous forces overwhelm inertial ones. Specifically, in the limit of zero Reynolds number, *This work is supported by the National Science Foundation under grant CMMI-1562871. 1 The authors are with the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. Emails:{msaadat, m.mirzakhanloo, jshen98, tomizuka, reza.alam}@berkeley.edu when the motion of the background fluid is governed by the Stokes equation, periodic movements of the body parts will not accelerate the organism Several designs can be found for artificial low-Reynoldsnumber swimmers in the literature: multiple-link mechanisms The Quadroar swimmer has four rotating paddles and a chassis that can expand and contract linearly (see Fig. Potential applications of this artificial low-Reynolds swimmer range from robotic inspection of oil tanks and environmental monitoring/remediation, to multi-agent drug delivery systems through blood vessels. Our artificial micro-swimmer can induce chaotic mixing Where all geometric properties of the disk are gathered in two tensors: the translation tensor K i and the isotropic tensor G where r r r i is the position vector of disk i. Note that absolute linear and angular velocities of each disk (i.e. v v v i , ω ω ω i ) can be calculated knowing velocity of the swimmer's center of mass, V V V c , and its angular velocity, Ω Ω Ω. Therefore, the force-and torque-balance equations can be combined and expressed as Detailed expressions for elements of the resistance matrix, C mn , and the forcing vector f m (m,n ∈ {1, 2}), are given in our earlier publication where T is the transformation matrix In practice, behavior of the swimmer is controlled by five control inputs: rotation rate of the four paddles and motion of the linear actuator. Through these five degrees of freedom, the Quadroar swimmer is able to move along transverse or forward straight lines, and perform re-orientation maneuvers about all of its body-fixed local axes The main body of the swimmer consists of two rectangular-shape sections (front and rear). Since most of the components installed on the swimmer (i.e. DC motors, magnetic encoders, lead-screw mechanism, etc.) have a density higher than that of silicone oil, a low-density machinable foam with a density of about 0.2gr/cm 3 is used to fabricate the body of the swimmer. The density of the swimmer is approximately 0.95gr/cm 3 , suitable for submerging in the silicone oil. A lead-screw mechanism with two guide rails and a small geared DC motor to turn the lead-screw is deployed to achieve linear expansion/contraction between the front and rear sections (see Fig. Fig. In low Re regimes, the required torque τ max to turn a thin circular disk with radius a in a background liquid with dynamic viscosity of μ can be calculated as where ω is the angular velocity of the disk. Based on the above equation, in order to achieve a maximum angular speed of 25rad/s with a 4cm diameter thin disk in a liquid with 5000cP viscosity, a 6N.mm torque is needed. Considering this maximum torque along with complexity in driving 1 , cost and compactness, a geared DC motor An accurate angular position and phase lag between the swimmer paddles and the chassis expansion is crucial to achieve propulsion and navigation in the background liquid. Consequently, an effective sensory system is necessary to measure the relative angles between each paddle and the swimmer body as well as chassis expansion length. Here, we used the AS5048A rotary magnetic encoder chip It has a resolution of 14bit per revolution (i.e. 0.02 degree) and a small package size (4x6x1mm). To measure the paddle angle, a magnetic ring 3 needs to be attached to the paddle shaft while the encoder chip is in front of and centered with the ring. However, in our swimmer system, neither of the paddle shaft ends are available to attach a magnetic ring while it faces the encoder chip. Therefore, the chip has to be placed with an offset (8mm) from the ring (see Fig. Fig. Similarly, a combination of a linear magnetic encoder (AS5304) and a multi-pole magnetic strip is used to measure the expansion/contraction of the chassis (see Fig. An on-board micro-controller is used to perform lowlevel control algorithms, calculate the command signals for 3 The ring needs to be radially magnetized. the actuators and measure the sensor values. Considering the number of I/O ports necessary for the system as well as size, processor speed and availability, the Atmega2560 (from Atmel) is used here. It has an 8-bit processor and can run with a maximum clock frequency of 16MHz. A unique board is designed and fabricated for installing this microcontroller as well as other electronic components, such as motor drivers, voltage regulators and linear encoders. The fully assembled microswimmer system is shown in Fig. The sampling rate between the micro-controller and sensors/actuators is more than 300Hz, while the communication rate between the micro-controller and the computer (attached via USB cable) is only 50Hz. Therefore, a hierarchical control scheme (c.f. After identifying and resolving minor mechanical and electrical bugs in the device, the swimmer system has been submerged and tested in a tank of silicone oil. Experimental tests for the two primary modes (i.e. forward translation and planar reorientation) have been conducted, and the dynamic behaviour of the swimmer system is compared with the theoretical model developed in our past studies We designed, fabricated, and experimentally tested a mmscale low-Reynolds-number swimmer, called the Quadroar. The swimmer was first introduced in our previous works, and is composed of four independent paddles (Quadro+oar) and a chassis capable of expanding/retracting. The swimmer body is made with a machinable foam to make it neutrally buoyant in silicone oil. A two-level supervisory control scheme was designed and implemented on the swimmer to perform two primary modes of swimming (i.e., forward translation and planar reorientation). The supervisory controller (i. 