We consider the propagation of acoustic time-harmonic waves in a homogeneous media containing periodic lattices of spherical or cylindrical inclusions. It is assumed that the wavelength has the order of the periods of the lattice while the radius a of inclusions is small. A new approach is suggested to derive the complete asymptotic expansions of the dispersion relations in two and three-dimensional cases as a → 0 and evaluate explicitly several first terms. Our method is based on the reduction of the original singularly perturbed (by inclusions) problem to the regular one. The Neumann, Dirichlet and transmission boundary conditions are considered. The effective wave speed is obtained as a function of the wave frequency, the filling fraction of the inclusions, and the physical properties of the constituents of the mixture. Dependence of asymptotic formulas obtained in the paper on geometric and material parameters is illustrated by graphs. Periodic media offer a great deal of possibilities for manipulating wave propagation. These include electromagnetic waves in photonic crystals, where one can create bands and gaps in the wave spectrum, positive or negative group velocity Similar phenomena can be observed in phononic crystals Deriving an explicit dispersion relation for the Floquet-Bloch waves in two and three-dimensional periodic media is an arduous problem and is usually performed numerically We consider the propagation of waves, governed by the Helmholtz equation in a medium containing periodic lattices of spherical or cylindrical inclusions of radius a. We assume transmission boundary conditions on the inclusions' interface and that a is small relative to the period of the lattice while the wave length is comparable to (or larger than) the lattice size. The Dirichlet and Neumann boundary conditions are also discussed. We suggest a new method for determining the dispersion relations of the Floquet-Bloch waves. The method reduces the original singularly perturbed problem to the regular one and provides explicit formulas for the dispersion relations in two and three dimensional settings with rigorous estimates of the remainders. Our approach can be extended if small inclusions have arbitrary shape. The coefficients of asymptotic expansion in this case will be expressed through solutions of a regular boundary value problem. This will be published elsewhere. We consider the propagation of acoustic waves through an infinite medium containing a periodic array B of spherical obstacles. The periods of the lattice τ 1 , τ 2 and τ 3 are normalized in such a way that l = min{|τ 1 |, |τ 2 |, |τ 3 |} = 1, while the radius of the balls r = a ≪ 1 (see Figure where ̺(r) is the mass density and γ(r) is the adiabatic bulk compressibility modulus of the media. Both ̺(r) and γ(r) are periodic piecewise constant functions with the periods of the lattice. In what follows, we denote functions in the inclusions and the external medium using the subscripts and +, respectively. Thus, ∆u + where We suppose that inclusions are penetrable and therefore impose the transmission conditions on their boundaries where the brackets • denote the jump of the enclosed quantity across the interface ∂B of the inclusions. Solution of (2.2) is sought in the form of Floquet-Bloch waves where k = (k 1 , k 2 , k 3 ) is the wave vector and Φ(r) is a periodic function with the periods of the lattice. The latter condition implies that function e -ik•r u(r) is periodic. We write this as where the inverted brackets • denote the jump of the enclosed expression and their first derivatives across the opposite sides of the cells of periodicity. We reduce the above problem to the fundamental cell Π centered at the origin: (2.9) Interaction of the incident wave with inclusions creates multiple Floquet-Bloch waves with the same direction. We consider the waves for which |k| is close to ω/c when a is small. For other waves, |k + L| is close to ω/c, where L is an arbitrary period of the dual lattice. These waves can be studied similarly. We consider both three and two dimensional cases (d = 3, 2). If d = 2, the inclusions have the shape of infinite cylinders shown in Figure is infinitely smooth. Moreover, where (2.12) has the following form in the case of the Neumann condition on inclusion boundaries Here c = 1/ √ γ + ̺ + is the speed of waves in the host medium, |Π| is the volume of the cell Π and f is the filling fraction of the inclusions. In the case of transmission conditions, we have Moreover, where (2.17) In the case of transmission conditions, we have ) Note that the Neumann condition on inclusion boundaries can be obtained from the transmission conditions by passing to the limit lim ̺ -→ ∞, lim γ -̺ -→ 0. While formulas (2.13), (2.17) coincide with (2.14), Our approach can be also applied to the problem with the Dirichlet boundary condition. The answer in this case differs considerably from the transmission problem. Namely, (2.19) (2.20) We begin with the observation that the unperturbed eigenvalue problem in the cell of periodicity Π and a fixed k with |k| = k + has a simple eigenvalue λ = 0 with the eigenfunction u = e -ik•r . This statement is independent of whether we solve (3.1) in the Sobolev space H 2 (Π) or in the space of infinitely smooth functions, since the ellipticity of the problem implies that solutions of (3.1) are infinitely smooth. The simplicity of a zero eigenvalue can be easily established using the substitution e -ik•r u = v and expanding the periodic function v into Fourier series. can be considered as a perturbation of problem (3.1). For arbitrary vector k, we denote by k + the vector with the same directions as k and with the magnitude k + , i.e. k + = k + k. If a and ε = k + -|k| are small, then the perturbation is small from the point of view of physics. Since λ = 0 is a simple eigenvalue of the unperturbed problem, it follows that the eigenvalue λ = λ(a, ε, k) of problem (3.2) is smooth when a and |ε| are small. Hence one could find the dispersion relation by finding λ(a, ε, k) and solving the equation λ(a, ε, k) = 0. It is not very easy to fulfill rigorously the approach discussed above, since problem (3.2) with a = 0 is a singular perturbation of problem (3.1), and the standard perturbation technique can not be applied. Thus we will consider problem (3.2) only with λ = 0: and will reduce it to an equivalent operator equation for which the standard perturbation theory is valid. Here ψ is a function on a sphere r = R of a fixed radius R < 1 (a circle if d = 2), and operator N + k -N - a (which will be defined below) is symmetric and Fredholm. Moreover, N + k -N - a is infinitely smooth in k, a, and has a simple zero eigenvalue when k = k + , a = 0. Thus, the dispersion relation can be found from (3.4) by the standard perturbation theory. Let us define operators in Both problems with ψ ∈ C ∞ have unique C ∞ -solutions for all values of R, except, possibly, a discrete set {R i }. We fix an R / ∈ {R i } and define operators N + k and N - a as the Dirichlet-to Neumann operators with the derivatives in the direction of r: where H s (∂B R ) is the Sobolev space of functions on ∂B R . Constant a will be always assumed to be less than R. 4 Analysis of operators are Fredholm. (2 and the same relation holds for N - a . Proof. Dirichlet-to-Neumann operators (for elliptic equations of the second order) are elliptic pseudodifferential operators of the first order (see are Dirichlet-to-Neumann operators related to the following problems (which are simplified versions of (3.5), (3.6)): From local a priori estimates for elliptic operators it follows that a perturbation of the boundary value problem outside of a neighborhood of the boundary on which the Dirichlet-to-Neumann operator is defined does not change the symbol of a Dirichlet-to-Neumann operator. The principal symbols of Dirichlet-to-Neumann operators do not depend also on the lower order terms of the equations. Thus, the principal symbols of operators n ± are the same as the ones for operators N + k , N - a , respectively. Hence, the first statement of the lemma will be proved if we prove that n +n -is an elliptic operator of the first order. For this purpose, it is enough to show that operator is an isomorphism. Consider the three-dimensional case (the two-dimensional case is similar). Denote by ∆ the Laplace-Beltrami operator on the sphere ∂B R . Its spectrum consists of the eigenvalues λ n = n(n + 1), n 0, of multiplicity 2n + 1. Let ψ ∈ L 2 (∂B R ) and let ψ n be the projection of ψ into the eigenspace of ∆ with the eigenvalue λ n = n(n + 1). Thus ψ = ∞ n=0 ψ n , and the norms of ψ can be defined as follows: Let us now estimate (n +n -)ψ. Obviously, and therefore Since R < 1, the isomorphism of map (4.3) follows immediately from (4.4)- (1) Relation ψ = u| r=R is a one-to-one correspondence between solutions u ∈ C ∞ of (3.3) and solutions ψ ∈ H 1 (∂B R ) of (3.4). (2) Zero is a simple eigenvalue of the operator Proof. Let u ∈ C ∞ be a solution of We will write each element f in the domain H 1 (∂B R ) and range L 2 (∂B R ) of operator (4.1) in the vector form f = (f 1 , f L ), where f 1 = cψ 0 is the projection of f in L 2 (∂B R ) on element (4.7) and f L is orthogonal to ψ in L 2 (∂B R ). Denote by L 1 , L 0 the subspaces of H 1 (∂B R ), L 2 (∂B R ), respectively, that consist of functions orthogonal in L 2 (∂B R ) to ψ 0 . Then, due to Lemmas 1,2, operator (4.1) has the following matrix form where A : L 1 → L 0 is an isomorphism. Obviously, operator N + k is infinitely smooth function of k. Thus the operator N + k -N - 0 in the same basis chosen for k = k + has a matrix representation where C is a constant, |ε| ≪ 1 and ) is the coefficient in the linear term of the Taylor expansion of functions q +q -as ε → 0 (i.e., k → k + ), where Here ψ and u + , v are solutions of (3.5), (3.6), respectively, with ψ = ψ and without the inclusion in problem (3.6). Let us evaluate q + . By the choice of R, problem (3.5) with k = k + is uniquely solvable. If ψ = ψ, then its solution is e -ik + •r . Thus, solution u + of (3.5) can be expanded into the Taylor series in ε with the zero order term being e -ik + •r , i.e., where the remainder term is small uniformly together with all its derivatives in r, and u 1 is the solution of the problem We note that Thus from (4.11) and (4.13) it follows that In order to evaluate the integral above, we make the substitution u 1 (r) = w(r) + i( k • r)e -ik + •r , which reduces (4.13) to the following problem for w with the homogeneous boundary condition on ∂Π: Denote the integral in (4.15) by q + 1 . Then ) ∂r e ik + •r dS + r=R ∂w(r) ∂r e ik + •r dS := q + 11 + q + 12 . We have The first integrand above is odd, and the corresponding integral is zero. Depending on the dimension d = 2, 3, the second integral above is 1/d times the Lebesgue measure of ∂B R . Thus Using the Green formula and the symmetry of boundary problem (4.16), we obtain Now we evaluate The latter integrand is odd, and therefore q -= 0. This fact together with (4.17 ) is infinitely smooth in a 0, and there are bounded operators P and Q such that Moreover, where c 1 and c 2 are given by (2.14), Proof. We prove this lemma using explicit construction of operator N - a -N - 0 . We denote the Laplace-Beltrami operator on the sphere ∂B R by ∆. Its spectrum consists of the eigenvalues λ n = n(n + 1), n 0, of multiplicity 2n + 1 (and its eigenfunctions are the products of the associated Legendre polynomials of cos θ and the exponents e imφ ). Let ψ n be the projection in L 2 (∂B R ) of ψ on the eigenspace of ∆ with the eigenvalue λ n = n(n + 1). Thus ψ = ∞ n=0 ψ n . Then solution of problem (3.6) has the form where j n , y n are the spherical Bessel functions and constants a n , b n , c n are determined from the the boundary conditions in (3.6) . Solving the system above, we obtain that where Solution of the problem (3.6) without the inclusion has the form where From the asymptotic behavior of Bessel functions J n (x), Y n (x) π n ) Then where constants C i do not depend on n, and therefore ∼ a 2n+1 uniformly in n 1 as a → 0 and f 0 d 0 j 0 (k + R) ∼ a 3 . The latter relations and (4.25) justify the first statement of the lemma. In order to obtain the exact values of coefficients c 1 , c 2 in (4.19) and complete the proof of Lemma 4 we need asymptotic expansions of f n , d n for n = 0, 1 when a → 0. They look as follows ) ) Let us substitute ψ for ψ in (4.33) and evaluate quadratic form .34) Differentiation of the first equality above with respect to |k + | leads to r=R ( k+ • r) e -ik + •r dS = -4πiR 3 j 1 (k + R). Therefore Now formula (4.19) follows from the last two relations and (4.33). Lemma 5. Let d = 2. Then the operator function where c 1 and c 2 are given in Theorem 2. Proof. The proof is similar to that in Lemma 4. Namely, solution v of the problem (3.6) is represented in the form where J n (x), Y n (x) are Bessel functions. Constants A n , B n , C n are determined from the boundary conditions in (3.6): where Then where Using the asymptotic behavior of the Bessel function as x → 0 one can derive the form of asymptotic expansion of D n and F n as a → 0 In particular, for n = 0, 1 we have As a result, Substitution of (4.45) into (4.44) provides first statement (4.37) of the Lemma. We use the values of the integrals From here we calculate projections ψ 0 , ψ 1 of the function e -ik + •r : and therefore Addition of the above formulas gives (4.38) in terms of notation (2.3),(2.4). 5 Proof of Theorems 1, 2 and formulas (2.19), Obviously, the first term on the left is infinitely smooth in k and has the matrix representation (4.9) in the decompositions ( ψ, L) of the domain and range of the operator. Recall that ψ is defined by (4.7) and L is the subspace of the domain or range, respectively, which consists of functions orthogonal (in L 2 (∂B R )) to ψ. Due to Lemma 4, the second operator in (5. where φ 1 = σ ψ is the projection of ψ on ψ, component φ 2 of ψ is orthogonal to ψ, operator functions Hence, a non-trivial solution of (5.2) for small ε, a exists if and only if where the left-hand side is an infinitely smooth function of ε, k + , k (when k + > 0) and operator B 11 (a) coincides with the left-hand side in This justifies the infinite smoothness of the dispersion relation From here it follows that |k|k + = O(a 3 ) and therefore 2k + = |k| + k + + O(a 3 ). The latter relation together with (5.4) implies (2.12) and completes the proof of Theorem 1. We also note that the first correction term in (2.12) agrees with that provided in ) • d = 2, Neumann boundary conditions: ) • d = 3, transmission boundary conditions: ) • d = 3, Neumann boundary conditions: ) Here c 1 , c 2 are defined by (2.14),(2.15) in three dimensions and are given by (2.18) for d = 2. The formulas are consistent with the results reported in ) The first terms in the numerators of the formulas indicate the mismatch in the characteristic impedances ̺c of the media. These formulas show that if the scatterers are slow (c -< c + ) then the effective wave speed will always be slower than the wave speed in the host medium. On the other hand, the presence of fast scatterers (c -> c + ) does not guarantee that the effective wave velocity will be larger than that in the matrix. It will be so only when the characteristic impedances of the two media are close enough so that their mismatch does not cause strong scattering. Figure Figure Increasing the wave frequency ω enhances the scattering and makes the decay of the sound velocity even faster as shown in Figure We have derived dispersion relations for the acoustic waves propagating in homogeneous medium containing a periodic lattice of spherical or cylindrical inclusions. The wavelength is assumed to be of the order of the periods of the lattice while the radius a of the inclusion is small compared to the periods. We suggest a new approach to derive and justify asymptotic expansions of the dispersion relations in two and three-dimensional cases as a → 0 and evaluate explicitly several first terms. The approach is based on the reduction of the original singularly perturbed (by inclusions) problem to an equivalent regular one. In order to get the latter problem we split the cell of periodicity into two parts by introducing an auxiliary spherical boundary of a fixed radius. We replace the original problem with the equality of Dirichlet-to-Neumann maps on the auxiliary boundary of the new two subdomains. The Neumann, Dirichlet and transmission boundary conditions on inclusion boundaries are considered. The effective wave speed is obtained as a function of the wave frequency,