Understanding the physical and chemical mechanisms occurring during the forming process and operation of an organic resistive memory device is a major issue for better performances. Various mechanisms were suggested in vertically stacked memory structures, but the analysis remains indirect and needs destructive characterization (e.g. cross-section to access the organic layers sandwiched between electrodes). Here, we report a study on a planar, monolayer thick, hybrid nanoparticle/molecule device (10 nm gold nanoparticles embedded in an electrogenerated poly(2-thienyl-3,4-(ethylenedioxy)thiophene) layer), combining, in situ, on the same device, physical (scanning electron microscope, physico-chemical (thermogravimetry and mass spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy) and electrical (temperature dependent current-voltage) characterizations. We demonstrate that the forming process causes an increase in the gold particle 2 size, almost 4 times larger than the starting nanoparticles, and that the organic layer undergoes a significant chemical rearrangement from a sp 3 to sp 2 amorphous carbon material. Temperature dependent electrical characterizations of this nonvolatile memory confirm that the charge transport mechanism in the device is consistent with a trap-filled space charge limited current in the off state, the sp 2 amorphous carbon material containing many electrically active defects. Organic resistive random-access memories (ORRAM) are promising as fundamental elements for the development of electronic organic circuitries 1;2 due to their various advantages, such as simple and low cost fabrication process, low weight, mechanical flexibility and tunable material properties. ORRAM should present two non-volatile resistance states separated by at least 3 orders of magnitude. We have recently demonstrated Many works on vertically stacked hybrid metal/organic-GNP/metal memories In the present work, the advantage of a nanoscale monolayer thick planar structure placed between coplanar electrodes, is that it makes possible to characterize the physico-chemical and electrical structure of the active material on the same device and in operation for a better understanding of the mechanisms responsible for the forming process and the resistive switching memory. Another advantage is the ability to prevent the metal diffusion during the top electrode deposition, which can also flaw the results in vertically stacked devices. Furthermore, the in situ electropolymerization process allows a better control of the organization of the conjugated polymer GNP hybrid material and finally the active layer remains accessible and can be studied by several techniques during voltage cycles in order to better understand the physics of the operation mechanisms. Here, we report on the mechanisms involved in the formation (forming process) and operation of devices based on a network of organic/GNP with a monolayer thickness. For this purpose, different characterizations have been carried out namely (i) the analysis by scanning (SEM) and transmission (STEM) electron microscopies of the morphological changes during the forming process and operation; (ii) the effects of thermal annealing on the morphology of the GNPs network; (iii) the analysis of the organic ligands material at high temperature and (iv) the temperature dependence of the charge transport behaviors in the two-resistance states. Device fabrication. Electrode fabrication. Devices were processed using a standard electron beam lithography process. We used highly-doped n + -type silicon (resistivity 1-3 mΩ.cm) covered with a thermally grown 200 nm thick silicon dioxide (135 min at 1100 °C in the presence of oxygen 2 L/min followed by a post-oxidation annealing at 900 °C in N 2 2 L/min during 30 min). The planar electrodes were patterned by electronic lithography using 10% MAA 17.5% / PMMA 3% 495K bilayer resists (with thicknesses of 510 nm and 85 nm respectively). Titanium/Platinum, (5/50 nm) were deposited by vacuum evaporation and lift-off. We fabricated electrodes with channel lengths L = 200 nm to 1 μm and channel width W = 100 nm to 1000 μm. Functionalized GNPs. The synthesis of the ligand 10-(2-(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)thiophen-3sulfanyl)decane-1-thiol (HS-C10-TEDOT) was described elsewhere prepared following the method of Santhanam The statistical SEM image analysis gives an average diameter of the GNPs of 9.3 nm, and an average spacing of 2.5 -3.0 nm between the NPs in the network The deposited monolayer of TEDOT-C10-S-GNPs on coplanar Pt electrodes (inset in Fig. Electrochemical experiments were performed with a Modulab potentiostat from Solartron Analytical. The substrate with lithographed electrodes was hermetically fixed at the bottom of a 0.2 mL Teflon cell containing the electrolyte solution. The counter electrode was a platinum wire of 0.5 mm diameter and Ag/AgCl electrode was used as a reference. Electrical measurement setup. The electrical measurements were performed with an Agilent 4156C parameter analyzer in DC sweeping mode. We used Carl Süss PM5 probe station in order to connect Agilent 4156C and devices. All electrical measurements were performed under inert atmosphere inside a dried-nitrogen filled glove box (O 2 < 1 ppm, H 2 O < 1 ppm). Thermogravimetry coupled with mass spectrometry analysis (TGA/MS). Thermogravimetry analysis (TGA) (Netzsch STA449F3 Jupiter apparatus) coupled with a quadrupole mass spectrometry (MS) (Aëolos QMS403D, 70 eV, electron impact) through a heated silica capillary system (0.220 mm internal diameter), have been used to monitor the thermal degradation of organic polymers. The TGA provides information relating the changes in sample mass during the annealing process, whereas mass spectrometry offers a method of identifying the evolved volatiles species. Before each experiment, the TGA system was first evacuated and then flushed with ultrahigh purity helium before starting heating. The experiments were carried out under dynamic inert gas atmosphere (helium: 99.999 purity) with a flow rate of 90 cm 3 /min. The samples were heated using a heating rate of 10°C/min. Raman Spectroscopy. Raman spectroscopy measurements were performed using a Horiba Jobin-Yvon LabRam®HR micro-Raman system combined with a 473 nm laser diode as excitation source focused by a ×100 objective. The scattered light was collected by the same objective in backscattering configuration, dispersed by a holographic grating of 1800 l/mm and detected using a CCD camera. monolayers were subjected to a thermal annealing under nitrogen atmosphere (instrument JetFirst 200 from JIPELEC). The annealing temperature (from 423 to 623 K with 50 K steps) was reached in 40 s from ambient temperature, and maintained during 120 s. After annealing, the samples were cooled down to ambient temperature in 180 s. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM). SEM observation was carried out using MEB ultra 55 purchased from Carl Zeiss, or by Focused Ion Beam Strata DB 235 from Fei. The accelerating beam voltage was fixed at 10 kV and 5 kV respectively. Scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) analysis. Cross-section lamellae for the different samples were prepared with a focused ion beam (FIB) microscope (FEI STRATA DB 235). Milling steps were performed at 30kV with current decreasing from 20 nA to 30 pA while lamella thickness decreased from 6 μm to less than 100 nm, followed by a final step at 5 kV and 30 pA to minimize amorphization. The transfer of the lamella samples to TEM grid was done using a Kleindiek micromanipulator. The STEM observations of these cross-section lamellae were done on a FEI Titan Themis 200 microscope. This microscope is equipped with an aberration corrector on the probe (STEM mode) and the Super-X windowless EDX (4 quadrant SDD EDX detectors with a solid angle > 0.7 srad). The acceleration voltage was 200 kV and the probe current about 50 pA with a half convergence angle of 17.6 mrad. The HAADF-STEM (High Angle Annular Dark Field) images were obtained on the annular dark field detector with a collection angle between 69 and 200 mrad. After electropolymerization a forming process is mandatory to form the formed-pTEDOT-C10-S-GNPs monolayer and to "initialize" the device and observe the NDR and memory operation. To understand the physical origin of the cluster formation and to estimate the temperature reached in the device during the forming process, pTEDOT-C10-S-GNPs monolayers are annealed at different temperatures from 423 to 623 K with 50 K steps (see methods), and imaged by SEM (Fig. The rounded shape and the size of the clusters formed by thermal annealing at 623 K have the same morphology as those observed after the forming process (Figures We observe the beginning of the melting of GNPs at ∼ 523 K (Fig. It was shown that in metal/oxide/metal coplanar structures for memory or memristive applications such as Ag/SiO 2 /Pt 30 , W/SiO 2 /Ag 24 or Pt/Ag nanoclusters in SiO2/Pt system 31 , the formation of metallic clusters may be caused by metal displacement or migration along the direction of the electric field between the metallic electrodes. However, to the best of our knowledge, no previous study mentioning the formation of clusters in organic bistable memories by a thermal effect has been reported so far. Thermogravimetry coupled with mass spectrometry analysis (TGA/MS) and Raman spectroscopy. Since high temperatures (higher than 523K) can be reach in the samples during the forming process, it was important to assess the thermal stability of organic ligands. Simultaneous thermogravimetry (TG) coupled with mass spectrometry (MS) were used to elucidate the thermal degradation/modification of organics. Two different organic compounds have been tested: i) a conjugated polymer namely p(TEDOT) and ii) 2 nm diameter GNPs functionalized with HS-C10-TEDOT (insets in Fig. As with many organic compounds, when TEDOT-C10-S-GNPs and p(TEDOT) are heated, the structural modification leads not only to volatile molecules, but also to a black residue called free carbon. TEDOT-C10-S-GNPs left a porous brittle black residue unsuitable for further analysis. However, the residue left on the silicon substrate issued from p(TEDOT), easier to handle, has been characterized by Raman spectroscopy. Figure In agreement with the literature After the forming process, the device is set in the ON state by applying a double voltage sweep (amplitude from 0 to 20 and 20 to 0 V at 4V/s), and in the OFF state by applying a single voltage sweep (0 to 20 V at 4V/s) followed by an abrupt return to 0V (Fig (low voltage -weak injection) (Eq. 1) where I is current, q the electronic charge, n density of charge, μ mobilité, V applied bias, s the inter-electrode distance, e dielectric constant, n t density of trapped charge and S the electrical contact surface. In the case of the ON state, the current is clearly ohmic. The same behaviors is also observed on shorter inter-electrode gap electrode of 500 nm (see Figure Cho et al. In the off state, we observed a weak thermal activation above 170 K and the I-V characteristics are well explained by a trap-filled SCLC current model. Lin et al. The physical mechanisms proposed here are close to that described by Simmons and Verderber in MIM structures in 1960s, involving charge trapping/detrapping and space charge field inhibition of injection. The gold clusters can act as trapping centers but also the amorphous sp2 carbon. Sp2 carbon was suggested as trapping centers in hybrid poly(N-vinylcarbazole)-graphene nonvolatile memory devices Through the course of this study, we followed the physical mechanism involved in the forming Table 