Filters are key devices in optical systems and are usually applied to signal suppression or selection based on their amplitude frequency responses. Different from amplitude filtering, an all-pass filter (APF) is a unique type of filter that exhibits a uniform amplitude and variable phase in the frequency response. Traditionally, an APF is designed to be ideal and lossless, which is impossible in practice. Here we demonstrate a method of realizing an APF even when transmission loss exists, and a possible structure for realizing the lossy APF is proposed. The method indicates that a lossy APF can be realized by introducing self-compensation of loss to the structure of an ideal single-stage APF, and an APF based on silicon-on-insulator (SOI) foundry is fabricated and demonstrated. The method of self-compensation of loss can also be used to realize APFs in the electrical domain. We anticipate that our work will inspire realizations of more APF-related devices that once seemed impossible in practice. Filters have been widely used in signal processing systems to select desired signals and suppress interferences and noise based on their amplitude frequency responses General optical APF structures have been achieved in ideal lossless circumstances To realize an APF, precise compensation of the transmission loss in the waveguide is of fundamental importance. In active waveguides, the transmission loss can be compensated by controlling and tailoring the gain spectrum in theory. However, it is rather difficult to precisely equalize the gain and loss, because the equalization is very sensitive to fluctuations in the input power and the injection current of the active waveguide. Therefore, to avoid lasing, the gain must be set to be lower than the loss, and consequently, the amplitude variations in the amplitude frequency response cannot be eliminated. To resolve the challenge of precise loss compensation, here we propose to compensate for transmission loss in passive waveguides by using a novel method called self-compensation of loss, in which the compensation is a power scaling copy of the input. A feasible source for this kind of compensation is to take a slice from the input. When the compensation precisely equals to the transmission loss, an APF can then be realized. Here, we consider an all-pass microring resonator (MRR), which exhibits all-pass transmission only for lossless transmission (see Methods), as an example to demonstrate the method. A detailed demonstration of the realization of a general singlestage lossy APF using self-compensation of loss is given in Methods. The transfer function of a lossy all-pass MRR (Fig. where r 1 is the self-coupling coefficient, is the round-trip phase shift of the MRR and a is the round-trip amplitude transmission, including both the propagation loss in the MRR and the coupling loss in the coupler where Eo represents the amplitude of the output at port 2 (Fig. To eliminate the influence of fabrication error on the deviations of the coupling coefficients, we propose a Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI)-assisted MRR structure (Fig. In the structure shown in Fig. APF operation, one part of the input optical signal is split into the upper waveguide by MZI0 and used as the compensation. Therefore, extra transmission loss is generated. Slight ripples with a maximal amplitude of approximately 0.3 dB and an FSR of approximately 0.3 nm are generated by the Fabry-Pérot cavities formed by GC 1 and GC 2 and by GC 1 and GC 3 , simultaneously. These ripples can be reduced by further optimizing the grating couplers. To measure the amplitude and phase frequency responses precisely, the fabricated APF is also measured by a vector network analyzer (VNA) (see Methods), and the results are shown in Fig. Since only phase variations exist in the frequency response of the APF and the amplitude remains constant, some interesting applications can be explored based on the fabricated APF (the experimental details are shown in Methods). The APF is an ideal device for a microwave photonic phase shifter. By adjusting the voltage applied to the micro-heaters deposited on the MRR, the measured microwave phase shifts and the corresponding amplitudes with respect to frequency are shown in Figs In summary, by using self-compensation of loss, we have demonstrated a real APF based on an add-drop MRR even when transmission loss exists, and an APF based on an MZI-assisted MRR has been demonstrated and fabricated using the SOI foundry. Applications of the proposed APF in a microwave phase shifter, a microwave photonic filter, and time delays have been explored. We believe that the method of selfcompensation of loss employed for realizing the APF holds great potential in numerous fields of research. Our work opens up a possible path for realizing devices that seemed to be impossible in the past, such as amplitude distortion-free Hilbert transformers Demonstration of the general single-stage APF. For a general 2 2 network-based lossless structure (Fig. When the output E2a is connected to the input E1a with a lossless delay line, the relation between E1a and E2a can be expressed by E1a=E 2a p 0 , where p 0 =exp(i 0 and  0 is the phase shift of the delay line. The transfer function of the lossless structure can be written as where In a single-stage APF, |Ha| 2 =1 must be satisfied. satisfy |Ha| 2 =1, and all-pass transmission can be realized. However, there is definitely transmission loss in practice, and a loss coefficient must be added into equation (5). Therefore, equation ( The determinants of M 1 and M 2 are represented by det(M 1 ) and det(M 2 ), respectively. Considering the loss of the 2 2 network structures, we denote that det(M 1 )=d Combining equations ( To compensate for the transmission loss of the input exactly, condition 2, which requires the power ratio between the compensation and the input in Sb to be equal to a specific value, also needs to be satisfied. To satisfy condition 2, the ratio between Ec and Eib can be ascertained by a simplified method. If we assume that the number of times that the light recirculates in the loop of Sb is n (n=0, 1, 2...), then the amplitude of the final output Eob in Sb can be decomposed into a superposition of separate outputs after each recirculation of the loop, which can be expressed as Eob(0), Eob (1), Eob (2)...and Eob(n) (Eob(n) denotes the amplitude of the output light in Fig. Therefore, an APF can be achieved based on the two conditions. Condition 1 ensures that the signal recirculations in the loops of the two structures are equivalent and can be expressed by equation (9). Condition 2 requires that the power ratio between the compensation and input must be equal to a specific value, which can be expressed by equation (13). By combining equations ( Comparing equation ( Obviously, |Hb| 2 is a constant, so we have proven that, when the two conditions are satisfied, the lossy structure (Fig. We can find some examples for a single-stage lossy APF. A possible structure is based on an add-drop MRR. Because the coupling loss also affects the transmission, here, the effect of the coupling loss on the transmission of the lossy APF will be discussed separately. In the add-drop MRR (Fig. and respectively. Here, det(M0)=r . Therefore, from equation ( From equation ( x can be derived as Compared with the occasion when the coupling loss in coupler C1 is not separated from the round-trip amplitude transmission a, where a=d 2 1 a 2 0 , the outcomes of x in the two cases are equivalent. When the coupling loss is separated from the round-trip amplitude transmission, the only alteration of the transfer function is that a modification should be added to equation (2). Based on equation ( where  0 /2From equations ( To simplify the demonstration of the MZI-based APF, here the coupling loss will not be discussed separately. For the structures shown in Figs and where p 1 =exp(i 1 ) and p 2 =exp(i 2 ). From equation (20), we can deduce that the determinant det(M 0 )=d 2 0 =p 2 1 . Based on equation (20) and E1a=E2ap 0 , the transfer function of the ideal lossless structure shown in Fig. Combining equations ( Combining equations ( By substituting p 1 =exp(i 1 ), p 2 =exp(i 2 ), y=exp[i( 2 - 1 )] and r 2 2 +k 2 2 =1 into equations ( From equations ( Adjusting the fabricated device to function as an equivalent optical waveguide. In Fig. Device fabrication and experimental details. The device is fabricated on a standard SOI wafer with a 220-nm-thick silicon layer on a 2-m-thick buried oxide layer. All the silicon waveguides are strip waveguides, and the width and depth of the waveguide are 500 nm and 220 nm, respectively. After the 220-nm silicon etch process, the silicon waveguides are then covered by SiO 2 deposition with a thickness of 1.2 m. The related metal layer is deposited upon the SiO 2 layer to form the micro-heater. The experimental setup for measuring the amplitude and phase responses of the fabricated APF is shown in Fig. Based on the APF, a microwave photonic notch filter can be implemented The experimental setup for measuring the time delay based on the APF Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics (WNLO), Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China. These authors contributed equally: Lu Xu, Yuan Yu. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Y.Y. (email: yuan_yu@hust.edu.cn) or to X.Z. (email: xlzhang@mail.hust.edu.cn)