The optical memristive switches are electrically activated optical switches that can memorize the current state. They can be used as optical latching switches in which the switching state is changed only by applying an electrical Write/Erase pulse and maintained without external power supply. We demonstrate an optical memristive switch based on a silicon MMI structure covered with nanoscale-size Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST) material on top. The phase change of GST is triggered by resistive heating of the silicon layer beneath GST with an electrical pulse. Experimental results reveal that the optical transmissivity can be tuned in a controllable and repeatable manner with the maximum transmission contrast exceeding 20 dB. Partial crystallization of GST is obtained by controlling the width and amplitude of the electric pulses. Crucially, we also demonstrate that both Erase and Write operations, to and from any intermediate level, are possible with accurate control of the electrical pulses. Our work marks a significant step forward towards realizing photonic memristive switches without static power consumption, which are highly demanded in highdensity large-scale integrated photonics. Photonic switches are core devices for energy-and cost-efficient photonic signaling and processing systems in cloud and data-intensive computing. Silicon photonics has emerged as a suitable platform for integrated optics owing to its low power consumption, small footprint, low cost by leveraging the advanced complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) manufacturing process On the other hand, memory switching effects have been studied in electronics for many years Most interestingly, combining PCM with silicon photonics allows one to relate the worlds of resistive memory and optical switching, leading to the realization of a compact memristive switch. Optical memristive switches are digital optical switches with multiple different transmission states that can be stored for long periods without external voltage. Hence, it possesses characteristics from both an optical switch and an optical memory in one configuration In this paper, we demonstrate an ultra-compact optical memristive switch based on a nanoscale GST-gated silicon multimode interferometer (MMI). The device exhibits a large transmission contrast when the GST changes between the amorphous and crystalline states. Both binary and multi-level optical switching has been achieved by controlling the crystallization degree of GST. We also investigate the dynamic processes during crystallization and amorphization of GST and their effect on the optical transmission. Figure Therefore, the doping strip works as a resistive heater when an electrical pulse is applied through the gold (Au) electrodes. A small circular piece of 30-nm-thick GST layer with a diameter of DGST is placed in the center of the MMI. The GST layer is covered by another 30-nm-thick indium-tinoxide (ITO) film to protect it from being oxidized when it is exposed in the air. Control of light wave propagation relies on the evanescent coupling between the MMI and the GST material. Change in extinction coefficient of the GST material after phase transition alters the optical transmittance through the MMI. As the GST is located at the light focusing spot, the interaction is maximized, favoring a high optical transmission tuning efficiency. Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations were performed to calculate light propagation through the MMI crossing. The non-volatile phase transition is induced by an electrical pulse (green arrow in Figure For amorphization, the GST is first melted and then quenched rapidly by applying a high-voltage electrical pulse (Write pulse) for a short time period. For crystallization, the GST is annealed by applying a medium-voltage electrical pulse (Erase pulse) at a temperature between the crystallization and melting points for a time long enough to recover the atomic order of GST. For optical memristive switch applications, the nonvolatility is beneficial since no static power is required to keep the current state and only a short low-power pulse is required to change the phase of the nanoscale GST material. The devices were fabricated (see Supplementary Material S1) using an SOI wafer with a 220nm-thick silicon layer on top of a 2-μm-thick buried oxide layer. diameter GST when we applied to the device a rectangular Erase pulse with a fixed duration of 100 ns and a varying amplitude from 3.5 V to 6 V, as shown in Figure However, as the pulse amplitude increases to exceed 4.5 V, GST begins to be partially crystallized and the transmission continuously drops after the excitation pulse. When the material is fully crystallized, the transmission goes down to the minimum and remains unchanged with the further increasing pulse amplitude. AMORPHIZATION PROCESS. The GST amorphization (Write) process determines the optical transmission dynamics during switch-on. In the amorphization process, the GST needs to be heated up to the melting temperature (650°C) and then quenched rapidly by applying a highvoltage electrical Write pulse for a short time period. Figure When the melting temperature is reached with a higher pulse amplitude (11V~11.6V), the GST is partially amorphized and the degree of amorphization increases with the pulse amplitude until it is fully amorphized (11.8 V). However, when the pulse amplitude is further increased (12 V), GST may be ablated with an increased loss, deteriorating the device performance. From Figures The measured result suggests that the device can operate over a bandwidth of more than 100 nm (limited by measurement). For the device with a 1.2-m-diameter GST, the insertion loss increases to 4 dB and the transmission contrast is improved to 18.59 dB. It reveals that a higher transmission contrast is obtained from the device with a larger-size GST. Because the doping region is narrower than the GST area, the GST is not uniformly heated up. Therefore, the GST is not completely amorphized after a single Write pulse, leading to a higher insertion loss due to the residual crystalline GST. It reveals that the transmission contrast exceeding 20 dB are possible with a larger-size GST at the cost of a higher loss. The insertion loss can be decreased by slightly widening the doping region to incorporate the entire GST material. On the other hand, the recently discovered new optical phase change material Ge2Sb2Se4Te1 (GSST) exhibits significantly reduced extinction coefficient compared to GST in the telecom wavelength range In our device, the doping region is a rectangular strip beneath the GST, and therefore, heat is uniformly generated along the thin strip. Given that the GST is only a micrometer-size circular disk, a considerable heat is thus wasted. The doping window can be further optimized to have a reduced waist in the GST region so that heat can be more concentrated in the center. The gap size between the two Au electrodes is another key parameter affecting the electrical power required for the Write/Erase process. A narrower gap gives a smaller silicon resistance, which helps to reduce the pulse voltage and improve the power efficiency. The operation speed is also increased with the reduced heat dissipation. It is expected that switching time of less than one hundred nanosecond is achievable. OPTICAL MEMRISTIVE SWITCHING. Figure We use different colors to code the bit levels, the result shows that five clearly distinguishable levels can be obtained. In fact, more transmission levels can be programmed, limited only by the noise level of the photodetector. These exciting results of our memristive optical switch demonstrate that any intermediate level can be reached just by applying the appropriate Write or Erase pulses. Such capabilities provide a huge leap forward in terms of functionality and will be crucial for applications in optical latching switch, optical computing, and reconfigurable photonic circuits. We have demonstrated a memristive optical switch whose optical transmission level can be electrically written and erased by combining a silicon MMI and the phase change material GST. The switching state change is based on the electrical pulse induced phase transition of a m-size