It has been shown that singlet Cooper pairs can be converted into triplet ones and diffuse into a ferromagnet over a long distance in a phenomenon known as the long-range proximity effect (LRPE). This happens in materials with inhomogeneous magnetism or spin-orbit coupling (SOC). Most of the previous studies focus on the cases with small SOC and exchange field. However, the physics was not clear when SOC and exchange field strength are both much greater than the disorder strength. In this work, we consider a two dimensional system with a large Rashba-type SOC and exchange field in the case where only one band is partially occupied. We develop a generalized quasiclassical theory by projecting the Green function onto the partially occupied band (POB). We find that when the SOC energy scale is comparable with the exchange field, there is no LRPE. The reason is that the nonmagnetic impurities together with the large SOC and exchange field can effectively generate spin-flip scattering, which suppresses the proximity effect. We also show that when increasing either SOC or exchange field, the decay length of superconducting correlations can be significantly increased due to an approximately restored time reversal symmetry or spin rotation symmetry around the z (out-of-plane) axis. The proximity effect in a superconductor (S)/ferromagnet (F) structure has been extensively studied during the past decades. Experimentally a significant increase of conductivity has been observed in the S/F structures indicating that the Cooper pairs can penetrate into the ferromagnet over a long distance The previous studies on the proximity effect in S/F hybrid structures focus on systems with a small spin splitting field. In that case, the exchange field and SOC can be treated perturbatively as the time and space compo-nents of an effective SU(2) potential In this work, we consider a two dimensional system with SOC and an exchange field both much greater than the disorder strength. We assume that the spin splitting is large enough, such that only one band is partially occupied. The proximity effect in this system is very different from that of a system with a nearly degenerate Fermi surface. The reason is the following. First, due to spinmomentum locking the singlet and triplet pairing correlations are locked together and have the same decay length We consider a 2D electron layer with a large Rashba SOC and an exchange field (induced from a ferromagnet beneath it) placed under a bulk superconductor and coupled to it via tunneling through a thin insulator layer as shown in Fig. where ĤN is the Hamiltonian of a 2D electron layer ĤS describes the bulk superconductor The coupling Hamiltonian H T has the form Here is the creation operator of an electron in the bulk superconductor and c † (r) = [c † ↑ (r), c † ↓ (r)] is the electron creation operator in the 2D electron layer. r is a 2D vector in the plane of the 2D electron layer and z is the out-of-plane coordinate. The 2D gradient is ∇ = ( ∇x , ∇y ). σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) are Pauli matrices acting on the spin space and η is defined by η = (-σ y , σ x ). m S/N , μ S/N , U S/N and ∆ denote the effective mass, chemical potential, disorder potential and pairing potential in the bulk superconductor/2D electron layer, respectively. h is the exchange field. Here we assume that the strength of SOC and the z component of the exchange field are much greater than the disorder strength αp F , h z 1/τ , where τ is the scattering time, whereas the in-plane components of h are small h x , h y 1/τ . We also assume that the chemical potential is within the magnetic gap and only one band is partially occupied as shown in Fig. In this work, our focus is to study how the pairing correlation decays in the right part of the 2D electron layer. Before going into explicit calculations, we can qualitively investigate the proximity effect by analysing the properties of impurity scattering. In the case where the SOC strength is comparable with the strength of the exchange field αp F ≈ h z , the spins are on average polarized in the z direction but also have considerable in-plane components as shown in Fig. In order to quantitively study the proximity effect, we first develop a quasiclassical theory for the 2D electron layer and then include the effect of the bulk superconductor as a boundary condition. We start with the Gorkov equation for the right part of the 2D electron layer. Within Born approximation and in spin⊗particlehole space, the Gorkov equation can be written as Here, ω n is the Matsubara frequency ω n = (2n + 1)πT with n = 0, 1, 2 • • • , τ 3 is the Pauli matrix acting on the particle-hole basis and Σ is the disorder self-energy obtained from Born approximation, Σ = Ĝ /τ , where • means an angular average over the momentum directions. In order to solve the Gorkov equation, we perform the quasiclassical approximation and obtain the Eilenberger equation Here h and σ are in-plane components of the exchange field and Pauli matrices, respectively, defined by h = (h x , h y ), σ = (σ x , σ y ). We have performed a Fourier transformation of the Green function in Eq. ( Here n F = p F /|p F |is a unit vector in the direction of momentum p F at the Fermi level. Denoting Q ≡ ih z σ 3 + iαp F η • n F , we emphasize that the main difference between Eq. ( Using the condition of [ĝ, Q] = 0, we can write down the most general form of ĝ where |ψ λ,e/h are eigenvectors of operator Q satisfying Q|ψ λ,e/h = λiE|ψ λ,e/h with λ = ± being band indices and e/h labeling particle and hole eigenvectors. As the upper band is very far away from the chemical potential, the quasiclassical Green function ĝ should contain no information of the upper band. Therefore, we can safely drop the |ψ +,e/h terms in ĝ and write it as with where a, b, d, e are arbitary constants, N is the normalization factor N = 2S F (S F + h z ) and φ is the angle between n F and the y axis so that cos(φ) = n y , sin(φ) = n x . By doing this we actually project the Green function onto the POB. Next we write Eq. ( Here ẑ is the unit vector in the z direction. Equation ( where P is given by P = |ψ -,e ψ -,e | + |ψ -,h ψ -,h |. We define Ô = P (iω n τ 3 + iv F ∂ r -U ) P and have Ĝ = 1/( Ô -ε p ). According to Eq. ( Here, Pup/dn is the projection operator defined by Pup/dn = |ψ up/dn ψ up/dn | and |ψ up/dn is the eigenvector of operator Ô with eigenvalue having the positive/negative imaginary part. Therefore, we have ĝ2 = Pup + Pdn . Since Pup + Pdn is the identity operator in the ψ -subspace, we immediately have Pup + Pdn = P . Thus the normalization condition reads ĝ2 = P . ( For convenience, we can write ĝ in a more symmetric form ĝ = 3 i=0 g i τi with τ0 = P and other τi being Pauli matrices acting on the ψ -basis. In terms of the coefficients g i , the normalization condition can be written as Here, we consider the diffusive limit 1/τ ω, h x , h y , ∆. In this limit, the dominant term on the right hand side of Eq. ( We need to be careful when calculating ĝ0 since the basis τ is now n F dependent. The proper way to do the angular average is to write τ in the usual spin⊗particlehole basis, perform the angular average for the 4 × 4 matrix and then project it back onto the ψ -space. We first consider the case αp F ≈ h z . In this case, we find that the only solution of Eq. ( Considering the limit αp F h z , we can find one approximate solution of Eq. ( It can be seen that this solution does not strictly satisfy Eq. ( where ∇ is the covariant derivative ∇ in which the small in-plane components of the exchange field h x and h y play the role of the U (1) gauge field. Multiplying Eq. ( where we have used the fact that X 1 , w n 1/τ . Combining Eq. ( where the diffusion constant D is given by D = τ v 2 F /2. Compared to the usual case, we have an extra term X 4 τ3 ĝs τ3 /τ , which represents an effective spin-flip scattering due to impurities coupling different spin-momentum locked states Solving this equation, we get where f 0 is a constant determined by the boundary condition and The Pauli matrices τ1/2 written in the usual spin⊗particle-hole space are given by The αp F terms represent the singlet pairing correlations while the S F + h z and S F -h z terms represent the triplet pairing. One can see that the induced pairing correlation is a combination of singlet and triplet pairing, which are locked together and have the same decay It can be seen that the different components of the exchange field play different roles in the proximity effect. h z and h x tend to suppress the decay length to be 4τ D X and S F v F 2hxαp F , respectively, while h y does not affect the decay length but introduces a phase gradient in the induced pairing correlations, similar to the anomalous Josephson effect induced by the SOC and Zeeman effect In the case of no h x and relatively small X, the decay length becomes ξ ≈ 4τ D X . The decay length thus depends directly on the time reversal symmetry breaking factor X. When decreasing X, the time reversal symmetry is further restored and the proximity effect is promoted until the decay length reaches the thermal coherence length ξ T . When increasing X, the time reversal symmetry is further broken, and the decay length is suppressed to the mean free path l = τ v F . Thus the system can smoothly cross over to the αp F ≈ h z regime, where the decay length is of the order of l. Next, we consider the opposite limit h z αp F . In this limit, the spins of the Fermi surface are almost polarized in the z direction [Fig. where τ+ and τ-are defined by τ+ = (τ 1 + iτ 2 )/2, τ-= (τ 1 -iτ 2 )/2, and g s,+ g s,-g s,3 are n F independent constants. Unlike the large SOC limit, we have here a phase factor in the τ-and τ+ terms. It is convenient to absorb the phase factor into the basis by defining a new basis |ψ -= (|ψ -,e , |ψ -,h ) T = (e iφ/2 |ψ -,e , e -iφ/2 |ψ -,h ) T . Then the solution can be written in this new basis as where τ i are Pauli matrices acting on the |ψ -basis and g s,i are constants. The angular average of ĝ0 becomes ĝ0 = ĝ0 + Y 2 τ 3 ĝ0 τ 3 with Y = (S F -h z ) 2 /4S 2 F (see Appendix. B). Using the same method as for the large SOC limit, we get the Usadel equation Again in the weak proximity limit, we obtain the pair correlation in the magnet as The Pauli matrices τ written in the usual spin⊗particle-hole space are given by Therefore, there exists LRPE with a decay length dominated by triplet pairing. Again in the case of no h x and relatively small Y , the decay length becomes ξ ≈ τ D Y . It can be seen that now the spin rotation symmetry breaking factor Y takes the similar role of the time reversal symmetry breaking factor X in the opposite limit. Without h x , the decay length can be increased up to the thermal coherence length when Y is decreased due to the further restored spin rotation symmetry around the z axis. On the other hand, when increasing Y , the decay length is suppressed to the mean free path l = τ v F and the system again can smoothly cross over to the αp F ≈ h z regime. In this section, we show how to calculate the constant f 0 in Eq. ( Here, Ĝ-1 0 , μ and Σ are the same as defined in Sec. II. Σ S is the self-energy of the bulk superconductor given by where p is a 2D vector in the plane of the 2D electron layer. We assume translational invariance for the bulk superconductor and the left part of the electron layer, such that the Green function ĜS has only one momentum parameter. ĜS (p, z = 0) is calculated as and ĜS (p, p z ) is determined by the Born self-consistency equation where τ S is the impurity scattering time in the bulk superconductor. The tunneling operator t is in general a 4 × 4 matrix in spin⊗particle-hole space. In the limit t/S F 1, only the quasiparticles in the ψ -subspace can tunnel into the 2D electron layer, which means that the tunneling matrix has the form where t is the tunneling amplitude. Pt is defined by Pt = |ψ -,e ψ -,e | + |ψ -,h ψ -,h | for αp F h z and Pt = |ψ -,e ψ -,e | + |ψ -,h ψ -,h | for αp F h z . Substituting Eq. Here, we have used the tunneling condition t/μ N 1, such that the renormalization of μ N by the bulk superconductor is negligible and the only effect of the bulk superconductor self-energy is introducing the ∆ τ1 term defined by ∆ = Tr(τ 1 ΣS )/2, which is finite and proportional to αp F /2S F and ∆. The quasiclassical Green function ĝ can be obtained from Eq. (37) in the dirty limit as it is uniform and isotropic in the left part, ∇ĝ = 0. Since the bulk superconductor does not change any property of the 2D electron layer except introducing the pairing correlation, the junction at x = 0 can be regarded as totally transparent. Therefore, we can use continuous boundary condition at x = 0, which is ĝ(x = 0 + ) = ĝ(x < 0). Then f 0 can be straightforwardly read out from ĝ(0 + ). Substituting the expression of f 0 back into Eq. ( with where L is the width of the junction. In the limit κL 1, the supercurrent density is calculated as where σ N = 2e 2 N 0 D is the normal-state conductivity and the lower line is valid for κL 1. At low temperatures T ≈ 0, the frequency summation can be converted to an integral Here, C depends on the x and z components of the exchange field, . From the expression of the current, one can see that the critical supercurrent is suppressed by both h z and h x . Another feature of the supercurrent is that the zero supercurrent state corresponds to a finite phase difference φ 0 = -2hyαp F L S F v F , which is due to breaking the inversion and mirror symmetries in the x direction. At high temperature T 2DC, D/L 2 , the lowest frequency gives the dominating part to the current. Thus we have which does not depend on h x or h z . In the case of αp F h z , we get the Josephson current using the same method for T ≈ 0, where C is given by C . At high temperatures, we have In the case of αp F ≈ h z , the Josephson current vanishes as there is almost no proximity effect. FIG. Let us briefly discuss the prospects of realizing our predictions experimentally in the presence of both spin-orbit coupling and exchange field, but in the two regimes where one is stronger than the other. In the case of αp F h z , we propose that one can use the surface of a doped 3D topological insulator (TI) such as Bi 2 Se 3 In conclusion, we consider the superconducting proximity effect in a 2D electron layer with large SOC and exchange field and assume that only one band is occupied. We derive a generalized quasiclassical theory for this system by projecting the Green function onto the POB. We show that the LRPE exists in αp F h z and h z αp F limits while when αp F ≈ h z there is no LRPE. Our work fills the theoretical research gap of studying proximity effect in systems with both large SOC and exchange fields. Our work is compared with previous works on proximity effect in other parameter regimes in Fig. 