To achieve the further development of supercapacitors (SCs), which have intensively received attention as a next-generation energy storage system, the rational design of active electrode materials with electrochemically more favorable structure is one of the most important factors to improve the SC performance with high specific energy and power density. We propose and successfully grow copper sulfide (CuS) nanowires (NWs) as a chalcogenide-based electrode material directly on a Cu mesh current collector using the combination of a facile liquid-solid chemical oxidation process and an anion exchange reaction. We found that the as-prepared CuS NWs have well-arrayed structures with nanosized crystal grains, a high aspect ratio and density, as well as a good mechanical and electrical contact to the Cu mesh. The obtained CuS NW based electrodes, with additional binder-and conductive material-free, exhibit a much higher areal capacitance of 378.0 mF cm -2 and excellent cyclability of an approximately 90.2% retention during 2000 charge/discharge cycles due to their unique structural, electrical, and electrochemical properties. Furthermore, for practical SC applications, an asymmetric supercapacitor is fabricated using active carbon as an anode and CuS NWs as a cathode, and exhibits the good capacitance retention of 91% during 2000 charge/discharge processes and the excellent volumetric energy density of 1.11 mW h cm -3 compared to other reported pseudo-capacitive SCs. Supercapacitors (SCs), such as pseudocapacitor and electric double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) that can bridge the potential gap between conventional rechargeable batteries and transitional electrostatic capacitors, have been considered as a promising building block for next generation energy storage systems that require the high specific energy and power density for wide-ranging energy/power supplies, electric vehicles, and portable devices. Copper oxide/hydroxide-based materials are one of the attractive pseudo-electrodes to enhance a charge storage ability in the pseudocapacitors due to their two-electron redox reactions. Herein, we present a facile synthesis approach to develop the dense arrays of copper sulphide (CuS) nanowires (NWs) with nanosized crystal grains with high grain boundaries (GBs), as attractive copper chalcogenides materials for SCs, directly on the Cu mesh current collector and investigate the interrelations between their structural and electrochemical properties in pseudocapacitors. We also propose that superior electrochemical pseudo-capacitive behavior of the well-defined CuS NWs based electrodes could be attributed to the synergistic effects that might be explained with the following major viewpoints: 1) the directly grown CuS NWs on the Cu mesh, without the need of conducting additives and binder materials, can provide stable adhesion, low contact resistance, and the fast charge transfer channels, thereby can induce the high areal capacitance and volumetric energy density as well as acceptable stability; 2) the CuS nanostructures consisted by nanosized grains with high GBs can induce large contact area for electrolytes, thus facilitating the opened diffusion path favorably for OH -ions and providing the fast charge transfer rates; 3) the CuS phase with the excellent electrical conductivity and good crystallinity can induce superior electrochemical cyclability and high structural stability. In addition, we design the asymmetric supercapacitor (ASC) with active carbon (AC) as the anodic material and CuS NWs as the cathodic material to demonstrate comparable volumetric energy density of 1.11 mAh cm -3 and good cyclability of 91% during 2000 charge/discharge processes to those of commercial SCs and other reported pseudo-capacitive SCs. To obtain highly uniform CuS NWs directly grown on a Cu mesh, we used a sequential twostep synthetic scheme involving (1) the solution growth of Cu(OH)2 and (2) the sulfurization process for CuS, which are schematically illustrated in Fig. NWs surface with thiourea as sulfur sources, followed by the sulfurization process. As a result, Cu(OH)2 phases were perfectly converted to CuS phases as shown by XRD patterns (JCPDS No. 06-0464). Furthermore, to investigate the morphology of CuS NWs, we carried out a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) analysis. Figs. 1c and 1d clearly show that dense CuS NWs were well arrayed and separated from each 1-D nanostructure with a high aspect ratio on the Cu mesh. Moreover, there was no observation of any structural agglomeration and collapse resulting from the sulfurization process involving sulfur anion exchange reactions, as exhibited in Fig. To further identify the detailed crystal structure and elemental distribution of CuS NWs, we performed transmission electron microscopy (TEM) examinations. As shown in Fig. The pseudo-behavior properties of CuS NWs were investigated through cycling voltammetry (CV) and galvanostatic charge/discharge analyses using a three-electrode system with CuS NWs on the Cu mesh directly used as a working electrode. Fig. However, additional peaks with the relatively very weak intensity were also observed near ~ 288.0, 335.2, and 617.7 cm -1 related to a CuO phase, which might be partially formed via the intercalation process of OH -ions during the galvanostatic charge/discharge process. Thus, we believe that the remarkably superior pseudo-behavior properties of the electrode, i.e., high areal capacitance and excellent cycling performance, are mainly attributed to the unique features of the CuS NWs with superior electrical conductivity, favorable structural architecture and phase, and electrochemical stability. To further investigate practical possibility for SC applications on the basis of previous electrochemical results and discussion, we fabricated an ACS using the AC as an anodic material and the CuS NWs as a cathodic material (inset in Fig. In summary, we demonstrated the CuS NW arrays directly grown on the Cu mesh successfully prepared via a facile liquid-solid chemical oxidation process and an anion exchange reaction for the enhanced pseudo-capacitive behavior properties in SCs. The obtained CuS NWs exhibited a superior areal capacitance of 378.0 mF cm -2 at a current density of 2 mA cm -2 and good rate performance as well as long-term electrochemical and structural stabilities during the galvanostatic charge/discharge process, compared to other reported Cu-based SCs. The improved electrochemical pseudo-capacitive behavior properties of the CuS NWs can be attributed to unique electrical and structural properties of the CuS NWs grown directly on Cu mesh current collector, providing synergistic benefits such as high electrical conductivity, good contact resistance, densely well-arrayed 1-D nanostructures with nanosized grains and high GBs, and the stable and favorite structure of a CuS phase. Furthermore, the AC//CuS ASC with a wide potential window of 1.5 V exhibited the enhanced volumetric energy density of 1.11 mWh cm -3 , the good cyclability of 91% up to 2000 cycles, and the high Coulombic efficiency of 97.7 %. Thus, it is expected that the CuS NWs directly grown on a Cu mesh current collector will be extensively utilized as highly stable and efficient pseudo-capacitive electrodes in SCs. Copper hydroxide nanowires (Cu(OH)2 NWs) were synthesized directly on the Cu mesh by using an aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide (NaOH, 97%) and ammonium persulfate ((NH4)2S2O8, 98%). The solution was prepared by mixing 20 mL of a 10 M NaOH solution, 10 mL of a 1 M (NH4)2S2O8 solution, and 22.5 mL of DI water. A pre-cleaned piece of a Cu mesh (1 x 1 cm 2 with thickness of 0.0267 cm, Alfa Aesar) was subsequently immersed into the mixed solution at room temperature. After the synthesis of Cu(OH)2 NWs for 1h, the Cu mesh sample was taken out of the solution and then rinsed with DI water, followed by dried on a hot plate at 60 °C for 15 min. A light blue color of the mesh was observed, indicating that highly dense Cu(OH)2 NWs were synthesized. In order to convert as-grown Cu(OH)2 NWs to CuS NWs, a 0.2 M thiourea (CH4N2S, 99.0%) solution was dropped on the surface of Cu(OH)2 NWs and then blown dry with nitrogen gas. After heating on the hot plate at 150 °C, the color of the sample was changed from a blue to dark brown color. It indicates that CuS NWs were completely transformed from Cu(OH)2 NWs. The electrochemical properties of the as-prepared Cu(OH)2 and CuS NWs directly grown on the Cu mesh were measured in a three-electrode system, consisting of as-prepared CuS NWs electrodes as a working electrode, Pt wire as a counter electrode, and Ag/AgCl (in saturated 3 M KCl) as a reference electrode, in order to analyze CV, galvanostatic charge/discharge, and EIS behavior using a potentiostat (PGSTAT302N, Metrohm, Autolab). For the fabrication of anode electrodes in the AC//CuS ASC, the slurry was prepared by mixing the active carbon as an active material, poly(vinylidene difluoride) as a binder, Ketjen black as a conductive material, and then was coated onto the compressed nickel foam as a current collector. All electrochemical results of the AC//CuS ASC were obtained using a two electrode system under 1.0 M KOH solution at room temperature. 