We describe boundary effects in superconducting systems with Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) superconducting instability, using Bogoliubov-de-Gennes and Ginzburg-Landau (GL) formalisms. First, we show that in dimensions larger than one the standard GL functional formalism for FFLO superconductors is unbounded from below. This is demonstrated by finding solutions with zero Laplacian terms near boundaries. We generalize the GL formalism for these systems by retaining higher order terms. Next, we demonstrate that a cuboid sample of a superconductor with imbalanced fermions at a mean-field level has a sequence of the phase transitions. At low temperatures it forms Larkin-Ovchinnikov state in the bulk but has a different modulation pattern close to the boundaries. When temperature is increased the first phase transition occurs when the bulk of the material becomes normal while the faces remain superconducting. The second transition occurs at higher temperature where the system retains superconductivity on the edges. The third transition is associated with the loss of edge superconductivity while retaining superconducting gap in the vertices. We obtain the same sequence of phase transition by numerically solving the Bogoliubov-de Gennes model. Fulde and Ferrell In the recent work In this work we answer two questions. (i) We demonstrate this effect in microscopic models for imbalanced fermions without relying on a Ginzburg-Landau expansion. We show that in dimensions larger than one, the superconductor undergoes a sequence of phase transition where superconductivity survives in sub-domains of se-quentially lower dimension. That is, by increasing the temperature and fermionic population imbalance in a square system, at the mean-field level, the system will undergo the following sequence of the phase transitions: superconducting bulk → superconducting edges → superconducting corners → normal state. (ii) For a Ginzburg-Landau approach, we explain that, as alluded in The plan of the paper is the following: In Section II we firstly recap canonical microscopic derivation of the Ginzburg-Landau model for non uniform FFLO superconductors. Then we demonstrate that the usual GL model is unbounded from below because it is unstable to formation of infinitely strong gradients near boundaries. In Section III we construct a Ginzburg-Landau functional which has energy bounded from below by retaining higher order derivative terms in the expansion. That allows us to in Section IV, obtain the face, edge and vertex states without divergent energies. In Section V we construct an alternative form for the Ginzburg-Landau expansion which does not suffer from the divergence near the boundary, but does not capture the full set of different types of boundary states. In Section VI we solve numerically Bogoluibov-de-Gennes (BdG) equation to show that the states exist in microscopic models that does not rely on any Ginzburg-Landau expansion. In the Appendix we confirm the existence of the boundary pair-density-wave by solving a more general BdG including Hartree terms. The Ginzburg-Landau description of superconductors in the presence of fermionic population imbalance was derived from microscopic theory for superconductors in where ψ is a complex field referred to as the superconducting order parameter and c.c. denotes complex conjugation. The coefficients α, γ, and ν depend on the fermionic population imbalance H and temperature T accordingly where N (0) is the electron density of states at the Fermi surface, T c is the critical temperature at zero H and we have defined the functions where z = 1 2i H 2πT and Ψ (n) is the polygamma function of order n. The remaining coefficients are given as β = βv 2 F γ, δ = δv 4 F ν, and μ = μv 2 F ν, where v F is the Fermi velocity and β, δ, μ are positive constants that depend on the dimensionality d. In one dimension we have β = 1, δ = 1/2, and μ = 4, in two dimensions we have β = 1/2, δ = 3/16, and μ = 2, and in three dimensions we have β = 1/3, δ = 1/10 and μ = 4/3. The Ginzburg-Landau description is valid in the parameter regime in which the highest order terms are positive, that is where ν is positive. In the parameter regime in which β is negative, inhomogeneous order parameters may be energetically favorable. The first considered structures of the order parameter are the so-called Fulde-Ferrell (FF) state ψ FF ∝ e ipx and the Larkin-Ovchinnikov (LO) state ψ LO ∝ cos px, with p 2 = -β 2δ and transition into the normal state at α = α bulk c = β 2 4δ . Inhomogeneous states can appear when the term |∇ψ| 2 has a negative prefactor. In this parameter regime, it is necessary to include higher order terms, resulting in a free energy density expansion in Eq. Consider first a one dimensional domain Ω = [-L/2, L/2] of length L. The equation ∆ψ = 0 is satisfied by the real field ψ(x) = qx, for any parameter q. The modulus |ψ| increases linearly as the boundaries are approached, resulting in increasing potential energy density closer to the boundaries. As system size increases, the penalizing potential energy is non-negligible, making the linear solution less energetically beneficial. Therefore, the linear solution is not energetically preferable over conventional one dimensional inhomogeneous structures, such as ψ LO ∝ cos px or ψ FF ∝ e ipx if L 1/p, where p 2 = -β 2δ . However, for small system sizes, the potential term does become negligible in comparison to the beneficial gradient term β|∇ψ| 2 = βq 2 . To lowest order in L, minimizing with respect to q 2 gives with transition into the normal state at α = α c1 = -12β/L 2 . In the limit of infinitesimal system size L → 0, we find that α c1 → ∞, and the associated momentum q and energy F diverges. Note that the value of ψ at the boundary, ψ(±L/2) = ±qL/2, does not vanish in this limit since q ∝ 1/L. Consequently the value of ψ at the boundary is independent of system size for sufficiently small systems. The effect generalizes to systems in higher dimensions. Consider the d-dimensional cube with volume L d . The linear solution here generalizes to a multi-linear solution ψ n (x) = q n n j=1 x j , where n ≤ d. Analogously to the one-dimensional case we find with transition into the normal state at α cn = nα c1 . Consequently we expect that in higher dimensions, we will see a sequence of transitions from (n = 1) → (n = 2) → . . . → (n = d) before transitioning into the normal state, as seen in Figure Figure Consider a two-dimensional domain Ω in the presence of boundaries. We can represent the domain Ω as section of the complex plane, by defining a complex coordinate ζ = x + iy. The order parameter ψ is now a function of ζ. Clearly if ψ is an analytic complex valued function (i.e. it satisfies the Cauchy-Riemann equations), it follows automatically that ∆ψ = 0. The system becomes unstable towards states of the form ψ(ζ) = Ae kζ with |k| → ∞, associated with a negative divergent energy. Crucially, the formations of these states require the existence of a boundary. If the complete two-dimensional plane were considered, the solution ψ(ζ) = Ae kζ would diverge in some direction, which would be penalized by the potential terms. However, the divergence of |ψ| can be cut off using the boundary of the system, as seen in Figure For example, consider the half-infinite two-dimensional domain x ≥ 0. An analytic function which satisfies ∆ψ = 0 is with k > 0. This state is characterized by phase-wave modulation (FF state) tangential to the boundary and exponential decay perpendicular to the boundary. We compute the energy density along the boundary (that is in the y-direction) by integrating over x and find We see that as long as the amplitude |A| 2 < -2β/μ, the energy diverges to -∞ as k increases. This shows that the model has an instability towards formation of boundary states with rapid modulation along the boundary. Analogous calculation for the state ψ = Ae -kx cos ky Figure In contrast to the example of linear solutions in small systems, see Section II B, the two-dimensional solutions with modulation along the boundary and exponential decay from the boundary exist in any system in the presence of boundaries, regardless of the system size. The divergence in energy and Cooper pair momentum is indicative towards the existence of superconducting boundary states. Note, however that GL solutions can only represent the long-wave-length physics of how order parameter decays away from the 1/k F length scales from the boundary. Hence, in order to find a suitable theory which is bounded from below, we have to include additional terms in the Ginzburg-Landau expansion. We would like to find the lowest order term in both momentum and amplitude of the order parameter, which is sufficient to include in order to stabilize the theory. The origin of the inhomogeneous state is the negative term |∇ψ| 2 , which is of second order in both momentum and amplitude. Conventionally it is stabilized by the term |∆ψ| 2 , which is of fourth order in momentum and second order in amplitude. Since there exists states that satisfy ∆ψ = 0, we have to resort to higher order in either momentum or amplitude. Terms such as |∇∆ψ| 2 , which is of sixth order in momentum and second order in amplitude, would not be helpful since it is automatically zero if ∆ψ = 0. Therefore we resort to retaining the term which is of fourth order in momentum and fourth order in amplitude, which reads Since this term is of higher order in amplitude than the lowest order beneficial gradient term, there will exist inhomogeneous superconducting states for any α, as long as the gradient coefficients are negative. This term was used to find two-dimensional solutions in where factor Ω d depends on the dimension d, where Ω 1 = 1, Ω 2 = 3/8 and Ω 3 = 1/5. Studying the functions K 5 (H, T ) and K 7 (H, T ), we see that there exist an overlapping region in which both functions are negative, which implies that the additional term is positive simultaneously as the previously higher order terms. In order to study a minimal model, we proceed with only retaining the term in Eq. ( Let us now consider the previous example of the boundary state ψ = Ae -kx+iky , which previously was associated with negative infinite energy and infinite momentum k. With the inclusion of the term in Eq. ( which makes the free energy bounded from below and the optimal value of k is now finite. Having obtained the Ginzburg-Landau free energy expansion without the spurious divergences enables us to study higher dimensional systems. We will numerically minimize the free energy functional using the nonlinear conjugate gradient method, parallelized on the CUDAenabled NVIDIA graphical processing unit (GPU). It is convenient to introduce rescaled coordinates and parameters defined accordingly: 4ν and p 2 = -β 2δ . Expressed in these quantities, the free energy reads where the rescaled free energy density F is identical to Eq. ( Specifically in three dimensions we have that κ = , which is not constant in the rescaled units. However, studying the functions K n in Eq. ( , where f n is some elementary function. Therefore, if we study a line in the T H-plane where H/T is constant, the rescaled parameter κ will also be constant. Particularly, we will study the line where H/T = 2π/3, along which κ 0.5752. On a technical note, since we are working in rescaled units, where we measure length in units of p -1 ∝ K 5 /K 3 , we also have to alter the rescaled length accordingly in order to appropriately describe the sample of fixed size. The obtained solutions are shown in Figure As temperature is increased, we first transition into a superconducting state which allows for modulation on the faces of the cube, while the bulk now has transition into a normal state. Second, when the temperature is elevated further, the faces become normal too, but superconductivity survives on the edges of the cube. Thirdly, the edges become normal and only the vertices remain superconducting, before finally the fully normal state is entered at an even higher temperature. Figure In e -ψmin = 2 ψmax = 0.08. Let us consider how to obtain a model which does not suffer from divergences near a boundary without introduction of the higher order terms, as in Section III. Firstly, observe that when one uses the usual microscopic derivation of the model Eq. ( The GL free energy in Eq. ( where n is the normal to the boundary ∂Ω. Since the standard microscopic derivation does not unambiguously determine the boundary contribution, we consider now the free energy expansion where |∆ψ| 2 is replaced by ij |∂ i ∂ j ψ| 2 and the boundary term f is discarded. The boundary state in Eq. ( We simulated numerically the GL model given by Eq. ( We start from Fermi-Hubbard model in path integral formulation defined by action (first part of the derivation follows with Grassman fields ψ iσ (τ ), ψ † iσ (τ ) corresponding to fermionic creation and annihilation operators defined on some lattice indexed by i, j ∈ [1, N ]. Kinetic part of action is given by h ijσ = -(μ + σh)δ i,jtδ |i-j|,1 , with chemical potential μ, spin-population imbalance h and nearest-neighbor hopping parameter t. Interaction is set by on-site attractive potential V > 0, which leads to swave pairing. Partition function is given by path integral We perform Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation, which introduces auxiliary bosonic field ∆ i (τ ). Up to a constant the interaction term becomes: By introducing Nambu spinors the action becomes With 2N × 2N matrix H defined by: Integrating out fermionic degrees of freedom we obtain Note, that up till this point this model exactly corresponds to Fermi-Hubbard model Eq. ( Next, one can simplify the action by reducing the term where last equality holds up to a constant, summation is performed over Matsubara frequencies ω n = 2πT (n + 1/2) and Fermi factor f (x) = 1/(e x/T + 1). Note, that trace sums over 2N diagonal elements of function of 2N × 2N dimensional matrix H and hence equals to just sum over a function evaluated at the eigenvalues of H. Finally, the action is given by Taking variation of Eq. ( where vectors, following We solve the problem numerically by taking a recursive approach. That is, we start with some initial guess for the pairing field ∆ i . Secondly, we diagonalize the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( . Then ∆ i is updated through the self consistency equation Eq. ( The process is repeated until convergence. 1 Note, that this formula is equivalent to the usual one with hyperbolic tangent since -e T i f (H) In this study we will investigate the surface properties, which requires significantly large system sizes. We consider both one-and two-dimensional systems, using open boundary conditions. In two dimensions we use a GPUbased approach, while in one dimension we use CPUs. The obtained order parameter for a one-dimensional system, while varying the temperature, is shown in Figure Note, that in the tight-binding model, non-zero values of the pairing field ∆ i on the boundary, as in Figure At a microscopic level, the mechanism of formation of boundary states has many complex aspect beyond the simple energy argument given in Next we show the existence of the boundary states in two dimensions by solving the BdG equation in Eq. Note however, that the precise structures of the edge and corner states obtained from the BdG calculations differ from those predicted by GL theory, which is not surprising given that they correspond to different physical systems. Indeed, BdG is considered in tight binding limit and hence corresponds to localized electrons with much stronger interactions than free electron approximation conventionally used to obtain GL model. The microscopic BdG results in Figure On the other hand, when replacing the Laplacian term by ij |∂ i ∂ j ψ| 2 we observe a strong resemblance between the GL and BdG simulations -compare for example we obtain configuration of the order parameter in GL, which is very close to that of BdG: compare Figure To demonstrate the presence of edge-modulated states on the BdG level we consider a sample with edges forming an angle of π/4 with the crystalline axis. The effect of this choice influences the interactions of the edge sites. In this case there appears modulation of the gap field along the boundaries. Figure In context of cold atoms a phase separation between FFLO-like bulk and normal or BCS-like boundary was predicted in a one-dimensional harmonic trap In conclusion, we considered boundary effects in a superconductor where Cooper pairing involves electrons with finite center-of-mass momentum (Fulde-Ferrel-Larkin-Ovchinnikov instability). Firstly, we demonstrated that the standard microscopically-derived Ginzburg-Landau model cannot be used to describe such superconductors in the presence of boundaries in dimension larger than one since it a spurious divergence of the free energy near the boundaries. To describe such states we constructed a generalized functional with higher order derivative terms were retained to guarantee finiteness of the free energy density. We showed that at the mean-field-level the system undergoes a sequence of the phase where each transition is associated with decreased dimensionality of the superconducting state. Namely as temperature is increased the system first looses bulk superconductivity but retains two-dimensional superconductivity on its faces. The next phase transition is associated with the loss of twodimensional superconductivity on the faces but retaining one-dimensional superconductivity on the edges. When the temperature is increased further the superconducting gaps survives only at the vertices. The transition from the bulk to surface pair-density-wave superconductivity is also captured by an alternative and simpler form of the Ginzburg-Landau functional described in Section V. In order to demonstrate the existence of multiple phase transitions in a model that does not rely on Ginzburg-Landau expansion we solved numerically Bogoliubovde-Gennes model in two dimensions. Clearly solution demonstrate the phase transition from the bulk to boundary superconductivity. The results provide a new route to identify and study properties of pair-density-wave superconductors. The results predict a discrepancy between the bulkdominated specific heat identification of critical temperature and surface-dominated current and diamagnetic response probes. The predicted possibility of a different modulation of the order parameter on the surface also has direct implication for scanning tunneling microscopy and Josephson experiments. The current work also opens up the question of the physics of boundary states beyond mean-field approximation. Beyond mean-field approximation, quasi-onedimensional superconductors are always phase disordered in thermodynamic limit at any finite temperature. However, again as in any superconducting wire that statement applies only to thermodynamic limit and it's expected to see the mean-field sequence of the phase transitions in local probes such as scanning tunneling microscopy. The surface phase transition beyond mean-field approximation should be of the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless type. However multiple transitions are also possible beyond mean-field in cases where the modulation is along the surface, associated with melting of stripes and loss of crystalline modulation order. This will be a counterpart of multiple transitions beyond mean-field approximation that attract currently substantial interest in the conventional two-dimensional Larkin-Ovchinnikov cases 