We report the first preparation of nanoporous Al-Mg alloy films by selective dissolution of Mg from a Mg-rich AlxMg1-x alloy. We show how to tune the stoichiometry, the porosity and the oxide contents in the final film by modulating the starting ratio between Al and Mg and the dealloying procedure. The obtained porous metal can be exploited for enhanced UV spectroscopy. In this respect, we experimentally demonstrate its efficacy in enhancing fluorescence and surface Raman scattering for excitation wavelengths of 360 nm and 257 nm respectively. Finally, we numerically show the superior performance of the nanoporous Al-Mg alloy in the UV range when compared to equivalent porous gold structures. The large area to surface ratio provided by this material make it a promising platform for a wide range of applications in UV/deep-UV plasmonics. During the last decade, Localized Surface Plasmon Resonances (LSPRs) have been explored extensively for their various technological applications such as surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS), metal-enhanced fluorescence (MEF), plasmon enhanced light harvesting, and photocatalysis. Chemical dealloying is a classical approach to prepare nanoporous metals with intriguing plasmonic properties. The most investigated material is probably nanoporous gold (NPG), Magnesium is a good candidate partner for the preparation of a convenient alloy with Al, since: i) it can form a stable phase with Al (the -phase Al12Mg17) By tuning the respective sputtering powers acting on the magnesium and on the aluminum targets, we were able to tune the Al/Mg ratio in our AlxMg1-x alloys (see table 1 and methods). The composition (obtained from EDS measurements) of the fabricated alloys is reported in Table Our fabrication strategy considered the immersion of the deposited alloy samples in acid solution in order to dissolve Mg, either partially or completely, thus leaving nanometric or micrometric pores at its place. Several aqueous acid solutions were tested for the dealloying process, including: citric acid, ortophosphoric acid, sulfuric acid, as well as solutions of ammonium acetate and acetic acid in methanol. While all the tested solutions yielded nanoporous morphologies (see SI -Supporting Note#1), significant differences in the final oxide contents have been observed. Here we focus our analysis on the kind of samples prepared with 1M solution of CH3COOH in methanol, since such an etchant solution leads to the lowest level of residual oxide in the etched sample. Table Sputtering * For simplicity, Oxygen is not reported in this column. Oxygen levels in the pristine samples were always below 4%. Fig. Vice versa, samples B0, B1, B2; C0 and C1 were prepared by co-sputtering Al and Mg for 60 minutes with applied powers of 100 W and 85 W, respectively. For all these cases the obtained films were not as rough as sample A0 therefore we proceeded with the etching step. Samples B1 and B2 were etched for 2 and 5 minutes, respectively, obtaining the morphologies depicted in Fig. Significant differences can be observed among the samples. In all cases, the structure of the not-etched layers (A0, B0, C0) presents peaks of AlyMgz stoichiometric phases, along with hexagonal phases that are prevalently composed of magnesium. The latter are substitutional solid solutions, where some smaller Aluminum atoms replace Magnesium atoms, with a resulting decrease of the lattice parameter. Since a smaller lattice parameter implies a higher diffraction angle, the peaks of these Mg-rich phases appear close to the peaks of pure Magnesium, but slightly shifted towards higher angles. It is interesting to notice the effect of the etching treatment on sample B0. The XRD pattern of the pristine sample B0 shows the Al0.5Mg1.5 phase and a Mg-rich phase (Fig. Let us now consider the effect of annealing. The XRD spectrum of sample C0 shows (Fig. Enhanced Spectroscopies -Plasmonic properties In the previous section we demonstrated the persistence of metallic phases in the etched samples. This finding, together with the obtained nanoporous morphology, suggests possible applications in enhanced spectroscopies. First of all, the reflectance of the prepared NPAM samples has been measured in the spectral range between 200 and 2000 nm. Due to the roughness of the samples, in order to collect the reflectance spectrum, a spectrophotometer equipped with an integrating sphere has been used. In this way the sum of the direct and diffuse reflectance could be collected. Supporting Note#3 (Fig. Finally, we investigated the potential plasmonic effects in terms of MEF and SERS. In order to perform MEF experiments, all NPAM samples have been functionalized with a fluorophore according to the protocol reported in Methods. In particular, we chose coumarins as reporter dyes. They are well-known fluorophores widely exploited for their optical properties and for the development of "off-on" switchable fluorescent biosensors. The FE value, the concentration of coumarin and the fluorescence signal determined for each substrate are reported in Figure The results obtained from MEF experiments are not surprising, as sample A0 presents significant surface roughness (Fig. Adenine film was formed on all the NPAM substrates prepared as described above, and on the same rough aluminum (Al) substrate used for the fluorescence experiment (methods). The experimental Raman spectra are presented in Figure However, a drawback related to this approach needs to be stressed, namely the obvious low number of photons that can be collected and the consequent high noise level in the signal (see Fig. In the spectra, especially strong peaks were observed at 1248, 1335, 1497, and 1629 cm -1 all attributable to Raman scattering of adenine vibrations. Table In order to gain insights regarding the microscopic interaction between UV radiation and the fabricated material, we have combined the actual nanoporous film geometry of sample C1 with 2D electromagnetic calculations to investigate the electromagnetic field localization within the NPAM film. The SEM image of a vertical cross section of a fabricated NPAM film (Fig. In conclusion, here we have reported about the procedures to prepare NPAM films from an alloy of Al and Mg. Co-sputtering from Al and Mg allows to deposit films with different concentration ratios between Al and Mg. For all cases, the dealloying processes lead to a residual oxide layer. This layer is found to be stable in time and always covering a porous structure of metallic Al-Mg alloy. Optical spectroscopies have been used to evaluate the optical properties of the prepared NPAM films and to verify their potential applications as UV plasmonic materials. The results, in terms of bulk composition of the prepared NPAM samples, suggest that the final oxygen content, primary detrimental factor in the application of NPAMs as plasmonic materials, depends both on the starting concentration of Mg with respect to Al and on the residual amount of Mg in the etched alloy. During our investigation we observed that, while it is possible to remove completely the Mg contents from the starting alloy by means of strong / long lasting acid etching, this always leads to high oxygen contents pushing the final sample composition close to that of Al2O3. This is not however the case if the dealloying process is optimized in order to create a nanoporous structure without completely removing Mg, an approach that seems to effectively lower the oxidation level within the bulk porous structure. MEF and SERS experiments demonstrated that the prepared substrates operate much better than standard rough Al films. Not surprisingly, a highly rough Al-Mg film can indeed give a higher enhancement due to lower surface oxidation. Finally, the present study should be considered as the first step towards the identification of an optimized fabrication procedure capable of further reducing the final oxygen contents in NPAM samples which, in turn, would lead to a powerful platform for UV enhanced spectroscopy. Materials: 7-hydroxil-4-coumarin acetic acid 97%, N-(3-Dimethylaminopropyl)-N′-ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride BioXtra (EDC hydrochloride), N-Hydroxysuccinimide 98% (NHS), (3-Aminopropyl)triethoxysilane 99% (APTES), acetic acid glacial 99.85%, Methanol anhydrous, 99.8%, Dimethyl sulfoxide anhydrous, ≥99.9% (DMSO). All mentioned chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Acetone, anhydrous (max. 0.01% H2O) ≥99.8% was purchased from VWR chemicals. Sputter deposition: silicon substrates have been sonicated in acetone and isopropanol to obtain a clean surface. A 10 nm Chromium layer and an Aluminium layer of the same thickness have been deposited on the silicon substrate, as the linker between the substrate and the subsequently deposited Al-Mg alloy. Al and Mg have been then sputter co-deposited by applying different biases to the Aluminium and Magnesium targets, as described in the text. All these processes have been performed in Argon atmosphere, at 5 μBar, in a Kenosistec KS500 Confocal sputter coater. The chamber was set to high vacuum (P<10 -6 mBar) before the deposition of every layer. Chromium and Magnesium were deposited DC, while Aluminum in RF. Rough Al evaporation: Aluminum and Silica have been evaporated within a Lesker E-beam evaporator. The chamber was set to high vacuum (P<10 -6 mBar) before the deposition. The 10 nm Aluminum layer has been deposited at 0,2 Å/s, the 5 nm silica layer at 1 Å/s. The silica layer was deposited just after the Aluminum layer, without losing the vacuum in the evaporator chamber. Etching by acid treatment: sample B1 was dipped in a 1 M methanol solution of acetic acid for 2 minutes while substrate B2 C1 for 5 minutes. The samples were then washed with methanol, isopropanol and pentane. Immediately after the acidic treatment, the samples were brought inside the glove box. Dye activation and attachment on the substrate: 7-hydroxyl-4-coumarin acetic acid (0.01 mmol) was solubilized in DMSO (1 mL) reaching 10 mM as final concentration. EDC (0.02 mmol) was added and stirred at room temperature for 15 minutes. Subsequently, NHS (0.03 mmol) were added and the reaction was stirred for further 45 minutes. After 1 hours, the mixture was diluted in acetone reaching a final solution of 1 mM of dye. 1 mL of this solution was added to each substrate in a 3 mL glass vial and 1 mL was added in an empty vial as reference for the dye quantification. The reaction was shacked at R.T. in glove box overnight. The substrates were carefully withdraw and washed with acetone. The remaining solution of coumarin was kept for dye quantification: the absorbance at 360 nm was used to determine the amount of coumarin present in each solution using as reference 1 mM solution of activated coumarin. The value founded were used to calculate the amount of coumarin covalently bound on the substrate's surface. Fluorescent measurement: after washing all substrates were placed in a 24-well plate, a drop of PBS was added on the surface in order to make a measurement under wet condition, and the fluorescent spectrum was recorded with a 360 nm excitation wavelength (λex). Fluorescent signal was measured selecting specific section of each well (λex:λem 360:460 nm) in order to better evaluate the efficiency of the functionalization. Tecan infite M200 was used for recording the fluorescent spectrum and for the fluorescent measurement of the substrates. CsPbBr3 colloidal Nanocrystals (NCs) deposition and measurement: In glove box (argon atmosphere, H2O < 0.1 ppm; O2 < 0.1 ppm, RT.) 2.5 μL of NCs solution (6.5 x 10 14 NCs/mL in toluene) were dropped on substrate A0, silicon and Al ensuring that all the suspension remain on the substrate to guarantee that the same amount of NCs are deposited on all substrates. After solvent evaporation, the fluorescence signal was measured for each substrates using Tecan infinite M200, using 280:510 nm as λex:λem respectively. RAMAN: UV Resonant Raman (UVRR) measurements have been carried out at Elettra synchrotron radiation facility. A complete description of the experimental apparatus can be found elsewhere. In particular, since the simulations aimed at investigating the field localised on nanopores and concave shapes of the surface, a faithful modelling of the metal layer is crucial. Therefore, as any numerical structure would not thoroughly reproduce the experimental sample, SEM images of the porous metal section have been directly employed. The measured profiles have been imported as images on COMSOL and used as permittivity maps associating each point ( , ) to a value between 0 and 1 according to the SEM image brightness. As a result, ( , ) = 1 represents pure metal, ( , ) = 0 background only. On the other hand, concerning nanoporous irregular metal surface, such a layer has been associated to a weighted permittivity defined as follows: = * ( , ) ( , ) > h ( , ) < h where a threshold value h has been defined to distinguish background medium from metal and model the surface boundaries. In the simulations surrounding environment is air, with = 1, while substrate is the investigated metal -either Al-Mg or Au. The permittivity of the alloy used for the simulations has been obtained from ellipsometric measurements on the as-deposited alloy (B0) , The threshold has been tuned to reproduce the experimental sample as much as possible. Indeed, h directly affects the permittivity governing the optical properties of the porous layer, determining the metal boundaries according to the SEM map values. In particular, the selected value for the field maps presented in Fig. Nevertheless, tests at different values of h , varying between 0.2 and 0.9, have been conducted for the both Al-Mg and Au. Thus, after having appropriately set the domain optical properties within the model geometry, Maxwell equations have been solved to determine the field spatial distribution. The incoming electric field is simulated by means of a port analysis, described as a plane wave at a given wavelength. Its amplitude is unitary, and its propagation direction is orthogonal to the surface while polarization is parallel to the sample. Continuous periodic conditions are imposed at the two sides of the system, and perfectly matched layers have been defined at the top and bottom of the structure, to prevent spurious enhancement due to unphysical reflections at the boundaries of the domain. Concerning mesh, the region corresponding to the interface between metal and environment required a particularly fine mesh to resolve the electric field within the nanopores. Two-dimensional triangular elements have been employed, with 2.5 and 10 as minimum and maximum size respectively. Furthermore, in order to investigate and compare Al-Mg plasmonic behaviour with Au response, the same SEM profile has been associated to the two different material permittivity. In addition, data of the field enhancement from nanoporous layers have been analysed in a fixed range only, for both metals. *For sample 135-100 pristine, the Al peak overlaps with the secondary peaks that are related to the high Mg content. The quantification may not be accurate, but some metallic Al is certainly present.