Spinel compounds have demonstrated rich functionalities but rarely shown superconductivity. Here, we report the emergence of superconductivity in the spinel MgTi 2 O 4 , known to be an insulator with a complicated order. The superconducting transition is achieved by engineering a superlattice of MgTi 2 O 4 and SrTiO 3 . The onset transition temperature in the MgTi 2 O 4 layer can be tuned from 0 to 5 K in such geometry, concurrently with a stretched c-axis (from 8.51 to 8.53 Å) compared to the bulk material. Such a positive correlation without saturation suggests ample room for the further enhancement. Intriguingly, the superlattice exhibits isotropic upper critical field H c2 that breaks the Pauli limit, distinct from the highly anisotropic feature of interface superconductivity. The origin of superconductivity in the MgTi 2 O 4 layer is understood in combination with the electron energy loss spectra and the first-principles electronic structure calculations, which point to the birth of superconductivity in the MgTi 2 O 4 layer by preventing the Ti-Ti dimerization. Our discovery not only provides a platform to explore the interplay between the superconductivity and other exotic states, but also opens a new window to realize superconductivity in the spinel compounds as well as other titanium oxides. It is fascinating to explore new superconductor in a family of materials with rich functionalities, which not only assists in unraveling the interplay between superconductivity and other exotic states, but also enriches diverse applications. The spinel family has demonstrated rich functionalities, such as multiferroic effects Since there are many similarities between MTO and LTO, e.g. approximate ionic radius between Mg 2+ and Li + , one would expect that the MTO might also show superconductivity. Considerable efforts have been made in past several decades, for instance, adjusting the Mg/Ti ratio or substituting Mg by La For the MTO film on MAO, the c-axis lattice constant could be tuned from ∼ 8.44 Å to ∼ 8.52 Å, as manifested by the obvious shift of (004) Bragg peak to lower angle from NS1 to SC1 samples in Fig. To confirm that the zero resistance indeed comes from a superconducting transition, we also carried out magnetotransport and magnetization measurements. Fig. Then questions arise: where does the superconductive signal come from? and what's the role of STO layer? Firstly, the STO has been reported to show superconductivity at ∼ 200 mK when annealed in high temperature and high vacuum To understand the change of electronic properties with the length of c-axis in MTO (Fig. We would like to thank J. P. Hu, and X. H. Chen for helpful discussions. 