We report a comprehensive study of the noncentrosymmetric superconductor Mo 3 P. Its bulk superconductivity, with T c = 5.5 K, was characterized via electrical resistivity, magnetization, and heat-capacity measurements, while its microscopic electronic properties were investigated by means of muon-spin rotation/relaxation (μSR) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques. In the normal state, NMR relaxation data indicate an almost ideal metallic behavior, confirmed by band-structure calculations, which suggest a relatively high electron density of states, dominated by the Mo 4d-orbitals. The low-temperature superfluid density, determined via transverse-field μSR and electronic specific heat, suggest a fully-gapped superconducting state in Mo 3 P, with ∆ 0 = 0.83 meV, the same as the BCS gap value in the weak-coupling case, and a zero-temperature magnetic penetration depth λ 0 = 126 nm. The absence of spontaneous magnetic fields below the onset of superconductivity, as determined from zero-field μSR measurements, indicates a preserved time-reversal symmetry in the superconducting state of Mo 3 P and, hence, spin-singlet pairing. Noncentrosymmetric superconductors (NCSCs) belong to a class of materials that miss a key symmetry, such as parity Despite numerous examples of NCSCs, to date only a few of them are known to break TRS in their superconducting state. The causes of such a selective TRS breaking remain largely unknown. Consequently, comprehensive studies of other NCSCs, such as Mo 3 P reported here, may help to identify the origin of this behavior. Superconductivity in Mo 3 P was first reported in 1954 In this paper, we report on an extensive study of the Mo 3 P physical properties, in the normal and superconducting state, by means of electrical resistivity, magnetization, thermodynamic, muon-spin relaxation (μSR) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) methods. In addition, we also present theoretical density functional theory (DFT) bandstructure calculations. Despite a noncentrosymmetric crystal structure, Mo 3 P is shown to be a moderately correlated electron material, which adopts a fully-gapped, spin-singlet superconducting state with preserved TRS. Polycrystalline samples of Mo 3 P were prepared via solidstate reaction, where high-purity (99.999%) Mo powders and P pieces were mixed in a stoichiometric ratio and made to react at 1100 • C for 48 hours. The resulting powders were thoroughly grounded and pressed into pellets and then sintered at 1100 • C for over 48 hours. The final product had a silvery color, indicative of good metallicity. Roomtemperature x-ray powder diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed by using a Bruker D8 diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. The magnetic susceptibility, electrical resistivity, and specific-heat measurements were performed on a 7-T Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS-7) and a 14-T Physical Property Measure-ment System (PPMS-14) equipped with a dilution refrigerator (DR). The μSR measurements were carried out at the GPS and HAL-9500 spectrometers of the Swiss muon source at Paul Scherrer Institut, Villigen, Switzerland The 31 P NMR measurements, including lineshapes and spin-lattice relaxation times were performed on Mo 3 P powder in two external magnetic fields, 0.503 and 7.067 T. This allowed us to compare the NMR parameters in the superconducting and the normal state, respectively. The NMR signals were monitored by means of standard spin-echo sequences, consisting in π/2 and π pulses of 2.7 and 5.4 μs, with recycling delays ranging from 0.25 to 20 s, in a temperature range 1.95 to 295 K. The lineshapes were obtained via fast Fourier transform (FFT) of the echo signal. Spin-lattice relaxation times T 1 were measured via the inversion recovery method, using a π-π/2-π pulse sequence. The electronic structure of Mo 3 P was calculated by using the full-potential linearized augmented plane-wave (LAPW) method, as implemented in the WIEN2k package The crystal structure and the purity of Mo 3 P polycrystalline samples were checked via XRD at room temperature. Figure The temperature-dependent electrical resistivity ρ(T ) of Mo 3 P was measured from room temperature down to 2 K. As shown in Fig. Here the first term ρ 0 is the residual resistivity due to the scattering of conduction electrons on the static defects of the crystal lattice, while the second term describes the electron-phonon scattering, with Θ R D being the characteristic (Debye) temperature and A a coupling constant. The third term represents a contribution due to s-d interband scattering, α being the Mott coefficient To determine the lower critical field μ 0 H c1 of Mo 3 P, its field-dependent magnetization M (H) was measured at various temperatures up to T c , as shown in Fig. sponse of a type-II superconductor. The estimated μ 0 H c1 values at different temperatures, determined from the deviation of M (H) from linearity, are plotted in Fig. . This provides a lower critical field μ 0 H c1 (0) = 29.4(2) mT, consistent with 24.9(5) mT, the value calculated from the magnetic penetration depth λ(0) (see below). To investigate the behavior of the upper critical field μ 0 H c2 , we measured the temperature-dependent electrical resistivity ρ(T ) and specific heat C(T )/T at various applied magnetic fields, as well as the field-dependent magnetization M (H) at various temperatures up to T c . As shown in Figs. , where t = T /T c is the normalized temperature (see, e.g., (1 + t 2 )/(1t 2 ). Although the GL theory is strictly valid near T c , the above form of H c2 (T ) has been shown to be satisfied in a wider temperature range. The solid lines in Fig. At low fields, both GL and WHH models describe the experimental data very well. At higher applied fields, however, the WHH-type fits deviate significantly from the data, clearly providing underestimated critical-field values. The remarkable agreement of the less elaborate GL model with experimental data is clearly seen in Fig. In the GL theory of superconductivity, the coherence length ξ can be calculated from ξ = Φ 0 /2π H c2 , where Φ 0 = 2.07 × 10 -3 T μm 2 is the quantum of magnetic flux. With a bulk μ 0 H c2 (0) = 0.94(1) T, the calculated ξ(0) is 18.7(1) nm. The magnetic penetration depth λ is related to the coherence length ξ and the lower critical field μ 0 H c1 via μ 0 H c1 = (Φ 0 /4πλ 2 )[ln(κ) + 0.5], where κ = λ/ξ is the GL parameter Specific-heat data offer valuable insight into the superconducting properties, including the gap value and its symmetry. Therefore, the Mo 3 P specific heat was measured down to 0.1 K in zero field. As shown in Fig. The Coulomb pseudopotential μ ⋆ , usually lying in the 0.09-0.18 range, was here fixed to 0.13, a commonly used value for transition metals. From Eq. ( where f = (1 + e E/k B T ) -1 is the Fermi function, ∆ 0 is the SC gap value at 0 K, and is the excitation energy of quasiparticles, with ε the electron energies measured relative to the chemical potential (Fermi energy) To investigate the superconducting properties of Mo 3 P at a microscopic level, we carried out μSR measurements in applied transverse fields (TF). The optimal field value for such experiments was determined via a preliminary fielddependent μSR depolarization-rate measurement at 1.5 K. To track the additional field-distribution broadening due to the flux-line-lattice (FLL) in the mixed superconducting state, a magnetic field (up to 500 mT) was applied in the normal state and then the sample was cooled down to 1.5 K. Figure ) Here A i and A bg represent the initial muon-spin asymmetries for muons implanted in the sample and sample holder, respectively, with the latter not undergoing any depolarization. B i and B bg are the local fields sensed by implanted muons in the sample and sample holder, γ μ = 2π × 135.53 MHz/T is the muon gyromagnetic ratio, φ is the shared initial phase, and σ i is a Gaussian relaxation rate of the ith component. The number of required components is material dependent, generally in the 1 ≤ n ≤ 5 range. For superconductors with a large κ (≫ 1) value, the magnetic penetration depth is much larger than the coherence length. Hence, the field distribution is narrow and a single-oscillating component is sufficient to describe A(t). In case of a small κ ( 1/ 2) value, the magnetic penetration depth is comparable to the coherence length. This implies a broad field distribution, in turn requiring multiple oscillations to describe A(t). Figures Then, the first and second moments of the field distribution in the sample were calculated by: where A tot = 2 i=1 A i . In the superconducting state, the measured Gaussian relaxation rate includes contributions from both a temperature-independent relaxation due to nuclear moments (σ n ) and the FLL (σ FLL ). The FLL-related relaxation can be extracted by subtracting the nuclear contribution according to σ FLL = σ 2 effσ 2 n . Since σ FLL is directly related to the magnetic penetration depth and the superfluid density (σ FLL ∝ 1/λ 2 ), the superconducting gap value and its symmetry can be determined from the measured σ FLL (T ). For small applied magnetic fields (H appl /H c2 ≪ 1) and large κ values (κ ≫ 1), σ FLL is field-independent and proportional to λ -240,48 . In the Mo 3 P case, however, the upper critical field μH c2 is relatively small (0.94 T) compared to the applied TF-field (50 and 500 mT). Therefore, to extract the penetration depth from the measured σ FLL , the effects of overlapping vortex cores with increasing field have to be considered, requiring the following expression for calculating the magnetic penetration depth λ where h = H appl /H c2 , with H appl the applied magnetic field. The above expression is valid for type-II superconductors with κ ≥ 5 in the 0.25/κ 1.3 h ≤ 1 field range. With κ ∼ 6 and h = 0.053 (TF-50 mT) and 0.53 (TF-500 mT), Mo 3 P fulfills the above conditions. By using Eq. ( where ∆ k is an angle-dependent gap function, f = (1 + e E/k B T ) -1 is the Fermi function, and 〈〉 FS represents an average over the Fermi surface We performed also ZF-μSR measurements, in order to search for a possible TRS breaking in the superconducting state of Mo 3 P. The large muon gyromagnetic ratio, combined with the availability of 100% spin-polarized muon beams, make ZF-μSR a very sensitive probe for detecting small spontaneous magnetic fields. This technique has been successfully used to detect the TRS breaking in the superconducting states of different types of materials (10) Here A s and A bg represent the initial muon-spin asymmetries for muons implanted in the sample and sample holder, respectively. In polycrystalline samples, the 1/3nonrelaxing and 2/3-relaxing components of the asymmetry correspond to the powder average of the local internal fields with respect to the initial muon-spin orientation. After fixing A s to its average value of 0.215, the resulting fit parameters are shown in Fig. The clear lack of an additional relaxation below T c implies that the TRS is preserved in the superconducting state of Mo 3 P. NMR is a versatile technique for investigating the electronic properties of materials, in particular, their electron correlations, complementary to μSR with respect to probe location. Considering the rather low T c -and H c2 (0) values of Mo 3 P, as well as the detailed μSR study of its superconducting properties (see previous section), we mostly employed NMR to investigate the normal-state electronic properties of Mo 3 P. To this aim, 31 P NMR measurements were performed at 7 and 0.5 T, i.e., above and below H c2 (0) (0.94 T). For both fields, the 31 P NMR reference frequency ν 0 was determined by using a solid-state NH 4 H 2 PO 4 sample, whose Larmor frequency coincides with that of phosphoric acid. The 31 P NMR shifts were then calculated with respect to this reference. Typical 31 P NMR lineshapes are shown in Fig. The Korringa relation where γ e is the gyromagnetic ratio for a free electron, and γ N the gyromagnetic ratio of the probe nucleus. Here, α is a coefficient of correlation which, in the ideal case of uncorrelated electrons, should be 1. As shown in Fig. To further understand the properties of the normal-and superconducting states of Mo 3 P, we performed DFT bandstructure calculations, whose main results are summarized in Fig. It is accepted that the band splitting at Fermi level is of primary importance for the superconducting properties 1 . Indeed, because of the large ASOC-induced band splitting, Li 2 Pt 3 B shows nodal superconductivity We also compare the superconductivity of Mo 3 P with other NCSCs. As shown in Fig. To summarize, we studied the normal-and superconducting state properties of the Mo 3 P NCSC by means of bulk-(electrical resistivity, magnetization, and heat capacity), local-probe (μSR and NMR) techniques, and numerical band-structure calculations. The superconducting state of Mo 3 P is characterized by T c = 5.5 K, a relatively low H c2 (0) = 0.94 T, and κ ∼ 6. The temperature dependence of the superfluid density and zero-field electronic specific heat reveal a nodeless superconducting state, which is well described by an isotropic s-wave model and is consistent with spin-singlet pairing. The lack of spontaneous magnetic fields below T c indicates that time-reversal symmetry is preserved in the superconducting state of Mo 3 P. Electronic bandstructure calculations suggest a small band splitting due the Table A selection of 31 P NMR lineshapes for both magnetic fields (0.5 and 7 T) is shown in Fig. The Clogston-Jaccarino K-χ plot shown in Fig. The offset may indicate the presence of other temperatureindependent components. The coupling constant [i.e., the coefficient in Eq. (A.1)] may become temperaturedependent for χ < 0.5 × 10 -4 emu/mol As shown in Fig. p = 2.65%, R wp = 3.70%, R exp = 1.14%, χ 2 r = 10.5 a Similar values were determined via electrical resistivity, magnetic susceptibility, and heat-capacity measurements. b Derived from a fit to Eq. ( * 