Recent experiments on cuprates show that as a function of doping, the normal-state specific heat sharply peaks at the doping δ * , where the pseudogap ends at low temperature. This finding is taken as the thermodynamic signature of a quantum critical point, whose nature has not yet been identified. Here we present calculations for the two-dimensional Hubbard model in the doped Mott insulator regime, which indicate that the specific heat anomaly can arise from the finite temperature critical endpoint of a first-order transition between a pseudogap phase with dominant singlet correlations and a metal. As a function of doping at the temperature of the endpoint, the specific heat diverges. Upon increasing temperature, the peak becomes broader. The diverging correlation length is associated with uniform density fluctuations. No broken symmetries are needed. These anomalies also occur at half-filling as a function of interaction strength, and are relevant for organic superconductors and ultracold atoms. Introduction.-The pseudogap phase in hole-doped cuprate superconductors indicates a partial loss of low energy excitations. The temperature and doping dependent boundary T * (δ) of the pseudogap is seen in many physical properties, but whether it is a phase transition or a crossover is not always clear At the doping δ * where the pseudogap ends there is a confluence of several phenomena such as robust superconductivity, linear dependence on temperature of resistivity On the other hand, it has been proposed that the pseudogap can emerge upon doping the Mott insulator without invoking broken symmetry states: Mott localisation and short-range antiferromagnetic correlations form singlet bonds that open a pseudgap How then to interpret thermodynamic anomalies such as divergent specific heat at δ * where the pseudogap ends Model and method.-The results reported in this Rapid Communication are based on the twodimensional Hubbard model on the square lattice, , where t ij = t is the nearest neighbor hopping, U is the onsite Coulomb repulsion, μ is the chemical potential, c † iσ and c iσ operators create and annihilate an electron of spin σ on site i, and n iσ = c † iσ c iσ is the number operator. We solve this model within the cellular extension work with the simpler model. Thus our low-temperature results aim to give qualitative and not quantitative understanding of experimental phenomena. In the following calculations, we do not allow symmetry breaking, so Mott physics is visible at all temperatures. Similarly, stripe order and other possible charge orders away from half-filling Figure Figure Upon lowering T towards the pseudogap endpoint (T * , δ * ), the position of the maximum as a function of doping moves to higher doping, the peak sharpens and its magnitude increases. The position of the specific heat maxima are shown in Fig. Two comments are in order. First, we are working with a minimal theoretical model, so we look for qualitative and not quantitative agreement with experiments. Larger values of U push the doping at which the specific heat diverges, or more generally where the pseudopgap phase ends, δ * , at higher doping, as demonstrated in Refs. 17 and 31. Larger values of U also push the critical endpoint to much lower temperatures. Second, the peak in C/T is not due to the renormalized van Hove singularity Discussion.-Our results provide a coherent microscopic theoretical model to understand what may occur in hole-doped cuprates. First, the peak in C/T as a function of doping is a signature of a critical endpoint, which can be confused with a quantum critical point since it occurs at low temperature for large U . However, the crossover arising from the endpoint has three distinct signatures that can be experimentally tested: (a) The peak in C/T becomes broader with raising temperature. This is compatible with experiments Second, the interpretation of a diverging C/T as a signature of a quantum critical point is complicated by the fact that no symmetry broken state ends at δ * , where the pseudogap ends. As pointed out in Ref. Third, the interpretation of a quantum critical point is at odds with the experimental finding of an abrupt end of the pseudogap temperature at δ * with a sizeable finite T * Fourth, our calculations suggest a possible explanation for the proliferation of long-range or quasi long-range ordered phases detected near δ * [1]. Large charge and energy fluctuations along the Widom line may develop into charge density ordered phases Specific heat versus interaction strength.-Enhancement of C/T at an endpoint has implications beyond the physics of cuprates. Specific heat maxima occur along the pseudogap to metal transition in the Uδ diagram of Fig. Conclusions.-In summary, using a two-dimensional Hubbard model, we unveiled a mechanism in which one can rationalise the thermodynamic anomalies in holedoped cuprate superconductors and organic superconductors. They may not reflect the presence of a quantum critical point. They are instead caused by a critical endpoint at very low temperature that arises from Mott physics plus short-range singlet correlations.