Lead-free Ba0.85Ca0.15Zr0.10Ti0.90O3 (BCZT) ceramic exhibits excellent dielectric, ferroelectric and piezoelectric properties at the Morphotropic Phase Boundary (MPB). Previously, we demonstrated that the use of the anionic surfactant Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate (SDS, NaC12H25SO4) could enhance the dielectric properties of BCZT ceramic using surfactant-assisted solvothermal processing For several decades, lead-based perovskite ferroelectric materials such as Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 (PZT) are widely used in sensors, ultrasonic generators, resonators, actuators and much more electronic devices due to their excellent ferroelectric and piezoelectric properties In this purpose, barium titanate (BaTiO3) is usually regarded as one of potentially promising lead-free ceramics, which was the first material practically, used to fabricate piezoelectric ceramics. It is widely employed in modern technologies such as mobile electronic devices, and hybrid electric vehicles However, its high dielectric constant (εmax > 10 000) decreases sharply to about 2000 at Curie temperature (Tc = 120 °C) because of the tetragonal/cubic phase transition More recently, literature has emerged contradictory findings about phase transitions of 50BCT-50BZT ceramic: on one hand, some works have reported the disappearance of the orthorhombic (O) phase in 50BCT-50BZT unlike in BaTiO3 and suggest the presence of unusual rhombohedral-tetragonal phase at room temperature The present study set out to shine new light on these debates through the examination of phase transitions in BCZT ceramic using in-situ Raman measurements. Moreover, the structural, dielectric and ferroelectric properties upon the phase transitions using a surfactant (SDS) for morphology adjusting have been also studied. The thorough analyses of P-E hysteresis as a function of temperature, conducted on the lead-free BCZT ferroelectric relaxor allowed us to highlight the variation of the electrocaloric temperature change (ΔT) around FE-PE phase transition and the energy storage performances in this compound. Since the energy storage is efficient with slim hysteresis loop, having low coercive field and high polarization, this BCZT ferroelectric relaxor will be a potential candidate for energy storage application. BCZT pure nanocrystalline powder were obtained through SDS-assisted solvothermal synthesis as reported previously The two solutions were then mixed together. Titanium (IV) isopropoxide and zirconium n-propoxide were added to the reaction medium according to the Ba0.85Ca0.15Ti0.90Zr0.10O3 (BCZT) formula. To control BCZT microstructure, a known concentration of SDS was introduced. After one hour of continuous stirring at room temperature, the obtained solution was transferred to a 30 ml Teflon-lined stainless-steel autoclave at 180 °C in an oven for 12 h. Thereafter the reaction was completed, the sealed autoclave was cooled in the air. The resulting product was collected by centrifugation at 12 000 rpm for 10 min, and washed several times with deionized water and ethanol. Then, the final product was dried at 100 °C for 12 h and calcined at 1000 °C for 4 h to get fine BCZT powder. Finally, the obtained powder was uni-axially pressed into pellets and sintered at 1250 °C for 10h. The crystalline structure of BCZT ceramic was performed by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Panalytical X-Pert Pro). The measurement were done at room temperature under a step angle of 0.02° in the 2θ range from 10 to 80° using a Cu-Kα radiation (λ ~ 1.5406 Å). Raman spectra were excited using the polarized radiation of an argon laser (λ=514.5 nm) and recorded using a Renishaw inVia Reflex spectrometer equipped with a NExT (Near-Excitation Tunable) filter for the analysis of the low-frequency spectral range down to 10 cm -1 . An optical microscope with a 50× objective was used to focus the incident light as a 2-μm-diameter spot on the sample. For temperature-dependent micro-Raman measurements, we used Linkam heating and freezing stage with temperature stability of 0.1K. The microstructure of BCZT ceramic was analyzed using a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM, Tescan VEGA-3). A precision LCR Meter (HP 4284A, 20 Hz to 1 MHz) was used to measure the electrical properties of BCZT pellets electroded with silver paste in the frequency range 20 Hz to 1 MHz. The ferroelectric hysteresis loops were measured using a ferroelectric test system (AiXACCT, TF Analyzer 1000). The electrocaloric adiabatic temperature variation and responsivity were calculated in the so called indirect method from registered P-E hysteresis loops at 1 Hz as a function of temperature. Fig. Raman peaks at around 298 and 725 cm -1 are characteristic to the ferroelectric phases (Rhombohedral, Orthorhombic and Tetragonal) of BCZT ceramic. The Rhombohedral structure was identified through the existence of the triple modes A1(TO2), A1(TO3) and E(TO1) at low temperature Fig. The polarization versus electric field (P-E) hysteresis loops of the BCZT ceramic registered at different temperatures at the driving frequency of 1 Hz are plotted in Fig. It is worth noting the presence of an anomaly at room temperature, which could be attributed to Orthorhombic/Tetragonal phase transition basing on Raman observations. Thus, the temperature dependence of the remnant polarization may indicate a change in the phase state of the material. The current-electric field (I-E) curves of BCZT ceramic at different temperatures are presented in Fig. Previous works on energy storage properties of ceramics or thin films have been conducted mainly under very high electric field (hundreds or even thousands kV/cm). However, it is well known that a large electric field can induce higher polarization. Consequently, as both the electric field and the polarization increase, the energy-storage properties increase inevitably according to the definition of energy-storage density. Unfortunately, in relation to applications, such large electric field is not desirable for energy storage devices To have an insight in these performances, the recoverable and loss energy densities as well as the energy storage efficiency of the BCZT ceramic in the range of 0 -140 °C were determined through P-E loops (Fig. For a fair comparison of the energy storage performances without the electrical field limitation, the energy storage efficiency was estimated according to the following formula (1): where η, Wrec and Wloss are the energy storage efficiency, recoverable energy density and energy loss density, respectively. From Fig. Despite the low Wrec due to the very low applied electrical field (~ 6.65 kV/cm), the elaborated material exhibits high energy storage efficiency (~80 %). Furthermore, the unsaturated P-E hysteresis loops indicate future opportunities to improve the energy storage capabilities of ferroelectrics Therefore, all these results demonstrate that the BCZT relaxor ferroelectric is a promising candidate for lead-free for energy storage application. The study of the electrocaloric effect (ECE) in the BCZT ceramic was performed to highlight the effect of elaboration technique when compares with a previously reported work on similar compounds elaborated using solid state reaction Relaxor Ferroelectrics for environment friendly solid-state cooling devices. The reversible adiabatic electrocaloric temperature change (ΔT) and the electrocaloric responsivity () where calculated by indirect method based on Maxwell equation, that leads to the equation where ρ and Cp are respectively, the mass density and the specific heat of the material. After recording P-E hysteresis loops as a function of temperature, we perform a five order polynomial fitting by considering only the upper branches of these curves (Fig. Fig. To set out our results to literature, table 2 compares the electrocaloric properties of various lead-free ceramics. The electrocaloric responsivity value of the studied BCZT ceramic is comparable to the reported values in literature Structural, dielectric, ferroelectric, electrocaloric and energy storage properties of the leadfree BCZT ceramic prepared by single-step surfactant-assisted solvothermal route have been successfully investigated. X-ray diffraction reveals pure perovskite phase with the coexistence of orthorhombic/tetragonal structure at room temperature. The phase transitions in BCZT ceramic were evaluated through the evolution of εr, tan δ, P-E, I-E and C-V as a function of temperature and were confirmed through Raman measurements. Thus, the succession of the traditional phase transitions from rhombohedral, orthorhombic, tetragonal to cubic like undoped-BaTiO3 were clearly evidenced. The maximal energy storage efficiency calculated from hysteresis loops reached ~ 80%. The electrocaloric effect was observed in BCZT ceramic, that led to the calculation of the adiabatic electrocaloric temperature change T = 0.109 K under 6.65 kV/cm and the electrocaloric responsivity  = 0.164 K mm/kV at 360 °C, using indirect method. Based on the findings presented in this study, it is worth to investigate electrocaloric properties in this compound using direct method, acting on microstructure engineering of lead-free BCZT ceramics elaborated by surfactant-assisted solvothermal processing. These results demonstrate that the BCZT ferroelectric relaxor is a promising candidate for lead-free for energy storage application.