We combined optical and atomic force microscopy to observe morphology and kinetics of microstructures that formed at free surfaces of unmodified pavement-grade 64-22 asphalt binders upon cooling from 150 • C to room temperature (RT) at 5 • C/min, and changes in these microstructures when the surface was terminated with a transparent solid (glass) or liquid (glycerol) over-layer. The main findings are: (1) At free binder surfaces, wrinkled microstructures started to form near the wax crystallization temperature (∼45 • C), then grew to ∼5 μm diameter, ∼25 nm wrinkle amplitude and 10-30% surface area coverage upon cooling to RT, where they persisted indefinitely without observable change in shape or density. (2) Glycerol coverage of the binder surface during cooling reduced wrinkled area and wrinkle amplitude three-fold compared to free binder surfaces upon initial cooling to RT; continued glycerol coverage at RT eliminated most surface microstructures within ∼4 hours. (3) No surface microstructures were observed to form at binder surfaces covered with glass. (4) Sub-micron bulk microstructures were observed by near-infrared microscopy beneath the surfaces of all binder samples, with size, shape and density independent of surface coverage. No tendency of such structures to float to the top or sink to the bottom of mm-thick samples was observed. ( Asphalt pavement is composed of a binder, generally bitumen, and mineral aggregates. While the aggregates make up the majority of the pavement by weight, the asphalt binder determines the pavement's strength and durability. Bitumen, a crude oil distillate, and is a complex mixture of long-chain hydrocarbons, some of which are waxes AFM topological images Here, to test this hypothesis, we study bee morphology and formation kinetics as a function of two variables: 1) Time during and after cooling the binder from 150 • C to RT. These observations help to relate bee formation temperature to wax crystallization temperature. Optical (as opposed to atomic force) microscopy is the method of choice here, because the binder is fluid at elevated temperature. 2) Binder interface termination with glycerol or glass. These overlayers add differing amounts of interfacial tension, variations in which elucidate the connection between interface microstructure and interface tension. Moreover, neither overlayer reacts with bitumen, based on Hansen solubility parameters. Thus they modulate mechanical tension without influencing binder chemistry The results of these studies show that bees indeed begin to form at a temperature that is consistent with the wax crystallization temperature. Moreover, we find that adding interfacial tension via glycerol or glass overlayers suppresses bee wrinkle amplitudes, in a manner consistent with thin film mechanics theory. We also find that extended glycerol coverage shrinks the laminate patch surrounding the wrinkle, even long after the sample has come to room temperature. We performed all measurements with Superpave Performance Grade 64-22 binder, a typical grade for pavement in warm climates To measure the temperature at which surface 'bee' microstructures first appeared at free surfaces, a 1-mm thick binder layer with area of ∼ 4 cm 2 was heated to 150 • C on a flat microscope slide. The sample was then cooled at a rate of ∼5 • C per minute while being imaged with the bright field optical microscope. Sample temperatures were recorded for each corresponding image. To search for evidence that bulk microstructures, such as wax islands, float preferentially to the top interface Side view schematic of glycerol-binder interface setup. The sample is first prepared with hot binder poured into a washer on a glass slide, then cooled to room temperature (A). After reaching room temperature, the washer-slidebinder sample is placed upside down in a glycerol bath and heated to 150 • C. Slice view through center of washer (B) of a sandwiched bitumen film, it was of interest to image both top and bottom glass-binder interfaces optically. We fabricated top-bottom-symmetric samples consisting of asphalt binder sandwiched between two 1 mm thick glass slides, each containing 0.5 mm deep dimples. The binder and slides were heated to 150 • C, a small bead of binder was poured into the dimple of slide 1, then slide 2 was placed on top. The resulting sandwiched bitumen film was 1 mm thick in the area of observation (see Figure To compare air-binder and glass-binder interfaces side by side, a 1 mm thick binder layer with area of ∼4 cm 2 was heated to 150 • C on a flat microscope slide. A glass cover slip was then placed over half of the binder (Fig. To heat and cool the asphalt binder with a liquidbinder interface, a washer supported and partially submerged in a tray of glycerol was used (see Figure The sample was then inverted and placed in a glycerol bath (see Fig. To observe the effect of prolonged glycerol coverage, the glycerol was left on the sample after cooling to room temperature for a designated amount of time Since initial conditioning temperature and cooling rate influence bee formation Figure Reflected bright field optical microscope images were obtained with a Leitz Ergolux compound optical microscope equipped with 20X (Leitz NPL, 0.45 numerical aperature) and 100X (Olympus LMPLFLN, 0.80 numerical aperature, 3.4 mm working distance) objectives. A 20W halogen lamp with a 550 nm narrow band filter illuminated the sample. Images of surface structures were recorded with a 14 MP Amscope CMOS digital camera (Amscope MU1403). Both dark-and brght-field images were analyzed using the commercial software ImageJ AFM measurements were all made in dynamic contact (tapping) mode Figure Figure Table Figure Figure Bee formation temperatures reported in Fig. The wax to form these surface islands must originate from the underlying bulk. The ubiquitous bulk microstructures that IR dark-field microscopy reveals immediately beneath a binder surface (see e.g. Figs. The partial or total suppression of wrinkle amplitude by glycerol (Table For an elastic film on a thick substrate, total wrinkle strain energy per unit area U T otal can be resolved into three contributions where U Bending is the in-plane bending strain energy, U Compression is the in-plane compression strain energy, and U Substrate is the strain energy from the substrate. The last term can be ignored here since the substrate is much thicker than the film. U T otal is a function of wavenumber k and amplitude A. A liquid over-layer adds a new strain energy term U T ension which can be modeled as the interfacial tension multiplied by the wrinkle length per wavelength where λ is the wrinkle wavelength, L is the distance along the wrinkle's oscillating surface, and γ is the interfacial tension between the thin film and the liquid overlayer. If we model the wrinkle as a cosine function with amplitude A and wavenumber k, then L is the arc length of w for one period Combining Eqs. 2, 3 and 4, the interfacial tension strain energy density becomes Typical values for λ and A are around 500 nm and 25 nm, respectively. From this we can calculate that (kA) 2 ∼ 0.1, and Eq. 5 can be Taylor expanded and integrated to solve for U T ension as a function of interfacial tension, wavenumber and amplitude Huang (2005) has shown that the other contributions to U T otal are also functions of k and A In a purely elastic system, the duration of glycerol coverage after the sample had reached room temperature would not affect bee formation. However, bitumen is viscoelastic This study used optical and atomic-force microscopy to elucidate mechanisms by which wrinkled microstructures ("bees") form at surfaces of pavement grade asphalt binders as they cool from 150 • C to RT. Real-time visible-wavelength (500 nm) optical microscopy, which is selectively sensitive to surface structures, showed that bees form at the wax crystallization temperature, determined independently by calorimetry. Microscopy at more deeply penetrating near-infrared wavelengths (850 nm) showed that underlying bulk microstructures remain isotropically distributed throughout the bulk, with no observable tendency to float or sink despite 12 hours of con-ditioning at 150 • C. Combined optical and atomic-force microscopy measurements showed that adding interfacial tension to the cooling binder by covering its surface with glycerol significantly decreases the size, wrinkle amplitude and number density of the surface "bees". Covering the binder's surface with glass suppresses bee formation altogether. Yet neither over-layer had an observable influence on underlying bulk microstructure. Taken together, results from this study support the hypothesis that bee microstructures at free surfaces of asphalt binders are thin films of wax extruded from the underlying bulk by surface tension that grow and wrinkle upon cooling below the wax crystallization temper-ature. They also show that surface "bees" differ fundamentally from underlying bulk microstructure not only in their larger size and intricate internal morphology, as shown previously 