We investigated the vapour sensing properties of different graphene-gold hybrid nanostructures. We observed the shifts in the optical spectra near the local surface plasmon resonance of the gold nanoparticles by changing the concentration and nature of the analytes (ethanol, 2-propanol, and toluene). The smaller, dome-like gold nanoparticles proved to be more sensitive to these vapours compared to slightly larger, flat nanoparticles. We investigated how the optical response of the gold nanoparticles can be tuned with a corrugated graphene overlayer. We showed that the presence of graphene increased the sensitivity to ethanol and 2-propanol, while it decreased it towards toluene exposure (at concentrations ≥30%). The slope changes observed on the optical response curves were discussed in the framework of capillary condensation. These results can have potential impact on the development of new sensors based on graphene-gold hybrids. Graphene has fascinating mechanical, thermal, and electrical properties, which make this two-dimensional crystal with sp 2 -hybridized carbon atoms arranged in a honeycomb lattice very attractive for several applications in the field of nanotechnology [ 1 , 2 ]. It is an ultrasensitive material for detecting gas molecules due to the large surface area [ 3 ] and the capability of all carbon atoms in graphene to interact with adsorbed molecules. The adsorption of targeted chemical species induces changes in the conductivity of the graphene sheet [ 4 , 5 ], which can be monitored by an appropriate sensing device. Several reviews on graphene-based gas/vapour sensors utilizing different operating principles were published recently [ 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 ]. Nobel metal nanoparticles (NPs) have also been in the focus of considerable interest for possible sensing applications [ 10 ]. Here, the sensing properties are determined either by the shift induced in the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) of the NPs, or due to stronger light-matter interactions (surface enhanced Raman scattering -SERS). The LSPR is manifesting as absorption and scattering peaks as well as strong near-field enhancements, which occur when the incident light frequency matches the collective oscillation frequency of conduction band electrons. The wavelength of the LSPR peak depends sensitively on the shape, size, and neighbourhood conditions of the metal NPs [ 11 , 12 ]. Therefore, it can be used for detection of adsorbed volatile organic compounds or many other biochemical molecules by visible spectroscopy measurements of the LSPR peak shift [see Ref. 13 for a review]. The synthesis of graphene-metal nanoparticle hybrid materials has been one of the many efforts dedicated to enhance the sensing properties of graphene based sensors [ 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 ]. Besides combining the unique properties of graphene and the advantages of metal NPs, these hybrid nanostructures can display synergistic effects or novel functions as well [ 18 ]. The role of metal-graphene hybrid nanostructures in promoting the performance of LSPR sensors was discussed very recently in a focused review [ 19 ]. In particular, graphene/gold nanoparticle hybrids were mainly studied for electrochemical [ 20 ] or SERS-based sensing [ 21 ]. The chemical sensing properties of graphene covered optical nano-antenna arrays made of gold were also tested by exposure to vapour phase organic solvents and measuring the shift of the resonance peak [ 22 ]. However, the fabrication of such nano-antenna arrays on a larger scale must be time consuming and involves precise e-beam lithography technique. In this work we use a simple way for the preparation of large area graphene-covered gold nanoparticles. We apply a corrugated graphene overlayer obtained by annealing at moderate temperatures. The use of such rippled graphene can be beneficial in terms of chemical activity, as the crests and troughs of graphene ripples can form active sites for the adsorption of different molecules [ 23 ]. We show that the NPs display pronounced optical response upon exposure to organic vapours (ethanol, 2-propanol, toluene), and that the corrugated graphene overlayer can improve the selectivity. Gold layers of 5 and 10 nm thickness were evaporated onto 285 nm-SiO2/Si substrate at a rate of 0.1 nm s -1 and background pressure of 5 × 10 -7 mbar. The substrate was held at room temperature during evaporation. The deposited gold films were transformed into nanoparticles by annealing at 400 °C under Ar atmosphere for 30 minutes. Graphene was grown by chemical vapour deposition on a copper foil, as described in our recent publication [ 24 ]. In order to transfer large-area graphene onto the gold NPs, we used thermal release tape, and an etchant mixture consisting of a CuCl2 aqueous solution (20%) and HCl (37%) in 4:1 volume ratio. After etching the copper foil, the tape holding the graphene was rinsed in distilled water, then dried and pressed onto the nanoparticle-covered SiO2 substrate. The tape/graphene/Au NPs/SiO2/Si sample stack was placed on a hot plate and heated slightly above the release temperature of the tape (95 °C). Graphene-covered Au NPs were obtained by simply removing the tape. The graphene-covered samples were further annealed at 400 °C for 60 minutes to improve the adhesion of graphene to the NPs. Structural characterization was performed by a MultiMode 8 atomic force microscope (AFM) from Bruker, operating in tapping mode under ambient conditions. The optical reflectance and the vapour sensing measurements were conducted by fixing the samples in an air-proof aluminium box covered with a quartz glass window to provide UV transmittance. For the illumination of the samples an Avantes AvaLight DH-S-BAL light source was used and the initial reflectance of the samples in air was measured by collecting the specular reflected signal (measured under 15°) with an Avantes HS 1024*122TEC spectrometer (Avantes BV, Apeldoorn, The Netherlands). During the vapour sensing measurements, three types of volatile vapours were passed through the cell's gas inlet and exhausted through the outlet: ethanol, 2-propanol (IPA), and toluene (analytical grade, VWR International Ltd, Radnor, PA, USA). The vapour concentration was set by switching digital mass flow controllers (Aalborg DFC, Aalborg Instruments & Controls, Inc., Orangeburg, NY, USA) to let pass synthetic air (Messer, 80% N2, 20% O2) and saturated volatile vapours from gas bubblers in the required ratio. A constant gas flow of 1000 ml/min through the cell was maintained during the measurements. Vapour sensing experiments were carried out by changing the concentration and the type of test vapours while monitoring the spectral variations in time: 20 s mixture flow was followed by 60 s of synthetic air flow, to purge the cell. A 60 s purging was used to recover the initial reflectance value before the introduction of the next vapour mixture. The structure of the samples is shown in Fig. The optical reflectance spectra of the samples are shown in Fig. However, this scenario is not confirmed by AFM measurements [see Fig. The spectral change during vapour exposure was characterized by dividing the actually measured spectrum with the respective reference. A direct comparison between the bare Au NP samples is given in Figure where m is the refractive index response of the Au NPs, n 0 is the refractive index of air, d is the thickness of the adsorbate, and l d is the characteristic field decay length. Nevertheless, taking into account the vapour pressures (at 20 °C) of the three solvents, 4.4 kPa, 3.0 kPa, and 5.9 kPa, respectively [ 33 ], we can say that at a given volumetric mixing ratio the toluene vapour contains smaller number of molecules, than either the IPA or ethanol vapours, which can explain the similar optical response for toluene and IPA: the smaller number of molecules compensates for the larger refractive index. Furthermore, graphene has a complex refractive index of about 2.65+1.27i [ 34 , 35 ]. We expect that its presence as a top layer on Au NPs should further increase the spectral change in all cases. However, this is not what we have observed. The graphene-covered sample shows higher sensitivity to ethanol (Fig. The spectral change increases from 132% to 150% for saturated IPA, decreases from 126% to 118% for saturated toluene, and increases from 118% to 138% for saturated ethanol vapours. The time responses of bare Au NPs and graphene-covered Au NPs for vapour exposures are shown in Fig. This becomes less sensitive only at higher concentrations (≥30%). We think that this change in the sensitivity is related to capillary condensation, as described in the next paragraph. In the following we analyze in more details the vapour concentration-dependent optical response curves of the bare Au NPs. Careful examination reveals pronounced increases in the slopes of these curves, as they are emphasized in Fig. where P 0 is the standard vapour pressure, R, T, γ, V m are the universal gas constant, absolute temperature, surface tension, and molar volume of the condensed liquid, respectively. The two principal radii which characterize the liquid-vapour interface are denoted by x and r C (see also Fig. In order to better understand the optical response curves of the analytes, and in particular the lower spectral change observed for toluene exposure, one should also consider the interaction between the solvent molecules and graphene. IPA and ethanol are polar molecules, which bind to graphene non-covalently, with adsorption energies of -7.9 kcal/mol for ethanol [ 38 ], and around -10.1 kcal/mol for IPA [ 39 ]. Toluene, on the other hand, is a nonpolar molecule, also binding to graphene through physisorption. The corresponding adhesion energy is -15.1 kcal/mol Graphene-covered gold nanoparticles were produced and their vapour sensing properties were investigated by measuring the LSPR shift of the Au NPs. We found that smaller, dome-like Au NPs were more sensitive to ethanol, IPA, and toluene vapours compared to slightly larger, flat NPs. The slope changes observed on the optical response curves of domelike Au NPs could be well described by capillary condensation. The fast response and recovery of Au NPs were preserved on the graphene-covered samples as well. We demonstrated that the presence of a corrugated graphene overlayer increased the sensitivity to ethanol and IPA, while it decreased it towards toluene exposure (at concentrations ≥30%). Nevertheless, at low toluene concentrations (10%) where capillary condensation does not yet occur, the graphene covered Au NPs are more sensitive to toluene, compared to bare Au NPs. The detection mechanism based on refractive index change does not fully explain the induced LSPR shifts. The interactions between adsorbate, corrugated graphene, and the Au NPs have to be considered, which requires further theoretical investigations. As a perspective, sensor arrays can be applied including graphene-covered and bare Au NPs as well, which can increase both the sensitivity and the selectivity of the hybrid system, offering the possibility of "fingerprinting" organic vapours. There are no conflicts of interest to declare. J. Niu, Y. J. Shin, J. Lee, J. H. Ahn and H. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 1116-1120. M. Cittadini, M. Bersani, F. Perrozzi, L. Ottaviano, W. Wlodarski and Alessandro Martucci, Carbon, 2014, 69, 452-459.