Emerging applications in nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) made from two-dimensional (2D) materials demand simultaneous imaging and selective actuation of the mechanical modes. Focused optical probes to measure and actuate motion offer a possible solution, but their lateral spatial resolution must be better than the size of the resonator. While optical interferometry is known to have excellent spatial resolution, the spatial resolution of the focused, laser-based optical driving is not currently known. Here, we combine separately scanned interferometry and optical drive probes to map the motion and forces on a suspended graphene nanomechanical resonator. By analyzing these maps with a force density model, we determine that the optical drive force has a spatial resolution on the order of the size of the focused laser spot. Using the optical force probe, we demonstrate the selective actuation and suppression of a pair of orthogonal, antisymmetric mechanical modes of the graphene resonator. Our results offer a powerful approach to image and actuate any arbitrary high-order mode of a 2D NEMS. Nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) made from two-dimensional materials, such as graphene 1 , h-BN 2 , and the transition metal dichalcogenides 3 have high promise for nanomechanical force and mass sensing 4-6 as well as studies of fundamental physics at the nanoscale 7 . Initial experiments with 2D nanomechanical resonators have primarily focused on the dynamics of the fundamental mode 6,8-10 , but advanced NEMS applications are increasingly exploiting higher order-mechanical modes Scanning optical interferometry combined with optical drive methods, where an intensity-modulated laser is focused onto the mechanical resonator modes in bulk micromechanical beams because the resulting radiation pressure and photothermal bending forces are localized to the immediate vicinity of the laser spot To determine the spatial localization of the optical force of a focused laser on a 2D NEMS, we measure the vibrational amplitude of a suspended graphene membrane, which is proportional to the driving force, while we scan the position of a focused, driving laser across the membrane. By comparing the resulting force images to the mechanical mode shapes obtained by scanning optical interferometry, we find that the resolution of optical drive force is limited by the spot size of the laser, and this resolution is sufficient to efficiently and selectively actuate higher-order modes of the graphene membrane. The graphene NEMS devices we study in this work are few μm diameter nanomechanical drumheads (a 3 μm device is pictured in Fig. The mode and force maps for the fundamental mode of device 1 (U01) are shown in Fig. The non-constant phase could be due to strain variations or other defects in the drumhead, which cause local changes to the thermal conductivity To further characterize the optical drive force, we examine the horizontal and vertical polarizations of the antisymmetric degenerate U11 mode, which we label U11 H and U11 V . The center frequency of the pair is about twice that of the U01, with U11 H = 27.4 MHz and U11 V = 31.0 MHz. Both mode maps (see Fig. Although the phase changes by a ~180° across the nodal line in both the mode and force maps, the position-dependence of the phase is quite different for each case. As seen in Fig. The non-zero θ we observe could be due to the thermal propagation time from one antinode to the other, similar to the nonuniform phase seen in Fig. We can infer a measure of the localization of the optical drive force by modeling the optical force density as a gaussian spot and by comparing the force and mode maps. The force exerted on the membrane when the drive laser is positioned at r d is F(r d ) = ∫ dA U n (r)f(r; r d ) (1) where U n (r) is the normalized mechanical mode shape Thus, this model predicts that the optical force is localized to the laser position within σ ≈ 1 μm. Though this procedure only yields an approximate value for the localization of the force density, the stark contrast between the measured force map and that predicted from a larger area force density (i.e. σ > 1 μm) strongly suggests that the drive force localized to a small region centered around the laser spot. Reducing the laser spot size by using shorter wavelengths or higher NA objectives could further enhance the control of the optomechanical drive efficiency, especially for smaller drumheads or beams which tend to vibrate at high frequencies As further evidence of the local nature of the optical force in 2D NEMS, we demonstrate that a focused drive laser can selectively suppress or excite either polarization of the U11 mode. To show this, we position the probe laser at a location sensitive to the motion of U01 and both polarizations of U11, and then we measure the frequency response while the drive laser is positioned at four different locations on the membrane, all either on an antinode or node of the orthogonal U11 H and U11 V modes (see Fig. In some devices, we observe more complex behavior in the force map than the mode map would indicate. For device 2, the mode map appears to be highly symmetric, similar to theoretical predictions In summary, we have combined spatially-resolved imaging with a force density model to infer the spatial resolution of the optical drive in a graphene nanomechanical resonator. Despite the fast thermalization, low reflectivity, and micrometer-scale size of the graphene resonator, we found that the optical force is localized to within 1 μm of the laser spot and can selectively and efficiently actuate high-order mechanical modes. The combination of high-spatial-resolution optical drive and read-out enables full multimodal control of suspended 2D nanomechanical resonators for future NEMS applications. Our highresolution, all-optical approach could be combined with optical beam shaping and spatial light modulation to selectively address an arbitrary subset of resonators within large arrays, a feat not easily achievable with electrostatic gating, or could serve as a point source of propagating mechanical waves for use in 2D nanomechanical circuits f(r; r d )~exp ( -(x-x d ) 2 -(y-y d ) 2 2σ 2 J.S. Bunch, A.M. van der Zande, S.S. Verbridge, I.W. Frank, D.M. Tanenbaum, J.M. Parpia, H.G. Craighead, and P.L. McEuen, Science 315, 490 (2007). S.J. Cartamil-Bueno, M. Cavalieri, R. Wang, S. Houri, S. Hofmann, and H.S.J. van der Zant, Npj 2D Mater. Appl. 1,