We report the effects of cobalt doping on the magnetic properties of two-dimensional van der Waals ferromagnet Fe3GeTe2. Single crystals of (Fe1-xCox)3GeTe2 with x=0-0.78 were successfully synthesized and characterized with x-ray diffraction, energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy and magnetization measurements. Both the Curie-Weiss temperature and ferromagnetic (FM) ordered moment of Fe3GeTe2 are gradually suppressed upon Co doping. A kink in zero-field-cooling low field M(T) curve which is previously explained as an antiferromagnetic transition is observed for samples with x=0-0.58. Our detailed magnetization measurements and theoretical calculations strongly suggest that this kink is originated from the pinning of magnetic domain walls. The domain pinning effects are suddenly enhanced when the doping concentration of cobalt is around 50%, both the coercive field Hc and the magnetic remanence to saturated magnetization ratio MR/MS are largely improved and a hard magnetic phase emerges in bulk single crystal samples. The strong doping dependent magnetic properties suggest more spintronic applications of Fe3GeTe2. Two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) ferromagnetic materials have recently drawn great attentions for their potential 2D magnetic, magnetoelectric and magneto-optic applications Fe 3 GeTe 2 (FGT) serves as a rare metallic example of itinerant ferromagnetic vdW materials Chemical substitution is an effective way to tune the properties and probe the underlying physics of magnetic materials. We noticed that both Fe 3 GeTe 2 and Ni 3 GeTe 2 form the same crystal structure while the intermediate element Cobalt failed to form a 'Co 3 GeTe 2 ' phase according to current reports. This is unusual because normally the properties of cobalt such as Pauling's electronegativity and ionic radius lie in the middle between iron and nickel. It would be interesting to see how the magnetic properties of Fe 3 GeTe 2 can be tuned by Co doping, which may also provides insights about the controversial ground state of FGT. In this paper, we report the magnetic properties of (Fe 1-x Co x ) 3 GeTe 2 single crystals with x=0-0.78. Our results suggest the previously reported suspicious AFM-like transition in FGT is actually caused by the movement of magnetic domain walls in a pinning state. The domain pinning effect can be largely enhanced by Co-doping, which induces an intrinsic hard magnetic phase (M R /M S ∼0.9) in contrast with the soft magnetic phase in undoped FGT. The single-crystalline samples of (Fe 1-x Co x ) 3 GeTe 2 were prepared by the standard chemical vapor transport (CVT) method with iodine as the transport agent similar to previous reports We performed first-principles density functional theory calculations using the same methods described in our previous publications The isothermal magnetization curves at T=1.8 K are presented in Fig. Here μ is the average moment per cluster, L(x)=coth(x)-1/x is the Langevin function, M S is the saturated moment, and χ is the paramagnetic susceptibility Based on the above observations, there are two possible explanations for the kinks and jumps mentioned above, namely a spin-flop transition (from AFM to FM) or a pinning-depinning crossover of magnetic domain walls. We argue that a spinflop transition is unlikely for two reasons. First of all, according to our theoretical calculations described in the previous section, the interlayer FM configuration is 0.81 meV/Fe more stable than the interlayer AFM configuration, suggesting a FM groundstate,which indicates flipping of magnetic moment from an anti-parallel to a parallel configuration is, most likely, not a reason for the observed magnetic transition. Even if the interlayer magnetism appears to be AFM, owing some reason, e.g. a particular stacking So we propose a crossover from pinning to depinning of magnetic domain walls as the reason for the magnetization kinks shown in Fig. The hysteresis loops are measured for all samples and reveal new doping induced magnetic properties. As shown in Fig. In summary, a series of (Fe 1-x Co x ) 3 GeTe 2 (x=0-0.78) single crystals have been successfully grown by CVT methods. All samples with x=0-0.58 are pinning type magnets and the previously reported AFM-like transition in Fe 3 GeTe 2 should originate from the movement of pinned magnetic domain walls based on our data analysis. The coercive fields and M R /M S values are strongly doping dependent. Instead of making few layer samples, the hard magnetic properties can be realized in bulk single crystals of Fe 3 GeTe 2 with Co doping.