An unusual regime for liquid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) where the magnetic field strength is so low that the J-coupling (intramolecular spinspin) interactions dominate the spin Hamiltonian opens a new paradigm with applications in spectroscopy, quantum control, and in fundamental-physics experiments, including searches for well-motivated dark-matter candidates. An interesting possibility is to bring this kind of "extreme NMR" together with another one-single nuclear spin detected with a single-spin quantum sensor. This would enable single-molecule J-spectroscopy. While the progress of NMR is often associated with the advent of better magnets with improved characteristics such as higher field, higher field homogeneity in a larger volume, or higher field gradients as in the case of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), recent years have seen the emergence of zero-to ultralow-field (ZULF) NMR sometimes referred to as "NMR without magnets"; see, for example, review Polarization. Thermal polarization, which is used in conventional NMR, is proportional to the magnetic field but is not the only or necessarily the best way to polarize nuclei. Methods like spin-exchange optical pumping (SEOP) or parahydrogen-induced polarization (PHIP) can produce orders of magnitude higher polarization and do not require strong (or any) magnetic fields. Another technique that does not rely on magnetic field is stochastic polarization (a.k.a. the "do nothing technique"): an ensemble of N randomly prepared spins will have an excess polarization on the order of ± √ N spins along any direction. The method becomes essentially 100% efficient as N → 1. This is the polarization technique of choice in single-molecule NMR, see below. Encoding. The role of magnetic fields and gradients is different for the two principal NMR modalities, spectroscopy and imaging. In the case of spectroscopy, chemical differentiation is typically based on the difference of chemical shifts for a given type of nuclear spins in different chemical environments. The role of the field is to "pull apart" the lines corresponding to different chemical shifts (measured in units of ppm) to better resolve and measure these. Typically smaller than chemical shifts and shift anisotropies, are couplings among nuclear spins, the J-couplings, that arise due to second-order hyperfine interactions. In contrast, in ZULF NMR, J-couplings are the dominant interactions, where in the "ultralow-field" regime A welcome feature of the ZULF regime from the point of view of spectroscopy is that the spectra are often completely different from one molecule to another (Fig. Only microtesla-level or even smaller fields are needed in the ZULF regime to produce Zeeman splitting of the J-coupled energy-level manifolds, which provides an additional handle on spectroscopy It should be mentioned that some of the benefits of zero-field encoding were exploited already in the original "zero-field NMR" ( where polarization and detection were, in fact, performed in high field. Detection. While Faraday induction, where the signal with a given sample magnetization scales roughly as B, is used for detection in most NMR setups, there exist highly efficient magnetometers capable of detecting nuclear magnetization at arbitrarily low applied fields. Many recent ZULF NMR experiments have been done with atomic-vapor optical magnetometers Bringing all of this together, a complete "NMR without magnets" experiment becomes possible While analytical applications were the initial motivation for the development of ZULF NMR, it was quickly realized that there is also a potential for fundamental-physics experiments An example of a recent application of ZULF NMR in chemistry and biomedicine is the study of systems undergoing chemical exchange In the meantime, the past decade has seen rapid development of magneticsensing technology based on nitrogen-vacancy (NV) color centers in diamond Combining the various "NMR extremes" discussed above, one arrives at the concept of single-molecule ZULF NMR with a stochastically polarized sample producing a signal detected with a single NV center In the realm of biology, one can imagine single-molecule ZULF NMR being useful for metabolomics at a single-cell level, allowing diagnostics of abnormalities at early stages of embryonic evolution or perhaps a massively parallel disease detection (and treatment) throughout a human body at such early stages that only a few malignant or abnormal cells are present. As with many disruptive technologies, the most exciting applications will likely be those that we cannot even imagine yet. 