On-chip scalable integration represents a major challenge for practical quantum devices. One particular challenge is to implement on-chip optical readout of spins in diamond. This readout requires simultaneous application of optical and microwave fields along with an efficient collection of fluorescence. The readout is typically accomplished via bulk optics and macroscopic microwave transmission structures. We experimentally demonstrate an on-chip integrated structure for nitrogen-vacancy (NV) spin-based applications, implemented in a single material layer with one patterning step. A nanodiamond with multiple NV centres is positioned at the end of the groove waveguide milled in a thick gold film. The gold film carries the microwave control signal while the groove waveguide acts as a fluorescence collector, partially filtering out the pump excitation. As a result, the device dimensions and fabrication complexity are substantially reduced. Our approach will foster further development of ultra-compact nanoscale quantum sensors and quantum information processing devices on a monolithic platform. NV centre-based nanoscale sensors are the most promising application of the developed interface. Colour centres in solids are promising candidates for the development of integrated quantum devices. These defects possess unique optical and/or spin properties and are compatible with scalable on-chip engineering. Of particular interest are the quantum emitters realising the so-called spin-light interfaces 1 . Examples of such emitters include colour centres in diamond 2 , silicon carbide 3 , rare-earth ions 4 , and donors in silicon 5 . The breakthrough applications of the solid-state defects encompass large-scale quantum simulators 6 , and multifunctional nanoscale sensing 7 , however, all of their demonstrations to date involved bulky table-top setups. There is a strong need for further miniaturisation and full on-chip integration of devices based on solid-state defects. The necessary components to be interfaced on-chip include pump sources, waveguides, the infrastructure for the control of electron spin states (e.g., microwave antennae and magnets), and photodetectors. Recently, several attempts have been undertaken towards CMOS-integrated quantum sensors with a multilayer architecture In this work, we focus on nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centres in diamond 10 , best known for their exceptional electron spin coherence at room temperature 11 and above 12 . NV's fluorescence intensity is spin-dependent, and this dependence is used for optical spin state readout. Upon optical excitation, the NV centre spontaneously decays to its ground orbital state following radiative or non-radiative paths (Fig. The sensing functionalities of the NV centres rely on the readout of the NV spin population as a function of the external electromagnetic, strain or temperature fields. Several schemes for NV spin readout have been demonstrated in the past The sensitivity of spin population measurement in this scheme depends on the fluorescence rate , optical excitation rate kexc, microwave Rabi frequency, setup efficiency, as well as on the achieved maximum spin contrast between the ms = 0 and ms = ±1 spin states. Generally speaking, one can increase the collected emission by enhancing the fluorescence rate , e.g., through Purcell effect while exciting an NV centre in the saturation regime (kexc > ), or by employing large NV ensembles (NVE). Here we focus on NVEs as they find practical applications in most sensing scenarios. In our prior work, we found that spin readout in dense NVEs is compromised in the optical saturation regime In the ODMR-based experiments, it is essential to deliver both optical and microwave excitations as well as collect the spin-dependent fluorescence. The delivery of the microwave excitation is usually performed using a dedicated conductor, separated from the optical pumping and fluorescence collection channels with the NV centre located within tens of micrometres of the wire/micro-antenna Simultaneous integration of MW and optical infrastructures can be achieved on a conducting platform, such as a thick metallic film patterned with nanophotonic collector-waveguides. It turns out that this structure can simultaneously deliver the MW control signal, couple the NV fluorescence into channel plasmon-polaritons We performed 3D numerical simulations of NV-VG interface and found that the VG geometry simultaneously satisfies the conditions of high coupling efficiency and moderate emission rate enhancement. In the experiment, each nanodiamond (ND) typically contained on average 400 NVs. Therefore, in the simulation we varied the dipole's position along the z-axis to study the dependence of NV emission characteristics on its spatial location, where z = 0 concurs with the ND centre (Fig. We fabricated an MSPI by milling VGs into a thick gold film and depositing NDs on the surface of the sample (see Methods, Sample fabrication). An image of an ND coupled to the v-groove is shown in Fig. The estimated single-shot spin-readout SNR and magnetic field sensitivity of the fabricated MSPI are on the order of 0.01 and 100T/Hz 1/2 . These characteristics can be further improved by reducing losses in the collector, for instance, by shortening its length. The plasmonic readout signal at the VG end can be converted to photonic low-loss modes On-chip integration is a key factor for enabling high-efficiency and small footprint NV-based quantum devices. Fabrication complexity is one of the major stumbling blocks in achieving this goal. We are addressing this challenge by implementing a microwave spin-plasmon-microwave interface in a single material layer and one patterning step. This on-chip MSPI prototype has the potential to further advance the development of quantum sensing and quantum information applications. This device enables compact sub-micrometre-scale footprints, higher operational speeds, and reduced fabrication complexity. Previously, the problem of on-chip large area MW excitation was addressed by constructing resonant antennae encompassing NVEs, such as a double split-ring resonator In most scenarios involving non-resonant optical pumping, it is important to suppress the residual pump power with, e.g. an optical filter. A waveguide-coupled excitation filter tailored for the NV centre fluorescence spectrum (Fig 5a ) has not yet been demonstrated. Our nanophotonic collector, through its unique dispersion characteristics, offers a high transmission in the required spectral window, while strongly attenuating the pump at 532 nm. We calculated propagation lengths at different wavelengths for the VG fundamental modes (orange line in Supplementary Fig. In the future, the drop-casting method that we utilised to position the ND can be replaced by the hybrid electrothermoplasmonic nanotweezer (HENT) technique, that promises faster and more precise placement of NDs into plasmonic waveguides The metallic film employed in our experiment not only supports optical plasmons and microwave signals but can also carry a DC voltage bias. It is therefore suited to stabilise the negative NV -charge states. Band bending induced by the potential difference across an ND can stabilise the negative NV -charge state Another opportunity resides in realising a low-temperature spin-plasmon chiral interface by employing spin-momentum locking of plasmon-polaritons Eigenmode 2D analysis (COMSOL 5.3a, Waves and Optics Module) was performed to investigate the fundamental v-groove mode parameters: field distribution, propagation length, and mode index. The simulation domain was a square box with an area of 1×1 m 2 . Scattering boundary conditions were applied on its edges, and the wavelength fixed to 665 nm, corresponding to the emission spectrum maximum. The groove's geometrical parameters were the following: opening angle -21.6o, width -160 nm, depth -338 nm, radius of curvature at the bottom edge -20 nm, radius of curvature at the side edges -15 nm. These parameters were extracted from the SEM measurements of the fabricated VGs. Gold dielectric permittivity at 665 nm was 3D full-wave simulations were used to estimate the total decay rate  and collection efficiency . The computational domain size was 1.8×0.6×0.85m 3 (length × width × height). It was surrounded by a perfectly matched layer (PML) shell with a thickness of 300 nm in order to suppress reflection from the boundaries. The ND was modelled as an ellipsoid with principal semi-axes of a = 135 nm, b = c = 65 nm. As a result of the ellipsoid reposing on the VG edges, the ND's centre was lifted with respect to the gold-air planar interface by ~50 nm. The choice of ND shapes and sizes was based on the obtained SEM images of the ND-VG. An NV centre was modeled as a volume current density oscillating coherently inside a 1-nm-radius sphere serving as a dipole emitter. The electric dipole orientation was chosen along the E-field of VG fundamental mode. Due to symmetry considerations, we partitioned the computational domain into four subdomains and performed simulations on one of them. The total decay rate is assumed to be proportional to the total released power P and, hence, it was estimated as , where bulk and Pbulk are the reference quantities of an NV in bulk diamond. Pbulk, power emitted by a dipole inside diamond environment, was analytically estimated with a standard textbook formula Pd =  SA . The NV-VG -factor was calculated as , where PVG is the power emitted into the VG modes propagating in both directions, 2 P CS lL VG A P e d =  SA . ACS is a rectangular cross-section area 0.8×1.04 μm 2 positioned at a longitudinal distance l = 0.75 μm from the NV center. LP = 3.14 μm the propagation length of the VG fundamental mode, was obtained from 2D mode simulations. A 1×1cm 2 Si substrate was cleaned with a stripper Nano-Strip 2X, Cyantek (mixture of sulfuric and peroxymonosulfuric acids, hydrogen peroxide, water) for 10 minutes, then rinsed with deionised water and dried with nitrogen. Deposition was performed using an e-beam evaporator, operating at a base pressure of 5×10 -7 torr. To improve the adhesion, we introduced a 5 nm thick Ti wetting layer. A 380-nm thick gold film was deposited at a rate of 2 Å/s and its thickness was characterised by profilometry measurement. We have milled a total of 18 channel v-grooves by bombarding the gold film with a focused Ga + beam (Nova 200, FEI). The milling was performed under 30 kV accelerating voltage, with a current of 10 pA, magnification of approximately 20k. The size of a single-shot hole was measured to be 35 nm. The patterning sequence was encoded into a stream file with the specified parameters: single loop, pixel spacing -3nm, dwell time -150 s, randomised sequence order. The dimensions of fabricated v-grooves were obtained from SEM: a length of 10.70±0.05 μm and a separation distance (between v-grooves) of 5 μm. Additionally, from a FIB-cut cross-section of a similar VG, the following dimensions were measured: a groove depth of 340±10 nm, an angle of 21.6±0.5°, and a width of 160±10 nm. NDs with an average size of 100 nm and containing nominally 400 NV centres (Adamas Nano) were dropcast onto the patterned metal surface. During the dropcasting procedure, we dissolved the initial solution (1mg/mL) 1000 times. We put a droplet of 10 μl onto the sample, covered it with a coverslip for 1 minute, after this we rinsed with DI water and nitrogen dried. Before depositing NDs the patterned gold film was covered with a poly-allyalamine hydrochloride (PAH) layer to improve adhesion of individual nanocrystals to the gold surface. The SEM study proved that several nanodiamonds were placed into or very close to v-groove. The optical signals were collected and analysed using a custom-made confocal microscope setup based on a Nikon Ti-U microscope body and equipped with a Nikon air objective (NA 0.9), a PI-561 objective piezo-stage driven by a E-712 controller (Physik Instrumente), a 532 nm CW laser (SLOC, GL532NA-200), a 514 nm picosecond laser (BDL-514-SMNi, Becker & Hickl), SPAD detector (SPCM-AQRH, Excelitas), an optical spectrometer (Ocean Optics QE65000) and a CCD camera (ATIK 414EX). The pump reflection was filtered by a long-pass 550 nm filter with OD6. Microwaves were generated by an Agilent E8254A generator, modulated by a MiniCircuits ZASW-2-50DR+ switch, and amplified with 16 W Mini-Circuits ZHL-16W-43 RF amplifier. The cable from the MW amplifier was soldered onto the sample's 380-nm-thick gold film. 