We consider both analytical and numerical studies of a steady-state fracture process inside a discrete mass-beam structure, composed of periodically placed masses connected by Euler-Bernoulli beams. A fault inside the structure is assumed to propagate with a constant speed and this occurs as a result of the action of a remote sinusoidal, mechanical load. The established regime of fracture corresponds to the case of an alternating generalised strain regime. The model is reduced to a Wiener-Hopf equation and its solution is presented. We determine the minimum feeding wave energy required for the steady-state fracture process to occur. In addition, we identify the dynamic features of the structure during the steady-state fracture regime. A transient analysis of this problem is also presented, where the existence of steady-state fracture regimes, revealed by the analytical model, are verified and the associated transient features of this process are discussed. The modelling of periodic flexural materials is a useful tool in understanding the behaviour of structures commonly found in civil engineering, such as buildings, bridges, rooftops, pipeline systems and many more. The need to understand the response of these structures, as shown in Figure We present a simplified analytical and numerical model to represent the failure of a long bridge or a rooftop. The structure is modelled by Euler-Bernoulli beams connecting periodically placed masses, where the failure is assumed to propagate steadily within the structure. The modelling of failure in structured materials has been widely developed for the analysis of mass-spring systems. These models help in describing several microstructural processes which occur in the fracture of materials In addition to the analytical models considered in The analytical approach developed in Lattices, composed of fundamental mechanical elements, can easily be designed to produce a variety of media capable of controlling the flow of waves for different applications. In particular, the introduction of structural heterogeneities may influence the admissible regimes where steady crack propagation is possible. The effects of inhomogeneities on Mode III crack propagation in two-dimensional lattices have been analysed in Periodically distributed inhomogeneities in mass-spring lattices have been shown to enhance fracture propagation in Other failure processes propagating in a lattice have been treated in The important question of admissibility of unstable and stable crack regimes for cracks propagating in discrete periodic media has been discussed in Failure regimes in discrete structures with non-local interactions and their effects on the wave radiation processes are presented in In contrast to the study of dynamic fracture in mass-spring systems, very few articles concentrate on the failure of systems incorporating flexural elements such as beams. The study of bending modes in 2D discrete flexural structures, composed of beams connecting masses and containing static faults, can be found in One-dimensional mass-beam chains supported by an elastic foundation, have been used to create a simplified model of a collapsing bridge Experimentally, one can observe counter-intuitive fracture behaviour in elastic materials such as rubber sheets Here, we consider failure propagation within the mass-beam structure shown in Figure The structure of the present article is as follows. In Section 2, we present an analytical description of the problem concerning failure propagation in the mass-beam structure subjected to a sinusoidal load. This section also includes the reduction of the problem to a functional equation of the Wiener-Hopf type, from which the alternating generalised strain regimes can be identified. The characterisation of the dispersive nature of this particular discrete system is given in Section 3. The results of Section 3 are then used in Section 4 to solve the Wiener-Hopf equation. We also identify the dynamic properties of the system during the steady propagation of the alternating generalised strain regime in Section 5. In Section 6, we present numerical simulations which support the analytical results of Sections 2-5. We give some conclusions in Section 7. Finally, Appendices A and B contain details of some derivations. 2 Model of failure within a discrete periodic flexural structure We consider a structure composed of a mass-beam chain, as shown in Figure Inside the structure, failure is assumed to propagate with a uniform speed V as result of the breakage of the transverse connections to the interfaces within the structure. This breakage occurs when the absolute value of the displacement w p of the p th mass (where m = p corresponds to the position of the transition front in the structure, see Figure and when the condition w p = ±w c is fulfilled, the transverse links at the p th -mass break and the moving interface advances a distance a in the structure to the (p + 1) th node. The condition (1) enables us to exclude the case of non-steady propagation of the interface inside the structure. Under these assumptions, we consider the case when the generalised strains (moments and shear forces) inside the transverse links alternate in sign during the failure process. At a given time t, the position of the interface in the structure is given by m = V t/a , where x denotes the integer part of x. Here, the inequality m ≥ V t/a corresponds to masses located in the supported part of the structure and m < V t/a are those in the unsupported region of the structure (see Figure The equations for the balance of linear and angular momentum for the m th mass, m ∈ Z, are where H is the Heaviside function In ( where w m is the displacement and θ y m is the rotation about the y-axis of the m th mass (see Appendix A for the derivation of ( In and where the contrast parameter r = E 2 I 2 /E 1 I 1 . In ( where the symbol "tilde" will be omitted in the following for ease of notation. In this case, the dimensionless governing equations for the system are then and Since we consider the case of alternating generalised strains, we look for the displacements and the rotations as functions of the moving coordinate η = mvt as follows where w(η) and θ(η) play the role of envelope functions (see We introduce the Fourier transforms with respect to the variable η for the quantities w F , where k is the dimensionless wavenumber. The following "half" transforms are also used: Here w + (w -) corresponds to a function analytic in the upper (lower) half of the complex plane defined by k. After substitution of ( -3[w(η + 1)w(η -1)] + [4θ y (η)θ y (η + 1)θ y (η -1)] = 0. The Fourier transform of and together with the Fourier transform of where Q F is the Fourier transform of the load Q and ) Here in Figure The dispersive properties of the structure can be determined from the zeros of h j , j = 1, 2, in for the waves ahead of the transition front and for waves behind the transition front. Waves inside the structure are assumed to propagate as a result of either the external action from a remote load or through dissipation from the transition front. These waves can be identified from the functions in Characterisation of the waves. Intersections of the line defined by ω = kv with the curve based on the relation ω 1 in (19) represent waves propagating ahead of the transition front (η ≥ 0). Those intersection points of this line with ω 2 , given by ( By computing the group velocity of the wave defined by v g = dω/dk at each intersection point, it is possible to determine the direction of propagation of the wave. Any intersection point of the curve given by ω 1 with the line ω = kv where v g < v or v g > v, indicates a wave propagating in the supported region towards or away from the transition front, respectively. In a similar way, any intersection of the curve provided by ω 2 with the ray ω = kv where v g > v or v g < v indicates a wave propagating in the unsupported region towards or away from the transition point, respectively. Roots of the functions h j , j = 1, 2. Here we describe, in general, possible roots of the functions h j , j = 1, 2, which will determine the nature of the waves inside the structure. These roots are associated with the intersections of the ray ω = kv and the curves determined by the functions ω j , j = 1, 2. For the analytical model presented here, we consider the speed range 0 < v ≤ v 1 = 1.117. Here the upper bound determines the maximum speed for which the failure process can occur under the alternating generalised strain regime. This upper bound is the slope of the dotted inclined line in Figure Zeros of h 1 . The function h 1 (k, ikv) has one, three or more pairs of simple zeros at the points k = ±y 1 , ±y 2 , . . . , ±y 2b+1 , with b ∈ Z, b ≥ 0. Here b depends on the speed v. Prior to taking the limit in , these points are located in the upper (lower) part of the complex plane defined by k. Thus in the limit Here, the points with v g < v can represent waves produced by a load situated far ahead of the transition front. In the loading problem considered in the next section, the points with v g > v will be associated with transmitted waves that propagate ahead of the transition front in the steady-state failure process. These waves can appear for particular failure speeds and an example of an interval of such speeds is shown in the shaded region in Figure Zeros of h 2 . The function h 2 (k, ikv) can have three, five or more pairs of simple zeros at k = ±z 1 , ±z 2 , ±z 3 , . . . , ±z 2l+1 , l ∈ Z, l ≥ 1. Again l is a parameter which depends on the speed v. For Again, in the limit in In the next section, in the problem concerning the loading of the structure, the wave numbers here with a negative or positive imaginary part will correspond to feeding or reflected waves, respectively, that appear behind the transition front during the steady failure regime. Here, we develop the solution of ( We rewrite this equation in the form with where 0 j=1 = 1 and Here, L(k) > 0 for k ∈ R and satisfies the conditions required for its factorisation. That is, In addition, L(k) → 1 as k → ±∞ and the index of the function L(k) is zero. Then, L(k) can be written using the Cauchy-type factorisation in the form: In this representation, the function L + (L -) is analytic in the upper (lower) half of the complex plane defined by k. Then, ( As in As L(k) has no real zeros and, referring to Section 3 and ( Here, we assume that the loading of the structure takes the form of an oscillatory mechanical load. This load is situated at some point far from the transition front on the negative x-axis with frequency ω 0 = vk f , where we note in addition ω 0 = ω 1 (k f ). Here k f , corresponds to a feeding wave that causes the failure to propagate with constant speed v (see section 6.2 for the description of how k f is chosen). Following where φ is the phase of the feeding wave and C is a constant to be linked to the amplitude of the feeding wave. The solution to the above equation is then found in the form In terms of the moving coordinate system, the condition (1) can be re-interpreted for the amplitude function w(η) as The first of these conditions can be satisfied by computing the limits using ( which allows for the determination of φ if the feeding wave amplitude, and consequently C, are known. With regard to the second condition in We have we obtain that the second condition in ( This allows for φ to be uniquely determined as a solution of (32). 5 Dynamic loading and waves in the steady-state fracture regimes We discuss the dynamic behaviour of the structure, subjected to a sinusoidal load, during the alternating generalised strain failure process. In particular, concerning the wave radiation processes associated with the moving transition front, we discuss the reflected and transmitted waves emitted from this point. We assume a sinusoidal load acts at some point far from the origin on the negative x-axis (see Figure From here on, we omit the symbol " ̃". This load generates a wave incident on the moving interface with the form where φ is the feeding wave phase, η = mω 0 t/k f , with ω 0 /k f = v being the phase speed of the outgoing wave and (see the Appendix B for the derivation of the amplitude in In doing so, we have Noting that Comparing with For the crack to propagate steadily, it is required that amplitude of the feeding wave reaches or exceeds the critical displacement, i.e. Using this condition, for the failure to propagate steadily in the alternating generalised strain regime, where 2.5 The plot of P min in a typical range of loading frequencies ω. Black curves are associated with the pure steady-state regimes identified in For illustrative purposes, we also plot the results of Accompanying these analytical computations is a verification of the predictions based on numerical simulations for a sufficiently large finite structure implemented in MATLAB (and described in detail in Section 6). There is a excellent agreement between the analytical results, which are based on an infinitely long medium, and the results of the MATLAB computations based on a finite medium. Here, we give the representation of the envelope functions for the reflected and transmitted waves encountered during the failure process based on Reflected waves behind the transition front. The reflected waves can be derived from the residues of the poles k = ±z 2j+1 + i0, 1 ≤ j ≤ l, of the function w -in r given by where and the phase shift ψ (s) r given as , ψ c = arg(C) . Waves transmitted ahead of the transition front. The waves that are transmitted ahead of the propagating interface are associated with the poles of the function w + in The transmitted waves w tr , 1 ≤ s ≤ b, are given by: Here the amplitude A (s) tr has the form with . The phase shift ψ (s) Note, if b = 0, then there are no propagating waves transmitted to the intact structure. 6 Numerical simulations modelling the failure process In this section, we implement a numerical scheme in MATLAB that models the behaviour of a finite flexural structure subjected to a sinusoidal load. In addition, using the numerical scheme we also trace the propagation of failure inside this structure as a result of the action of the load. The scheme is based on the normalised governing equations ( We use the results from the analysis of the alternating generalised strain fracture regime presented in Section 2, to show that we can predict: (i) when such regimes occur, (ii) the speed with which the fracture propagates in such regimes and (iii) the behaviour of the structure in these particular regimes. A finite structure composed of 3800 nodes, connected by massless beams, is considered. As the numerical scheme is based on the dimensionless equations ( The external applied force is taken as a sinusoidal force having the form P 0 sin(ω 0 t), where P 0 and ω 0 are the dimensionless load amplitude and frequency. This load is situated at node x = 1800. We can choose the value of ω 0 based on the frequency ω of the unforced problem for the unsupported structure of infinite extent in the x direction. To generate feeding waves in the unsupported structure capable of reaching the transition front, the load frequency ω 0 should be chosen in the interval 0 < ω 0 < √ 48, representing the passband for the analogous infinite medium. Below, we consider ω 0 = 3.1 and 5.9 representing frequencies located in the middle and close to the upper limit of the passband, producing waves capable of exciting the microstructure. In the numerical scheme, the right end of the structure is clamped at x = 3800, whereas the node at x = 1 is free. The structure's size has been chosen to minimise effects due to reflections produced by the ends. As discussed in Section 5.1, the feeding waves generated by the load help to initiate and propagate the failure process. Fracture regimes in two different types of structure are exam- The dispersion curves ω 1 and ω 2 for the case of the alternating generalised strain regime for fracture propagation (see The dispersion curves ω 3 and ω 4 for the pure steady-state regimes that are associated with the conditions Here we show that it is possible to encounter two fracture regimes. The first involves the regime where the failure will propagate if ( where p represents the node number where the interface is located at a given time t. This was studied in detail in We first show that speeds associated with the failure regimes observed can be predicted from the dispersion curves For the case ω 0 = 3.1, the horizontal dashed line in Figures Without loss of generality, we take the first of these points (k * , ω), shown in Figure Owing to the 2π-periodicity of the function ω 2 (k), a decreasing sequence of possible speeds can be deduced in the form , n ≥ 0, n ∈ Z . As an example, for the case ω = 3.1 in Figure The intersection points connected with these speeds are shown along the line defined by ω = 3.1 in Figure In the MATLAB simulations we can also identify pure steady-state regimes corresponding to the case when the failure propagation occurs as a result of the violation of (42) at the transition front. In this scenario, following Results of the transient analysis and identification of failure regimes. Here, for r = 0.4 and ω = 3.1, we analyse the failure processes in the finite structure for various load amplitudes. We show that the failure processes discussed here and in Figure In particular, we will also demonstrate that dynamic response of the structured medium is different when undergoing an alternating generalised strain failure mode when compared with a pure steady failure mode. The failure of the finite structure resulting from the harmonic load was performed for a large interval of load amplitudes. We denote by m * the index of the mass where the transition front is initially located. For the simulations m * = 2000. The index m i = mm * + 1 refers to the index of a mass in the supported region where the failure of the transverse beams at time t i , i ≥ 1, i ∈ Z, occurs. Simultaneously, as the length of the beams along the central axis is equal to unity, m i also represents the position of the failure in the supported region measured with respect to the initial position of the transition front. Figure After these initial periods, the transition process settles and the position of failure appears to behave as a linear function of time, representing that the steady-state failure phenomenon has been achieved. After the transient failure process, we can calculate the average failure speed from the data shown. The average speed v is then computed as the slope of the line of best fit for this data. In this case, the average speeds obtained are v = 0.1773, 0.2162, 0.2768, 0.3848, 0.6307, 1.7484, that agree with the analytical predictions for the possible failure speeds of Section 6.2. As expected from physical considerations, Figure Actually, one can observe further oscillations in the failure speed when it appears to have settled to a uniform state. We define the instantaneous speed v i for the fracture process as Using the notion of the instantaneous speed, we also can understand how quickly the failure process settles to the steady-state limit. In Figure the speed v pred that was attained in Figure Larger oscillations in the transition front speed are attained with larger values of the amplitude P. The speed of convergence of these regimes appears to be a non-monotonic function of the load amplitude. In Figure In the Figure From Figure • The average speed is a monotonically increasing function of the load amplitude. • There exists several plateaus, highlighted in red and blue indicating alternating generalised strain regimes and pure steady-state regimes, respectively, where speeds predicted by the analytical model are realised. • Only a finite collection of speeds predicted by the analytical model are realised and lower speeds exist for narrow intervals of the load amplitude or are never realised. • Between any two pure steady-state regimes, corresponding to the fracture process associated with criteria (1), there exists a plateau of finite width at the failure speed associated with the alternating generalised strain failure regime. • The size of plateaus for each steady-state regime corresponding to the alternating generalised strain fracture process increases with the load amplitude. The same behaviour is observed for the plateaus corresponding to the pure steady-state regimes. • Outside the plateaus, the fracture propagates non-uniformly. Between two steady-state speeds, we encounter the clustering phenomenon, first observed in Additionally, with reference to Section 5, we show that the analytical model can be used to efficiently predict the initial load amplitudes when steady-state failure regimes can appear. In Table Note that here we have shown only a finite collection of the predicted speeds is obtained in the simulations. The intervals of the load amplitude for when these steady-state speeds can occur have the form [P min , P max ]. For the alternating generalised strain regime, P min is determined using For P = 13.115, Figure In Figures Failure induced by a high frequency. Here, we give an example of when the alternating generalised strain regime is never realised. In this illustration, ω 0 = 5.9 and r = 0.4. As mentioned earlier in Section 6.2, the analytical model predicts a semi-infinite list of possible speeds for both the alternating generalised strain regimes and the pure steadystate regimes (also see the dispersion curves of Figure Figure In Figure For the same amplitudes, in Figure Here we analyse the failure process in a structure possessing transverse links that are "stiffer" than the links along the central axis of the structure. Stiffer supports and intermediate load frequency. Here the supports in the system are characterised by the parameter r = 3.4. We first study the case when this structure is subjected to an oscillating force with a frequency ω 0 = 3.1. Although the flexural stiffness of the transverse links inside the supported region is now larger compared to that of the beams along the central axis, the list of admissible steady-state speeds for failure, outlined in Section 6.2, remains the same. The MATLAB simulations described below indicate which of these regimes are realised. In Figure When r = 3.4, we only observe one of the predicted steady-state speeds, v = 1.7484, which corresponds to a pure steady-state regime with the highest possible speed. The regimes analysed in Sections 2-4 are not observed. In comparing with the computations of Figure Figure In addition, the normalised instantaneous speeds v i , calculated using The example presented here shows that the number of failure regimes observed for different structures subjected to a remote sinusoidal load with a fixed frequency can vary. In this case, the stiffer supports have reduced the number of possible failure regimes that are realisable. High frequency loading of structure with stiff supports. Finally, we consider a structure with stiff supports and this structure is subjected to a sinusoidal load with a high frequency, which is located near the upper boundary of the passband for unsupported part of the This particular example shows that the alternating generalised strain regime can be realised in high-frequency loading configurations. In fact, the results of the MATLAB simulations show there are two regimes encountered, as shown in Figure Figure We have developed an analytical model characterising a particular propagation regime in a flexural system, composed of beams connecting periodically placed masses. The regime identified corresponds to the scenario where the generalised strains, represented by bending moments and shear forces in the beam connections, alternate in sign as the failure advances through the system. Analytical results characterising the dynamics of the system during its failure and when possible failure regimes occur have been determined. In particular, the results have been shown to provide excellent predictions for the behaviour of sufficiently long finite systems subjected to sinusoidal loads that were modelled with a numerical scheme developed in MAT-LAB. simulations revealed that the existence of regimes modelled here is dependent on the parameters describing the structure and sinusoidal loading. In addition, the failure regimes identified in The model can be generalised to consider different types of loading and more complicated failure criteria, where other types of special failure phenomena may exist. Applications of the tools developed here are envisaged in civil engineering, where the dynamics and failure of large multi-structures are considered. Thus, from the above we have Note, in the considered phase transition problem, the transverse supports fail at the connections to rigid interface. In this case, behind the transition front, the transverse beams are attached to the masses at one end and are free at the other. At the free end, the bending moments and shear forces are zero. Hence, the displacements along these beams can be shown to be linear functions of their local y-co-ordinate. Consequently, they do not contribute to the linear and angular momentum balance of the masses behind the transition front (for instance, see ( The angular momentum balance about the y-axis for a mass in the supported region then gives M x,+ m (0, t) -M x,- m (a, t) = 0 , where the right-hand side is zero as it is assumed all masses have negligible moments of inertia. This together with (A.2) and (A.3) implies θ x m = 0 in the supported region. The shear forces in these beams then have the form V y,± m (ỹ ± , t) = -E 2 I 2 d 3 W ± m dỹ 3 ± (ỹ ± , t) and using (A.2) and (A.3) leads to respectively. Insertion of (A.1) into these relations yields (4) and Here, we derive the amplitude associated with the outgoing waves generated by point force in a mass-beam chain. The force is assumed to have frequency ω 0 and amplitude P 0 . According to the derivation of the governing equations in Section 2.2, the problem may be written as P 0 e -ikm h 2 (k, iω 0 ) dk . For outgoing waves from the source to exist we require that ω 0 < √ 48, representing the pass band of the structure. In this case, in the interval -π < k < π the chosen load frequency can be linked with two wave numbers ±k f ∓ i0, that define the waves propagating in the medium. These wavenumbers are simple poles of the kernel in the above integral. The above is then rewritten as where the positive function R 0 is defined in , for m → ∞ . Finally, combining this with (B.6) and (B.3) leads to w m (t) ∼ P 0 2k f R 0 (k f , ω 0 ) cos((k f + π)mω 0 tπ) for m → ∞ . Thus, from this we see that the amplitude of the feeding wave in the problem considered in Section 5 is , where the variables in this expression are dimensionless. a 3 E 1 I 1 d 2 w m (t) dt 2 = -6 2[2w m (t)w m-1 (t)w m+1 (t)]a[θ y m+1 (t)θ y m-1 (t)] m+1 (t)w m-1 (t)] + a[θ y m+1 (t) + θ