We have investigated the critical temperature behavior in periodic superconductor/ ferromagnet (S/F) multilayers as a function of the ferromagnetic layer thickness d f and the interface transparency. The critical temperature Tc(d f ) exhibits a damped oscillatory behavior in these systems due to an exchange field in the ferromagnetic material. In this work we have performed Tc calculations using the self-consistent multimode approach, which is considered to be exact solving method. Using this approach we have derived the conditions of 0 or π state realization in periodic S/F multilayers. Moreover, we have presented the comparison between the single-mode and multimode approaches and established the limits of applicability of the single-mode approximation, frequently used by experimentalists. Nowadays, the rates of development of such areas as spintronics and superconducting logic and memory circuits increase significantly. In particular, much attention was attracted to superconductor/ ferromagnet (S/F) structures. Rich physics of S/F systems is based on the proximity effect in S/F bilayers. The critical temperature have nontrivial behavior even in S/F bilayers. The model of an S/F/S junction we are going to study is depicted in Fig. To calculate the critical temperature T c (d f ) of this structure we assume the diffusive limit and use the framework of the linearized Usadel equations for the S and F layers in Matsubara representation. In the F layer (-d f /2 < x < d f /2) the Usadel equation can be written as Finally, the self-consistency equation reads, In Eqs. ( 2 ), where n = 0, ±1, ±2, . . . are the Matsubara frequencies, h is the exchange field in the ferromagnet, T cs is the critical temperature of the superconductor S, and F s(f ) denotes the anomalous Green function in the S(F) region (we assume = k B = 1). We note that ξ h = ξ f 2πT cs /h. Equations ( where The solution of the Usadel equation in the F layer depends on the phase state of the structure. In the 0 phase state the anomalous Green function is symmetric relative to x = 0 (see Fig. while in the π phase state the anomalous Green function is antisymmetric (see Fig. where In Eqs. ( To solve the boundary value problem Eqs. ( where B f (ω n ) can acquire one of two different values, depending on phase state. In the 0 phase state, 65 while in π phase state from Eq. ( Similar boundary condition can be written at x = -d f /2. The boundary condition ( According to the Usadel equations ( Thus we can consider only positive Matsubara frequencies and express the self-consistency equation (3) via the symmetric function The problem of determining T c can be then formulated in a closed form with respect to F + s . Using the boundary condition ( where we used the notations, Similar boundary conditions can be written at the boundaries of the left S layer. The self-consistency equation ( will be used for finding the critical temperature of the S/F/S structure both in 0 and π phase states. In general, this problem should be solved numerically. In this section we present the single mode approximation (SMA) method. The solution of the problem Eqs. ( where δ and Ω do not depend on ω n . The above solution automatically satisfies boundary condition (14b) at x = d s + d f /2. Substituting expression (17) into the Eq. ( To determine the critical temperature T c we have to substitute the Eqs. ( where ψ is the digamma function. Boundary condition (14a) at x = d f /2 yields the following equation for Ω, The critical temperature T c is determined by equations ( The multimode approach (MMA) was applied for the first time considering the problem of T c in an S/N bilayer. where n = 0, 1, ..., N , m = 1, 2, ..., M (we take M = N ), and Ω n are determined by the following equation, obtained from Eq. ( The multimode approach is considered to be much more accurate comparing to the single-mode approximation, and it was shown in previous studies that in some cases SMA and MMA perform significantly different qualitative behavior for 0 phase state junctions in S/F bilayers. In this section we present the results obtained by numerical calculations for 0 and π phase states using both the single-mode approximation and multimode approach. We provide complete theory for T c (d f ) behavior description in general case, where system can be in 0 or π phase state depending on the F layer thickness d f . Moreover, comparison between the SMA and MMA is also presented. The accuracy of calculations was checked by choosing sufficiently large matrix K dimensions in multimode approach. Here and below we have used in our calculations the same parameters as in Ref. 65, i.e. γ = 0.15, h = 6.8πT cs , d s = 1.24ξ s . A. Tc in S/F/S structures in π phase state In Fig. The single-mode approximation is frequently used to calculate the critical temperature because of its simplicity. However, that approach has restricted range of applicability which was considered in Ref. 65 for S/F bilayers. Nevertheless the SMA method quite often is used for wide range of parameters, even for values when the approximation can be rude enough, due to its simplicity and speed. The difference between single-mode and multimode methods can be seen in Fig. It is well known that decreasing the S layer thickness d s in S/F hybrid structures the critical temperature is suppressed since superconductivity is suppressed due to the inverse proximity effect. As it was mentioned above the single mode approximation is very popular because of its simplicity and speed. However, this approximation is applicable only in particular range of parameters. The solution of the equations in Sec. II is accurate when it can be considered as ω n independent, which happens in case when γ b ≫ |B f | in Eq. (9). Estimating |B f | we introduce the real and imaginary parts of k f in Eqs. ( where the ratio T c /T cs originates from ω n /πT cs with ω n ∼ πT c as the characteristic energy scale. The equations ( In this paper we have calculated the T c (d f ) dependencies for different values of transparency parameter γ b . Comparing the results calculated by both SMA and MMA, we note that for high enough resistance across the S/F interfaces, the SMA and MMA show good agreement with each other. However, for highly transparent interfaces, SMA and MMA demonstrate qualitatively and even quantitatively different results. In fact, in this case in the single mode approximation the T c drops to zero abruptly at particular d f [see Fig. 