Several of the key issues of planar (Al,Ga)Nbased deep-ultraviolet light emitting diodes could potentially be overcome by utilizing nanowire heterostructures, exhibiting high structural perfection and improved light extraction. Here, we study the spontaneous emission of GaN/(Al,Ga)N nanowire ensembles grown on Si(111) by plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy. The nanowires contain single GaN quantum disks embedded in long (Al,Ga)N nanowire segments essential for efficient light extraction. These quantum disks are found to exhibit intense emission at unexpectedly high energies, namely, significantly above the GaN bandgap, and almost independent of the disk thickness. An in-depth investigation of the actual structure and composition of the nanowires reveals a spontaneously formed Al gradient both along and across the nanowire, resulting in a complex core/shell structure with an Al deficient core and an Al rich shell with continuously varying Al content along the entire length of the (Al,Ga)N segment. This compositional change along the nanowire growth axis induces a polarization doping of the shell that results in a degenerate electron gas in the disk, thus screening the built-in electric fields. The high carrier density not only results in the unexpectedly high transition energies, but also in radiative lifetimes depending only weakly on temperature, leading to a comparatively high internal quantum efficiency of the GaN quantum disks up to room temperature. (Al,Ga)N is the material of choice for the fabrication of deep ultraviolet (UV) solid-state emitters with a wide range of applications in biological, medical, and communication areas. , However, planar (Al,Ga)N-based heterostructures suffer from a number of problems, among them high densities of threading dislocations, low dopant activation and carrier injection, poor light extraction, and strong internal electrostatic fields in quantum wells. As a result, the currently existing (Al,Ga)Nbased UV light emitting diodes (LEDs) still exhibit comparatively low external quantum efficiencies, and their performance degrades with decreasing wavelength. , - (Al,Ga)N-based heterostructures in the form of three-dimensional nanostructures have the potential to resolve several of these issues challenging conventional planar devices. Consequently, the fabrication of such nanostructures is currently the subject of worldwide research activities, utilizing a wide range of techniques ranging from basic topdown and bottom-up , approaches to hybrid schemes combining top-down processes and subsequent regrowth. , A particularly active field of research is the synthesis of GaN/(Al,Ga)N nanowires by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). These nanowires tend to form on a variety of structurally and chemically dissimilar substrates, invariably yielding material of high structural perfection, since dislocations do not propagate along the nanowire growth axis. In addition, the efficient elastic strain relaxation at the nanowire sidewalls facilitates the fabrication of GaN/(Al,Ga)N heterostructures with coherent interfaces. Moreover, the elastic strain relief leads to reduced polarization fields as compared to planar layers, which is expected to result in higher internal quantum efficiencies. Finally, the high geometric aspect ratio of nanowires offers superior light extraction. In most previous works utilizing MBE, the structures under investigation consisted of axial GaN/(Al,Ga)N nanowires containing an active region formed by GaN or (Al,Ga)N quantum disks clad by comparatively thin (Al,Ga)N or AlN barriers. Ultimately, a nanowire heterostructure serving as efficient deep UV emitter should be free of GaN segments to avoid any reabsorption of the light emitted by the quantum disk. At the same time, a GaN quantum disk embedded in a pure (Al,Ga)N nanowire or a long (Al,Ga)N segment will exhibit a significantly larger internal field than the same disk in a GaN nanowire with short (Al,Ga)N segments. , Since the radiative recombination rate of charge carriers confined in the disk critically depends on the magnitude of the internal electrostatic field, it is of high relevance for future applications to investigate the spontaneous emission of GaN quantum disks embedded in (Al,Ga)N nanowires. In this Letter, we examine the carrier recombination of GaN/(Al,Ga)N nanowires synthesized by plasma-assisted MBE (PAMBE) on Si(111) substrates. The nanowires contain a single GaN quantum disk embedded in an . μm long (Al,Ga)N segment. The disks have a thickness ranging from . to . nm and emit intense luminescence at an energy invariably above the bandgap of bulk GaN, suggesting that the quantum-confined Stark effect in the disk is essentially absent. A detailed investigation of the composition of the (Al,Ga)N segment reveals a core/shell microstructure formed spontaneously during growth, with a continuously varying Al content both across the nanowire diameter and along the growth direction. The latter induces a high electron density in the shell via polarization doping, leaving the quantum disk in a degenerately doped state with screened internal electrostatic fields thus resulting in the high transition energies regardless of the disk thickness. A quantitative analysis of the transition energies and the temperature dependence of the radiative lifetime allows us to extract not only the mean value of the electron density in the disks, but also its distribution. Further consequences of the degenerate doping level are a short radiative lifetime and a comparatively high internal quantum efficiency up to room temperature. Figure (b) depicts room temperature photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the four nanowire ensembles under continuous-wave excitation at nm together with that of a bare GaN nanowire ensemble under continuous-wave excitation at nm. The PL spectrum of the GaN nanowires shows a line at . eV originating from the recombination of free A excitons in strain-free GaN. The PL spectrum of the bare (Al,Ga)N nanowires exhibits a single band at . eV. A band at essentially the same spectral position ( . eV) is also observed in the PL spectra of the (Al,Ga)N nanowires with an embedded GaN disk, and we thus attribute this highenergy band to emission from the (Al,Ga)N segment. Consequently, the low-energy band in the spectra is associated with the GaN quantum disks. In all cases, the corresponding transition energy is notably higher than the bandgap energy of GaN and depends only weakly on the thickness of the disk itself. The same is true for the integrated PL intensity of this band. In addition, the PL intensity drops by only a factor of two to three between and K (see Supporting Information) and is thus about two orders of magnitude higher than that of the bare GaN nanowires at K. These results suggest that the GaN quantum disks exhibit a very high internal quantum efficiency up to room temperature. As shown in the Supporting Information, the low thermal quenching is in part due to an efficient transfer of photoexcited carriers from the (Al,Ga)N segment to the quantum disk, but the actual internal quantum efficiency remains significantly higher (about a factor of ) than that of GaN nanowires of comparable length and density. For the nominal parameters of our nanowires [see Fig. The maps clearly show the complementary nature of the two emission bands, in that the band at . eV arises from the top of the nanowires, where the GaN disk is located, while the homogeneous emission at . eV originates from the region corresponding to the (Al,Ga)N segment. The high transition energies of the GaN quantum disks could be explained if they were actually much thinner than nominally. In this case, the quantum-confined Stark shift would be outweighed by quantum confinement, resulting in energies larger than the GaN band gap. To test this hypothesis, we perform a detailed structural and chemical analysis of the nanowire ensemble with the . -nm-thick GaN disk, whose transition energy depends most sensitively on the internal electrostatic fields. mission electron microscopy (STEM) images acquired in high-angular annular dark-field (HAADF) mode for three representative single nanowires from this ensemble. The GaN quantum disk is clearly visible in all three micrographs and has a thickness of (6 ± 1) nm, confirming that the actual thickness is consistent with the nominal value. This result rules out the possibility that the high transition energies are caused by strong quantum confinement in thin disks. Moreover, the disks are seen to intersect the entire nanowire and are not enclosed in (Al,Ga)N shells, excluding also the possibility of a blueshifted emission energy due to an essentially hydrostatic strain state of the disk. The HAADF-STEM images also reveal that the quantum disks are not delimited by flat (000 1) planes, but by facets with semi-polar orientation, as most clearly seen in Fig. (a)-(c), suggesting that the Al concentration also varies along the nanowire axis. To investigate this finding in more detail, we analyze individual nanowires with chemically sensitive techniques. The presence of this axial gradient in the radially averaged Al content cannot explain the constant, low emission energy observed along the (Al,Ga)N segment The complex core/shell structure has important consequences for the electronic and optical properties of the nanowires, which have not been elucidated so far. In particular, due to the spontaneous polarization of the group-III nitrides, the compositional grading of the (Al,Ga)N segment along the nanowire axis induces a bulk polarization charge, which in turn leads to the accumulation of mobile charge carriers of the opposite sign. This phenomenon, known as polarization doping, has been exploited for n-type as well as p-type doping of GaN/(Al,Ga)N heterostructures, and is the rationale for the nanowire diode design proposed in Refs. and . Obviously, the radial and axial compositional gradients as well as the effects of polarization doping are essential for an understanding of the radiative transitions observed in Likewise, electrons induced in the shell by polarization doping transfer to the core and from there to the GaN quantum disk, thus screening its internal electrostatic field. This charge accumulation potentially accounts for the absence of the quantum-confined Stark effect demonstrated by the spectra in Fig. In general, both GaN layers and GaN nanowires grown by MBE are invariably ntype doped due to the unintentional incorporation of O. GaN nanowires synthesized in our lab typically exhibit background doping densities on the order of 10 16 cm -3 . -This low doping level is also reflected by narrow PL linewidths down to meV and below. For (Al,Ga)N nanowires, the dominant alloy broadening of the optical transitions impedes a corresponding optical analysis of the background doping. Due to the high reactivity of Al with O, the doping level could very well be substantially higher than in GaN (see, for example, Ref. for studies of metal-polar films) but we are not aware of data for Npolar (Al,Ga)N. For GaN of either polarity, there is general agreement that O incorporation is reduced substantially with increasing growth temperature. , Our nanowires were grown at temperatures not accessible for planar layers ( °C), and we would thus expect that O incorporation is reduced even further. For a quantitative estimate, we have examined the APT data for the presence of O, but also C, Ca, and B (which are the most abundant impurities in GaN layers grown by PAMBE). The only element present with a concentration above the detection limit was the isoelectronic impurity B. Due to the unusually high laser power we had to use for evaporation, the APT detection limit may have been higher than under ideal circumstances (on the order of 10 17 cm -3 ), but none of these impurities should be present in concentrations exceeding 10 18 cm -3 . Note that this concentration of O in (Al,Ga)N does not translate into a correspondingly high electron concentration, since O undergoes a DX transition with increasing Al content. It is thus most unlikely that the background doping in our nanowires is sufficiently high to screen the internal electrostatic fields in the GaN quantum disk. To quantitatively determine the electron density induced by polarization doping alone and the resulting transition energy, a full three-dimensional simulation of the complex core/shell structure would be desirable. However, when attempting to simulate such a core/shell nanowire including the axial and radial gradients in composition using nextNanoTM, we found that the solution depends sensitively on details of the structure, such as the precise thickness of the shell and the presence or absence of semipolar facets. To illustrate the physical principles, and to get a reliable order-of-magnitude estimate, we thus employ simple one-dimensional simulations , as discussed in the following (for further details, see the Methods section). To estimate the electron density induced by polarization doping, we consider a planar heterostructure with a . -nm-wide GaN well embedded in an (Al,Ga)N layer with a negative Al gradient along the growth axis (the [000 1] direction). shows the polarization-induced free electron density in a graded (Al,Ga)N segment without GaN well to be on the order of 5 × 10 17 cm -3 . The solid line in the inset shows the electron concentration in a structure with a graded (Al,Ga)N segment and additional GaN quantum well, corresponding to the sample whose band profile is shown in the main figure. The charge transfer taking place in this structure results in a degenerately doped GaN well with an electron sheet density n s of 4 × 10 12 cm -2 . To quantitatively determine the impact of this high electron density on the transition energies in the GaN quantum well, we next calculate the electron and hole states in GaN quantum wells with a width between and nm embedded in Al 0.1 Ga 0.9 N, the approximate composition of the nanowire core. The calculations are done for undoped wells, for which the polarization results in an internal electrostatic field of around MV/cm, and for wells with an electron density as determined by the simulations discussed above. We also take into account the compressive strain in the GaN quantum well imposed by a coherent interface with the Al 0.1 Ga 0.9 N layer. The insets of Fig. To investigate the consequences of this high electron density for the recombination dynamics in the GaN disk, we perform timeresolved PL measurements on the nanowire ensemble with the . nm-thick GaN disk at temperatures between and K. The disks were excited directly using an excitation wavelength of nm, corresponding to an energy below the bandgap of the (Al,Ga)N core. The PL transients presented below are thus not af-fected by carrier transfer processes. Figure Another possible reason for this gradual redshift is the progressive relaxation of photoexcited excitons within a band of localized states, leading to their spectral diffusion. , This phenomenon is most frequently observed in ternary layers and quantum wells, for which compositional fluctuations induce the disorder responsible for exciton localization. - In the present case, compositional fluctuations in the barriers or steps at the GaN/(Al,Ga)N interfaces could potentially induce localization as well. However, the transfer of carriers from higher to lower energy states manifests itself in a characteristic temporal delay of the emission at lower energies, which is not observed here. Instead, the rise time of the emission is found to be the same regardless of energy. We also do not observe any other signature of localization effects, such as the typical S shape of the transition energy with temperature (not shown). - An alternative explanation for the spectral shift suggests itself when considering that we are not dealing with a spatially uniform emitter, but a large ensemble of individual emitters (in the present experiments, we excite about 10 4 nanowires). In other words, the temporal redshift may simply result from a spectral superposition of GaN quantum disks emitting at different energies. In fact, for the present nanowire ensembles with a spatially random arrangement, it is not conceivable that the Al gradient in the shell is identical for each nanowire. Differences must occur because of both shadowing effects , and the different diameters of individual nanowires, affecting the diffusion of the group-III adatoms on the nanowire sidewalls. These differences in the Al gradient in turn result in different electron densities induced by polarization doping. The higher the electron density in the quantum disk, the lower the internal electrostatic field due to screening, which translates into higher emission energies and shorter lifetimes. The most heavily doped quantum disks thus dominate the high-energy emission at short times. In more lightly doped disks, the residual field leads to longer lifetimes and lower emission energies, which lead to the long-living and redshifted tail of the emission. The net result of this superposition of an ensemble of disks with different transition energies and lifetimes is the apparent spectral shift of the emission band as seen in Fig. Figure For temperatures above K, the decay is seen to accelerate accompanied by a continuously decreasing integrated intensity [cf. ). (c) Temperature dependence of the radiative lifetime determined from the peak intensity of the transients (solid circles). The dashed lines show the calculated temperature dependence for electron sheet densities in the quantum disk of 0.2, 0.6, and 1.6 × 10 12 cm -2 (from left to right). The solid line represents the radiative lifetime of a nanowire ensemble with an ensemble distribution of the electron volume density as shown in the inset. tion in the Supporting Information). To separate radiative and nonradiative channels, we examine the peak intensity of the transients, which is directly proportional to the radiative decay rate. -Figure (c) shows the temperature dependence of the radiative lifetime determined in this way. The radiative lifetime starts to increase already at temperatures as low as K, confirming that the emission from the GaN quantum disks is dominated by the radiative recombination of delocalized charge carriers already at low temperatures. However, the increase in radiative lifetime does not enter the linear temperature dependence characteristic for nondegenerate two-dimensional systems in general and GaN/(Al,Ga)N quantum wells in particular. , To quantitatively understand this peculiar temperature dependence, we calculate the spontaneous recombination rate using Fermi's golden rule for the general case of Fermi-Dirac statistics valid also for the high carrier density in the GaN quantum disks (for details, see the Supporting information). -Note that this calculation ignores any residual electric fields in the disk. Consequently, we do not compare the abso-lute transition rate in the following, but only its temperature dependence. The three dashed lines in Fig. The theoretical dependence for an electron density of n s 6 × 10 11 cm -2 is closest to the experimental data, but it does not describe them well, particularly at low temperatures. The agreement can be much improved when allowing for a distribution of the electron density as qualitatively discussed above in the context of Figs. (a) and (b). Quantitatively, we obtain the solid line in Fig. To summarize and conclude, we have shown that, during the synthesis of GaN/(Al,Ga)N nanowire ensembles by molecular beam epitaxy, a complex core/shell structure forms spontaneously, characterized by a continuously varying Al composition both along the growth axis and across the diameter of the nanowires. This phenomenon has been observed in similar form by other groups, which shows that it is not caused by specific growth conditions, but the fundamental growth mechanisms of (Al,Ga)N nanowires by PAMBE. The peculiar structure resulting from this self-assembly process has important consequences for the optoelectronic properties of the nanowires. First of all, the axial Al gradient in the Al-rich shell induces a threedimensional polarization charge, leading to the accumulation of electrons in the shell. Second, due to the Al deficient core, these electrons in the shell are efficiently transferred to the GaN quantum disk. The resulting high electron sheet density inside the GaN disk screens the internal electrostatic field, effectively canceling the quantum-confined Stark effect, and manifesting itself in both transition energies almost independent of thickness and short radiative lifetimes up to room temperature that result in a comparatively high internal quantum efficiency. The latter is obviously attractive for the realization of efficient light emitting devices in the ultraviolet range. However, we emphasize that for taking ad-vantage of the effects reported here in any application, one would have to achieve a high level of control over the formation of the compositional gradients. To reach this aim, further studies are required to fully understand the mechanisms leading to the self-assembly of (Al,Ga)N nanowires in PAMBE. Moreover, this compositional self-assembly is likely to occur also for other mixed cation nanowires synthesized by diffusion-controlled growth techniques such as MBE. Hence, our findings may be relevant not only for deep UV emitters based on (Al,Ga)N nanowires, but for example also for MBE-grown (In,Ga)N nanowires for emission in the visible spectrum and solar energy harvesting. The GaN/(Al,Ga)N nanowire ensembles are synthesized utilizing a DCA Instruments P molecular beam epitaxy system equipped with two radio frequency plasma sources for active N and solid-source effusion cells for Al and Ga. First, GaN nanowires are grown on Si(111) substrates relying on their spontaneous formation on this substrate under suitable experimental conditions. , The growth temperature is measured with an optical pyrometer calibrated with the (1 × 1) → (7 × 7) surface reconstruction transition of Si(111), which takes place at °C. Fluxes calibrated using GaN and AlN films are given in units of monolayers (ML)/s where ML refers to the cation density of 1.136 × 10 15 cm -2 on GaN(000 1). A two-step growth approach is employed in order to minimize the incubation time. Specifically, the substrates are outgassed at °C for min prior to growth to remove any residual Si x O y from the surface. Afterward, the N shutter is opened, and the substrates are exposed for min to an active N flux of . ML/s at °C. Nanowire nucleation is initiated by opening the Ga shutter providing a Ga flux of . ML/s. Once nanowire nucleation has commenced as observed by reflection high-energy electron diffraction, the temperature is increased to °C, and growth of the GaN nanowire base is continued. After the formation of a GaN nanowire ensemble with a nominal length of nm, the Ga flux is reduced to . ML/s and an Al flux of . ML/s is added for the synthesis of a nominally nm long (Al,Ga)N segment with a nominal Al content of . and the same V/III ratio as for the GaN nanowires underneath. For the formation of the GaN quantum disk, the Al shutter is simply closed for a duration corresponding to the intended disk thickness. Finally, the disk is capped by a nominally nm long (Al,Ga)N segment. Three samples are grown in this way, differing only in the thickness of the GaN quantum disk with nominal values of . , . , and . nm. A sample without quantum disk, but otherwise identical (Al,Ga)N nanowires on a GaN base serves as comparison. The nanowires thus obtained have an average length of . μm (close to the expected value) and an average equivalent disk diameter at their top of nm. The mean density of nanowires in the ensemble is 3 × 10 9 cm -2 . Top-and sideview secondary electron micrographs of the sample with a .nm-thick-disk are shown in the Supporting Information. The morphological properties of the as-grown GaN/(Al,Ga)N nanowires are studied by scanning electron microscopy carried out in a Hitachi S-field emission microscope using an acceleration voltage of kV (see Supporting Information). Single nanowires in cross-sectional specimens are investigated by transmission electron microscopy. The crosssections are prepared by mechanical grinding and dimpling followed by Ar-ion beam milling down to electron transparency. Scanning transmission electron microscopy is performed by using a JEOL F field emission instrument equipped with a bright-field and a dark-field detector and operated at kV. High-angle annular dark-field micrographs of the nanowires reflect the chemical contrast be-tween the GaN quantum disk and the surrounding (Al,Ga)N segments. The composition of single nanowires is investigated by energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy and atom probe tomography. The former is performed using an EDAX Apollo XV silicon drift detector attached to a Zeiss Ultra field emission scanning electron microscope operated at kV. The latter is carried out using a Cameca LEAP X-HR system. Single nanowires from the ensemble with the . nm thick quantum disks are isolated in an FEI Nova Nanolab i. Welds are created by electron-induced metal deposition of Pt or Co. The selected nanowire is mounted on a tip, and the evaporation of atoms is triggered by a laser generating picosecond pulses at a wavelength of nm. Since the (Al,Ga)N nanowire absorbs only weakly at this wavelength, a comparatively high pulse energy of pJ is used. Due to the increase in Al content toward the bottom of the nanowire, only the top nm of the nanowire are evaporated and analyzed. The field-of-view probed in these experiments is about nm. For the investigation of the optical properties of the nanowire ensembles, the as-grown samples are mounted onto the cold finger of a liquid He cryostat allowing continuous control of the sample temperature between and K. Cathodoluminescence spectroscopy is carried out at room temperature with a Gatan Mo-noCL system fitted to a Zeiss Ultra fieldemission scanning electron microscope operated at kV with a probe current of . nA. The signal is spectrally dispersed by a monochromator and detected using a photomultiplier tube. Continuous-wave photoluminescence spectroscopy is performed by exciting the ensembles with the nm ( . eV) line of a Coherent Innova C FreD Ar + ion laser focused to a spot of about . μm diameter yielding an excitation density on the order of W/cm 2 . The signal is spectrally dispersed by a monochromator and detected with a cooled charge-coupled device array. Time-resolved PL measurements are performed by exciting the ensemble with the second harmonic ( nm) of -fs-pulses from an APE optical parametric oscillator synchronously pumped by a Coherent Mira Ti:sapphire laser, which itself is pumped by a Coherent Verdi V frequency-doubled Nd:YVO 4 laser. The pulses with an energy of pJ are focused onto the sample with a -mm plano-convex lens to a spot with a diameter of μm. The transient PL signal is dispersed by a monochromator and detected by a Hamamatsu C streak camera with a temporal resolution set to about ps. The band profiles and electron densities are obtained by one-dimensional Schrödinger-Poisson simulations performed with 1DPoisson. For the polarization of Al x Ga 1-x N, we assume a value of -2×10 -6 (1+ 2.1x + 0.475x 2 ) C/cm 2 (the negative sign is due to the fact that the nanowires grow in the [000 1] direction). This value is about half of that predicted theoretically, but in agreement with the majority of experimental results. For the conduction band offset between GaN and (Al,Ga)N, we take the value reported by Tchernycheva et al. The spontaneous recombination rate is calculated from Fermi's golden rule assuming k conservation as , where ρ r (E) is the reduced density of states, f c (E) and f v (E) are the Fermi-Dirac distributions for the conduction and the valence bands, respectively, and R 0 is a prefactor. Details of this calculation are presented in the Supporting Information.