The nature of light-matter interaction is governed by the spatial-temporal structures of a light field and material wavefunctions. The emergence of the light beam with transverse phase vortex, or equivalently orbital angular momentum (OAM) has been providing intriguing possibilities to induce unconventional optical transitions beyond the framework of the electric dipole interaction. The uniqueness stems from the OAM transfer from light to material, as demonstrated using the bound electron of a single trapped ion. However, many aspects of the vortex light-matter interaction are still unexplored especially in solids with extended electronic states. Here, we unambiguously visualized dipole-forbidden multipolar excitations in a solid-state electron system; spoof localized surface plasmon, selectively induced by the terahertz vortex beam. The results obey the selection rules governed by the conservation of the total angular momentum, which is numerically confirmed by the electromagnetic field analysis. Our results show light's OAM can be efficiently transferred to an elementary excitation in solids. The Fermi's golden rule defines whether an optical transition between quantum mechanical states is allowed or not. In the common case of the plane wave with no transverse phase structure in the long-wavelength regime (field gradient along the propagation direction is ignored), one obtains dipole selection rules, which has been successful in describing a variety of linear optical phenomena The vortex beam with the orbital angular momentum (OAM) However, the transition probability of such a transition is very small due to the significant size mismatch between the diffraction-limited spot size of the vortex beam (~ 1000 nm) and the spatial extent of the electronic wavefunction (< tens of nm) In this context, electrons in solids with extended wavefunctions are expected to provide a promising platform for studying vortex light-matter interaction Let us first characterize the THz excitation beam, which is measured without metallic structures. Linearly polarized coherent THz pulses are focused to the electro-optic (EO) crystal (LiNbO3) by two lenses (Fig. We can see a vortex rotating counter-clockwise (Fig. To visualize the near-field pattern due to spoof LSPs, we fabricated corrugated gold disks directly on the top surface of the EO substrate (Fig. Figure These observations indicate that multipole spoof LSPs are excited by using vortex beams. To clearly illustrate this point, we performed the following analysis. The orthogonal functional forms of the electric field [cos(mj), m: integer] for different LSP modes allow us to decompose the complicated field pattern into the superposition of each mode. See Methods for the proof of the one-to-one correspondence between the LSP modes and cosine functions for their electric field distributions. For this purpose, we focused on the electric field along the outer circle of the sample as we have done in Fig. Figure These results allow us to deduce the selection rules for the excitation of multipole spoof LSPs. Table The selection rules inferred by the experiments are exactly the same as the ones predicted for real LSPs by numerical simulations We succeeded in selectively exciting dipole-forbidden eigen modes of spoof LSPs, multipolar modes with high OAM, using the phase vortex beam. The efficient TAM transfer from light to spoof LSPs are achieved. This is due to the negligible electron scattering in metals in the THz frequency region that assures the coherent collective motion of electrons over the entire sample with a similar size to the excitation beam. Theory predicts similar TAM transfer to a variety of elementary excitations in solids such as single electronic states Spiral phase plate. We used two SPPs made of ZEONEX (cyclo olefin polymer, refractive index 1.52) with different step heights. SPP-1 is nominally designed to convert the Gaussian beam into the vortex beam (±ħ) at 0.45 THz. The step height is 1.29 mm. SPP-2 has a step of 2.18 mm, which generates the vortex beam (±2ħ) at 0.53 THz. The steps are discretized to 16 small steps. The sign of the OAM can be inverted by reversing the SPP in the beam path. As schematically shown in Fig. We ignore the time-dependence (rotation of the charge distribution) at this moment and calculate the static electric field, E >⃗ ? where A0, B0, Al, and A'l are coefficients determined by boundary conditions. In order to avoid the divergence of the electric field in the limit of r → 0 and r → ∞, the electric field distributions have to take the following forms, From the boundary condition, RE >⃗ (r ≥ r # , φ) -E >⃗ (r ≤ r # , φ)U • e ⃗ $ = ρ ? (φ) at r = r0, we obtain the following result for the static electric field around rl(j), E >⃗ ? (r, φ) = lA ? r I?IL Rcos(lφ By taking the projection onto the detection polarization axis e ⃗ # = e ⃗ $ cos(φ) -e ⃗ % sin(φ), the azimuthal angle dependence of the electric field detected in the experiment is, When rl(j) rotates as rl(j,t) = cos(lj ∓ 2pft) = cos(±lj -2pft), additional electric field components such as radiation field and induced field are generated. However, in the near field regime, the following quasi-static field is the dominant one, E ? (φ, t) ∝ cos(±(l + 1)φ -2πft) By replacing ±(l + 1) by m = ±2 (dipole), ±3 (quadrupole), and so on, we have As mentioned in the main text, this shows different LSP modes correspond one-to-one to cosine functions which are orthogonal to each other. Similar calculation for l = 0, i.e., a uniform surface charge r0(j) ∝ Const. leads to the following form, These functions E b (φ, t) (m = ±1, ±2, ±3, ...) plus E # (φ, t) = Const. form a complete set for symmetric field distributions about j = 0 with the period of 2p. The dispersion relation of the spoof surface plasmons that propagate on the periodically corrugated metal surfaces is given as follows Here, k is the wavevector along the surface, and c is the speed of light. The asymptotic (cutoff) frequency in the limit of k → ∞ is c 4n x (R -r) ⁄ . By folding the surface to make a corrugated metallic disk, k becomes the wavevector along the circumference, which is quantized due to the periodic boundary condition. We used eq. ( We numerically calculated the electromagnetic field in our system using the finite-element method in the commercial software COMSOL Multiphysics with an RF module. We performed three-dimensional harmonic propagation calculation with perfectly matched layers (PMLs) on the side and lower boundaries, plus the scattering boundary condition on the top surface. At the top surface, we excited the THz incident beam and made it propagate in the z direction, normal to the EO crystal. The perfect electric conductor was used at the surface of the corrugated disk to simulate the spoof LSP. To ensure the good match in the resonance frequency between the experiment and the simulation, an air layer of 1 μm thickness was introduced above the corrugated disk. Figure The OAM purity of the excitation beam can be evaluated by the same field pattern analysis performed in the main text. The drawings on the top of Fig. We performed two-dimensional Fourier transform of E(j, t) taken from the excitation beams (Fig As shown in the main text and above, cos(±2j) component contains information on the dipole LSP mode and vortex beam (±2ħ). This is the reason why we eliminate the excitation beam signal in time-domain for the LSP mode identification done in the main text. Figure As described in the Methods section, the cutoff frequency of the spoof LSP is inversely proportional to the groove depth (R -r). Accordingly, the resonance frequency of the spoof LSP is expected to increase as the groove depth becomes shallow. To verify this point, we fabricated corrugated metallic disks with differing groove depths (outer radius R = 100 μm is fixed). Figure Figure 