Recently, the field of Metal-Insulator-Transition (MIT) materials has emerged as an unconventional solution for novel energy efficient electronic functions, such as steep slope subthermionic switches, neuromorphic hardware, reconfigurable radiofrequency functions, new types of sensors, teraherz and optoelectronic devices. Designing radiofrequency (RF) electronic circuits with a MIT material like vanadium dioxide, VO2, requires the understanding of its physics and appropriate models and tools, with predictive capability over large range of frequency (1-100GHz). In this work, we develop 3D Smith charts for devices and circuits having complex frequency dependences, like the ones resulting by the use of MIT materials. The novel foundation of a 3D Smith chart involves here the geometrical fundamental notions of oriented curvature and variable homothety in order to clarify first theoretical inconsistencies in Foster and Non Foster circuits, where the driving point impedances exhibit mixed clockwise and counter-clockwise frequency dependent paths on the Smith chart as frequency increases. We show here the unique visualization capability of a 3D Smith chart, which allows to quantify orientation over variable frequency. The new 3D Smith chart is applied as a 3D multi-parameter modelling and design environment for the complex case of Metal-Insulator-Transition (MIT) materials where their permittivity is dependent on the frequency. In this work, we apply 3D Smith charts to on Vanadium Dioxide (VO2) reconfigurable Peano inductors. We report fabricated inductors with record quality factors using VO2 phase transition to program multiple tuning states, operating in the range 4 GHz to 10 GHz. Finally, the 3D Smith chart enables the design and fabrication of a new variety of Peano curves filters that are also used to experimentally extract the frequency-dependent dielectric constant of VO2 within 1 GHz-50 GHz, a quasi-unexplored field of major importance for the accurate predictive design of radio frequency electronic applications with phase change materials. The Smith chart, invented in 1939 1 , is a graphical tool widely used in various fields of electrical engineering and applied physics when dealing with frequency dependent reflection coefficients or impedances. The Smith chart is widely employed in the design/measurement stage of a large variety of circuits, from metasurfaces 2 to coils 3 (Supplementary Fig. An essential drawback of the Smith chart and previous 3D Smith chart representations [1][2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13] is the lack of visualization of the variable parameter (frequency), thus the orientation changes and dynamics of the scattering parameters frequency dependency being impossible to be pictured. Although many circuits exhibit a clockwise orientation of their driving point impedances and reflection parameters curves as frequency increases [2][3][4][5]9 ,( 6,10unspecified), the absence of a clockwise motion (i.e. discontinuity points or counter-clockwise motion) was often reported leading to diverse interpretations. In active devices (transistors), as for example in 14,15 it is referred as "kink-phenomenon", in lossless (purely reactive) non-Foster circuits (such as negative capacitors and inductors) 16- 19 , as an intrinsic phenomenon. Unfortunately, this counter-clockwise dynamics phenomenon recurrent existence in lossy circuits with non-Foster elements 18,[20][21][22][23] , led to some misleading conclusions: in [20][21][22][23] the authors assume that the existence of this phenomenon proves the presence of a non-Foster element, while in For this purpose, we first introduce the notion of oriented curvature Further the 3D Smith chart is additionally exploited and further developed in order to display simultaneously parameters needed in reconfigurable frequency designs while dealing with inductors. Frequency dependent inductances based on the Y11 The newly developed capabilities are particularly suited to explore and design reconfigurable CMOS-compatible inductors design for microwaves frequencies using a phase change material like Vanadium Dioxide (VO2) The on state limited conductivity levels restricted the quality factors of the reconfigurable inductors fabricated with VO2 in its conductive state Here we further introduce a new type of reconfigurable inductors based on the Peano curves By producing a series of Peano inspired filters (using the space filling property of the curves to shift resonance frequencies down while using limited areas) with a series of different resonance frequencies with or without a thin VO2 layer below them we propose based on a mixed frequency shift model and avoiding the limitations of conformal mapping 43 a more complete model of the effective permittivity including both intrinsic dielectric losses (damping) and conductive losses Based on the notion of oriented curvature introduced and explained in the Supplementary Material, we show that the changes in sign of the reactance frequency derivative do not imply changes in orientation neither for the input impedance nor for the reflection coefficient of 1-port networks (when losses occur). We provide the conditions and equations under which one may have the same orientation (more details in Supplementary Section 1) for both reflection coefficient and input impedances. The lossless (reactive) cases (purely Foster (1) (2) The complex link between the change of sign of ( Denoting with x mF (ω) and B mF (ω) the reactance and susceptance of purely Foster elements and with x mNF (ω) and B mNF (ω) the ones for Non Foster elements we obtain: for Foster networks r m (ω) =0 while In the case of two port networks with equal port impedances similar computations can be done for purely Foster and non-Foster elements resulting in the corresponding reflection coefficients Γ 2zmF and Γ 2zmNF with their corresponding oriented curvatures k Γ 2zmF (ω)= -2 and k Γ 2zmNF (ω)= 2. Their oriented curvature magnitudes explain their paths on 0.5 radius circles in Fig. The results plotted in Fig. The S parameters of the inductors are directly converted by the new implementations in the software tool into the series inductance model LSeries(ω) LSeries, shunt 3d (ω) = (LSeriesN, shunt N (ω) + 1) * S 11 3d (jω) (5) The quality factor Q(ω) of the inductors is also computed by the new 3D Smith chart tool implementation using classical conversion formulas (from the S parameters) (see Supplementary Section 2) and normalized to its maximum over the frequency range of interest obtaining Q N (ω). Using the 3D representation of the LSeries, shunt 3d (ω) curves we then use the normal plane of the curves to associate to each (frequency) point of them the quality factor as a cylinder of variable radius associated to its normalized value Q 3D (ω). In Fig. The new implementation helps one to visualize key parameters of interest in the same time and thus supports and gives new insights, unreachable by any other means to our best knowledge, in the design stages of an inductor where one needs Q↑, stable series and shunt inductance (or both) over a large frequency range while maintaining the matching information S 11 3d (jω). As a case study of the 3D Smith chart and its predictive capabilities for radiofrequency design with VO2, we have designed and fabricated a reconfigurable inductor based on the Peano curve of order 2 by means of VO2 switches. Its geometry is presented in Fig. The small width of the VO2 switches (0.6 μm at the limit of photolithography) minimizes the losses while in the on state, while their increased length (120 μm) contributes too to this effort (a tilted photo of the switch in Fig. The inductor has been designed and simulated in the Ansys HFSS commercial software tool with the aim: to obtain a higher Q than in The measured inductances and quality factors plotted in Fig. The overall performances of the inductor with two switches on, two switches off and of a fabricated inductor with one switch on are all plotted together in Fig. On the other hand, the limited off state (at room temperature) quality factor (Q) is comparable with the one reported in The design of radiofrequency functions in wideband applications, with accurate predictive capability, pointed out the need of an accurate modeling and extraction of main parameters of VO2 such as the relative effective dielectric permittivity as a function of frequency, for which the reports in the literature are limited or inconsistent. A new extraction approach and new data are presented in the following section. The current ignores the VO2 switches and goes through all the windings in its path from port 1 (input) to port 2 (output). d, VO2 switch fabricated photo: a gap in the contact metal of 0.6μm is left in order to contact the VO2 layer. In the insulating phase of VO2 the switch is in off state (acting like a lossy dielectric), in the conductive state of the VO2 the 600nm gap plays an important role to minimize the conductive losses since the VO2 has a limited 40,000S/m conductivity on the SiO2/Si substrate. e, Current distribution (5GHz) in the hypothetical on state of one switch while the other is in the off state. The current ignores the off state VO2 switch and follows a shorter path from input to output. f, Current distribution (5 GHz) in the on state for an inductor with 2 switches. All current distributions are within a range from 0.5 A/m (dark blue) to 5.2 A/m (intense red) using the same scale. g, Series inductance of the fabricated inductors with 2 switches, in on state and off state, series inductance of an inductor with one switch in on state. h, Quality factor of the inductor with 2 switches in off state and on state, and of an inductor with one switch (on state) i, Simultaneous 3D Smith chart representation for the 2 GHz-10 GHz frequency of the series inductance and quality factors for all 3 situations. Space filling curves can be also used to generate resonating structures with a variety of central frequencies using very limited space. To generate resonating frequencies within the 1 GHz-50 GHz microwave spectrum we use tenths of Peano inspired defected ground plane structures (DGS) in the coplanar waveguides (CPW). Peano curves of order 3 kind of DGS (which have 9 times the complexity of the Peano curve of order 2) are used to generate resonance frequencies below 10 GHz (Fig. To overcome limitations of previously reported models of the VO2 of the ε reff (f) for the 1 GHz-50 GHz frequency ranges We have first reported new theoretical foundations for a frequency-dependent 3D Smith with 3D visualization methods for the orientation of parametric curves and used them to quantify and understand curvature reversal, while sweeping the frequency, of driving point impedances and reflection coefficients of circuits in the RF frequency bands. Further we have additionally extended the capabilities of the tool to simultaneously envision a variety of frequency dependent parameters required in the inductor design and thus proposed a unique multiparameter display. We demonstrated by design, fabrication and measurements, original Peano reconfigurable inductors by employing the phase change VO2 materials in CPW/ CMOS compatible technology on SiO2. The reported inductors improve the previously reported state of art in the incipient field of VO2 reconfigurable inductors design for the S, C and X band of the radio frequency spectrum. Last, a variety of first-time DGS Peano structures resonating within the mobile, satellite communications and military bands were fabricated in CPW CMOS compatible technology in order to extract based on a frequency shift, for the first time, the VO2 dielectric constant within the 1 GHz-50 GHz frequency range and to propose and validate a more general and accurate model for it. The devices were fabricated using a high resistivity (10000 Ω•cm) Si wafer (525 μm) as the starting substrate. A 300 nm-thick amorphous Si was deposited by low pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD), to reduce the losses during measurement. A surface passivation using 500 nm sputtered SiO2 was then carried out, followed by deposition of 140 nm (and 170nm)-thick VO2 using a Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD) system The film was deposited by pulsed lased deposition (PLD) using a Solmates SMP 800 system. The deposition was performed at 400 C in oxygen ambient, with a chamber pressure of 0.01 mbar. The ablated V2O5 target was placed at 60 mm distance from the wafer. Further the deposition, an annealing of 10 min at 475 C was performed without breaking the vacuum in the chamber. The fabrication process for the Peano filters on the above substrate then commenced with a photolithography step to pattern the VO2 followed dry etching to remove the VO2 from the unwanted areas. A Cr-20 nm/ Al-400 nm bi-layer metal stack was then deposited by evaporation after a subsequent photolithography step on the patterned VO2. This thin metallization made it possible to realize sub-micron gaps (600 nm) which is critical for extracting a good Q in the conductive state of VO2 for the inductors. This was followed by deposition of a 2.4 μm-thick Al layer on these contact pads by conventional lithography followed by metal lift-off procedure to form the CPW elements with low RF losses. The numerical simulations of the inductor and filters were done in HFSS ANSYS commercial software relying on the finite element method (FEM) to solve Maxwell equations. Considering the full wave electromagnetic simulation technique, we used the modal solution type for the inductors and the terminal solution type for the filter simulations. The conductivity of the Al was decreased to 3.1*10^7S/m and the VO2 switches were modeled for the inductors as simple dielectrics with 20S/m losses and a loss tangent of 0 in the off state. In the on state, the VO2 switches were simulated as lossy metals of a conductivity of 40,000S/m. Subsequently full inductors and filters models were built in the software according to the actual physical structure fabricated. The Peano shapes were implemented using the Equation Curve facility of the tool, their equations being written parametrically and where needed rotations and reflections were used for the very final shapes. In the case of the filters an extensive de-embedding was used in order to extract the frequency dependent model of VO2 using variable dielectric constant, tan of losses and conductivity by fitting the results obtained. In the frequency model of the relative effective dielectric permittivity all parameters available in the HFSS model were used (frequency dependency of the dielectric constant, loss tangent, conductivity losses) The devices were measured with the Anrtisu Vector Star VNA in a Cascade Summit prober with controllable chuck temperature who was set to 20 °C in the "off state" and 100 °C in the on state. For the 2D graphical interpretation the measured S parameters were converted using the Anritsu Star VNA installed Microwave Office too into the desired parameters analyzed. The 3D Smith Chart application is developed using the Java programming language and the following libraries and development environment are used: -3D rendering: OpenGL through the Java Binding for the Open GL API (JOGL2) library; -Mathematical operations and complex data representation: the Apache Commons Mathematics Library; -Development environment: The NetBeans IDE with Beans Binding Library for the implementation of the application GUI and JOGL2 usage. Further implementation details about the new mode of visualization, new simulation parameters used in the paper and their 3D representation on the Riemann sphere can be found in Supplementary Section 2. The calculations for the oriented curvature was performed using Mathematica software tool by writing the frequency parametric equations of the curves analyzed. In 8 it is stated (for the particular case of an antenna) "Usually, the impedance of any antenna moves about the Smith chart in a clockwise direction with increasing frequency. However, this behavior is not dependent on the antenna obeying the Foster reactance theorem". We will construct our proposed theory based on the notion of oriented curvature The formula for the oriented curvature for an arbitrary parameterization of C(ω)= r(ω)+j x(ω) is obtained Then, the curvature sign is positive if the projection of C′′(ω) on the normal vector has the same direction as n(ω) and negative in other case. As C′′(ω) is the variation of the tangent vector t(ω) and the normal vector n(ω) completes the positively oriented orthonormal base {t(ω), n(ω)} (i.e. it is always to the left of the tangent vector), then one gets that k(ω) is positive when the curve is turning "left" with respect to the tangent vector and negative when it turns "right". Therefore, the oriented curvature of a plane curve gives us information about the orientation of the curve and it is easy to see that the lines have zero curvature and that the curves with negative curvature are curves clockwise oriented and the curves with positive curvature are counterclockwise oriented. Consider first a one port network ended on a resistive load r. The input impedance z m (jω) is given by (S3), where r m (ω) denotes its resistive part and x m (ω) its reactive part, while its reflection coefficient is given by (S4). Computing the oriented curvature values for both of them we get k zm (ω) (the oriented curvature of the input impedance) and k Γ 1zm (ω) (the oriented curvature of the reflection coefficient) as (S5) and (S6). In any other case, the changes of sign between (S5) and (S6) as the angular frequency changes will depend on the sign of the numerator of the total expression (S6) and the following relation has to be obeyed so that both curvatures should have the same sign: This condition will assure that both curvatures have the same sign and therefore the same orientation. Any passive, causal, linear and stable network which can be realized by resistors, capacitors, inductors and transformers has a driving-port immitance characterized in the frequency domain by positive real functions Let us consider a linear one port passive network represented by the following input impedance of the (S10). Making the notations in equations ( As described in (i) and (ii) the changes of sign in the curvature correspond to the changes of orientation in the z m (jω) and Γ 1zm (jω). In Supplementary Fig. Circuits including non-Foster elements can surely exhibit too counter-clockwise Smith chart rotations on certain frequency ranges. The non-Foster elements, which do not obey the Foster reactance theorem Supplementary Fig. Clockwise and counter-clockwise movement of the S parameters occurs but may be overlooked and may be uneasy to be detected on a classical Smith chart. Please look on Supplementary Video. The circuit changes orientation of the S11 parameter at 0.49 GHz. Circuit is analyzed between 0.44 GHz and 0.60 GHz. Let us first consider a simple one port circuit (Supplementary Fig. Let us first consider a simple one port circuit (Supplementary Fig. L 3d (ω) = (L N (ω) + 1) * S 11 3d (jω) (S41) For the 3D representation that uses the quality factor as a 3D variable radius cylinder, the following steps have been implemented for each segment of the 3D space curve: 