We show theoretically that a heterostructure of monolayer FeTe1-xSex -a superconducting quantum spin Hall material -with a monolayer of FeTe -a bicollinear antiferromagnet -realizes a higher order topological superconductor phase characterized by emergent Majorana zero modes pinned to the sample corners. We provide a minimal effective model for this system, analyze the origin of higher order topology, and fully characterize the topological phase diagram. Despite the conventional s-wave pairing, we find rather surprising emergence of a novel topological nodal superconductor in the phase diagram. Featured by edge-dependent Majorana flat bands, the topological nodal phase is protected by an antiferromagnetic chiral symmetry. We also discuss the experimental feasibility, the estimation of realistic model parameters, and the robustness of the Majorana corner modes against magnetic disorder. Our work provides a new experimentally feasible high-temperature platform for both higher order topology and non-Abelian Majorana physics. Introduction -For the past decade iron-based superconductors (FeSCs) have been a central research theme in condensed matter physics, owing to their high superconducting (SC) transition temperature T c , rich phase diagrams, and in particular the puzzle of the origin of pairing In this Letter, we provide an alternative pairingsymmetry-independent route to obtain Majorana bound states in monolayer FTS systems. We demonstrate that Majorana zero modes emerge at physical corners of a sample when a FeTe layer is deposited on top of the FTS monolayer, as shown in Fig. Model Hamiltonian -The low-energy theory of monolayer FTS around the Γ-point is a superconducting version of the Bernevig-Hughes-Zhang (BHZ) model in terms of a choice of 8 × 8 Γ matrices with Here s, σ and τ Pauli matrices denote spin, orbital and particle-hole degrees of freedom, respectively. When 0 < m < 8B, the normal-state part of h BHZ is topologically nontrivial and possesses helical edge modes. However, the s-wave SC pairing necessarily trivializes the band topology of the full BdG model and introduces a pairing gap on the edge. Covering the FTS monolayer with a monolayer FeTe introduces an exchange coupling with the bicollinear AFM order of FeTe to the system. Unlike a conventional collinear AFM, the magnetic moments in the bicollinear AFM flip their orientation every two atoms along the diagonal direction (e.g. the Majorana Corner Modes -To understand the emergence of topological Majorana zero modes in our system, it is instructive to first switch off superconductivity and study the topological consequence of the bicollinear AFM. Despite explicitly breaking the time reversal symmetry Θ, introducing AFM to a QSH system does NOT necessarily destroy the helical edge states. These edge states are instead now protected by an effective TRS Θ M = Θe ikx/2 , which combines Θ with a half-unit-cell translation along a x. As shown in Fig. Due to the crystalline nature of Θ M , not every edge preserves Θ M and is capable of hosting helical edge states. In particular, as shown in Fig. Therefore, the higher order topology in the heterostructure is controlled by the character of the ỹ edge gap where SC and FM compete. This motivates us to construct an effective theory of the ỹ edge that describes the competition between FM and SC, Here δ M is the effective exchange coupling on the ỹ edge, which orignates from the edge projection of the bulk AFM order M . While it is generally difficult to analytically express δ M in terms of M , we numerically confirm a simple linear relation with δ M ≈ β M M . The linear coefficient β M depends on the details of hopping parameters and we find β M 0.678 for our choice of parameters. For nonzero δ M and ∆, the edge topological phase transition occurs when the energy gap of h ỹ closes. The topological condition of HOTSC is thus given by [56], when FM exceeds SC on the ỹ edge. To further confirm Eq. 4, we numerically map out the energy gap distribution in the parameter space spanned by M and ∆ at a fixed μ. As shown in Fig. Emergent Nodal TSC -In the small μ limit, the edge topological condition in Eq. 4 provides a simple analytical diagnostic for the appearance of Majorana corner modes. To explore the fate of higher order topology at finite μ, we fix the value of ∆ and numerically map out the topological phase diagram tuning M and μ. In Fig. The origin of the emergent nodal SC can be understood by projecting s-wave pairing onto the bulk Fermi surface. At zero M , the effective pairing gap ∆ F S (k) is always uniform on the Fermi surface, which simply signals the uniform, isotropic s-wave pairing. As M is turned on from zero, the Fermi surface develops a spin texture such that ∆ F S (k) becomes anisotropic in the Brillouin zone and thus develops momentum contours with ∆ F S (k) = 0. For example, the Fermi surface for (M, ∆, μ) = (0.6, 0.2, 1.2) is mapped out in Fig. These emergent bulk SC nodes carry non-trivial topological charge and thus lead to interesting boundary Majorana physics. By combining the effective TRS Θ M and particle-hole symmetry Π, an AFM chiral symmetry operation is defined as which anticommutes with H FTS . The AFM chiral symmetry allows us in turn to define a topological charge Q [56, 62, 63], and we numerically find for every SC node. The bulk-boundary correspondence then implies the existence of edge Majorana flat bands between SC nodes with opposite topological charges in a nanoribbon geometry. In Fig. Feasibility of Experimental Realization -We now discuss the experimental feasibility of our proposal. We first notice that the fabrication techniques for iron chalcogenide heterostructures are well-developed We also attempt to make some realistic estimates on the energy scales of physical quantities involved in the topological condition of Eq. 4. ARPES studies on the monolayer FeSe system reveal a SC gap ∆ of about 10 meV Conclusion and Discussion -We have established the higher order TSC phase with Majorana corner modes in monolayer Fe(Se,Te) heterostructures, together with an emergent symmetry-protected nodal TSC phase. In addition to our proposed heterostructure being feasible to create, both the Majorana corner modes and the dispersing Majorana edge flat bands exhibit distinct features in local spectroscopy and should therefore be experimentally visible using standard STM techniques. Our proposed realization of Majorana corner modes does not rely on fine-tuning of the chemical potential, nor does it require perfect ordering of moments in the FeTe layer. In the Supplemental Material [56], we consider a disordered model with a fixed density of magnetic defects where ±M → ∓M , which explicitly breaks Θ M , and we find that the corner modes persist even for a substantial defect density. Finally, unlike most previous proposals for higher order TSC Superconductivity in Fe(Se,Te) Heterostructures" The full effective model for the FTS/FT heterostructure is The G matrices describe the sublattice degree of freedom; the hopping matrix elements are described by and the onsite matrix elements are described by diagonal matrices Here M deontes the interlayer exchange coupling between FTS and FT. In particular, G 3 describes opposite coupling for electrons with sublattice i = 1, 2 and i = 3, 4, which captures the bicollinear AFM texture. For convenience, we have assumed the alignment of magnetic moments of FeTe to be along the ±x direction. The model parameter α ∈ [-1, 1] accounts for the possible difference in g factors of p-electrons and d-electrons. Numerically, we find that changing α gives little contribution to the physics we are interested in, so without loss of generality we take α = 0 in our discussion. The key to realize corner Majorana physics is to understand the competition between FM and SC on the ỹ edge. It is instuctive to start from an effective model of the edge theory Here δ M is the induced magnetic gap on ỹ edge, which is generally smaller than the exchange coupling effect M in the bulk. For a given M , the value of δ M can be identified by calculating the energy gap on the ỹ edge at μ = ∆ = 0. In fact, we have numerically confirmed the existence of a simple linear relation between M and δ M , For our choice of parameters with A = B = 1, m = 2, we find that The eigenvalues of H ỹ can be solved analytically, Therefore, the edge topological phase transition happens when the edge energy gap closes. This is equivalent to finding k ỹ such that E = 0 is satisfied. It is straightforward to show that the equation we are solving is which leads to Therefore, the topological phase transition can only happen at k ỹ = 0 when This leads to the topological criterion shown in the main text As discussed in the main text, the effective TRS symmetry Θ M and particle-hole symmetry Π lead to an emergent AFM chiral symmetry C = Θ M Π. In the nodal SC phase, a topological charge Q ∈ Z can be defined based on C to characterize the topological nature of the nodal point. Given {C, H FTS } = 0, we notice that the unitary transformation We then perform a singular value decomposition to N (k), and define The topological charge is simply the winding number of det N (k) along a closed loop L that encloses the nodal point, which is mathematically As shown in Fig. to track the evolution of winding phase integral in Eq. 20. As shown in Fig. We perform first principles calculations to obtain an estimate on the proximity induced exchange coupling in FeTe/Fe(Te,Se) heterostructures. For our purpose, we calculate the energy spectrum of a bilayer FeSe with an experimental lattice constant a = 3.905 Å . In particular, the FeSe in the bottom layer is assumed to be ferromagnetic, while the top layer FeSe is initially non-magnetic. Consequently, the spin splitting for the top layer FeSe in the energy spectrum is expected to provide an approximate strength of the proximity induced exchange coupling effect. The obtained band structure is displayed in Fig. We first characterize the effect of disorder on the edge gap in the spectrum, defined here as the energy of the lowest quasiparticle state above the corner states. In the inset of Fig. This motivates us to consider the effect of individual impurities based on their spatial location. In Fig. We investigate this stability of the Majorana states further by quantitatively characterizing the localization of corner modes through their disorder-averaged inverse participation ratio (averaged also over the four Majorana corner states and the eight particle-hole ⊗ orbital ⊗ spin basis states), We show in an inset to Fig. In summary, we have demonstrated that the HOTSC phase we uncover does not rely on perfect bicollinear AFM order: even for relatively large n imp the bulk remains essentially inert (since the bulk QSH does not require the AFM texture). The main effect of increasing n imp then is increasing the likelihood that a particular realization will contain edge impurities. These edge impurities bind additional low-energy localized states, which can hybridize with the Majorana corner modes to "push" the zero-mode away from the corners, but an isolated zero-mode cannot be eliminated. Instead, a high density of edge impurities is required to push Majoranas from two separate corners together to trivialize them. 