We investigate the electromechanical actuation of a pair of suspended silicon nitride membranes forming a monolithic optomechanical array. By controlling the membrane resonators' tensile stress via a piezoelectrically controlled compressive force applied to the membrane chip we demonstrate noninvasive tuning of their mechanical mode spectrum, as well as strong intermode electromechanical coupling. Piezoelectric actuation is also shown to enhance the nonlinear response of the membranes, which is evidenced either by parametric amplification of the fundamental mode thermal fluctuations or by resonant driving of these modes into high amplitude states. Such an electro-optomechanical membrane array represents an attractive tunable and versatile platform for sensing, photonics and optomechanics applications. Introduction-Electro-optomechanical systems involving high-quality nano/micromechanical resonators and integrating electric and optical degrees of freedom 1 are widely studied for sensing and photonic applications The combination of small effective mass, large area and high mechanical frequencies/quality factors makes suspended membranes made of low-loss material such as silicon nitride excellent resonators for optical sensing Placing arrays of nanomembranes into an optical cavity In this letter we investigate the electromechanical actuation via piezoelectricity of a pair of suspended silicon nitride membranes forming a monolithic optomechanical array. The application of a piezoelectric compressive force to one of the membrane chips allows for modifying the tensile stress of the membranes and, thereby, for tuning their mechanical mode a) Electronic mail: dantan@phys.au.dk spectrum without deteriorating the mechanical quality factors of the resonances. Such a scheme was recently applied to a single membrane resonator Electro-optomechanical array-The array used in this work consists in a pair of commercial 46 , high-stress, 500 μm-square stochiometric silicon nitride thin films (thickness 92 μm) deposited on a 5 mm-square silicon chip (thickness 500 μm). The chips were assembled parallel with each other with an 8.5 μm intermembrane separation (multilayer Si/Si/SiN spacer in Fig. Tuning of mechanical mode spectrum-In the tensile stressdominated regime the vibrational mode frequencies of the membrane resonators are given by ω where T = 715 MPa is the tensile stress, ρ = 2700 kg/m 3 the density of silicon nitride, a = 500 μm the lateral dimension of the membrane and n and m are strictly positive integers. When a static compressive force is applied to the silicon frame, the tensile stress of both films is modified in such a way that opposite, linear frequency shifts with similar magnitude are observed for the (1, 1) and (2, 2) modes of each membrane over the bias voltage range 0-80V, as illustrated in Fig. where γ A,B are the mode mechanical damping rates, ω A,B their resonance frequencies at zero bias voltage, ε A,B V dc the linear voltage dependent frequency shifts, η the intermode coupling constant and F A,B the thermal noise forces (divided by the mode effective mass). Fourier transforming these equations readily yields the Fourier component amplitudes at frequency ω, e.g., where and with a similar expression for x B (ω) when exchanging subscripts A and B. The interferometric signal measured by the spectrum analyzer is proportional to the noise spectrum of x Ax B , S(ω), whose analytical expression can then be obtained from the previous relations. The dashed lines in Fig. Parametric actuation-We now turn to the piezoelectric tuning of the nonlinear response of the mechanics and investigate the parametric amplification where ω α includes the bias voltage shift and where ζ α is proportional to the parametric modulation amplitude V 2ω . The bias voltage is chosen so as to operate away from the degeneracy point for the (1,1) modes, as well as far from resonance with the (2,2) modes, whose frequencies are close to the second harmonic of the fundamental frequencies (the absence of excitation of these modes was verified experimentally). Figure The effect of the bias voltage on the response of each membrane is quite different in nature, though. To assess the effect of biasing on the dynamical response of the membranes, the (1,1) and (2,2) modes of each membranes were driven independently at their mechanical resonance frequency, for a fixed bias voltage and increasing modulation amplitudes, as shown in Fig. In contrast, such a direct parametric modulation of the spring constant does not explain the lowering of the parametric oscillation threshold for A(1, 1), as the linear response of the modes of membrane A-whether at the fundamental or the second harmonic frequency-is fairly independent of the bias voltage. To investigate the role of the biasing on the nonlinear response of membrane A further, its fundamental mode was driven in the high amplitude regime before the onset of bistability. Frequency scans around ω 1,1 of the signal measured by the spectrum analyzer in zero-span mode were performed where F ω is the amplitude of the driving force at frequency ω and β is the Duffing nonlinearity coefficient. For a small nonlinearity and neglecting the thermal force, the Fourier component amplitude at ω is approximately given by a solution of the implicit equation 54 The solid lines in Figs. 6 show the results of global fits of this equation to the data, using low drive power scans to fix ω α and γ α and leaving as free parameters β α and a global amplitude for the driving force, the respective amplitudes being apppropriately scaled by the known applied powers. The fits match well the observed spectra and yield values of β α (in units of x 2 0 × 10 -12 ) of 1.11 ± 0.16 and 1.75 ± 0.07 for V dc = 20 V and 80 V, respectively. Application of a bias voltage thus increases the nonlinear response of membrane A to a driving force at the resonance frequency ω α . Since the nonlinear Duffing term in x 2 α in Eq. ( Conclusion-A simple and noninvasive scheme, based on piezoelectrically-induced stress control, for tuning the vibrational mode frequencies and the nonlinear response of high-Q suspended membrane resonators in a monolithic optomechanical array has been demonstrated. While enhancing their nonlinear response is useful for various sensing applications, tuning the mechanics and engineering electromechanical couplings in such electro-optomechanical arrays is essential for future collective optomechanics investigations.