We numerically study reservoir computing on a spin-torque oscillator (STO) array, describing the magnetization dynamics of the STO array by a nonlinear oscillator model. The STOs exhibit synchronized oscillation due to coupling by magnetic dipolar fields. We show that reservoir computing can be performed using the synchronized oscillation state. The performance can be improved by increasing the number of STOs. The performance becomes highest at the boundary between the synchronized and disordered states. Using an STO array, we can achieve higher performance than that of an echo-state network with similar number of units. This result indicates that STO arrays are promising for hardware implementation of reservoir computing. Reservoir computing Recently, reservoir computing on spin-torque oscillators (STOs) In this paper, we investigate reservoir computing on an array of STOs coupled by magnetic dipolar fields, as shown in Fig. We place N STOs on a square lattice with a size of M × M (= N ) as shown in Fig. For reservoir computing, we utilize the dynamics of the oscillation powers and phases (or frequencies) of the STOs where t, c i , δω i (p i ), Γ i (p i ), and Ω ij (i = 1, 2, • • • , N ) are the time, complex amplitudes representing the slowlyvarying magnetization dynamics, the nonlinear frequency shifts originating from magnetic anisotropy, the effective damping rates taking account of Gilbert damping and the spin-transfer torque, and the coupling strengths between the STOs caused by the dipolar fields, respectively. Here, a uniform high-frequency oscillation factor has been eliminated (see Sec. B 1). δω i (p i ) and Γ i (p i ) are supposed to depend on a dimensionless oscillation power p i = |c i | 2 . Assuming a linear dependence of δω i (p i ) and Γ i (p i ) on p i where p i0 , N f , Γ p , and ξ i (t) are the stationary oscillation power, the nonlinear frequency shift, the rate of damping of power, and the modulation by an input signal, respectively, in units of frequency In the array, the dipolar fields between the nearestneighbor STOs Ω, and between the next-nearest-neighbor STOs, Ω/ √ 8, are taken into account, as the dipolar field is inversely proportional to the cube of the distance. Differences between the STOs are modeled by taking p i0 as a Gaussian random variable with a mean of p 0 . In this work, the input signal is applied to an STO at the corner of the array, namely STO1 in Fig. Reservoir computing utilizes the dynamics of the waveforms induced by the input signals. Figure Next, we explain reservoir computing on the STO array. We evaluate its performance by following the setting used in Ref. We evaluate the performance by using short-term memory (STM) and parity-check (PC) tasks is 0 for even S and 1 for odd S. The capacities are measured by C τ , where C τ is the square of the correlation coefficient of ȳk and y k called a τ -delay capacity (0 ≤ C τ ≤ 1). Here, τ max = 500. A larger C τ means higher performance, and C τ reaches its maximum value of 1 when ȳk = y k . The performances are evaluated for 20 sets of (p i0 , s k ), and the average values of the performances and standard deviations are calculated. Figures The data in Figs. Figure The largest values of the STM and PC capacities obtained in the present study are 46.4 at N = 400 and T s = 2 ns, and 6.4 at N = 196 and T s = 50 ns, respectively. These values are larger than the values for an ESN with 500 units reported in Ref. A possible reason for this large STM capacity is that the STOs have a phase degree of freedom, where the phases are time integrations of the oscillation frequencies in the past. In the STO array, the phases affect the time evolution of the powers, and a memory for longer time can be obtained from the powers. In an ESN, on the other hand, each unit has only one variable and shows damped motion in reservoir computing, which suppresses the past memory. Studies of reservoir computing on general nonlinear oscillator networks are an important topic for future work. Another difference which can lead to higher performance of an STO array than of an ESN is in the network structure. The STOs here are coupled by short-range interaction. This kind of weak connection allows various cooperative dynamics suitable for reservoir computing Finally, we investigate the dependence of the STM and PC capacities on the coupling, and find that the capacities depend strongly on the coupling strength. To clarify the reason for these dependences of the capacities, we examine the oscillation states of the STO array under the corresponding conditions. The oscillation states are characterized by an order parameter ρ which are shown in Figs. To see more clearly the relation between the performance and the oscillation state, we plot the capacities and the order parameter as a function of |Ω| in Fig. The decrease of ρ with increasing N is due to the shortrange interaction between the STOs. By designing the STOs in the array to couple through a long-range interaction, e.g., by using a common electrode We investigate reservoir computing on an STO array coupled by dipolar fields. Numerical experiments on reservoir computing are performed by using a corresponding nonlinear oscillator model, which exhibits synchronized oscillation. As a result, we show that the performance of reservoir computing is improved by increasing the number of STOs in the synchronized oscillation state. The values of the STM and PC capacities for N ≤ 400 can be larger than those for an ESN with 500 units. In particular, the maximum STM capacity is more than twice that of an ESN. The largest capacities are obtained at the boundary between the synchronized and disordered states. We believe that the results can be explained by an enhancement of the capacities at the edge of chaos. The present results indicate that STO arrays are promising for the hardware implementation of reservoir computing. The performance can be further improved by introducing methods in reservoir computing not included here, such as time multiplexing. In this paper, the effects of thermal fluctuations To realize the reservoir computing on an STO array, further considerations of several factors are necessary. We expect that an array of pillar-shaped magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs) like those in magnetoresistive random access memories We show an example of the magnetization dynamics of STOs by solving the LLGS equation. The LLGS equation for the magnetizations of a free layer of STOs m i (i = 1, 2, • • • , N ) normalized by the saturation magnetization M s is given by where N , t, γ, and α are the number of STOs, the time, the gyromagnetic ratio, and the Gilbert damping, respectively. H eff i and T S i = σI i m i × (m i × e p ) are an effective field and a spin-torque term with efficiency σ, current I i , and unit vector in the direction of the spin polarization of the current e p . Owing to Hz, ep = (cos 5 • , 0, sin 5 • ) is assumed. Neighboring STOs are separated by 50 nm. The mean and standard deviation of Ii are 20 mA and 0.2 mA, respectively. The initial directions of mi are randomized in the plane of miz = 0. In the example, we choose an array of typical STOs with in-plane magnetized free and fixed layers, having a rectangular shape. A small (50 2 × 10 nm 3 ) and thus uniform m i is assumed. A perpendicular field H z is applied, yielding an out-of-plane precession (OPP) for large I i where the term including H eff i is transformed exactly, while the damping and spin-torque terms are represented by using an effective damping rate Γ i , which is discussed in Sec. B 2. Here, we assume uniform magnetizations in each STO. In the OPP, H eff iz mainly determines the precession axis and frequency ωi = γH eff iz . Besides, H eff ix -iH eff iy is due to the dipolar fields from the other STOs. Although the prefactor includes m iz , this prefactor depends little on ci , because m iz is almost constant for the OPP. The term including H eff ix -iH eff iy reduces to the coupling term as follows. We approximate, for simplicity, the magnetization of a free layer of volume V by a point magnetic moment μ = M s V m. The dipolar field at the position r = (x, y, z) arising from this moment at the origin is given by Then, On the same plane, i.e., r = (x, y, 0), Thus Eq. (B1) can be written as where 2 / 2|r i -r j | 5 . Here r i represents the position of STO i. We assume that the STOs generate a common frequency ω when isolated in the steady state, and that the variation of the frequencies is caused by the nonlinear frequency shifts δω i . Thus, the oscillation frequencies are represented by ωi = ω + δω i . Then, the uniform oscillation with frequency ω is decoupled by ci = c i e -iωt as dc Note that an oscillating factor with a frequency 2ω appears in the coefficient of c * j . This term does not affect the dynamics of c i when c i varies slowly, as shown in the following. We assume that the timescale of the change of c i is much longer than the oscillation period 2π/ω and that c i can be approximated by a constant during 2π/ω. Then, by averaging Eq. (B6) for a time π/ω, the term including c * j vanishes owing to the factor e 2iωt , and hence the nonlinear oscillator model, is obtained. This averaging is equivalent to using a variable The numerical order of magnitude of |Ω ij | can be estimated as follows. In the typical case of m 2 iz = 0.5, M s = 1.6 × 10 3 emu/cm 3 , and V = 50 2 × 10 nm 3 , |Ω ij | is 0.031 ns -1 and 0.25 ns -1 for center-to-center distances of 200 nm and 100 nm, respectively, indicating that |Ω ij | is of the order of 0.01 ns -1 to 0.1 ns -1 . The effective damping rate Γ i is assumed to be a function of the current I i , while the nonlinear frequency shift δω i is not Here, the Gilbert damping term is transformed to this form [the second term in the right-hand side of Eq. (B9)] by assuming α 2 1 and |ασI| 1, which is valid for typical STOs. We consider the OPP and assume H eff in the z direction. By supposing e p = e px x + e pz ẑ (where x and ẑ are unit vectors in the x and z directions), the spin-torque term can be divided into two terms. The term including e pz ẑ is collinear with the Gilbert damping term and can balance and cancel that term, allowing a stationary oscillation state. From these terms, the effective damping rate can be expressed as Γ = αγH eff z -σIe pz m z , which depends explicitly on I and is almost constant for the OPP. On the other hand, the term including e px x can have a component parallel to the first torque term -γm × H eff , which determines the oscillation frequency. The total contribution of the e px x term during one precession, however, is small because the component in the direction of the first torque term changes sign during the precession and cancels out The forms of Γ i and δω i used in Eqs. ( where the first term is expressed by using a damping rate of the power We express the second term yielded by the input signal as The minus sign is because the spin-transfer torque works as a negative damping, which is proportional to the current. As we assume that δω i = 0 at p i = p i0 and δω i does not depend explicitly on I i , δω i is approximated as δω i N f (p i -p i0 ). This kind of description of the current modulation has been developed in Ref. Appendix C: NARMA TASK Here, we show the performance in the NARMA task, where series defined by nonlinear recurrence relations are emulated, and the ability to predict nonlinear time series is measured. We perform a NARMA task defined by the following equation: y k+1 = 0.4y k +0.4y k y k-1 +0.6s 3 k +0.1 for s k consisting of uniform random numbers in (0, 0.2), called the NARMA2 task The results for the NARMA2 task are shown in Fig. 