The fabrication of atomically precise structures with designer electronic properties is one of the emerging topics in condensed matter physics. The required level of structural control can either be reached through atomic manipulation using the tip of a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) or by bottom-up chemical synthesis. In this review, we focus on recent progress in constructing novel, atomically precise artificial materials: artificial lattices built through atom manipulation and graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) realized by on-surface synthesis. We summarize the required theoretical background and the latest experiments on artificial lattices, topological states in onedimensional lattices, experiments on graphene nanoribbons and graphene nanoribbon heterostructures, and topological states in graphene nanoribbons. Finally, we conclude our review with an outlook to designer quantum materials with engineered electronic structure. Creating and studying nanostructures where each atom is in a well-defined, pre-determined position is currently being vigorously pursued within condensed-matter physics and materials chemistry research communities. This type of atomic-level control cannot be achieved by standard high-resolution lithographic techniques such as electron beam lithography. At the same time, it would obviously open a new path to constructing materials with engineered electronic properties and there are approaches available that are making it a reality. The required precision can either be reached by positioning every atom of the nanostructure by the tip of a scanning probe microscope, or by clever bottom-up chemical strategies that allow direct synthesis of well-defined structures from molecular precursors. Atom manipulation by scanning tunnelling microscope (STM) or atomic force microscope (AFM) can be used on single-crystal surfaces to place individual atoms on the desired positions to construct proof-of-principle -type individual nanostructures In the case of the GNRs, this includes being able to predetermine the atomic width of the ribbon and its precise edge structure. We will review both approaches to achieve novel artificial materials with engineered electronic properties. We will start by discussing the relevant key concepts required for understanding the cutting-edge experimental results that have been reached in recent years. For example, the control of the lattice structure gives complete control over the resulting band structure; e.g., creating a lattice with the honeycomb symmetry will mimic the extraordinary electronic properties of graphene that arise from the symmetry of the hexagonal lattice with a two-atom unit cell Tight-binding model for two-dimensional lattices. In considering the electronic structure of artificial lattices, we need some theoretical, conceptual understanding of how the lattice symmetry is connected to the electronic structure. This can be offered by the tight-binding (TB) theory, which considers the band structure arising from electrons hopping between localized atomic orbitals |Ψ i where i is the on-site energy and c † i , c j are the creation and annihilation operators. In principle, the summation runs over all atom pairs i, j , but it is often sufficient to restrict this to the nearest-and next-nearest neighbours. The eigenenergies and eigenstates of the system can then be calculated by diagonalizing the Hamiltonian. The power of the TB model can be introduced by considering a couple of lattices shown in Fig. The flat bands are interesting as they are prone to electronic instabilities and spontaneous symmetry breaking at (near) half filling. Depending on whether the electron-electron interactions are attractive or repulsive, this would result in the system becoming superconducting or magnetic, respectively Experiments on artificial lattices. The idealized concepts presented in the previous section on band structure engineering can be realized in artificial lattices by STM manipulation Previous work has shown that artificial quantum corrals, quantum mirages and quantum holographic encoding can be constructed through the confinement of electrons The exciting electronic properties of massless Dirac fermions in graphene have motivated research into artificial honeycomb lattices (artificial graphene) by different means such as ultra-cold atomic gases, phononic and photonic lattices, and two-dimensional electron gases in semiconductor nanopatterns Using the same strategy, experiments have developeded rapidly in recent years in realizing more complicated lattice structures such as the Lieb lattice The results on the Lieb and fractal lattices are illustrated in Fig. Again, similar to the artificial graphene, the physics of the Lieb lattice is not restricted to the particular experimental realization and the Lieb lattice has also been constructed using chlorine vacancies by Drost et al. Electrons confined on a fractal lattice will behave as they move in a space having the fractal dimension D. This very exciting prospect has been realized in the CO/Cu(111)system using Sierpiński triangles (Fig. , where N is the number of circles needed to cover the LDOS and r is the circles radius (Fig. Instead of patterning an extended electron gas as in the case of using adsorbates on a Cu(111) surface, we could directly build the lattice out of the atomic sites hosting localized orbitals. While these approaches are largely complementary, it might be more intuitive to add some additional effects (e.g. magnetism) or to study edge states in lattices built from atomic building blocks. Early studies in this direction have demonstrated that 1D particle-in-a-box states can be produced in chains of adatoms In this way, highly tunable electronic states could be constructed in linear chains. Another interesting platform for creating engineered electronic states out of localized orbitals was demonstrated by coupled dangling bonds on H-Si(100) surface Another appealing system is formed by Cl vacancies in a NaCl bilayer on Cu While a single Cl vacancy shows a localized state The problem with this system, however, is that creating the vacancies requires removing single Cl-ion with the STM tip in a vertical manipulation step. Before another vacancy can be created, the Cl-ion has to be removed from the tip rendering the process time-consuming and prone to failure. Analogous Cl vacancy defects can be formed in the c(2 × 2) chlorine superstructure on Cu(100) surface, with essentially error-free manipulation as illustrated by the extremely large-scale patterns (more than 8000 bits) demonstrated in the paper by Kalff et al Furthermore, in 2017, Drost et al. showed that this system can be used as a platform for artificial lattices (Fig. Topological states in one-dimensional lattices. While topological states can be realized by adding spin-orbit interaction to the honeycomb or kagome lattices, topological concepts can be readily illustrated in simple one-dimensional tight-binding models. Perhaps the simplest model exhibiting topological states is the one-dimensional Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) model that was developed to describe solitons in polyacetylene The dimer chain (also called SSH chain) is illustrated in Fig. and the winding number where h(k) = d x (k) -id y (k). If we plot the circle spanned by the vector d(k) as the momentum k is swept over the Brillouin zone, the result depends on the sign of δt = t 1 -t 2 . Either the origin is contained within the circle (ν = 1), or it is not (ν = 0) (see Fig. What happens when we construct a system where the dimerization changes from one phase to the other, the circle naturally has to pass through the origin, i.e. d(k) = 0. This means physically that the band gap becomes zero, which means that there will unavoidably be an in-gap state spatially localized somewhere on the domain boundary. The presence of this state is not dependent on how the domain wall is realized and it cannot be removed without doing something drastic, it is topologically protected. More on the one-dimensional topological systems can be found in several review papers and books The experimental realization of the SSH model using the Cl vacancies is shown in Fig. Graphene nanoribbons (GNRs, see schematic in Fig. Pure graphene edges are expected to undergo reconstruction The electronic properties of armchair and zigzag GNRs differ dramatically (Fig. The band gaps of AGNRs depend on their atomic width N and can be divided into three groups (similarly to carbon nanotubes). There will be a large gap with N = 3p + 1 (p is an integer), a medium gap with N = 3p, or a small (close to zero) gap with N = 3p + 2, together with an overall decrease with N within the same class (Fig. More realistic calculations predict edge relaxation that will open a small gap in the band structure (Fig. Here, it is worth noting the "band gap" can refer to a couple of different values depending on the system and experiment in question. In STS experiments, the resonances at positive and negative bias correspond to electron addition or removal (hole addition), respectively. This means that the STM quasiparticle gap is larger than the single-particle gap due to the polarization energies associated with electron/hole addition. It is also different from the optical gap, where one has the additional exciton binding energy. The interaction with the substrate can also result in a strong modification of the electronic states of GNRs. For AGNRs, this effect is usually weak as there is only a weak hybridization between the GNRs and the substrate In addition, Fermi level pinning can occur when some of the GNR electronic states are situated close to the substrate Fermi level Therefore, decoupling layers such as NaCl The ZGNRs have edge states associated with the zigzag edge that should have nearly flat dispersion and be magnetic Additional functional groups that help to decouple the edges from the metallic substrate, or an ultrathin insulating film need to be used to resolve these states. Both of these strategies were used to resolve the edge state of 6-ZGNR (a ZGNR which is 6 carbon zigzag lines wide) The synthesis via Ullmann coupling followed by the decyclohydrogenation step works well on Au Substrate-independent growth of cGNRs through the Ullmann pathway can be achieved by the 2,2 -dibromo-9,9 -bianthracene molecular precursors The band alignment and the band gap can be tuned effectively through atomically-precise doping. The first examples of on-surface fabrication of doped GNRs were demonstrated in chevron-type AGNRs by one On the other hand, boron-doped AGNRs have also been reported where the boron atoms are located in the centre of the AGNRs (Fig. GNR heterostructures. One direction to extend the work on atomically-precise GNRs is to increase the functionality encoded in a single GNR. This can be achieved through the formation of GNR heterostructures that can combine several different GNRs into a covalently bonded entity. Atomically precise GNR heterostructures have been grown by onsurface synthesis (Fig. AGNR heterostructure resembles a tunneling barrier in a metallic lead. Adapted by permission from Springer Nature: Ref. erostructures between GNR segments of variable widths. Structures consisting of 7, 14, 21, and up to 56 carbon atoms across the width have been realized More precisely controlled GNR heterojunctions can be constructed by combining two different precursor molecules. Chevron-type AGNR heterostructures consist of pristine (undoped) GNR and nitrogen-doped GNR behave similarly to traditional p-n junctions Figure It is thus possible to form quantum dot states in GNR structures combining segments with different band gaps. The narrow bandgap GNR acts as the dot and the wide bandgap GNR acts as the barrier. These quantum dot states have been well studied in 7-13-7 AGNR (Fig. Mixing nearly metallic GNR segments with wider band gap regions allows the realization of structures resembling a tunneling barrier with metallic leads (Fig. In the above cases, the fabrication method depends on the random process of precursor self-assembly and thus leads to a random sequence of heterojunctions. It would obviously be desirable to have more direct access to the different segments of the heterostructure. A higher proportion of single-junction GNR heterostructures can be formed using a hierarchical GNR fabrication strategy based on the different dissociation energies of C-Br and C-I bonds Topological states in GNRs. Symmetry-protected topological phases in GNRs were first explored in the theory paper by Cao et al. in AGNR However, for the usual junctions (Fig. If the junctions where the topological invariant changes are organized in a periodic array, Majorana-type end states There is currently a strong push to realize designer quantum materials with electronic responses that no naturally occurring material possesses by combining different elements in atomically precise geometries. Already the current level of structural control allows precise engineering of the sample electronic structure. We used artificial lattices and graphene nanoribbons as examples of this trend, where the already existing results have demonstrated, for example, band-structure engineering and realization of topological states. It is worth noting that it is already possible to transfer the on-surface synthesized GNRs off the metal substrate onto SiO 2 or glass substrate Longer term, we need to look further into the kinds of building blocks that can be brought into designer quantum materials. For example, by combining magnetism and superconductivity, it is possible to engineer one-dimensional systems that support Majorana modes, exotic particles that are their own antiparticles and that have been proposed as building blocks for a topological quantum computer 