Semiconducting two-dimensional (2D) materials, such as molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) and other members of the transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) family, have emerged as promising materials for applications in high performance nanoelectronics exhibiting excellent electrical and optical properties. Here, highly efficient photocurrent generation is reported in vertical few-layer MoS2 devices contacted with semitransparent metallic electrodes. The light absorption of the device can be improved by fabricating vertical photodevices using few-layer flakes, achieving a photoresponse of up to 0.11 A/W and an external quantum efficiency of up to 30%. Because the vertical design, the distance between electrodes can be kept in the range of a few nanometers, thus substantially reducing collection time of photogenerated carriers and increasing the efficiency. The wavelength dependent photocurrent (PC), photoresponsivity (R) and external quantum efficiency (EQE) are measured over the photon energy range from 1.24 to 2.58 eV. Compared to previous in-plane and vertical devices, these vertical few-layer MoS2 photodevices exhibit very short response time, ~60 ns and a cutoff frequency of 5.5 MHz, while keeping a high photoresponse. 2D materials are a very interesting family of materials because of their strong light-matter interaction, Here, we fabricate few-layer devices that take advantage of the increased optical density of fewlayer flakes and a fast collection of the photogenerated carrier pairs because of the short semiconductor channel length, which is fully encapsulated between semitransparent metallic electrodes. A semi-transparent gold electrode is fabricated depositing a 24 nm thick Au film on a glass slide substrate at a rate of 1.5 Å/s by thermal evaporation. MoS2 nanosheets are exfoliated by micromechanical cleavage, under ambient conditions, using the Scotch tape method We study electron transport in our devices measuring characteristic I-V curves. These I-V curves are measured under ambient conditions using a high speed low noise current amplifier at a gain of 10 5 V/A with an acquisition card (PCIe-6363; National Instruments) at 2 MHz sampling rate. We illuminate the device using a modified optical microscope (Nikon Eclipse LV100) to focus the light with a 20X objective (NA = 0.45) on an area restricted to a single disk electrode. Our illumination source is a supercontinuum white laser (SuperK Compact; NKT) filtered through a single grating monochromator (IMS3011B; Optics Focus) to provide monochromatic light over the 480-1000 nm wavelength range, which corresponds to a photon energy range from 1.25 to 2.60 eV, with a band pass of less than 1 nm. The mean optical power incident on A bias voltage is applied to a single Au disk, which is in electrical contact with a sharpened Pt wire that can be precisely positioned on a selected disk. We illuminate the photodevices using a pulsed laser, which is filtered by a single grating monochromator. The monochromatic beam will be partially transmitted through the semitransparent thin film electrode and will generate photocarriers in the device. the device was measured at the sample using a power meter (PM100D; Thorlabs) with a calibrated silicon photodiode (S120C; Thorlabs). A schematic of the experimental set-up for the measurement of photocurrent I-V characteristics is shown in Figure We select 20 nm thick flakes because their increased optical density over monolayer MoS2 and their effective charge separation region still extends to the entire volume. As a result, an external quantum efficiency of up to 30% is achieved. Since transmittance of the semitransparent electrode is around 40-60% in the visible range (see Supporting Information for experimental data) higher values of EQE could be achieved using a lower absorbance material for the electrode, such as indium-tin-oxide (ITO), which is commonly used in solar cell technology. As the metal electrodes can be much closer in vertical devices than in in-plane devices, a shorter channel length results in a much shorter optical response time. The top and bottom electrodes protect the MoS2 semiconducting channel from the ambient contaminants, reducing unintentional surface charge. Additionally, a thermal annealing in vacuum at 240 °C during 3 hours removes adsorbates from the metal-semiconductor interfaces. When a semiconductor is brought into contact with a metal, a Schottky barrier is formed at the interface, whose height is, according to the Schottky-Mott rule, where I 0i = A i A * T 2 exp(-qφ i / k B T), q is the electron charge, η i is the diode ideality factor, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, Ai is the effective contact area, φ i is the Schottky barrier and A * is the Richardson constant, A * = 4πqm * k B 2 /h 3 . Here h is the Planck constant and m * is the effective mass. We have obtained Schottky barriers slightly lower than those given by the Schottky-Mott rule, similar to those found in previous studies of metalsemiconductor interfaces, which have reported values from 0.12 to 0.53 eV. We illuminate the devices using a monochromatic pulsed laser source with a pulse duration of less than 2 ns. Under illumination, there is a current due to the photogenerated electron-hole pairs (Figure Mean P light is the incident light power. The EQE is the ratio between the number of charges collected by the photodevice and the total number of incident photons and is given by EQE = n e n photon total ⁄ = R hν q ⁄ , where ν is the photon frequency. R and EQE spectra (Figure We characterize the response time of the device modulating the illumination intensity delivered by the 640 nm LED and detect the generated PC using a lock-in amplifier (HF2LI; Zurich Instruments) and high speed low noise current amplifier (DHPCA-100; FEMTO) with 14 MHz bandwidth. We measure the frequency dependent photocurrent, Figure In summary, we fabricate vertical Au-MoS2-Au photodevices that are fast and highly efficient photodetectors. The metal-semiconductor interfaces form thermionic emission Schottky barriers. In such a vertically stacked structure, one can tailor the semiconducting channel length to a desired optical density while keeping the electrode separation in the nanometer range. The entire volume of the few-layer MoS2 contributes to generate photocarriers, which are efficiently collected before recombination due to the reduced length of the semiconducting channel. These advantages make our photodetector reach much faster photoresponse than in-plane devices. Using pulsed monochromatic illumination, we study the wavelength dependent mean photocurrent, photoresponsivity and external quantum efficiency spectra. Above a photon energy of 1.7 eV the photodetector shows a large EQE of up to 30%, a R of 0.11 A/W, a response time of 60 ns and a bandwidth of 5.5 MHz, making these devices fast and highly sensitive detectors in the visible light range. We measure micro-transmittance We conclude that between 40-60% of the light is transmitted through the semitransparent Au substrate and between 10-40% through the Au disks, see Figure 1 vibration mode at 383 cm -1 and the A 1g vibration mode at 408 cm -1 , which are in agreement with the bulk values of MoS2 . The maximum power at MoS2 flakes was 1 mW to prevent overheating or laser damage. Photoluminescence in few-layer MoS2 is observable but the peak intensity decreases with the thicknesses of the flake. 