Crystalline two-dimensional (2D) superconductors (SCs) with low carrier density are an exciting new class of materials in which electrostatic gating can tune superconductivity, carrier-carrier interactions play a strong role, and bulk properties directly reflect the topology of the Fermi surface. Here we report the dramatic enhancement of superconductivity with decreasing thickness in semimetallic T d -MoTe2, with critical temperature reaching up to 7.6 K for monolayers, a sixty-fold enhancement as compared to the bulk. We show that monolayers possess a similar electronic structure and density of states (DOS) as the bulk, indicating that electronic interactions play a strong role in the enhanced superconductivity. Reflecting the low carrier density, the critical temperature, magnetic field, and current density are all tunable by an applied gate voltage. The response to high in-plane magnetic fields is distinct from that of 2D SCs such as 2H-NbSe2 and reflects the canted spin texture of the electron pockets. In the 2D limit, superconductivity can differ strongly from the bulk due to spatial confinement and increased interactions, and can be tuned electrostatically, opening up new possibilities for device applications Here we explore the superconducting properties of T d -MoTe 2 in the 2D limit. In the bulk, T d -MoTe 2 is a type-II Weyl semimetal In this study, we utilize high-quality single crystals synthesized by a self-flux technique; recent studies indicate that this high quality is maintained after mechanical exfoliation The crystal structure of monolayer T d -MoTe 2 (1L-MoTe 2 ) is isostructural to that of WTe 2 (Fig. Supplementary figure The central result of this paper is shown in Fig. In conventional SCs many factors tend to suppress superconductivity in the 2D limit. For instance, Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory predicts suppression of superconductivity when film thickness is below the bulk coherence length Enhancement of T c in the 2D limit (without induced doping or other extrinsic factors) is extremely rare, with a few prominent examples shown in Fig. 1L-MoTe 2 is, therefore, the only known example of a 2D SC which shows large enhancement of T c while maintaining a similar carrier density and DOS to that of the bulk. The increase in T c must therefore come from an increase in the pairing interaction. Such an increase does not seem to be consistent with phononmediated superconductivity: in van der Waals materials, in-plane phonons do not significantly change for monolayers, and as discussed above μ * is expected to be largest for monolayers. In fact, there is already significant evidence that superconductivity in bulk T d -MoTe 2 is electronically mediated Next we characterize the superconducting phase diagram of monolayer sample S2 under applied magnetic fields. Figure (1 -T /T c ), where Φ 0 is the flux quantum, μ 0 the permeability of free space, and ξ 0 the in-plane coherence length at 350 mK), roughly half the bulk coherence length We now examine the gate-tunability of superconductivity. While both S1 and S2 exhibit changes in the superconducting behavior as a function of electrostatic doping, S2 utilizes the Si/SiO 2 substrate as its backgate, which introduces static doping from trapped charges in the oxide. Therefore, Fig. Whereas T c decreases uniformly in S1 with increasing V bg , H c2 peaks concurrently with the normal-state resistivity. The reason for the different gate-dependence of T c and H c2 is unclear, but may be related to variation in mean free path and/or coherence length near neutrality, such that the system moves toward the dirty limit The effects of Ising spin texture on H c2 for 2H-TMDs has been described in previous literature by a linearized gap equation which takes into account outof-plane SOC Figure between the samples with presumably different φ, provides strong confirmation of the model. However, open issues remain. Most importantly, the change in the ratio of H c2 /H p between S1 and S2 is less than expected, as can be seen from Fig. The telluride family of TMDs remains poorly explored, and rich phenomena should emerge now that reliable and clean fabrication processes are available for the study of air-sensitive monolayer films. The demonstration here of strongly enhanced, gate-tunable superconductivity in 1L-MoTe 2 should motivate significant future studies to understand both the mechanism for the observed enhancement and to confirm the proposed tilted Ising SOC, which remains an experimental challenge due to the need for in-plane rotation in magnetic fields in excess of 25 T and temperatures below 1 K. Additionally, the electronic structure of MoTe 2 is highly sensitive to external inputs like strain or electric fields We would like to acknowledge A. Prepatterned Contact Devices: While prepatterned contacts had less yield over via devices for monolayer, the yield for multilayer devices using prepatterned contacts is dramatically improved over that of via contacts. Using 12 nm Au, or AuPd, prepatterned contacts on 20-30 nm h-BN we were able to achieve nearly 100% yield of successful devices when proper care was taken into consideration post-stacking. First, metal backgates are patterned on to 285 nm SiO 2 using standard EBL techniques and a bilayer -PMMA 495A4/PMMA 950A2 resist mask. After patterning, 10 nm of AuPd was deposited via e-beam deposition, followed by 300 This also implies that the frequency we are measuring is likely due to the larger hole pocket. Using the aforementioned carrier density, the mean free paths are calculated for samples S1 and S2 and summarized in Table However, as indicated by the unrealistic spin-orbit scattering times (see table Klemm-Luther-Beasley: The KLB model is defined by a fit to ln(T /T c ) + Ψ( 2 ) = 0, where Ψ is the digamma function, τ SO the spin-orbit scattering time, and μ B is the Bohr magneton. With in-and out-of-plane SOC: For a paramagnetic limiting field at finite temperature, T , we consider the linearized gap equation: Where g is the spin-orbit field, B is the magnetic field, μ is the electron magnetic moment, and ... FS is the Fermi surface average: , where ξ k is the kinetic energy and ξ k = 0 is the Fermi surface. We can then fit the upper critical field data using g k = (α y k y , α x k x , α I k y ). For an in-plane field B = B(cos φx + sin φŷ) we have: FS . In the main text, we have Using this formalism, we fit samples one and two from the main text to reconfirm the differing spin-orbit coupling, shown in Supplementary Fig. with larger out-of-plane SOC the uncertainty in the fitting becomes substantially larger. In sample S2 (see Supplementary Fig. The ground-state crystal structure of monolayer MoTe 2 was obtained from first-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations as implemented in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) using the plane wave basis ? with an energy cutoff of 400 eV and the projector-augmented wave method ? . We adopted the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhofs form of exchange-correlation functional within the generalized-gradient approximation and the Monkhorst-Pack k-point sampling of 8×16×1 for the integration over the first Brillouin zone as well as a vacuum slab of 16 Å along the z direction to reduce image interaction under the periodic boundary condition in the calculation. The monolayer crystal structure was fully relaxed with a maximum residual force of less than 0.01 eV/ Å. To investigate the detailed electronic structure, we performed DFT calculations with a hybrid HSE06 exchange-correlation functional ? and transformed the DFT Kohn-Sham eigenstates into a set of highly localized quasiatomic orbitals and corresponding first-principles tight-binding Hamiltonian ? . Using the effective Hamiltonian we computed the corresponding fine electronic band structure and spin texture in the 2-D Brillouin zone. An electric field of 0.01 V/ Å was applied along the z direction which breaks the C 2 two-fold rotation symmetry, thus breaking the inversion symmetry and leads to spin splitting which qualitatively matches the experimental data. 