We demonstrate a single-stage, multipass Ti:sapphire amplifier capable of delivering sub-13 fs, 3.2 mJ pulses at 1 kHz repetition rate. Gaussian filters are used to suppress the gain-narrowing effect, thereby enabling the achievement of an ultrabroadband flat-top spectrum with a FWHM > 130 nm. The carrier-envelope phase (CEP) of the output pulses is actively stabilized via the feed-forward scheme (for the oscillator) and a fast 1 kHz f-to-2f interferometer, which corrects the amplifier-induced CEP drift. The single-shot 75 h CEP measurement yielded rms noise of <150 mrad. https://doi.org/10.1364/OL.44.001464 After three decades of research and development, titaniumsapphire (Ti:Sa) chirped-pulse amplifiers for both beam axes and the results are plotted in Fig. In this study, we demonstrated an ultrabroadband multimillijoule Ti:Sa multipass amplifier with unprecedented longterm CEP stability. By performing the spectral shaping in different passes using the Gaussian filters, we were able to achieve significant suppression of the gain-narrowing effect and attain a flat-top spectrum with a FWHM > 130 nm. The Wizzler-Dazzler feedback loop enabled to compress the pulses nearly to the FTL, resulting in sub-13 fs pulses. The pulse duration was measured across the spatial beam profile to inspect the homogeneity of the compression. Based on our investigations, the following steps may further enhance the output parameters. First, the output energy can be scaled up by at least a factor of 2-3 using a booster stage. Low amplification factor allows for the gain-narrowing effect compensation using only the Dazzler. Second, larger transmission gratings, featuring high transmission >150 nm (available from the company Gitterwerk GmbH) can further increase the compressed output energy. Lastly, it may be possible to achieve shorter pulse duration using a Dazzler with a broader diffraction bandwidth. In terms of the output parameters, the developed ultrabroadband single-stage Ti:Sa amplifier can be considered a promising step in filling the gap between more complex (and often more expensive) OP(CP)A systems and the standard Ti:Sa sources. Funding. H2020-MSCA-ITN-2014-641789-MEDEA (Marie Skłodowska-Curie Innovative Training Networks).