The nematic instability of iron-based superconductors is an undebatable ingredient of the physics of iron-based superconductors. Yet, its origin remains enigmatic as it involves a fermiology with an intricate interplay of lattice-, orbital-and spin-degrees of freedom. It is well known that thermoelectric transport is an excellent probe for revealing even subtle signatures of instabilities and pertinent fluctuations. In this paper, we report a strong response of the thermoelectric transport properties of two underdoped 1111 iron-based superconductors to a vanishingly small strain. By introducing the strain-derivative of the Seebeck and the Nernst coefficients, we provide a novel description of the nematic order parameter, proving the existence of an anisotropic Peltier-tensor beside an anisotropic conductivity-tensor. Our measurements reveal that the transport nematic phenomenology is the result of the combined effect of both an anisotropic scattering time and Fermi surface distortions, pointing out that in a realistic description, abreast of the spin-fluctuations also the orbital character is a fundamental ingredient. In addition, we show that nematic fluctuations universally relax in a Curie-Weiss fashion above T S in all the elasto-transport measurements and we provide evidences that nematicity must be band-selective. The investigation of nematic orders in solid state systems has been strongly boosted in recent times by the hypothesis of their intimate link with the emerging unconventional superconductivity in copper-based It is common wisdom that thermoelectric transport properties are excellent probes to investigate the fermiology of unconventional materials. In the vicinity of electronic instabilities, they could exhibit spectacular effects, resulting in an extreme sensitivity to phase transitions and fluctuations of order parameters We will show that the thermoelectric transport properties react extraordinarily to a tiny strain well above the nematic transition, revealing an extended zone of nematic fluctuations with a diverging behavior at the structural transition. Moreover, by analyzing the contribution of the different transport coefficients we demonstrate that a band-selective response of the Peltier tensor ᾱ is indispensable to quantitatively explain the behavior of the thermoelectric coefficient under strain, pointing out the fundamental role of the Fermi surface distortions caused by electron-nematic order Figures Figures In addition, with our experimental approach we could also take advantage of the fact that S is sensitive to the sign of the charge carriers. Indeed, the most striking result of our measurement concerns the sign of δ(∆S/T )/δ : In the parent compound, though S changes sign, δ(∆S/T )/δ is always positive and it remains finite also when S crosses the zero. This points out that not all the different Fermi pockets are responsible for the electronic nematic phenomenology but only some of them contribute. Interestingly, the strain derivative persists to be positive also in the x=0.035 sample, in which the transport properties are dominated by the electron-like carriers. This suggests that if the nematicity is band-selective, the electron-pockets play the major role. Figure Figures 3b and 3e present the temperature dependence of the strain derivative of the Nernst coefficient δ(∆ν/T )/δ as a function of T , where ∆ν=ν( )-ν( =0). In analogy to the strain-derivative of the Seebeck effect, also δ(∆ν/T )/δ presents a diverging behavior in the tetragonal phase and a change of regime at around T S . Differently from the Seebeck coefficient, the ambipolar nature of the Nernst effect prevents ν to cross the zero value in our compounds. This allows to normalize δ(∆ν/T )/δ to the value of the unstrained ν without incurring the risk of an unphysical divergency and define a Nernst nematic susceptibility χ ν =δ(∆ν/ν)/δ . χ ν can be directly compared to the susceptibility calculated from the elasto-resistivity χ ρ =-δ(∆ρ/ρ)/δ 24 , whose value is generally assumed as the response of the electronic nematic order parameter to the applied strain Let's now focus on the absolute value of χ ν and χ ρ . Interestingly, χ ν tends to decrease from x=0 to x=0.035, reaching the respective maximal value of around 230 and 120 close to T S . On the contrary χ ρ increases with doping. The increase of χ ρ due to Co-doping in the Ba(Fe,Co) 2 As 2 series was attributed to an increase of the nematic fluctuation intensity towards the optimally-doped composition, which maximizes the superconducting critical temperature show that the behavior of the elasto-Nernst of the x=0.035 compound (closer to the single band condition thanks to the doping) can be reasonably obtained from the other transport coefficients, in a self-consistent scenario. First of all, in a single-band approximation, it is possible to evaluate also a Seebeck susceptibility χ S =δ(∆S/S)/δ , shown in Figure Once established the existence of a finite χ α beside a finite χ ρ , one can conjecture on the microscopic mechanisms that determine the transport nematic phenomenology. Generally, a pure spin-nematic scenario mainly supports an anisotropic scattering time as a source for transport anisotropy In the context of cuprate superconductors, it was explicitly predicted that the Nernst effect anisotropy is a very sensitive probe of Fermi surface distortions caused by electronnematic order On the other hand, it has been reported that the NMR spin-lattice relaxation rate (T 1 T ) -1 of LaFeAsO is finite well above T S , as a signature of persistent spin fluctuations 34 . For T < T S , (T 1 T ) -1 increases a lot, before diverging in correspondence of T N , where spin fluctuations freeze In summary, we measured for the first time the strain-derivative of the Seebeck and the Nernst effect of two single crystals belonging to the 1111 family of iron-based superconductors. We observed that thermoelectric properties, in proximity of a nematic instability, are strongly susceptible to a vanishingly small strain. The inspection of the Seebeck effect provided a clear signature of the band-selective character of the nematic phenomenology in case of a multi-band system, which is a fundamental information for the definition of a nematic order parameter. In addition, by defining a Nernst nematic susceptibility, we experimentally demonstrated that an anisotropy in the resistivity tensor ρ is not enough to explain the behavior of the thermoelectric properties, but a finite anisotropy in the Peltier tensor ᾱ must be included. This suggests that the transport nematic phenomenology is likely to be the result of the combined effect of both an anisotropic scattering time and Fermi surface distortions, pointing out that in a realistic description, beside the spin-fluctuations also the orbital character is a fundamental ingredient. We expect that these results will trigger novel theoretical insights, setting new bounds for the anisotropic transport models and giving a substantial contribution to the understanding of the nematic puzzle. The crystals were obtained using the solid-state single crystal growth method at ambient pressure using Na-As as a liquid phase promoting an abnormal grain growth due to enhanced interfacial anisotropy by introducing a liquid-solid interface. This is a different strategy from the usually used flux growth. As this growth is based on polycrystalline starting materials, a polycrystalline sample of LaFeAsO was prepared using a two-step solid-state reaction. The obtained polycrystalline pellets and Na-As powder were layered into an alumina crucible. The molar ratio of LaFeAsO to Na-As used was 1:4, which corresponds to a ratio in volume of about 1:1. The material was heated to 1080 • C and annealed for 200 h. By using this method single crystals sized up to 2x3x0.4 mm 3 were obtained. Ref. We applied an in-plane uniaxial strain by gluing the samples on commercial piezoelectric stacks (Part. No. Pst 150/5x5x7, form Piezomechanik, Munich, Germany), using the Devcon General Purpose Adhesive Epoxy (No. 14250). The samples are oriented in order to align their orthorhombic axis to the strain axis of the piezo, in analogy to elastoresistivity measurements α , where χ α =δ(∆α xx /α xx )/δ . From these relations, one can evaluate the temperature dependence of α xx and χ α , presented in Figure