Nitrogen-vacancy (NV) quantum defects in diamond are sensitive detectors of magnetic fields. Due to their atomic size and optical readout capability, they have been used for magnetic resonance spectroscopy of nanoscale samples on diamond surfaces. Here we present a protocol for fabricating NV-diamond chips and for constructing and operating a simple, low-cost "quantum diamond spectrometer" for performing nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy in nanoscale volumes. The instrument is based on a commercially-available diamond chip, with an ion-implanted NVensemble at a depth of ~ 10 nm below the diamond surface. The spectrometer operates at low magnetic fields (~ 300 G) and requires standard optical and microwave components for NV spin preparation, manipulation and readout. We demonstrate the utility of this device for nanoscale proton and fluorine NMR spectroscopy, as well as for the detection of transition metals via ESR noise spectroscopy. We estimate that the full protocol requires 2-3 months to implement, depending on the availability of equipment, diamond substrates, and user experience. NV diamond quantum sensor. NV color centers are atomic-scale quantum defects that provide highresolution magnetic field sensing and imaging via optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR), with broad applicability in both the physical and life sciences. NVs have been reviewed extensively elsewhere 12- 16 ; and so we give only a brief overview here to introduce the most important concepts for the present work. An NV center is created when two neighboring carbon atoms in the diamond lattice are replaced by a nitrogen atom and a vacancy (Figure NV centers have drawn considerable interest in recent years as a tool for sensing, especially of magnetic fields where D = 2.87 GHz, S = [Sx, Sy, Sz] T is the electronic spin operator, γe = 2.8 MHz/G is the electron's gyromagnetic ratio 14 , and B is an external magnetic field that in this work consists of a strong applied field along z (B 0 ) plus a weak 'signal field' to be sensed (B z (sense) ). The first term on the right hand side of equation 1 describes a zero-field splitting due to spin-spin interactions 17 . The second term describes the Zeeman interaction with the magnetic field. For a sufficiently weak signal field, the NV is largely sensitive to the z component such that: Magnetic resonance spectroscopy of electrons and nuclei comprises a family of ubiquitous and essential analytical tools in modern chemical and biological research Thus, the signal field has the effect of shifting the spin state states ms = ±1 by ±γeBz (sense) (Figure Transitions between ground electronic states of different ms are driven by application of a resonant microwave (MW) field. A sensing sequence consists of a specified set of MW pulses followed by readout of the final spin state. Spin-state readout is enabled by the fact that NVs emit fewer PL photons on average when optically excited from ms = ±1 than they do from ms = 0, owing to a significant probability of decaying via an alternative pathway mediated by singlet electronic states in the former case (Figure The other important characteristic that enables optically detected magnetic sensing with NVs is the ability to initialize the spin state. At thermal equilibrium, each of the three ms sublevels in the electronic ground state is roughly equally populated. However, a laser pulse of sufficient duration results in nearly complete polarization into the ms = 0 state, a consequence of the unequal nonradiative decay rates Nuclear spin sensing. When exposed to a static magnetic field of a few hundred gauss, nuclear spins generate NMR signals, i.e., alternating (AC) magnetic fields (BAC), with frequencies between hundreds of kHz and a few MHz. In the protocol presented here, these NMR fields are sensed with a near-surface NVensemble-layer. Importantly, each NV is primarily sensitive to NMR fields generated by nuclear spins within a hemisphere volume above the diamond, with the radius set by the depth of the NV beneath the surface is satisfied, where f0 is the Larmor frequency of the sample spins, the NV center accumulates maximum phase, leading to a measurable reduction in the NV fluorescence rate during the readout laser pulse. The XY8-N pulse sequence has been usefully applied in sensing surface nuclear spins However, experiments have shown that this pulse sequence can also pick up signals from higher harmonics of f0, which can lead to ambiguous results Limitations of nuclear spin sensing with NV centers. High-frequency resolution (few Hz) is important for resolving molecular structures via chemical shifts and scalar (i.e., "J") couplings. The nanoscale NVexperiments described above are limited in that they provide only modest frequency resolution of typically 1-100 kHz. This limitation is due to two reasons: (i) Measured linewidths are limited by NV-T2 relaxation when sensing is performed using dynamical decoupling sequences, and by NV-T1 relaxation when correlation spectroscopy is used. Since NV-T2 < NV-T1, correlation spectroscopy gives superior frequency resolution, as good as ~ 100 Hz. (ii) Unfortunately, this frequency resolution is usually not achieved in nanoscale NV-NMR experiments. Sample diffusion limits the interaction time between the NV sensor and the nuclear spin, resulting in short correlations times τc and broadened lines. The linewidth, LW, depends on the diffusion coefficient, D, and NV depth, d, as described in the following equation: For instance, for a 10-nm deep NV, signals produced by protons in water give rise to linewidths of ~ 40 MHz and viscous oil signals produce linewidths of ~ 10 kHz. Recent experiments have overcome some of these limitations through two different approaches. The first approach uses nuclear spins in the diamond as a quantum memory to extend the readout time, enabling resolution of chemical shifts at high magnetic fields (~3 T) In these experiments, we overcome the diffusional line broadening by detecting thermal spin polarization in a ~ (10 μm)3 volume. These new developments are not described in further detail in this protocol, since they need advanced technical expertise and equipment.The more basic NV-NMR methods described here are useful for detecting NMR signals from nanoscale surface layers. Practical applications are structural analysis of quadrupolar nuclei in 2D materials Compared to conventional liquid state NMR with an inductive detection scheme, the NV-diamond sensor has two main advantages: i) the detection of very small sample volumes down to a single molecule or to nanometer surface layers (described in this protocol), and ii) the potential to perform NMR microscopy and nanoscopy, enabled by the optical nature of NV readout. On the other hand, for some applications the reduction of the sample volume associated with NV-NMR relative to conventional NMR can pose a disadvantage, e.g. due to the diffusive broadening mentioned above. Electronic spin sensing. Electronic spins resonate at much higher frequencies (~600x) than nuclear spins at the same magnetic field. Such high frequencies (~1 GHz for a few hundred gauss magnetic field) cannot be detected with NVs using dynamic decoupling sequences due to the finite duration of the MW pulses (few tens of nanoseconds). Here, an alternative detection protocol, NV-relaxometry, is used The NV spin state is read out via an optical pulse as a function of t and the decay of the polarization can be fitted to an exponential function. Possible applications for nanoscale electronic spin sensing include the detection of biological important ions Limitations of electronic spin sensing with NVs. NVs are initialized and read out with green laser pulses. Although the light intensity reaching the sample is reduced by the total internal reflection geometry used in this protocol, the evanescent wave at the sample's surface may be sufficient to excite the sample. This may cause problems when samples that absorb green light are measured (e.g., various colored transition metal complexes), possibly inducing unwanted photochemistry and sample degradation First, we discuss the experimental design and the required hardware. Second, we describe the technical details of the specific pulse sequences used for sensing. Finally, we describe the experimental procedure itself, which in turn is organized into four parts (Figure In the following we discuss the technical design choices made and equipment used in the development and implementation of this protocol. Figures Choice of diamond substrate and nitrogen implantation. Ultra pure diamonds with low concentration of defects (nitrogen concentration <10 ppb) are needed to maximize probability of creation of NV centers with long coherence times and optimized sensing properties. Traditionally "electronic grade single crystal" diamonds from Element Six (https://e6cvd.com/us/application/all.html) have been used as substrates. Another potential source of diamond substrates are "ultra pure diamond plates" from LakeDiamond (https://lakediamond.ch/products.) Depending on the user's application, a Our diamond is cut such that the top face is perpendicular to the <100> crystal axis, and the lateral faces are perpendicular to <110>. Ideally, the edges of the diamond are polished so that the NV layer can be excited through the edge in a total internal reflection geometry. Nanostructured diamond surfaces have been shown to increase the magnetic resonance sensitivities For AC magnetometry, nitrogen ion implantation is usually done with 14 N (I = 1), which has hyperfine structure that does not greatly interfere with NV sensing. In contrast, Following implantation, the diamonds are annealed under vacuum (<10 -6 mbar typically, <2x10 -8 mbar in this instance) and high temperature (800-1200 °C) to allow migration of vacancies and formation of NV centers. High-temperature processing also allows one to minimize interactions with neighboring spins by annealing out other spin impurities. There are limitations to how much annealing can improve the spin bath properties and formation of NVs; this is still an active area of research, especially for high density shallow implantation diamonds The efficiency of NV creation depends on both the ion energy and the ion fluence The diamond chip described in this work is an E6 CVD 99.6% Choice of magnets. Permanent magnets are generally preferred to electromagnets for reasons of simplicity and cost, and due to stringent requirements on the stability of the current sources used to power the latter. In principle, any commercial permanent magnets can be used, as long as they generate a field B0 of at least a few 100 G at a distance of a few centimeters from their surface. The field strength B0 is important for nuclear spin sensing because it defines the Larmor frequency fL according to where γn is the gyromagnetic ratio of the spin of interest and B0 is the field strength at the sample position. Gyromagnetic ratios for different nuclei are provided e. g. by the Committee on Data of the International Council for Science (www.codata.org). For efficient NV detection with a dynamic decoupling sequence, the Larmor frequencies of the target nuclear spins should be between a few hundred kHz and a few MHz. Magnets can be stacked to increase magnetic field strength. In all cases, magnetic field gradients should be kept as small as possible in order to suppress inhomogeneous broadening. The use of two opposed identical magnets, each with diameter at least on the order of a few centimeters (i.e., much larger than the laser spot size of ~ 20 μm) helps to minimize field gradients. For a detailed analysis of the magnetic field distribution of a given permanent magnet geometry, the software package Radia (O. Chubar, P. Elleaume, J. C. Radia software package (2017). URL http://www.esrf.eu/Accelerators/ Groups/InsertionDevices/Software/Radia) in Mathematica can be used. A common issue with static magnets is their temperature-dependent magnetization. To mitigate this problem, we employ samarium cobalt magnets (Electronic Energy Cooperation, 2:17 TC-15), which have a low temperature dependence (0.001 %/°C). To excite the NV ensemble, a 532-nm laser with ~1-W output power is employed. We recommend using a high-quality optically pumped semiconductor laser (OPSL) or diode-pumped solid-state (DPSS) laser (for example Coherent Verdi G series or Lighthouse Photonics Sprout series of lasers). However, lower-priced 1-W laser diodes can also be used, at the expense of inferior noise properties. For the sensing protocol described here, laser pulses on the microsecond time scale are necessary for initializing and reading out the NVs. We recommend using an acousto-optic modulator (AOM) with a drive frequency of 80 MHz or higher (e.g., IntraAction Corp., Model ATM-801A2) to achieve high extinction ratios. The AOM can be driven either by a commercially-available AOM driver (which will include a signal source and amplifier) or by a radio frequency (RF) signal source operating at the specified AOM drive frequency and amplified to reach the required RF power level. We use a commercial AOM driver (IntraAction Corp., Model ME-802N), which is usually modulated by a voltage input. However, we achieved better performance (i.e. a larger extinction ratio) by inserting a switch between its internal signal source and amplifier. Choice of excitation and collection geometry. The quantum diamond spectrometer is optimized for electronic and nuclear spin sensing on the diamond surface. The use of a total internal reflection geometry minimizes back reflection of the laser into the detector and reduces unwanted exposure of the sample to excitation light. Note that energy can still flow from the laser beam into the sample via the evanescent wave produced at the diamond-sample interface. Total internal reflection can be achieved either by sending the laser through an edge of the diamond, or through the light guide into the bottom of the diamond chip (as depicted in Figure Choice of photodetector and interference filter. The photodetector is chosen according to the expected collected photon count rate in a given experiment. Usually, for shallow high-density implanted NV-diamonds, an avalanche photodiode (APD) provides the necessary sensitivity and should have a noise equivalent power of < 0.1 pW/√Hz. The bandwidth is usually limited by the data acquisition unit and is typically > 1 MHz. For efficient light collection, the distance between the light guide and the APD surface should be kept as small as possible and the active area of the APD should be larger than the diameter of the light guide. The NV-based quantum sensing schemes applied in this protocol have previously been described in the literature The most basic sequence is the NV-electron spin resonance (NV-ESR) pulse sequence. We distinguish the term NV-ESR from ESR in order to specify obtaining a spectrum of the NV spin itself rather than that of a target sample using the NV as a sensor. NV-ESR is used to detect the NV resonance frequency and to measure the strength of the applied magnetic field by sweeping the MW frequency fM and reading out the fluorescence. If the applied MW is on resonance, some population is transferred from ms = 0 to one of the dimmer ms = 1 or ms = -1 states, which causes a dip in the fluorescence signal. In the absence of a strong applied field usually two resonances can be observed around the zero-field splitting D of 2.87 GHz (Figure where fNV is the center of the resonance frequency of the transition at lowest frequency. Keep in mind that D (2.87 GHz) is not an exact constant and might vary depending on temperature and strain in the diamond. This resonance corresponds to the ms = 0 to ms = -1 transition of the NV orientation with the largest magnetic field projection. Usually, the laser light polarization is adjusted by a λ/2 waveplate to maximize the excitation of this NV-orientation. The NV-ESR pulse sequence is shown in Figure Rabi pulse sequence. In a Rabi experiment, the MW frequency is tuned to match the NV spin resonance (e.g., to the ms = 0 to ms = -1 transition) and the NV fluorescence is measured as a function of the MW pulse duration. As the NV quantum state undergoes nutation, the expected number of detected fluorescence photons oscillates (Figure The Rabi contrast (fractional difference in signal measured at zero applied MW pulse duration and at πpulse duration) can be as high as 30% for a single NV. For an ensemble of NVs, the contrast is reduced due to the presence of fluorescence background from off-axis NV centers as well as heterogeneity in NV properties, resulting in typical values in the range 1-6%. The contrast depends on the degree of NV repolarization (related to laser intensity) and on the presence of other sources of background light (light scattering, non-aligned NV centers etc.). Obtaining a high contrast is important since sensitivity improves linearly with contrast. The Rabi pulse sequence requires four PB channels: PB_AOM, PB_MW, PB_DAQ, and PB_StartTrig. The AOM polarization and readout pulse are usually combined in one pulse. The first part (~ 1 μs) of the AOM pulse is used to read out the NV-state, whereas the subsequent 4 μs repolarize the NV. These durations depend on the laser intensity and must be optimized in each case. We use a laser intensity of ~ 10 kW/cm 2 . The timing of the DAQ readout pulse relative to the AOM pulse must be chosen carefully. Early readout leads to a reduction of signal-to-background since the population transfer may be probed before completion of the MW pulse sequence. Late readout results in a signal-to-background reduction since most of the information about the NV population is lost once the laser has been on long enough to produce significant repolarization. Although the PulseBlaster outputs the AOM and DAQ trigger pulses at the same time, the arrival times of these pulses are usually delayed with respect to each other because of the non-negligible AOM response and/or differences in cable lengths. For that reason, the DAQ readout pulse output of the PulseBlaster is manually delayed in order to properly synchronize the AOM and DAQ readout pulses. As with the NV-ESR sequence, the second half of the pulse sequence is the reference readout (without MW manipulation) for noise cancellation. The most basic AC magnetometry sequence is the spin-echo (Hahn-echo) sequence. It consists of a sequence (πx/2-τ-πy-τ-πx(-x)/2) of MW pulses separated by free precession time τ. As τ is swept, the signal decays according to the transverse relaxation of the NV with time constant NV-T2Hahn-echo. τ should be much longer than the π pulse duration (we typically use τ > 4π pulse durations). In addition to the four standard PB channels (PB_AOM, PB_MW, PB_DAQ, and PB_StartTrig), two additional channels are needed to control the phase of the MW pulses. Four possible on/off combinations of these two pulses determine the phase output of an IQ mixer (see Table Keep in mind that this contrast definition is different from that in the ESR and Rabi experiments. We plot contrast versus free precession time for a spin-echo measurement in Figure For high-density, shallow NV ensembles, the NV-T2Hahn-echo time is typically around a few microseconds. NV-T2Hahn-echo is an important parameter, as it sets the lowest frequency that can be sensed. Usually the NV-T2Hahn-echo time is extended for higher sensitivity through the application of trains of π-pulses in dynamic decoupling sequences, e.g., an XY8-N as described in the following paragraph. XY8-N dynamical decoupling pulse sequence. The XY8-N sequence consists of trains of pulses of the following form: For N = 1, the sequence consists of a train of 8 π pulses where the rotation axis is alternated between x and y (see Figure Correlation spectroscopy pulse sequence. The correlation spectroscopy pulse sequence consists of two XY8-N sequences separated by tcorr: πx/2-τ/2-(πx-τ-πy-τ-πx-τ-πy-τ-πy-τ-πx-τ-πy-τ-πx) N -τ/2-πy/2tcorr-πx/2-τ/2-(πx-τ-πy-τ-πx-τ-πy-τ-πy-τ-πx-τ-πy-τ-πx) N -τ/2-πy(-y)/2. Note that the phase of the last π/2 pulse of each XY8-N sequence is shifted 90°/270° relative to the first π/2. The time tcorr between these two sequences is swept and the fluorescence recorded. The π-pulse spacing τ in the XY8-N sequences is set to satisfy the condition τ = 1/(2f0), where f0 is the frequency of the signal we want to sense (and τ is the time at which the dip in the XY8-N decay occurs). The recorded data oscillates at the signal frequency f0. In the example of Figure NV-T1 relaxation pulse sequence. The NV-T1 relaxation pulse sequence is very simple and, in principle, needs no MW pulses. To measure NV-T1 (longitudinal) relaxation, the time t between AOM laser pulses is swept. As in all previous pulse sequences, the readout AOM pulse and repolarization AOM pulse are combined. By sweeping the total sequence duration t, the fluorescence decays exponentially according to the longitudinal relaxation of the NVs from the polarized ms = 0 state into the thermal equilibrium mixed state (see Figure Critical: We list the equipment used for our experimental setup. Unless otherwise specified, items can be replaced by equivalent components from other vendors with similar performance. !Caution: Ensure that all chemicals, substances, equipment and apparatus in this protocol are handled and operated safely by obtaining, reading, and following their respective manufacturers' safety instructions. • Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) (Sigma Aldrich SYLGARD® 184) • Fomblin oil for • Deionized water (e.g., Sigma Aldrich) • Isopropyl alcohol (e.g., Sigma Aldrich) • Sulfuric acid (Merck SX1244-6). !Caution: sulfuric acid is strongly corrosive. Protective equipment should be worn (laboratory coat, gloves, safety goggles), and all handling should be performed in a ventilated laboratory fume hood). • Nitric acid (EMD Millipore NX0409-4). !Caution: nitric acid is strongly corrosive and oxidizing. Protective equipment should be worn (laboratory coat, gloves, safety goggles), and all handling should be performed in a ventilated laboratory fume hood). • Perchloric acid (VWR BDH4550-500ML). !Caution: perchloric acid is strongly corrosive and oxidizing. Protective equipment should be worn (laboratory coat, gloves, safety goggles), and all handling should be performed in a ventilated laboratory fume hood). • Oscilloscope (e.g., Keysight DSO7104A) • Signal source for coil signals (e.g., Rigol Technologies DS1022) • Voltmeter (e.g., Fluke 77 IV) • Optical power meter for measuring laser intensity (e.g., Thorlabs PM100D and S121C) • Laser goggles (e.g., Thorlabs, LG3) • RF power meter (e.g., Keysight V 3500). • Soldering iron and solder • Epoxy glue (e.g., Epoxy technology, Optical epoxy 301-2/8Z KIT and instant adhesive (crazy glue). • Heat conduction paste !Caution: Consult the safety data sheet for handling. • BNC cables (e.g., Digikey) • SMA cables (e.g., Digikey) • BNC/SMA adaptors (i.e., a selection of BNC-SMA, SMA-SMA and BNC-BNC adapters for all gender combinations, e.g., Digikey) • 1x 25 mL round bottom flask (e.g., Sigma Aldrich) • Reflux condenser that fits with round bottom flasks, stand, and clamps (e.g., Sigma Aldrich) • Gas bubbler that fits to the reflux condenser (e.g., Sigma Aldrich) • Heating mantle for the round bottom flasks (e.g., Sigma Aldrich) • 3x beakers (e.g., Sigma Aldrich) • Large-area avalanche photodiode (APD) (e.g.,Luna Optoelectronics, SD197-70-72-661); it requires an additional power supply with +12,-12 V, and GND outputs in addition to +5 V and GND for the onboard cooling element. For details consult the APD manual. We employ an additional heat sink and small fan to further facilitate heat dissipation. • 1x SRS SG384 signal generator (this is a MW signal generator with IQ option). Note: the qdSpectro software package (Aude Craik, 2019) used in this protocol is designed to work with an SRS SG384 signal generator and has only been tested with this and the SG 386 models. It should be compatible with other SRS SG3800 or SG3900 models, but has not been tested with these. Other pulse generators can be used but will require modification of the qdSpectro code by the user. • 1x USB/GPIB converter (National Instruments GPIB-USB-HS) • 1x high-power amplifier (Minicircuits ZHL-16W-43+) • Circulator (DiTom D3C2040) • MW loop: Amphenol 901-9867-RFX and semi rigid coaxial cable (Micro-Coax UT-047C-TP) • 2x static magnets with a diameter of > 1cm. We stack two Electronic Energy Cooperation, 2:17 TC-15 magnets in order to increase magnetic field strength and homogeneity. Power Supplies • Personal computer (PC)the software installation is described in the protocol for a Windows PC and the qdSpectro package has been tested with Windows 10. It should be portable to Linux or Mac operating systems but has not been tested in these platforms and may require some user modification. Critical: Recommended installation procedures for the software used in this protocol are described in the Procedure in the section entitled 'Setup Experimental-Control Software, DAQ, and PulseBlaster Card' (Steps 18-32). Below, the necessary packages, libraries and drivers are listed for reference. • qdSpectro Set-up round bottom flask, reflux condenser, and bubbler on the heating mantle as shown in Figure 10. Dry the diamonds with nitrogen gas blower and put them in a clean container for storage. 11. Properly rinse all glassware and dispose of all chemical waste in correct containers. CRITICAL: The annealing procedure (Steps 12-17) should be done after the diamond has been implanted with ions and acid cleaned. The procedure described here is for use with a home built vacuum furnace system (Figure 12. Annealing (Steps 12-17): Remove the quartz boat from the quartz tube. Place the quartz boat in an enclosed space (to avoid losing the diamond if it is dropped when transferring). Transfer diamond samples (several samples can be annealed at once in this configuration) to the quartz boat using ceramic tweezers. Place the quartz boat back into the quartz tube and push the quartz boat down to the end of the quartz tube (into the area that will be under the furnace). 13. Use a ConFlat (CF) flange to seal the quartz tube to the rest of the vacuum assembly. Place a copper gasket in between the two metal seals making sure that it is in the proper place relative to the knife edge. Ensure the quality of the vacuum seal through proper tightening of the bolts and nuts for the seal. 14. Open the gate valve. The roughing pump begins pumping down the entire chamber. Consult the manual of the turbo pump being used to determine minimum pressure needed to spin the turbo pump up to speed. Once this pressure is reached, turn on turbo pump and wait for chamber pressure to decrease. The wait time depends on turbo pump used and the volume of the vacuum chamber. Once the pressure reaches an acceptable level (<10 -7 mbar) then one is ready to start the heating. 15. Program the heating profile (Figure Critical: The following steps (18-50) are only necessary for the initial construction of the setup. If you are using an existing setup, proceed to the section "NV Diamond Characterization Experiments Alignment and sensing (steps 51-59). !Caution Before proceeding, ensure that the appropriate laser safety training at your institution has been completed. In addition, the laboratory and the laser system itself must comply with the relevant institutional laser safety guidelines. Generally, you should follow the basic laser safety instructions, including wearing laser goggles, refraining from wearing reflective items and avoiding bringing your head to the laser height level. !Caution Before proceeding, ensure that appropriate MW and radio-frequency safety training at your institution has been completed. In particular, ensure that you are familiar with how to handle MW sources, amplifiers and antennas safely. Consult the AOM manual for the necessary radio frequency (RF) input power of the AOM. Depending on the choice of AOM driver, there may be a number of options to enable switching the drive to the AOM. In general, the drive consists of an RF oscillator at the frequency required by the AOM (80 MHz in our case), and an RF amplifier. We drive our AOM using a commercially available AOM driver (IntraAction ME-802N). Within the housing of the driver, there is an RF oscillator connected to an amplifier with an ordinary BNC cable. To achieve high extinction switching, we disconnected the oscillator from the amplifier, and inserted a MW switch (Minicircuits, ZASWA-2-50DR+) in between, with the oscillator output connected to the switch input and the switch output (RF 2) connected to the amplifier input. Be careful to avoid unwanted grounding or shorting through these connections by properly isolating the components and cables. Terminate the second switch output (RF1) with a 50-Ω load (see Box 3). Power the switch with +5V and -5V provided by a separate power supply. Choose a PulseBlaster channel to control the switch and connect the channel to the switch's TTL input. Update the definition of the variable PB_AOM in connectionConfig.py to match the output bit number of this PulseBlaster channel. Before connecting the amplifier output to the AOM input, be sure you do not exceed the maximum RF input power specified in the AOM manual. First measure the drive power by connecting to an RF power meter and adjust accordingly. Turn off the drive and connect to the AOM after power adjustment. CRITICAL STEP: Depending on the AOM type, the procedure in Steps 33-35 will vary. Consult the manual for proper mounting and alignment. For a general overview use Figures 4 (optics) and 5 (electronics). 34. Install the 532-nm laser on an optical table. One possible arrangement of the optics of the experiment is depicted in Figure 36. Place a λ/2 waveplate (Thorlabs WPH05M-532) in a continuous rotation mount (Thorlabs RSP1) between the pinhole and 200-mm focal length lens (see Figure Install an XY translation stage with a rotating platform (Thorlabs XYR1) with four 1.5" pedestal pillar posts (Thorlabs RS1.5P) on the laser table. These define the position of the APD and the center of the NV experiment. Consult Figure Anchor the translation stage to the optical table by mounting with two right-angle end clamps (Thorlabs RA180), a sufficient number of posts (e.g., Thorlabs TR6, 2TR2, and TR1), and a post holder (Thorlabs PH2E) (see Figure Cut off a 5-cm piece of the semi rigid coaxial wire (Micro-Coax UT-047C-TP). Use a wire stripper to remove ca. 3 mm of the outer part of the coaxial wire and the isolation so that the inner wire is free. Place the white isolation ring of the SMA adaptor (Amphenol 901-9867-RFX) on that wire (see Figure Connect the GPIB port of the MW signal source (SRS signal generator, e.g.,model SG384) to a USB port on the PC using the GPIB/USB converter. Enable the GPIB interface on the SRS signal generator and select its GPIB address by following the GPIB setup instructions in the SRS manual (e.g.,for models in the SG 380 series, see page 46 of the SG380 series manual Revision 2.04). In the "SRS connections" section of connectionConfig.py, set the variables GPIBaddr and modelName to be the GPIB address and model name of the SRS (e.g.,GPIBaddr=27, modelName= 'SG384'). 49. !Caution: Turn off the RF output of the SRS before continuing. If using the SRS SG384 model, this is done by pressing the Shift button followed by the AMPL button on the SRS. The SRS screen will display "N-type OFF" when this is done, to indicate that the RF output of the SRS is off. Scripts in the qdSpectro package will instruct the PC to send remote commands to turn on the SRS RF output during the experiments, but this output should be kept off while the MW path is being built. Install one MW switch (Minicircuits ZAWSA-2-50DR+) and power it with +/-5 Volts from a power supply (see Figure Connect the TTL inputs of the switches to two PulseBlaster channels and update the definitions of the variables PB_I and PB_Q in connectionConfig.py accordingly. Remove the magnets to work at near-zero applied magnetic field (i.e., at the Earth's field). This makes it easier to find the NV-ESR resonance for the first time. Refer to Box 1 for a description of the qdSpectro package and how to run experiments. Open ESRconfig.py in Notepad++, read the description of the variables and data-processing options defined in this script and change the frequency sweep values to 2.7 -3.0GHz with a step size of e.g.,3 MHz (i.e., set startFreq=2.7e9, endFreq=3e9 and N_scanPts=101). Set the microwavePower variable, which sets the output power level of the SRS signal generator in dBm, to a level which is below your amplifier's maximum input, e.g., we set microwavePower=0 (units are dBm) when using the Minicircuits ZHL-16W-43+ amplifier. The duration of the pulse sequence (the signal-acquisition half), t_duration, should be set to 80μs, with 10000 samples taken per scan point (i.e.,set t_duration=80*us and Nsamples=10000 in ESRconfig.py). Turn on the MW amplifier. Run python mainControl.py ESRconfig. Check the pulse sequence by monitoring all the PulseBlaster output channels on an oscilloscope and comparing them with the pulse sequence shown in Figure Turn off the AOM using togglePBchan.py (Box 2). Mount the magnets at the ends of the rail so that each magnet is roughly equidistant from the laser spot on the diamond. Also use x and y of the rotational stage to move the magnets so that the diamond and the laser spot are centered between the two magnets. Rotate the stage so that the magnet faces are parallel/perpendicular to the edges of the diamond [if the diamond is cut along (110) facets] and tilt the rail ~36 degrees out of the horizontal plane. This gives a rough alignment of the B0 field along one of the NV axes. Turn on the AOM and run python mainControl.py ESRconfig. Depending on the magnetic field strength, sweep the MW frequency between 1.8 GHz and 4 GHz in 3-MHz steps. If the experiment is not aligned along one of the four possible NV axes (which is very likely, see Figure Open ESRconfig.py in Notepad++ and change frequency sweep values around the expected resonance frequency after alignment. Typically, we drive the lowest resonance frequency (ms = 0 to ms = -1). Run python mainControl.py ESRconfig. Use the center frequency of the dip to calculate B0 according to equation 6. Although the PulseBlaster outputs the AOM and DAQ trigger pulse in synchrony, these pulses usually do not coincide in real time because of a finite AOM response time and cable length differences. Open optimReadoutDelay.py in Notepad++. This script sweeps the readout delay between the start of the AOM and the DAQ pulse. Edit the startDelay and endDelay variables to set the sweep range of the delay, e.g.,we use startDelay = 10*ns (note that the startDelay must be at least 5*t_min, where t_min is the time resolution of the PulseBlaster which, for a 500MHz-clock board, is 2 ns), endDelay = 10000*ns, with 100 points in the sweep (set by N_scanPts). Run python optimReadoutDelay.py. The recorded data shows temporal overlap of these pulses (see Figure If there is insufficient SNR to see the Rabi oscillation in the signal channel, optimize the contrast by adjusting the laser spot size and power, as well as the AOM pulse duration. Importantly, if the laser intensity is too high, the contrast will again be diminished because repolarization occurs faster than the readout time of the DAQ. (depending on the NV-T2 relaxation time). Set t_readoutDelay as determined in step 54. The IQ function of the SRS signal generator must be activated. Set numberOfPiPulses=1 to produce a Hahn Echo sequence consisting of a single π-pulse sandwiched between two π/2 pulses, with τ defined as the delay between the π/2 and π pulses, as shown in Figure Determine the B0 field with the NV-ESR procedure according to step 53 and equation 6. Calculate the nuclear spin resonance frequency fL by multiplying the B0 field strength in G by the gyromagnetic ratio in MHz/G (equation 5). Calculate τ0 = 1/(2fL), to be set as the time spacing between π pulses in the XY8-N sequence. Reasonable τ0 are between 300-2000 ns. iii. Repeat Rabi (step 57) to determine the π/2 and π-pulse durations. In some cases, the Rabi contrast goes down upon placing a sample on the surface due background fluorescence of the sample or because the TIR condition is no longer met. Note that the sample can also influence MW delivery. iv. Open XY8config.py in Notepad++. Set the π-pulse duration (t_pi) and MW frequency (microwaveFrequency) according to the previous steps. Sweep τ around τ0 with, for example, 50 points and 4-ns spacing, which is double the smallest step size (t_min) allowed by our PulseBlaster card (recall, as shown in Figure Open correlSpecconfig.py in Notepad++. Set the π-pulse duration (t_pi), the XY8-N π-pulse spacing, τ0 (tau0), and the MW frequency (microwaveFrequency), as determined in the previous steps. Choose the sampling of the swept delay, t_corr, so that at least 2 points per 1/fL are recorded. The full duration of the sweep depends on the requirements of the measurement and can be kept short for initial nuclear spin detection (e.g. Determine the NV-T1 relaxation time of the clean diamond first according to step 59 (it should be around a few milliseconds). ii. Pipette a droplet of the sample on the diamond's surface at the laser spot. Keep in mind that the refractive index of the sample might change the total internal reflection condition, which in turn may lead to reduced sensitivity. When performing this step for the first time, we recommend using 1-M Cu 2+ , Gd 3+ or Mn 2+ solutions. iii. Repeat Rabi (step 57) to determine the π-pulse duration. In some cases, the Rabi contrast goes down upon placing a sample on the surface due background fluorescence of the sample or because the TIR condition is no longer met. Note that the sample can also influence MW delivery. iv. Run python mainControl.py T1config. The acquired data should show a decrease NV-T1 as shown in Figure The timing given below are strongly depend on the user's experience. Most steps will be much faster after set up the procedures or can take longer if performed for the first time. Steps 1-17, Fabrication of NV-diamond chips. To illustrate the capabilities of the quantum diamond spectrometer, we here describe some results of nuclear and electronic spin sensing experiments. In all cases, we worked at a magnetic field of 311 G. In Figure In Figure In Figure • Data acquisition card (DAQ), with a sampling rate of at least 250 kSa/s (e.g., National Instruments NI USB-6229 or NI USB-6211). Note: the qdSpectro software package used in this protocol was tested with NI USB-6229 and NI USB-6211. The code is designed to work with National Instruments DAQs and will require modification by the user if other data acquisition systems are used. https://notepad-plus-plus.org/ and install Python 3 version 3.6.3 or later from https://www.python.org/. The Python bitness must match both the NI-VISA library's bitness (see