Spin torque nano-oscillators (STNO) are nanoscale and multifunctional devices with wide band frequency tunability. Their RF properties are well suited to define novel schemes for wireless communication used within wireless sensor networks (WSN). To meet constraints of low power consumption and autonomy, WSNs use basic protocols for data transmission which are amplitude, frequency and phase shift keying (ASK, FSK, PSK). ASK and FSK have been demonstrated for STNOs but implementation of PSK has been left open so far. Phase shift keying requires a stable phase and a well-defined reference phase, while in free running STNOs the phase is free and characterized by large fluctuations. Here we introduce a special PSK technique for STNOs by combining their modulation and injection locking functionality. Injection locking provides a stable reference phase and reduces the STNO phase noise making the system compatible with IEEE standards. We used injection locking at 2f and f/2. The STNO intrinsic frequency is detuned via injecting additional modulation signal resulting in a well-defined phase shift in the injection locked state at the constant frequency multiple to the external source frequency. The concept is validated using magnetic tunnel junction based vortex STNOs. For injection locking at 2f and f/2 we demonstrate PSK data transmission rates up to 4Mbit/s as well as the possibility of quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK). Finally we have built a bench-top transmitter-receiver system to demonstrate data transmission over a 10 meter distance using analog phase modulation of STNOs and a conventional software defined radio receiver. We discuss the steps to be taken for integration of this scheme. This demonstrates that performances of the STNO-based PSK modulator (e.g. phase noise and output power) are compatible with existing technologies and that STNO multifunctional properties can be exploited to define compact approaches for wireless communication in sensor networks. Wireless sensor networks (WSN) 1 are amongst the key enabling technologies of the Internet of Things (IoT) The idea of the PSK technique for STNOs is the following: Injection locking reduces the phase noise and provides a stable reference phase for the STNO. This is necessary to well distinguish different phase levels at reasonable modulation indices. Perfect locking has been demonstrated for MTJ based vortex STNOs when the locking ratio N = f source /f ST N O is 0.5, 1, 2 It is generally accepted to consider only positive values of the detuning and define the locking range as the maximum positive detuning of the oscillator's intrinsic frequency: ∆Ω = δ max /N . Note that the value of ∆Ω varies with the order N of synchronization. In order to use the full potential of synchronization phenomena we employ both positive and negative values of the frequency detuning δ and therefore we define the full locking range as 2∆Ω. With this the phase difference as seen from the external source is given by Here, we have taken into account the possibility of injection locking at harmonics with N = 1, 2, 3, ... and fractional injection locking at sub-harmonics For data transmission using PSK we are interested in the phase difference that can be induced in the STNO signal since it will serve as the carrier to be phase-modulated. Moreover, for PSK we need to have a constant carrier frequency. Therefore, we keep the frequency of the external source f source unchanged and shift the STNO phase by detuning its intrinsic free running frequency f ST N O 0 via a modulation signal. Taking into account the ratio between the external and forced frequency of the STNO f source = N f ST N O the equation (1) can be rewritten for the phase difference of the detuned and synchronized STNO: From Eq. 1 and 2 and for the maximum locking range with δ = ∆Ω, the corresponding 3 For the experiments MTJ based vortex nano-oscillators were chosen, since they have demonstrated the capability of perfect locking to an external source A DC source (Keithley 2401) was used for signal generation, a signal generator (Agilent E8257D) for injection locking and a waveform generator (Tektronix AWG4162) for modulation. RF signals were injected via couplers to separate the STNO input and output signal. The output signal is passed through a filter (275-325MHz) and amplified by 20dB using a commercial amplifier. The STNO output voltage signal is measured by a spectrum analyzer to deduce the carrier frequency f ST N O , linewidth ∆f and the power of the free running and injection-locked states as well as by a real-time oscilloscope with a single-shot mode to register time traces. From the Hilbert transform of the time traces the phase fluctuations and the phase noise properties are deduced in the free running, injection locked and phase modulated state similar to previous studies For the injection locking as well as PM and PSK, the operating point has been chosen such that the free running oscillator frequency is f ST N O 0 = 300M Hz, which requires a DC current of 4mV @f /2 and 6mV @2f , f mod = 500kHz, (b) -8mV @f /2 and 12mV @2f , f mod = 500kHz; (c)f mod = 250kHz, V mod = 6mV @f /2 and 10mV @2f , (d)f mod = 2M Hz, V mod = 6mV @f /2 and 10mV @2f The shift ∆Ψ| ST N O reaches ≈ 0.9rad which is ≈ 60% of ∆Ψ max for 2f locking and ≈ 2.1rad which is ≈ 70% of ∆Ψ max | ST N O for f /2 locking on increasing the modulation signal to V mod = 12mV and 8mV respectively (see Fig. it is close to ≈ 60% of the theoretical limits. This is caused by the inertia-like behavior in the STNO in response to an external source and is reflected in the amplitude-relaxation frequency Γ p above which the influence of the external signal on the STNO becomes weaker and the STNO does not respond to external signals. Γ p is usually different for each synchronization regime V mod and zero P source ). The FSK and BPSK signals are characterized by multiple sidebands. In the FSK regime the instability of the carrier frequency translates to the modulation sidebands causing their broadening and, therefore, will degrade the quality of the demodulated signal. In the PSK regime the linewidth of modulation sidebands is defined by the stability of the external source and the modulation signal itself. With this it is possible to use modulation indices β 1, while for the FSK scheme using STNOs The concept was extended to demonstrate voice transmission using analog modulation as well as quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK) by injecting a modulation signal with four distinct levels. The demonstration of PSK presented here has been done for injection locking at 2f and f /2 since for injection locking at f the signal of the STNO and the external source cannot be distinguished. While injection locking at 2f limits the theoretical phase shift ∆Ψ max to π/2, the advantage of sub-harmonic locking is that theoretically the full range of phase shift ∆Ψ max = π can be used. Here we used the injection of current generated by an arbitrary waveform voltage generator as the modulating signal. As shown previously 8 , this limits the maximum possible modulation rate to the amplitude relaxation frequency -Γ p . For vortex devices Γ p lies on the order of several MHz. Using a microstrip line to generate a modulation RF magnetic field one can improve the maximum possible modulation rate above 2MHz for vortex devices. However, vortex devices have been selected here merely for the demonstration, since they show perfect locking. For uniform in-plane devices, which have Γ p in the range of 100-200MHz 8 , FSK was demonstrated using current modulation with data transmission rates up to 400Mbit/s The proposed technique presented in this paper can be applied and is best suited for any type of nano-scale auto-oscillators where the phase noise is high due to nanoscale dimension and where it can be sufficiently improved with an external synchronization signal. As an outlook, we note that the use of many, either external or internal, RF sources for every channel in communication systems leads to consumption of area and complicates the transmitter design. As a development of the technique, we are going to exclude the external RF sources and use separately controlled PLL-stabilized STNOs 21 working at different frequency channels. Such STNO-PLLs can thus be considered as a stable RF reference source with a stable reference phase. Injection locking of a second STNO to such a phase stabilized STNO-PLL will provide a route to implement phase modulation as a compact and effective communication scheme for integrated circuits(ICs). Data post-processing. To better asses the dynamics of the instantaneous phase φ(t), we registered the time traces x(t) of the voltage output signal from which the phase fluctuations are extracted using the Hilbert transform where HT is the Hilbert transform. The data shown in Fig. and to the phase in relation to the average STNO frequency for unlocked free-running state: The analysis of the phase noise figure was done by taking the power spectral density of the instantaneous phase fluctuations δφ(t) (1,1): The Arnold tongue was assembled from data of state diagrams at different P source . From each state diagram a line at f source was taken to assemble the Arnold tongue contour plot, where the y-axis is P source , color-axis is P ST N O . The accuracy of this method is limited by the free running linewidth. It also doesn't distinguish between general and complete synchronization regimes. However, it is accurate enough to determine the center of the locking range and the approximate maximum amplitude of the modulation signal V mod = I mod R which has to be applied to achieve the maximum phase detuning ∆Ψ max . For experiments with PM and PSK the value of P source was chosen in the linear part of the Arnold tongue to avoid nonlinear effects in frequency and phase detuning. 42. Video Demonstration of Voice Transmission using PM. http://www.spintec.fr/.