One of the hallmarks of the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition in two-dimensional superconductors is the universal jump of the superfluid density, that can be indirectly probed via the non-linear exponent of the current-voltage IV characteristics. Here, we compare the experimental measurements of IV characteristics in two cases, namely NbN thin films and SrTiO3-based interfaces. While the former display a paradigmatic example of BKT-like non-linear effects, the latter do not seem to justify a BKT analysis. Rather, the observed IV characteristics can be well reproduced theoretically by modelling the effect of mesoscopic inhomogeneity of the superconducting state. Our results offer an alternative perspective on the spontaneous fragmentation of the superconducting background in confined two-dimensional systems. The progress in material science has made nowadays available a wide class of systems with thickness ranging from a few nanometers down to the atomic-layer limit. The possibility to engineer these effectively twodimensional (2D) materials in field-effect devices opens also the exciting possibility to tune their quantummechanical ground state by changing the electron density. In some remarkable cases, including transition-metal dichalcogenides 1 , SrTiO 3 -based oxide interfaces 2 , such as LaAlO 3 /SrTiO 3 and LaTiO 3 /SrTiO 3 (LTO/STO), and the recently discovered twisted graphene A particularly interesting issue about 2D SC materials regards the very nature of the SC transition, that is expected to belong to the same Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) universality class of the 2D XY model In practice, the experimental observation of the BKT transition in real systems is far from being straightforward. In clean thick films J s is much larger than the critical temperature, so that the temperature T BKT where J s (T BKT ) T BKT is indistinguishable from the T c at which pairing disappears. In few-nanometer thick films of conventional superconductors, like NbN or MoGe, n s (and then J s ) is strongly suppressed by disorder The plan of the paper is the following. In Sec. I we show the experimental results for the IV characteristics in two paradigmatic cases, a NbN thin film and a STObased sample. While in the former case a paradigmatic example of BKT physcis is found, in the latter pursuing a BKT analysis lead to clear inconsistencies. In Sec. II we then discuss an alternative model to explain the observed non-linearity in STO-based systems, and we compare it with the experiments. Sec. II contains the concluding remarks. In Appendix A we give more details on the penetration-depth measurements in the NbN sample, and Appendix B contains additional information on the theoretical model of Sec. II. Let us start with the case of a 3 nm thick NbN film grown on single crystalline MgO substrate. Details of sample preparation are given in As mentioned above, within the BKT scenario the IV characteristics acquire a non-linear dependence near T c , since a large enough current can unbind the vortexantivortex pairs present below T c . This effect generates a voltage V ∝ n V (I)I, where the equilibrium density of free vortices n V (I) scales with a power-law of the applied current, with an exponent proportional to J s 9 : In the ideal BKT case 4,6,8 J s (T ) is expected to jump discontinously at the intersection with the BKT line: When inserted into Eq. (1), this implies that also the IV exponent should jump at the transition: In real 2D superconductors, as NbN thin films, the J λ s obtained by direct measurements of λ -2 by means of twocoil mutual inductance technique In Fig. We now turn to the case of STO-based interfaces. Here we used a 10 u.c thick LaTiO 3 epitaxial layer grown on a TiO 2 -terminated SrTiO 3 single by Pulsed Laser Deposition Even though these observations should already sug-gest that at different mechanism is at play here, we can nonetheless pursue the BKT analysis based on Eq. (1), and extract the a(T ) exponent, see Fig. To explain the IV non-linearity in LTO/STO we then propose a simple model, starting from the basic idea that in these systems transport is dominated by percolation through a strongly inhomogeneous background emerging at mesoscopic length scales where each R i has a probability w(T ) = ∞ T dT i c P (T i c ) of being zero. Even though the EM approach neglects spatial correlations, nonetheless it gives insight about the qualitative behaviour of the system. At I = 0 the condition R em = 0 requires that the fraction w(T ) of SC links has reached the percolation threshold w * (in two dimensions, w * = 0.5, see Appendix B for more details). The shape of R em (T, I = 0) depends on the width of the P (T i c ) distribution, that sets the width of the paraconductivity regime, and on the total fraction w s of SC links. When w s is smaller than one, i.e., part of the system remains metallic, and slightly larger than the percolation threshold, i.e., w s 0.5, one finds A finite driving current is then able to break the weak links between the good SC regions having mesoscopic length scales. Even though we lack a precise information on the nature of the microscopic weak links, we checked (see Appendix B) that the experimental data can be well reproduced by a temperature-dependent critical-current that follows the Ambegaokar-Baratoff formula where I c,0 at T = 0 is independent of the resistor, and the T = 0 value of the local gap scales with the local The temperature dependence of I c following from Eq. ( In summary, we analyzed the IV characteristics in two paradigmatic examples of 2D superconductors: NbN thin films, and STO-based oxide interfaces. In the former case we observed a non-linear behavior well consistent with the typical occurrence of BKT physics in realistic systems. In particular, even if the universal BKT jump of the superfluid stiffness J s (T ) is partly hindered by nanoscopic inhomogeneity of the SC background, its essential features remain visible and reflect in a similar fashion on J λ s extracted by measurements of the inverse penetration depth, or on J a s extracted by measurements of IV characteristics. In the presence of a smeared jump, the intersection of J s (T ) with the universal 2T /π BKT line has no particular meaning, and the critical temperature is identified by the temperature scale where the superfluid stiffness effectively vanishes. For J λ s this occurs exactly at the same T c where the resistivity goes to zero. In the case of J a s we observed a few percent increase of T a c with respect to T c , that we ascribed to finite-size effects. Indeed, in full analogy with what observed measuring the stiffness at finite frequencies In the case of STO-based interfaces we argued that the non-linear IV characteristics cannot be ascribed to a BKT phenomenon, but rather to the existence of a strong fragmentation of the SC properties on mesoscopic length scales. On the experimental side, we identified two typical signatures of the emergent inhomogeneity: a marked rounding of the resistance, that cannot be explained with usual paraconductvity effects In Fig. As shown in Ref. where ∆(T )/∆(0) is computed from the self-consistent BCS equation, and vanishes at the mean-field temperature T M F . Both T M F and ∆(0)/T M F are obtained by the fit of J λ s at low temperature. As one can see in Fig. Notice that in our film finite-size effects due to screening currents are irrelevant near T c . At the intersection with the BKT line J s 5 K so that λ 2 μm. As a consequence the Pearl length 61 Λ = 2λ 2 /d 2.6 mm. Since our sample is around 8 mm in diameter, we are safely in the condition where screening effects due to charged supercurrent can be neglected. In addition, it is worth noting that screening effects act as a finite-size cutoff for the logarithmically vanishing stiffness at the transition, so they would only give a smearing of the jump above T c . What we observe is instead a rather symmetric smearing of the jump around the intersection with the universal line. As recently discussed in Ref. Suppose now that the each resistor can take only two constant values: R i = R N if the link is in the normal-state, and R i = 0 if the temperature is lowered below the bond critical temperature T i c , so the temperature dependence in each bond will be The critical temperature T c of the network, i.e. the temperature where R em → 0, is then defined by Eq. (B2) as the temperature where the SC fraction reaches the percolation threshold of 1/2, as expected in two dimensions For the distribution of local critical temperatures we assume a Gaussian distribution with average value T c and variance σ, w s representing the total fraction of SC regions in the material. To determine numerically the EMA solution we will resort to the form (5), by randomly sampling the local T i c of each resistor according to the distribution (B4). At each temperature T a fraction ∞ T dT i c P (T i c ) of bonds are "switched-off", following the condition so that the effective resistivity R em will diminish by lowering the external temperature, until the percolation threshold w = 0.5 is reached and R em becomes zeo. This procedure is more convenient than the numerical solution of Eq. (B1) to implement the effects of a finite current, as we shall see in the next section. Starting from the EMA, the information about the local critical temperature of each bond can be easily implemented as: where I i c is the critical temperature of the i-th bond. In the absence of a full microscopic model for the SC puddles, we analyzed different critical-current schemes for the relation ) and compared them with the data, in order to get an insight on the physical mechanism at play. The simplest relation one can guess is the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) relation for the critical current: Here I i 0 (T ) sets the magnitude of the current, depending on the microscopic structure of the material; in principle, it can be a function of the external temperature T and it can depend on the single resistor. As a starting point, we consider the easiest case I i 0 (T ) = I 0 so the function is analytically invertible and therefore, for the i-th resistor to be superconducting, the condition to be fulfilled is T i c ≥ T + (I/I 0 ) 2/3 . We thus have where is the effective temperature perceived by the resistors. In this situation the R em depends on the applied current and the IV characteristics will be in general non-linear. In Fig. where P (x) is the distribution given in Eq. (B4). For the GL model of the critical current we showed above that f (T c ) = I 0 (T c -T ) 3/2 and g(I c ) = T ef f , so that P I (I c ) takes the following form: The main result is that in this case P I (I c ) does not depend on the external temperature T . This is also evident looking at the resistivity at finite I in Fig. These observations suggest that a different modelling for I i c (T ), able to satisfy two requirements: (i) the zero temperature critical current must be independent on the single resistor I i c,0 = const, (ii) the critical current should saturate pretty fast to its zero-temperature value in order to recover the behaviour of IV curves at low temperature. The second item is also suggested by recent mea-surements in an other STO-based sample of the criticalcurrent distribution below T c 50 . We then explored the outcomes of the Ambegaokar and Baratoff 69 formulas, describing the critical current for a weak link between two SC electrodes According to Eq. (B11) the critical current through a constriction scales with the superfluid density, that is expected to follow the BCS-like relation for J S reported in Eq. (A2) above. with J S (T ) = J S (0) ∆(T ) ∆(0) tanh ∆(T ) 2k B T . To mimic the BCS temperature dependence of the gap ∆ i (T ) in each resistor we use a simple approximated formula that reproduces well the BCS behavior (see inset of Fig. 1.76 (B12) where τ i = T /T i c . The resulting temperature dependence of I c (T ) from Eq. (B11) is shown in Fig. 