Using both multiple scattering theory and effective medium theory, we find that an acoustic metamaterial consisting of an array of spinning cylinders can possess a host of unusual properties including folded bulk and interface-state bands in the subwavelength regime. The folding of the bands has its origin in the rotation-induced antiresonance of the effective compressibility with its frequency at the angular velocity of the spinning cylinders, as well as in the rotational Doppler effect which breaks the chiral symmetry of the effective mass densities. Both bulk and interface-state bands exhibit remarkable variations as the filling fraction f of the spinning cylinders is increased. In particular, a zero-frequency gap appears when f exceeds a critical value. The uni-directional interface states bear interesting unconventional characteristics and their robust one-way transport properties are demonstrated numerically. Acoustic metamaterials (AMs) are artificial acoustic composites made of subwavelength microstructures and they are designed to exhibit novel wave phenomena or functionalities not found in natural acoustic materials. Exotic examples of these phenomena include acoustic superlenses In this work, we study both the bulk bands and the interface-state bands of AMs consisting of spinning cylinders using multiple scattering theory (MST) We begin by considering a two-dimensional (2D) periodic array of solid circular cylinders, each with mass density s ’ü▓ and acoustic wave velocity s c , immersed in a fluidic background with mass density 0 ’ü▓ and acoustic wave velocity 0 c , as shown in Fig. given by After applying the boundary conditions that both p and r u are continuous at s rr ’ĆĮ , the Mie scattering coefficients can be obtained as where Eq. ( Knowing the Mie scattering coefficients m D , we can obtain the effective medium parameters of the homogenized medium in the long-wavelength regime. Using the EMT technique where f denotes the filling fraction of the cylinders and the ’é▒ sign refers to anticlockwise/clockwise rotation (" 1 m ’ĆĮ’é▒ "). Eq. ( By substituting e B and e ’ü▓ into the acoustic wave equation we obtain the following effective medium dispersion relation: As a concrete example, we consider a prototypical system in which the rotating cylinders are epoxy ( . The band structures calculated using MST and EMT are compared in Fig. Since the zeros of the functions () We now investigate the dispersion relation of interface states. We consider two semi-infinite media separated by a boundary at Since ’üó is positive in Eq. ( This flat band has zero group velocity and does not transport energy. Similar flat bands were found previously at the interface of two magnetic domains of some Hermitian system We now use MST to numerically verify the interface state dispersion derived above. We construct a supercell with 10 cylinders rotating anticlockwise in the region 0 y ’Ć╝ and 10 cylinders rotating clockwise in the region 0 y ’ĆŠ . In the MST calculation, we apply the periodic boundary condition on the two edges of the supercell. For the case of 0.3 f ’ĆĮ , the result of the four lowest interface-state bands calculated by MST are shown by the blue circles in Fig. Using the EMT result of Eq. ( ’üĘ’éó in Fig. To the best of our knowledge, the unusual dispersion of interface states and their sensitive dependence on the filling fraction are not found in Hermitian systems. To explicitly demonstrate the interface states, we show in Figs. To demonstrate the robustness of the one-way transport of the interface states, we choose the filling fraction 0.3887 f ’ĆĮ as an example. The corresponding projected bulk bands and the interface states are shown in Fig. These effects include the effective bulk modulus and the mass density tensor becoming dispersive; a rotation-induced low-frequency cutoff for high filling ratios; and antiresonance behavior in the effective compressibility. all cylinders on the 0 y ’ĆŠ side for the two states in (c) and (d), respectively. The exponential fittings are also presented. 