We examine the interdiffusion in multicomponent systems using the approach analogically to one developed earlier for description of interdiffusion in binary alloys. This approach in opposite to traditional theory, takes into consideration an active role of vacancies, equilibrium distribution of which is not supposed. In this case, in equations for flux components there are contributions conditioned by vacancy concentration gradient. As the vacancy diffusion coefficient is much larger than those for the components, a counteraction to this process will equalize the fluxes of components and, consequently, hinder from increase of deviation of vacancy concentration from the equilibrium one. If we substitute the expressions for fluxes in the equation of a continuity then we have the system of diffusion equations for components and vacancies. This system is solved and we have found a relation between the interdiffusion coefficients and the corresponding tracer diffusion coefficients. Interdiffusion coefficient equations sufficiently differ from traditional one (Darken's approach). The analysis of the possible reasons of "sluggish" diffusion in multicomponent alloys is carried out on the basis of the derived equations for fluxes. Diffusion processes in metals and alloys play an important role in manufacturing technology and heat treatment and determining a lot of properties of these materials In this paper approach that developed for binary system In the first section of the paper the mathematical apparatus of the approach is illustrated by the example of a binary system. In the second, the main stages of obtaining equations for fluxes in multicomponent systems are presented and the resulting equations are written out. The third section presents the results of illustrative calculations for the concentration dependences of the matrix of interdiffusioncoefficients and numerical solutions for a system of nonlinear diffusion equations for various values of the parameters. In the last part possible reasons of sluggish diffusion in high entropy alloys are discussed on the basis of the derived equations for fluxes. According to works where c A , c B are the atom concentrations of kind A and B, c v is the vacancy concentration, Ω is the volume per lattice site, Γ A is the probability of the exchanging atoms of kind A with a vacancy per unit of time, ν A is the attempt frequency, Q A is the potential barrier (activation energy); expression for Γ B is similar, a is the lattice parameter, γ is the dimensionless factor depending on the type of crystallographic structure and the geometry of diffusion atomic jumps into a vacancy. Further, it is assumed that Γ A and Γ B are independent of x, t to simplify mathematical transformations. The concentrations of components and vacancies for a we define as a function of x, ξ and t in contrast to c B x + ξ, t , c v x + ξ, t on range 0 < ξ < l. ( Underscore that within the interval there are no vacancy sinks and sources, but they may be on its boundaries. Further we represent each of the concentrations c A , c B , c v as the sum of two functions: c A x + ξ, t = c A 0 x, t + c A 1 ξ, x, t , c B x + ξ, t = c B 0 x, t + c B 1 ξ, x, t , c v x + ξ, t = c 0 x, t + c 1 ξ, x, t . ( An example of such a presentation is the Taylor series. Since the Eqs. ( Under these conditions, the continuity equations are valid not only for atoms, but also for vacancies: ∂c B ∂t = -div J B . Substituting the Eqs. ( where D V t = Ac A 0 x, t + Bc B 0 x, t , D A t ≡ Ac 0 x, t . Note that in these equations x is a parameter. We introduce the notation for the initial and boundary conditions: v 0 ξ = c ξ, 0 , v 1 t = c 0, t , v 2 τ = c l, t . The system of equations, apparently, has no analytical solution in the general case. However earlier At first, we should find the solutions of the diffusion equations with the diffusion coefficient depending on time. The description of this approach is given in Appendix I. Considering the form of solution obtained in Appendix I, the solutions of Eqs. ( ∞ n =1 were λ n = πn/l. And after simple transformations for φ n t and φ n A t we get: and φ n B has a similar form. After substitution of φ n A and φ n B in Eq. ( Substitution of Eq. ( Provided that the equilibrium concentration of vacancies for the current composition is maintained at the sinks, we have: where c e is the quasi-equilibrium vacancy concentration. Since systems are close to ideal, the second term is small compared to the first one, but it should be taken into account in the equation for the flux of vacancies when estimating the shifting rate of marker displacement in the Kirkendall effect If we reduce the linearization interval h and push it to zero, then: that is, the coefficient of interdiffusion has the same form as previously obtained The dependences of the interdiffusion coefficients on the concentration for different ratios of the self-diffusion coefficients of A and B atoms are shown for comparison in Figure Fig. The dependences show that the larger the ratio of self-diffusion coefficients, the greater the difference D and D Dark . The above solution approach can be generalized to the many component system (α = 1, ... ... , m). We apply linearization in the same way as it is done for a binary system: c α x + ξ, t , c x + ξ, t ; c α x + ξ, t = c α 0 x, t + c α 1 ξ, t , 0 ≤ ξ ≤ l c v x + ξ, t = c 0 x, t + c 1 ξ, t ; Then the linearized equations for the alloy components have the form: Z α = γa 2 Γ α , D α t ≡ Z α c 0 x, t . And for the concentration of vacancies we get: where D V t = Z α c α 0 x, t After transformations similar to those used earlier when considering a binary system, for slowly varying coefficients of the series of type Eq. ( In this equation, as before, we restrict ourselves only to terms of the first order of the series in the vacancy concentration. Then Eq. ( where β = 1, ... ... , m as well as α. The condition α ≠ β is not necessary since with the equality of these indexes the corresponding term in Eq. ( In the case of a three-component system for fluxes, we obtain Or in a accepted view: The equation for the fluxes of components 2 and 3 can be obtained by replacing the indexes. If we carry out transformations taking into account conditions Eq. ( Usually the calculations of the matrix of diffusion coefficients in ternary systems are based on the concentration profiles obtained in the experiment Analytical solution of diffusion equations obtained after substitution the flux (Eq. (29) or Eq. ( In the case of a four-component system for fluxes we obtain: Similarly, it is easy to write equations for fluxes in alloys with many components. Figure The data in Fig. The following are the results of numerical solutions of a system of diffusion equations for a three-component alloy. After substituting the Eqs. (30) for the fluxes into the continuity equations, we obtain a system of three nonlinear diffusion equations. This system is solved for the same values of the selfdiffusion coefficients as above. The calculation results are given on Fig. We also note that the calculations performed show the same maximum values of the deviation of the concentration of the third component from the initial one for different times ("undamped" wave process.) In other words, the concentration distribution of the third component has the form of a solitary wave similar to solitons, but this wave not only shifts, but also expands with time. Fig. From the results (Fig. The second significant factor, in contrast to the binary system, is that in manycomponent alloys the slowing down can be caused not only by smaller diffusion coefficients, but also, as follows from the equations for the fluxes, by the component concentration gradient directionality. Consider, for example, an equation for the flux j 1 in a four-component system of equiatomic composition. Suppose for simplifying that the concentration gradients for all components are equal in magnitude. It is easy to see, taking into account the values of the coefficients of the interdiffusion matrix (Table We believe that the factors mentioned above, acting together or separately, can slow down interdiffusion in highly entropy alloys, but the rate of slowing down can apparently be quite different. • The mathematical apparatus of the alternative theory of interdiffusion for multicomponent systems close to ideal solid solutions has been developed. • Equations for the fluxes of components for multicomponent systems and corresponding matrices of coefficients of interdiffusion are obtained. • It is shown that consistently taking into account the deviation of the concentration of vacancies from the equilibrium one, which underlies the developed approach, makes it possible to explain the possibility of sluggish diffusion in multicomponent alloys under certain conditions and to identify factors contributing to the slowdown. As a result, we obtain an inhomogeneous equation with a constant diffusion coefficient. The solution can be written using the Green's functions: 