A system model is used, describing the voltage-to-voltage transfer function for an ultrasonic transmit-receive transducer pair based on simulations using a finite element model for piezoelectric transducers (FEMP). The piezoelectric ceramic elements used in this work are cylindrical Pz27 disks vibrating radially in air at room temperature and 1 atm, over a frequency range up to 300 kHz. Comparisons are made between measurements and simulations. Effects of uncertainties in alignment are examined, together with comparisons with prior work. Accurate modelling of ultrasonic measurement systems for characterization of gas is of interest in industrial and scientific applications. Examples include fiscal flow measurement for custody transfer of natural gas Various approaches have been used to describe transmit-receive ultrasonic measurement systems for fluids. This includes methods based on (i) the Mason model [or equivalent one-dimensional (1D) approaches] for thickness-mode transmitting and receiving transducers, combined e.g. with uniform piston The work presented here builds on prior work described in Refs. The experimental measurement setup used in the present work is described in Section 3.1. A system model based on this setup is used. This was first introduced by The system model illustrated in Figure The voltage spectral components V 6 ( f ) and V om ( f ) are divided to obtain the voltage-tovoltage transfer function of the complete signal chain as defined in Equation (2.1) in The various transfer functions used in Eq. ( where is the magnitude and θ 15open the phase of this transfer function. The phase can be decomposed into a slowly varying phase and a plane wave component, cf. Equation (2.100) in where k = ω/c is the wave number and c is the speed of sound in air. The transfer function relating the measured voltage at Channel 1 on the oscilloscope to the voltage at T x , H VV 0m1 , is defined as equation (2.5) in The transfer functions H VV 5open5 , describing the influence of the electrical load from cable 3 and the receiving electronics on the output voltage from R x , and H VV 5 6 , describing the receiving electronics including cables 4 and 5, are defined as and respectively. The simulated lossless open-circuit transfer function H VV 15open is calculated by assuming spherical reciprocity and using the simulated far-field axial pressure p f f = p 4 (z f f ), where z f f = 1000 m is used, extrapolating it to the desired distance, d. This model assumes identical transducers and does not include losses in the medium or diffraction effects caused by the distance, d, being in the near-field of the transducers. The lossless open-circuit transfer function is then given as Equation (2.52) in where the input electrical impedance of T x , Z T , and the far-field pressure, p 4 (z f f ), is simulated using finite element modelling (FEMP) In order to obtain a lossless open-circuit transfer function, H VV 15open ( f ), from measurements, corrections are made for attenuation in the medium and near-field effects caused by diffraction due to the finite sizes of T x and R x .The attenuation correction factor, C α , is found by accounting for attenuation due to the classical absorption of sound in air, α cl , rotational motion of the air molecules, α rot , vibrations of oxygen molecules, α vib,O and vibration of nitrogen molecules, α vib,N . These are calculated according to H VV 0m1 and H VV 5open5 are estimated using transmission line models as proposed in From Equation 1-6 and the corrections mentioned above, the lossless transfer function The experimental setup has been largely kept as used by The two piezoelectric disks are mounted in air on positioning stages (Physik Instrumente GmbH&Co, Germany). T x is connected to a PI linear positioning stage (PI M-531.DG The disks are soldered onto partially twisted pairs cables, shielded with aluminium foil, mounted in a Faraday cage, cf. Figures Firstly the disks are roughly placed on the z-axis by adjusting R x in xand y-direction so that the two laser beams point to the x marking the center on each of the disks. This mark has a finite size, so the laser is moved to the top, bottom (vertically) and side edges (horizontally) of the disks to see if these are aligned. Adjustments are made by moving R x in xand y-direction if necessary. When the disks are both centred on the z-axis and aligned vertically and horizontally, the rotational alignment is investigated. For rotation about the y-axis this is done by moving the laser to the top and the bottom of T x , noting the distance from the laser to the disk in both positions and subtracting them to find the difference. This is referred to as uncertainty in the alignment caused by rotation about the y-axis. If alignment is not satisfactory the disk is moved by a light touch at the bottom of the disk, continuously monitoring the position on the laser display until the desired deviation about the y-axis is acquired. This procedure is then repeated for R x . For rotation about the x-axis the laser is placed on one of the furthest horizontal sides of the disk. The uncertainty in alignment is found by measuring at the two horizontal sides of the disk and subtracting the two distances to find the difference. For T x corrections are now made by using the rotation stage mentioned in Section 3.1. For R x a light touch or a screw at the top of the mounting rod allows for the rod and the disk to be rotated and is used to correct its positioning. The process is repeated several times, to check that corrections in one direction did not affect the deviation or uncertainty in alignment in another direction, until satisfactory alignment is achieved. Lastly the positioning stage in z-direction is used to position the front of the transmitting disk at the separation distance z = d and the front face of the receiver is placed at z = 0. The combined standard uncertainty for the separation distance, d, as claimed in Section 7.1.1 in The small and bright red/white area on each piezoelectric disk in Figure In For the first two peaks, associated with the fundamental radial mode R 1 , there is little to no change in the magnitude of the transfer function H VV 0m6 , for all three accuracies. At the second pair of peaks, associated with the second radial mode R 2 , there is no noticeable change in the magnitude for alignment to the degree of 50 μm and 10 μm. However, the measurement with 500 μm uncertainty in the alignment shows a decrease in magnitude of almost 5 dB compared to the measurements with 50 μm and 10 μm misalignment. The effect of misalignment in the slowly varying phase will be investigated further in Measurements of the open-circuit transfer function H VV 15open as compared to prior work It should be noted that the receiving disk used by Hagen In the frequency range 30 -80 kHz the measurements in the present work reveal a clear undulation pattern, which is also present in the measurements presented in For the magnitude of H VV 15open at the first peak associated with R 1 , the deviations of the present work are about 4.5 and 1 dB relative to Similarly, for R 2 , the corresponding deviations of the present work at the first peak are 6 and 1 dB, relative to The oscillations in the magnitude of the current work and With respect of the frequencies for the two peaks associated with R 1 and the first peak associated with R 2 , the corresponding deviations of the present work relative to Figure Therefore these curves are identical, cf. Figure The sensitivity of the transfer function H VV 15open ( f ) with respect to rotary alignment about the yand x-axes is investigated. It is found that a rotary misalignment less than 50 μm does not significantly influence on |H VV 0m6 ( f )|. However a rotary misalignment ≈ 500 μm reduces |H VV 0m6 ( f )| significantly, especially for R 2 , at which there is a decrease of approximately 5 dB. Comparisons with prior experimental measurements show some deviations from Comparisons with prior simulations ISBN 978-82-8123-019-4 Proceedings of the 42nd Scandinavian Symposium on Physical Acoustics, Geilo, Norway, Jan.