We report the temperature, magnetic field and time dependences of magnetization in advanced Ba122 superconducting tapes. The sample exhibits a peculiar vortex creep behavior. Below 10 K, the normalized magnetization relaxation rate S=dln(-M)/dln(t) shows a temperature insensitive plateau with a value comparable to that of the low temperature superconductors, which can be explained within the framework of the collective creep theory. It then enters into a second collective creep regime when the temperature increases. Interestingly, the relaxation rate below 20 K tends to saturate with the increasing field. However, it changes to a power law dependence on field at a higher temperature. A vortex phase diagram composed of the collective and the plastic creep regions is concluded. Benefit from the strong grain boundary pinning, the advanced Ba122 superconducting tape has promising potential to be applied not only in liquid helium but also in liquid hydrogen or at the temperature accessible with cryocoolers. Understanding the behavior of vortex matter in a superconductor is vitally important for both basic physics and technological applications. Vortex creep caused by thermal fluctuation introduces measurable dissipation and a reduction of the maximum loss-less current. The scale of the thermal fluctuation is usually parameterized by the dimensionless Ginzburg number Gi∝γ 2 T c 2 λ 4 /ξ 2 , where γ is the anisotropy parameter, T c is the superconducting transition temperature, λ is the penetration depth and ξ is the coherence length. Due to high T c , small ξ and large γ, the thermal fluctuation in cuprates is significant, giving rise to the so-called giant vortex creep After ten years of research and design since the discovery of IBSC, the (Ba/Sr) 0.6 K 0.4 Fe 2 As 2 superconducting tapes fabricated by the powder in tube (PIT) method In this paper, we measure the magnetization of the same Ba122 superconducting tape studied in Ref. The temperature dependence of magnetization is depicted in Fig. Fig. example is shown by the dashed line in Fig. The temperature dependence of relaxation rates are concluded in Fig. The collective creep theory supposes a diverging pinning energy U(J ) when the current density diminishes (1) Fig. For a closer inspection on the vortex creep behavior in the intermediate temperature region, we study the relation between the pinning energy and the critical current density. Firstly, we depict the effective pinning energy as a function of 1/J at 1 T, as shown in the inset of Fig. To investigate the application prospect at liquid hydrogen temperature, we compare the field dependence of the vortex creep rates of several high temperature superconductors that have probable application at 20 K. As shown in Fig. In summary, the advanced Ba122 superconducting tape with high critical current density exhibits slow vortex creep below 10 K, of which the value is comparable to that of the low temperature superconductors. It is found that the vortex creep behavior in the low and intermediate temperature region can be well explained by the model of collective creep. Interestingly, the S(H) curves below 20 K saturate at high field which is beneficial to high field applications. Our studies indicate that the advanced Ba122 superconducting tape has promising potential to be applied in high field magnets operated not only with liquid helium, but also with liquid hydrogen or cryocoolers.