This paper introduces the first tunable ferroelectric capacitor (FeCAP)-based unreleased RF MEMS resonator, integrated seamlessly in Texas Instruments' 130nm Ferroelectric RAM (FeRAM) technology. An array of FeCAPs in this complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) technology's back-end-of-line (BEOL) process were used to define the acoustic resonance cavity as well as the electromechanical transducers. To achieve high quality factor (Q) of the resonator, acoustic waveguiding for vertical confinement within the CMOS stack is studied and optimized. Additional design considerations are discussed to obtain lateral confinement and suppression of spurious modes. An FeCAP resonator is demonstrated with fundamental resonance at 703 MHz and Q of 1012. This gives a frequency-quality factor product f • Q = 7.11 × 10 11 which is 1.6x higher than the most state-of-the-art Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 (PZT) resonators. Due to the ferroelectric characteristics of the FeCAPs, transduction of the resonator can be switched on and off by adjusting the electric polarization. In this case, the resonance can be turned off completely at ±0.3V corresponding to the coercive voltage of the constituent FeCAP transducers. These novel switchable resonators may have promising applications in on-chip timing, ad-hoc radio front ends, and chip-scale sensors. Tunable high-Q, small footprint resonators have great potential in both mature and emergent fields such as radio frequency (RF) components The demanding performance of these devices and systems, alongside requirements for miniaturization, lower power consumption, and lower cost, has pushed the limits on what conventional technology can achieve The authors have previously demonstrated high-Q, unreleased resonators with field effect transistor (FET) electromechanical sensing, referred to as Resonant Body Transistors (RBTs) GHz It is therefore necessary to explore alternative IC integrated materials. Ferroelectric materials have spontaneous electrical polarization which can be reoriented under an external electric field Commonly used ferroelectric materials include barium titanate (BaTiO3) Texas Instruments (TI) E035 FeRAM technology has integrated ferroelectric PZT in the back-end-of-line (BEOL) process of their 130nm CMOS technology Leveraging this IC platform, we can realize ferroelectric based CMOS-MEMS resonators with Under the full bias sweep, C0 varies between 4.6 pF and 6.5 pF as demonstrated in Fig. ). The resulting 'butterfly'-corresponding circuit parameters is summarized in