We present a micrometer scale, on-chip integrated, plasmonic enhanced graphene photodetector (GPD) for telecom wavelengths operating at zero dark current. The GPD is designed and optimized to directly generate a photovoltage and has an external responsivity∼12.2V/W with a 3dB bandwidth∼42GHz. We utilize Au split-gates with a∼100nm gap to electrostatically create a p-n-junction and simultaneously guide a surface plasmon polariton gap-mode. This increases light-graphene interaction and optical absorption and results in an increased electronic temperature and steeper temperature gradient across the GPD channel. This paves the way to compact, on-chip integrated, power-efficient graphene based photodetectors for receivers in tele and datacom modules. The ever-growing demand for global data traffic[1] is driving the development of next generation communication standards A variety of functionalities have been developed and demonstrated in Si photonics for local optical interconnects On-chip integrated Ge PDs Graphene is a promising candidate for on-chip integrated photonics . The advantages of single-layer graphene (SLG) for photonics stem from its superior optoelectronic properties GPDs can be built exploiting different mechanisms: photo-voltaic (PV) PTE is ideal for PD operation in a voltage mode. In optically illuminated SLG, electron-electron scattering drives the formation of a 'hot' (optically excited)-carrier distribution, described by the Fermi-Dirac function where x is the coordinate along the channel from drain to source, and S is given by Mott's formula with σ(x) the conductivity, k B the Boltzmann constant, e the electron charge and μ c the chemical potential (μ c = E F at T e = 0 To increase R V for PTE-GPDs, Eq.1 suggests two strategies: 1) maximize S; 2) maximize the T e gradient profile in the SLG channel. The former is related to μ via Eq.2 and the Drude conductivity Here, we report compact (∼0.5-4μm), PTE-based, waveguide-integrated, plasmonic-enhanced GPDs for telecom wavelengths with R V ∼ 12.2V/W at zero sourcedrain bias and zero dark current, with a 3dB cutoff frequency∼ 42GHz. To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest R V to date for waveguide-integrated GPDs operating in voltage mode. We use SLG grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and transferred onto low-loss (∼ 1dB/cm) planarized (i.e. fully-embedded in polished cladding To optimize the cross section parameters at λ=1.55μm, we perform optical simulations using a commercial finite difference solver tool (Lumerical MODE). After selecting the fundamental gap plasmon mode for a given design and λ, we extract the optical electric field distribution in the SLG channel to model the absorbed power density that generates the hot carrier distribution as timeaveraged electric power dissipation density where ∆T e (x) = T e (x) -T l is the local temperature fluctuation, ξ is the cooling length (see Methods) and κ e (x) is the electronic thermal conductivity (see Methods). Eq.3 gives the T e (x) profile along the SLG channel. The S(x) profile from Eq.2 is used in Eq.1 to obtain V ph . The device parameters are chosen to maximize V ph . A second aspect of device design concerns the coupling between the dielectric and plasmonic waveguides, as well as the positioning and width of the SLG channel along the split-gate. Taper-assisted butt-coupling (end-to-end alignment) was reported to yield the lowest insertion loss (< 0.6dB) Representative spectra of SLG on Cu (after removal of Cu background photoluminescence After the final encapsulation, To determine the DC operating point, we perform electrical characterizations by sweeping the split-gate voltages (V Gate 1 , V Gate 2 ) while measuring the device current I DS under a constant source-drain bias V DS =1mV, using DC probes on micromanipulators and two source measure units. To record the static photoresponse, we add two fibre probes and couple continuous wave (CW) transverse-electric (TE) polarized light at 1.50-1.58μm from a tunable laser into the SiN waveguide via an optical fibre and a grating coupler (GC). While V ph is recorded across the unbiased (V DS =0V) channel as a function of V Gate 1 and V Gate 2 , using a lock-in amplifier under internal modulation (square wave, ON-OFF) of the laser with 200Hz, we monitor the transmission with a second fibre positioned over the output GC and connected to an external InGaAs power meter to ensure constant P in . Fig. To calculate R V , we first estimate the optical power inside our GPDs by taking into account: a) combined loss (∼9.6dB at peak transmission) of waveguide propagation and fiber-to-waveguide coupling (wavelength-dependent, following the response envelope of the GC); b) 3dB power reduction from the input laser modulation (square wave, ON-OFF) with a 50% duty cycle; c) 3dB power splitting in the Y-branches and their∼0.2dB losses. We get R V ∼ 12.2V/W, the largest reported so far for waveguide-integrated GPDs in voltage mode at zero-bias. Fig. To highlight our GPDs' behavior as voltage sources, when a signal is generated, we place two devices back to back on the same waveguide and connect them in series. This modified design, Fig. Figs.7d,e plot the photovoltage maps for both GPDs at P in ∼ 70μW. The GPD closer to the input GC (A) absorbs most of the light and has the six-fold pattern typical of PTE, Fig. To evaluate the frequency response we use the optical heterodyne set-up in Fig. Fig. To determine the cut-off, we therefore modify the set-up (Fig. In summary, we reported waveguide-integrated plasmonic enhanced GPDs with an external responsivity∼12.2V/W, a -3dB cut-off∼42GHz, and small (∼3-20μm 2 ) device footprints, using CVD SLG on SiN. We exploited the integration of an SPP waveguide with a SLG p-n junction to enhance light-SLG interaction and create a confined electron heat-source to obtain a strong, PTE-dominated photoresponse. This paves the way to power-efficient receivers for optoelectronic links. We acknowledge funding from EU Graphene Flagship, ERC Grant Hetero2D, EPSRC Grants EP/K01711X/1, EP/K017144/1, EP/N010345/1, and EP/L016087/1. Plasmonic gap width, SLG placement, and thickness of metal and oxide structures are the key parameters to be optimized to achieve maximum photovoltage. To do so, we build a device model in the layout environment of a commercial eigenmode solver (Lumerical MODE Solutions). In order to model SLG in the optical solver and subsequent calculations consistently, we use a volumetric permittivity material model, in which SLG is described as cuboid with finite thickness t = 0.34nm and in-plane (ε ) and out-of plane (ε ⊥ ) permittivity are defined as independent tensor elements. To calculate the in-plane relative permittivity for SLG, we use where ε ′ (ω) and ε ′′ (ω) are the real and imaginary part of the relative permittivity ε(ω), σ(ω) is the SLG optical conductivity, ω is the angular frequency, ε r is the background relative permittivity (whose frequencydependence is ignored in the small (λ =1.5-1.6μm) wavelength range under consideration), and ε 0 is the permittivity of free space. σ(ω) is obtained by linearresponse We then run the eigenmode solver, using the relative permittivity function for SLG, and select the fundamental (gap plasmon) mode for further processing. We export the simulation mesh grid positions, electric E and magnetic H data, effective refractive index (n eff = β/k 0 , where β is the propagation constant of the mode and k 0 is the free space wavevector A crucial intermediate step requires the determination of the T e (x) profile in the SLG channel. The first step establishes the operating regime. As discussed in Refs. The contrasting case, the "weak heating" regime, is characterized by |∆T e (x)| ≪ T l The intended operation of our GPD is under CW or, during data reception, quasi-CW (i.e. the pulse duration exceeds the cooling time of the hot-carrier distribution) illumination with low P in < 0.1mW at in-plane incidence. Furthermore, a linear dependence of V ph on P in , such as in Fig. In order to evaluate Eq.3, we need to specify the cooling length ξ and the light absorption heat source. In principle, ξ, which describes the energy transfer from the electronic system to the optical phonons In order to relate J(x) to physically meaningful quantities, we integrate the normal component of the timeaveraged Poynting vector over the simulation region and normalize it to a given input power. After solving Eq.3 for the T e (x) fluctuation profile ∆T e (x), we take its derivative with respect to x and obtain the second factor of the integrand in Eq.1. Figs. To model S along the channel, we assume that the structure is gated to achieve the maximum S below the gates, as for Eq.2 (opposite in sign but equal in magnitude for the p-n case) and approximate the gap region with a linear interpolation between the two. Combining both factors in Eq.1 and computing the integral yields To calculate R V or photovoltage maps as in Fig. We then perform a sweep of gap width, SLG position, gate oxide thickness, gate contact height as a function of μ in SLG and ε r . As for Fig. Extracting E and H of the fundamental mode in the hybrid region is sufficient for the design of the device cross-section. However, it does not capture the field distribution along the device, since optical losses, transition from dielectric to plasmonic waveguide, and power exchange between different modes that co-exist in the hybrid region remain unaccounted for. To find a good combination of SLG position and width within the constraints of the cross-section design, targeting a T e distribution with maximal derivative across the PD, but minimal along the propagation direction over the device length, we perform FDTD of the transition between SiN waveguide and GPD. We construct a device model in the same way as for the eigenmode analysis and adjust the source settings to 1.5-1.6μm. We launch the fundamental quasi-TE mode of the SiN waveguide towards the GPD and use frequency domain field monitors (FDFM) with various orientations (parallel and perpendicular to the propagation direction) to track the field and power profiles at different points. Figs. Figs.10d,e display the electric field intensity from a vertical FDMD monitor along the center line of the GPD, at two wavelengths. As expected for this non-adiabatic transition with fast decrease (<1μm) of the taper crosssection down to the target gap size, scattering and reflections at the start of the hybrid region reduce the power at the GPD, but the desired sharp intensity profile over length scales that match the fabricated SLG channel widths is achieved. Consequently, we place the SLG channel 100nm after the SPP structure has reached its final gap width. The comparison of field intensities for 1.5 and 1.6μm on the same color scale in Figs.10d,e reveals a larger peak intensity and a longer interaction length for the latter, which indicates improved coupling efficiency at larger λ, as for the wavelength-depended R V in Fig. 