Periodic field patterns of atoms and their charges/spins/orbits emerge in crystals, forming novel states of matter called emergent crystals (ECs). In recent years, they are observed in diverse systems such as skyrmion crystals in helimagnets, and periodic ripples in 2D materials. ECs essentially changes the properties of material underneath, and are deformable when subject to various effective fields. A major challenge in application is first to predict what kind of EC will appear in the system of interest, and how to quantify its "elasticity" when subject to an effective field. Here we establish the theoretical framework of thermodynamics for deformable ECs, and derive from it the linear constitutive equations when subject to the primary external field. We provide a systematic study on the ECs that may appear in helimagnets induced by the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction, and analyze their elasticity when subject to bias magnetic fields. We construct in this work the basis of emergent elasticity, a new branch studying deformable emergent crystals under effective fields. Emergent crystals (ECs) are spatially periodic field patterns emerging from atomic crystals. These field patterns appear due to collective behaviors of atoms or their charges, spins, or orbits, etc. They appear in different material systems, including but not limited to skyrmion crystals (SkX) Spatial patterns formation has long been the subject of interest in the study of liquid crystal In this work, we establish the general framework of thermodynamics and emergent elasticity for deformable ECs when the system is subject to the primary external field (work conjugate of the order parameter vector). Based upon this general framework, we systematically study all ECs that can appear in bulk helimagnets due to presence of the DMI, where a symmetry analysis of the form of DMI and related EC for different point groups is provided. Generally, we find four types of ECs (Bloch SkX, Néel SkX, Anti-I SkX, Anti-II SkX), and four mixed states of them when anisotropy of DMI is presented. We then study the emergent elasticity of these ECs under bias magnetic fields, where the elasticity of the 8 types of ECs can be effectively described by two models. We establish in this work the foundation to study the deformation, stability, phase transitions, and elementary excitations The contents of this paper are organized as follow. In section II, we first introduce the emergent strain tensor to describe the deformation of ECs, and then establish the general method to derive the thermodynamic potential of deformable ECs from that of the underlying material. In section III, based on the thermodynamic potential obtained, we derive the linear constitutive equations for ECs when the system is subject to the primary external field of the EC considered. In section IV, we systematically study the thermodynamic potential for various kinds of ECs induced by the DMI in magnetic materials, and solve from it the equilibrium field configurations of ECs and their variation with certain thermodynamic parameters. To achieve this, we perform a group theoretical analysis on the functional form of DMI permitted by different crystalline groups, which determines the ECs that may appear. We obtain from our study the Bloch SkX, Néel SkX, Anti-I SkX, Anti-II SkX and their mixed states. In section V, we study the emergent elastic property of all kinds of ECs that appear in previous section when subject to bias magnetic fields. Consider an EC emerging in an ordinary crystal, the existence of the EC can be described by an order parameter vector field v of the underlying material. For SkX in helimagnets, v refers to the magnetization vector; for SkX in ferroelectrics where q n denotes the reciprocal lattice vectors of the emergent crystal. For a d-dimensional emergent crystal (d = 1, 2, 3), T is a vector of integers, and q 1 , q 2 , • • • , q d are the basic reciprocal vectors. When the work conjugate of v, the primary external field X, changes, the EC is anticipated to deform. For ECs in magnetic materials, X refers to the magnetic field; for ECs in ferroelectrics, X refers to the electric field; and for periodically rippled 2D materials, X refers to the mechanical forces applied perpendicular to the 2D plane. We assume that due to the emergent deformation, the original coordinates a map to r, which gives r = a + u e . Here u e denotes the emergent displacement vector. Similar to atomic crystals, rigid translation of emergent crystals does not induce any change of energy and is not considered here. To describe a deformable EC, we have to transform a to r in Eq. in the Eulerian coordinates, and in the Lagrangian coordinates. One should notice that in Eqs. q n in the Lagrangian coordinates. From eqs. Now consider an isothermal disturbance of the equilibrium state at given temperature T and external field X q , where the disturbance is small enough so that it does not lead to any phase transitions and the deviation from the equilibrium state can thus be described by small quantities. To study this deviation, we expand φ in terms of all the independent variables to quadratic terms: where φ0 denotes the undisturbed averaged free energy density, terms with a prefix d denote a small disturbance, and In Eq. ( dX q = μ μ μ q dv q + (g eq ) T dε ε ε ea , where for 3D EC The emergent elastic stresses and emergent torsion introduced in σ σ σ ea share the same dimension with the elastic stresses. However, they do not correspond to any kind of macroscopic field that we have known, for which we usually have dσ σ σ ea = 0. In this case, we have from Eq. ( where λ λ λ = -(C e ) -1 g eq (μ μ μ q * ) -1 and μ μ μ q * = μ μ μ q -(g eq ) T (C e ) -1 g eq . λ λ λ describes the stiffness of ECs with respect to X q , the Fourier magnitudes of the primary external field, and is called the "primary crossover stiffness matrix". The word "crossover" means that the matrix links the deformation of an emergent crystalline states with an external field applied to the underlying atomic lattice. λ λ λ should be distinguished from the emergent elastic stiffness matrix C e defined in Eq. ( Magnetic skyrmions are topologically protected emergent particles. They exist as stable or metastable state in noncentrosymmetric helimagnets due to the competition between the ferromagnetic exchange interaction, favoring a collinear spin alignment, and the DMI, favoring a rotating spin alignment Here, the magnetization M is chosen as the threedimensional order parameter field. The first term in Eq. ( where T 0 is the ordering temperature with zero DMI To get the form of DMI for different helimagnets, we carry out the symmetry analysis. In a continuum model, the free energy density of DMI can be written as a general form Here, D ijk are the coefficients describing the strength of DMI, M i (i = 1, 2, 3) are components of magnetization vectors, and x i (i = 1, 2, 3) are spatial coordinates. According to the theory of phase transitions by E. M. Lifshitz As a result, we have D ijk = -D jik , and the number of nonzero independent DMI coefficients reduces from 27 to 9. The magnetization M is a pseudovector, thus, it transforms under a rotation R as is the determinant of R, for proper (improper) rotation |R| = 1 (-1); R i i is the scalar product of unit vectors along i and i axes. D is a third order tensor; therefore, under a rotation R, we have When R is a symmetry operation for the helimagnets, the free energy density of DMI is invariant, thus By applying the symmetry operations of certain point group to Eq. ( to simplify Eq. ( where φ(m) = β K 2 φ(M) and φ DM (m) = β K 2 φ DM (M) are the rescaled total free energy density and the rescaled DMI free energy density, respectively. In practice, we use the following Fourier representation of 2D ECs instead of Eq. ( When truncated at a specific value of n, the nth order Fourier representation given in Eq. ( ε e 11 and ε e 22 are the normal strains of SkX, ε e 12 and ω e reflect respectively the shear deformation and rotation of SkX. For 2D ECs distributed in the xy plane, we find that the first six point groups in Table I possess a DMI with higher symmetry, such that a hexagonal or square lattice can be assumed, for which we have ε e 11 = ε e 22 and ε e 12 and ω e can be set to be zero. In this case, Eq. ( with q = 1 -ε e 11 = 1 -ε e 22 . m 0 = [m 01 , m 02 , m 02 ] T is the averaged magnetization. q ij (j = 1, 2, ..., n i ) are the wavecectors of ith order waves, there are n i of them. q ij can be seen as vectors of reciprocal lattice spanned by the basis q 11 and q 12 , they satisfy the following relations: Without loss of generality, for 2D ECs with hexagonal symmetry, we set q 11 = [0, 1] T and q 12 = [- ] T . Some information about the Fourier representation of hexagonal SkX is listed in Table The free energy functional for 2D ECs can be obtained by substituting Eq.( where φper = includes all gradient terms, i.e., the exchange interaction and DMI which are the dominant parts of the free energy, (m * qij ) T denotes the complex conjugate of m qij . A ij for different point groups have different forms, but they are all Hermitian, and have the same eigenvalues: λ 1 = (s i q -1) 2 , λ 2 = (s i q) 2 + 1 and λ 3 = (s i q + 1) 2 . In the orthonormal basis spanned by the unit eigenvectors P ij1 , P ij2 and where c ijk = c re ijk + ic im ijk (k = 1, 2, 3), and c re ijk and c im ijk are real variables to be determined. Using Eq. ( Obviously, the value of φper is non-negative because λ k ≥ 0 (the matrix A ij is positive semidefinite). When q = 1 and c ijk = 0 for i = 1 or k = 1, φper reaches its minimum 0. We now list the matrix A ij and the orthonormal basis for different point groups. For T , O or D n (n = 3, 4, 6) point group For C nv (n = 3, 4, 6) point group For D 2d point group For C n (n = 3, 4, 6) point group For S 4 point group The equilibrium states of ECs are determined by free energy minimization at given temperature and magnetic field. FOr all the point groups studied, we find that ECs with hexagonal symmetry always has lower free energy than ECs with square symmetry, for which we focus on the former case. For SkX with hexagonal symmetry, we have . Hereafter, we focus on the case where b = [0, 0, b] T . At fixed temperature t and magnetic field b, these parameters are obtained by minimizing the rescaled free energy. In this work, the Fourier expansion order is chosen as n = 3. In C nv (n = 3, 4, 6) helimagnets, the DMI free energy density φ DM can be divided into a Bloch part φ BL = Dsinξ(L 321 + L 132 ) and a Néel part φ NE = Dcosξ(L 131 + L 232 ) (see Table , the in-plane magnetization components are perpendicular [parallel] to the corresponding radial directions. Therefore, the SkX belongs to a Bloch [Néel] type, which exists also in helimagnets with T , O or D n (n = 3, 4, 6) [C nv (n = 3, 4, 6)] point group. At ξ = 60 • or ξ = 30 • , the magnetization structure is between that of Bloch SkX and Néel SkX, and we call it Bloch-Néel mixed SkX. According to Fig. It has been proved by numerical simulation that anisotropic DMI deforms isolated skyrmion from a circular one to an elliptic one When we plot Fig. In Ref. 2 ) reflecting the wave amplitude are equal. About the lattice deformation, we have ε e 11 = ε e 22 , ε e 12 = 0, and ω e = 0, for which the only parameter is ε e 11 . Consider Bloch type DMI without anisotropy and apply a magnetic field perpendicular to the skyrmion plane, we study the evolution of the normal strain ε e 11 with respect to the thermodynamic variables b and t. We first fix the temperature t = 0, and study the influence of mag- netic field b on the size of a skyrmion cell, the result is plotted in Fig. We now study the influence of DMI anisotropy on the deformation of SkX in D 121 /c re 131 are always 1, meaning that the waves along deformed q 11 and q 12 directions are equivalent. This is reasonable, because the DMI anisotropy do not break the antisymmetry of DMI with respect to the y axis. Now we study the emergent elasticity for all the ECs that appear in helimagnets when subject to a disturbance of the bias magnetic field. other words, we try to derive the linear relationship between dε ε ε ea and db = [db 1 , db 2 , db 3 ] T . Compared with the generalized relation given in Eq. ( where λ λ λ bias is a 4 * 3 matrix whose components depend on the temperature t and magnetic field b, db i (i = 1, 2, 3) are small distributions of the bias magnetic field. λ ij can be expressed analytically, but their expressions are too length to be present. Here, we just calculate their numerical values. Based on symmetry analysis, we find that for the ECs permitted by the first six types of point groups listed in Table In this case, λ 13 is no longer equal to λ 23 , meaning that anisotropic lattice deformation of ECs takes place. Fig. The work was supported by the NSFC (National Natural Science Foundation of China) through the funds 11772360, 11472313, 11572355 and Pearl River Nova Program of Guangzhou (Grant No. 201806010134). 