Fundamental working mechanisms of perovskite solar cells remain an elusive topic of research. Impedance Spectroscopy has been key to characterize the main physical processes governing the behavior of dye and quantum dot sensitized solar cells, which are considered, in many aspects, predecessor technologies. In contrast, IS application to perovskite-based devices generates uncommon features and misleading outputs, mainly due to the lack of a stablished model for the interpretation of the results. In this work we control the perovskite precursor concentration to fabricate a series of perovskite-based solar cells with different amounts of perovskite absorber. Low concentration devices present the well-known dye sensitized solar cell (DSSCs) impedance pattern. As the amount of perovskite is increased, the characteristic impedance spectra of thin-film perovskite solar cells (PSCs) arises. This transition is characterized by a change in the working principles, determined by an evolution of the dominant capacitance: from the intermediate frequency chemical capacitance of TiO2 in devices with isolated perovskite domains, to a large low-frequency capacitance signal which divides the spectra in two sections, yet with no direct influence in final device performance. This study allows to link experimentally, in terms of impedance behavior, PSCs with the rest of solar cell devices via DSSCs. We observe that it is not possible to assign a single physical origin to the different resistances determined in the impedance spectra except for the series resistance. In contrast, resistive element present contributions from different physical processes, observing a transport-recombination coupling. Based on this analysis we provide an equivalent circuit model to evaluate the impedance pattern of PSCs in terms of the processes directly affecting the final performance (i.e. considering transport-related and recombination-related losses), a crucial tool for further development of perovskite photovoltaics. More than a decade ago, a new family of light sensitizers, the quantum dots (QDs), experienced an increase of performance and popularity among the dye sensitized solar cell (DSSC) community. Intensive research targeted a thorough understanding of the DSSCs working principles, Since the first reports, the photoconversion efficiency of QD sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) has continuously increased up to current values close to 13%. Despite the very competitive efficiency reported for halide perovskite sensitizer in liquid QDSSCs, these materials did not receive much attention due to their instability in liquid iodine redox electrolyte. However, the use of a solid hole transporting material (HTM) in 2012 PSCs have shown unconventional behaviors, such as hysteresis of current-voltage (J-V) curve, The analyzed samples were prepared on transparent conducting glass substrates, SnO2:F (FTO), depositing a compact TiO2 layer and a TiO2 mesoporous layer (~400 nm thick), as it is conventionally used in DSSC as well as in some PSC. CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3), and CsPbI1.3Br1.7 were deposited on these films by sequential deposition of precursors, known as 2 steps deposition method (details in experimental section). Different hybrid and inorganic perovskite materials were used in order to highlight the generality of the approach as the same trends have been observed in all cases. Figure Impedance spectroscopy measurements were carried out for different samples at 0.1 sun illumination at varying applied forward bias. Limited light intensity ensures device stability during IS measurements, while it still reproduces the characteristic behavior of PSC. In Figure Rdr=7000 Ω, and Cdr=10 -4 F. The features observed in the impedance spectra of an all-solid DSSC, Figure Consequently, the characteristic time of the HF arc considering only the elements of the TL is τ ,-./0 = R "∥ • C 2 . This arc is followed by a straight line. The length of the HF arc plus the straight line in the Nyquist plot is one third of the total transport resistance, Rt, obtained as the series association of electron and hole transport resistances: Ultimately, the LF arc is determined by the coupling of Cμ with Rrec, and the resistance at the low frequency limit (DC limit) is Rrec+Rt/3. Note that for the sake of clarity in Figure The evolution from DSSC behavior to a more complex one when the perovskite amount increases in the device, (description of this effect in terms of the equivalent circuits depicted in Figure With the analysis performed for 3a and 3b patterns, though the incorporation of a dr-brach, we have connected devices with typical PSC responses with devices with DSSCs behavior. Nonetheless, it is very important to highlight that this dr-like branch acts as an open circuit at DC conditions, thus it does not affect directly the J-V curve or the cell performance, but it can still result in hysteretic behavior as analyzed elsewhere In addition, the physical origin of the characteristic behavior of PSCs at LF 21 is already discussed in the literature A theoretical approach to the model schematized in Figure Coming back to the analysis of the IS, note that the standard TL for all-solid DSSCs, Figure The size of each of the two parts depends on the ratio: (5) The DC resistance, RDC, which can be used to reconstruct the JV curve, can be extracted from the low frequency limit: Note that R DE , which determines the JV curve, does not include any of the parameters of the relaxation-like branch as previously commented. The pattern observed in Figure When the Cμ becomes lower than Cdr and Cg, the extended TL equivalent circuit, Figure (3) and ( As previously discussed, the significant decline of Cμ results from the reduction of the electron injection into TiO2 scaffold when the system get close to a PSC configuration, as electrons are transported through the low resistivity perovskite rather than through the TiO2. The impedance spectra observed in Figure Most of the previous studies in impedance spectroscopy of PSCs have been made in terms of RHF and RLF, but an important conclusion of this work is that RHF and RLF are not related to a single physical process but to a combination of charge transport, recombination and dielectric relaxation-like processes, as defined by Eq. ( Finally, an important factor in solar cell performance is the effect of the contacts and interfaces that, beyond Rs, has not been explicitly considered in the discussed model so far. It has been observed that an increase of the transport layers' thicknesses, and consequently contact transport resistances, does not change the IS pattern shape. The large variety of PSC materials and configurations have also generated a significant amount of particular cases that provide richer perovskite patterns than the double arc spectra of Figure We Characterization. The PV device performances were analyzed under a standard illuminating condition (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm -2 ) using a solar simulator (ABET Technologies Sun 2000) and the current-voltage curves were measured with a digital source meter (Keithley 2612). The light intensity was calibrated with a NREL-certified Si reference cell. The solar cells were masked with a metal aperture of 0.12 cm 2 to define the active area. The TiO2/perovskite film morphologies were investigated using a scanning electron microscope (SUPRA 40VP, Carl Zeiss) and EDXS maps were recorded using an Apollo X (EDAX) to define the compositional ratio of I/Br in CsPbIxBr3-x. The powdery TiO2/MAPbI3 was collected by scraping the film into as small a piece as possible, and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) imaging was carried out using a JEOL (JEM-2010) microscope operated at 200kV. The impedance spectroscopy measurements were carried out on a PGSTAT30 potentiostat (Autolab). A Xe lamp was used to illuminate the perovskite solar cells and a neutral-density filter was used to adjust the light intensity to 0.10 Sun power. All the impedance spectra were measured ranging between 1 MHz and 0.1 Hz. In this section, we try to discuss some of the previous results in literature in terms of the model described in this work. One of the parameters more interesting that could be extracted from the impedance analysis is Rrec as it allows to characterize an important part of the losses of the device. Rrec can be defined generally as: where R00 is the preexponential factor, q the electron charge, V the voltage, m the ideality factor, T the temperature and kB the Boltzmann constant. In a very recent work, where Eg is the energy of the bandgap. On the other hand, the slope correlation of log(RHF) and log(RLF) vs. Voc has been also studied in previous works. Some works reported similar slopes for RHF and RLF, fact that was explained suggesting that both arcs are referred to the same physical phenomena. (5) (Eqs. 3-5 in the main text) as: When RLF/RHF ratio presents a weak voltage dependence in comparison with the exponential dependence of Rrec, see Eq. ( 