Electrically driven light sources are essential in a wide range of applications, from indication and display technologies to high-speed data communication and quantum information processing. Wide-bandgap semiconductors promise to advance solid-state lighting by delivering novel light sources. However, electrical pumping of these devices is still a challenging problem. Many wide-bandgap semiconductor materials, such as SiC, GaN, AlN, ZnS, and Ga 2 O 3 , can be easily doped n-type, but their efficient p-type doping is extremely difficult. The lack of holes due to the high activation energy of acceptors greatly limits the performance and practical applicability of wide-bandgap semiconductor devices. Here, we study a novel effect which allows homojunction semiconductors devices, such as p-i-n diodes, to operate well above the limit imposed by doping of the p-type material. Using a rigorous numerical approach, we show that the density of injected holes can exceed the density of holes in the p-type injection layer by up to three orders of magnitude, which gives the possibility to significantly overcome the doping problem. We present a clear physical explanation of this unexpected feature of wide-bandgap semiconductor p-i-n diodes and closely examine it in 4H-SiC, 3C-SiC, AlN and ZnS structures. The predicted effect can be exploited to develop bright light emitting devices, especially electrically driven non-classical light sources based on color centers in SiC, AlN, ZnO and other wide-bandgap semiconductors. The possibility to create a high density of non-equilibrium charge carriers in the active region of semiconductor optoelectronic devices is essential for a wide range of optoelectronic applications, from LEDs The traditional solution to this problem is to use the superinjection effect in double heterostructures For decades it was believed that the superinjection effect was a unique feature of semiconductor heterostructures, while the maximum density of injected electrons and holes in homojunction structures could not exceed the free carrier densities in the n-type and p-type injection layers, respectively Figure The acceptor compensation ratio is also equal to η p = 5% To understand the observed superinjection of holes in the 4H-SiC p-i-n diode, let us look at Figure where E is the electric field and μ p is the hole mobility, and q is the electron charge. On the contrary, in the n-type region near the i-n junction, where D p is the hole diffusion coefficient, L p is the hole diffusion length in the n-type layer, and d is the size of the i-region. The hole current at the p-i junction and the hole current at the i-n junction are connected to each other via the current continuity equation: (3) where R (z) is the net recombination rate. We can rewrite this equation as (4) where K represents the hole current reduction factor due to recombination in the i-region. If the recombination rate is low, K ≈1 and J p | z =d+0 ≈ J p | z =-0 . Using equations ( Using the material parameters for 4H-SiC listed in Table The above explanation shows that the superinjection effect in the 4H-SiC p-i-n diode arises at high bias voltages due the high contrast in the hole transport mechanisms of the p-type and n-type injection layers, which is naturally provided by the very high activation energy of acceptors. The potential well for holes near the i-n junction, which is formed at high bias voltages and where holes are accumulated, is a consequence rather than a cause of the superinjection effect. The real reason for the superinjection effect is the requirement for the current continuity, which can be ensured only by an area with a high hole density between two regions (the p-type and n-type regions of the diode) with different (drift and diffusion) hole transport mechanisms. Therefore, the superinjection of holes can be observed in many wide-bandgap semiconductor p-i-n diodes that feature a similar asymmetry in the hole conduction mechanisms of the n-type and p-type layers. The key requirement for such an asymmetry is a low density of free carriers in the p-type layer and a high density of free carriers in the n-type layer. Figure Finally, we note that the strength of the superinjection effect decreases at extremely high bias voltages (Figure As discussed in the previous section, the superinjection effect in the p-i-n diode arises due to the high contrast in the conductivity mechanisms of the p-type and n-type layers. If at a fixed bias voltage, the density of free carriers in the n-type injection layer decreases, the electric field in the n-type layer increases, which directly follows from the Poisson equation. Accordingly, the ratio of the drift hole current to the diffusion hole current increases at the i-n junction. Since the asymmetry in conduction mechanisms of the n-type and p-type injection layers reduces, the strength of the superinjection effect decreases, which can be seen in Figure The activation energies of donors and acceptors are critical parameters that can strongly affect the efficiency of hole injection. Since the activation energy of donors in 4H-SiC is much lower than the activation energy of acceptors Figure Equations ( Activation energies of acceptors and other material parameters in 6H-SiC are roughly the same as in 4H-SiC The activation energies of acceptors in 3C-SiC are pretty much the same as in 4H-SiC: 0.26 eV for Al Although the activation energies of acceptors in silicon carbide are high, which limits the density of holes in the p-type material to 10 14 -10 15 cm -3 , the p-type doping problem is even more pronounced in such materials as gallium nitride, aluminum nitride or zinc sulfide. If in the case of GaN (which also features very high activation energies of acceptors Another example of a wide-bandgap semiconductor, which can hardly be used as an active layer of the double heterostructure is zinc sulfide We have numerically demonstrated the superinjection of holes in homojunction p-i-n diodes based on different wide-bandgap semiconductors. This effect gives the possibility to create a high density of non-equilibrium holes in the i-region of the p-i-n diode at high forward bias voltages. The created density of holes exceeds the hole density in the p-type injection layer by more than two orders of magnitude, which can be exploited to improve the performance of light emitting devices. The highest hole density is found near the i-n junction, which contradicts the common belief about p-i-n diodes, since in the i-region, one could expect to find the highest hole density near the p-i junction. However, we have provided a clear physical explanation for the observed effect, which is based on the asymmetry in the free carrier densities in the n-type and p-type layers. In SiC, GaN, AlN, ZnS and many wide-bandgap semiconductors, this asymmetry is naturally provided by the high activation energy of acceptors, which greatly limits the density of holes in the p-type layer of the diode. Hence, for optoelectronic devices, it is crucially important to overcome this doping limit, especially if it is not possible to use heterostructures. We have demonstrated that the superinjection of holes can be observed at high forward bias voltages. At the same time, the superinjection effect does not show itself at low and moderate injection currents (bias voltages). The higher the density of holes in the p-type layer, the higher the threshold current (see Figure The strength of the superinjection effect depends on the minority carrier lifetime and other properties of the semiconductor diode, but the most crucial parameter is the activation energy of acceptors E A since it determines the hole density in the p-type region. We found that the superinjection of holes can hardly be detected at doping levels above 10 17 cm -3 if E A is lower than ~0.15 eV. On the other hand, at high activation energies ( E A ≳ 0.4 eV), it is strong even at relatively low injection currents. Assuming the density of electrons to be high in the n-type region of the p-i-n diode ( n eqn ≳ 10 17 cm -3 ), the results of the numerical simulations and equation A disadvantage of the superinjection effect is that when a very high density of injected holes is achieved, the electron current is at least an order of magnitude higher than the hole current. Therefore, the energy efficiency of LEDs based on the superinjection effect in homojunction p-i-n diodes will be lower than that of based on double heterostructures. A strong effect also requires high bias voltages (>6 V for 4H-SiC diodes and >30 V for AlN) that can create a high electric field in the p-type region of the diode (see equation ( We should emphasize that the superinjection effect not only gives a unique possibility to create a density of non-equilibrium holes which is orders of magnitude higher than the doping limit p eqp , but also provides it in the vicinity of the i-n junction, where the density of injected electrons is maximal (see Figure Igor A. Density of states effective electron mass 0.77m 0 1.25×10 7 Energy bandgap, eV E g (T) = E g (0) -6.5×10 -4 T 2 /(1300+T) The same temperature dependence as for electrons *