Resonant cavity-assisted enhancement of optical absorption was a photodetector designing concept emerged about two and half decades ago, which responded to the challenge of thinning the photoactive layer while outperforming the efficiency of the monolithic photodetector. However, for many relevant materials, meeting that challenge with such a design requires unrealistically many layer deposition steps, so that the efficiency at goal hardly becomes attainable because of inevitable fabrication faults. Under this circumstance, we suggest a new approach for designing photodetectors with absorber layer as thin as that in respective resonant cavity enhanced ones, but concurrently, the overall detector thickness being much thinner, and topmost performing. The proposed structures also contain the cavity-absorber arrangement but enclose the cavity by two dielectric one-dimensional grating-on-layer structures with the same grating pitch, instead of the distributed Bragg reflectors typical of the resonant cavity enhancement approach. By design based on the in-house software, the theoretical feasibility of such ∼ 7.0μm -8.5μm thick structures with ∼ 100% efficiency for a linearly polarized (TE or TM) mid-infrared range radiation is demonstrated. Moreover, the tolerances of the designed structures' performance against the gratings' fabrication errors are tested, and fair manufacturing tolerance while still maintaining high peak efficiency along with a small deviation of its spectral position off initially predefined central-design wavelength is proved. In addition, the electromagnetic fields amplitudes and Poynting verctor over the cavity-absorber area are visualized. As a result, it is inferred that the electromagnetic fields' confinement in the designed structure, which is a key to their upmost efficiency, is two-dimensional combining in-depth vertical resonant-cavity like confinement, with the lateral microcavity like one set by the presence of gratings. Photodetector (PD) is an indispensable part in optical sensors, communication systems and photonic interconnects. If each photon absorbed in a photoactive layer of PD contributes to creation of an electron-hole pair and there is no parasitic recombination, the quantum efficiency η, i.e. the ratio of the number of the photogenerated electronhole pairs to the number of incident photons, equals the optical absorbance A. In monolithic PDs the detected light traverses the absorber once, so η may be increased only by increasing the absorber's thickness t a , but the larger the t a the stronger the thermal generation-recombination noise and the longer the transit time in photodiode PDs. For most applications, a high signal-to-noise ratio and operation speed concurrently with high η are both crucial. A drastic decrease in t a to this end while keeping high η requires the impinging light to be strongly confined in a vicinity of the absorber. An adopted approach to the confinement is the solid-state resonant Fabry-Perot cavity in which the absorber layer is sandwiched between two multilayers. In each multilayer, a distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) acts as a mirror, and two layers adjacent to the absorber layer form a cavity. Thin enough absorber may weakly affect the optical cavityresonance condition absorbing nevertheless at the resonance wavelength the largest portion of the incident light. Such a resonant cavity enhanced (RCE) PD The field of RCE PDs have matured over the past two and half decades, regarding different spectral ranges, e.g. the telecom bands in the near infrared (NIR) In a quest for thinning PDs, we proposed to replace the front DBR mirror by an one-dimensional (1D) gratingon-layer structure (GLS), and reported the proof-of-concept examples of HgCdTe based PDs An emergent promising approach to high capability photo-detection is nowadays with PD focal plane array (FPA) Here, to meet challenge of further reducing the size and complexity of the entire PD device by surpassing the above thickness bounds while benefiting from our previous designs We consider PD structures, adapted to MWIR range portion, around a center-design wavelength (CDW), using HgCdTe, as the absorber. The MWIR design involves a variety of materials, see In this study, we adopt the η = A modeling that simplifies the design to one in which only the optics needs to be considered, and still has a prevalent use for initial PD designs It also worthwhile to prevent losses due to light escape from the PD's sides, which is achieved by suppressing non-specular orders of diffraction from GLSs into the cavity. To this end, it is sufficient to consider the subwavelength grating (SWG) operation regime, viz. to constrain the minimum operation wavelength by λ min > λ R , where λ R = Λn CdTe . Yet, the SWG regime is not compulsory for the non-specular orders can be suppressed with additional design optimization constraints. We performed the designs with a trial-and-error automated multi-start optimization using in-house software, described in detail elsewhere As seen from Table As discussed in the Introduction, conventional planar RCE PD realizes the vertical (1D) light confinement due to the optical resonance While the phenomenon behind the resonant-cavity EM confinement is well understood, the current understanding of that in micro/nanocavity structures, which would be more structure-specific, is nowadays much less mature. Computation of the electric and magnetic fields (E and H), and Poynting vector (S) at CDW and visualizing its results, are to shed light and infer on the near-EM field recirculation in dual-GLS PDs, while for RCE PDs aim primarily at confirming the adopted vision 1,2 . Visualization of S is expedient for inferring on the EM power flow. We restrict the graphic presentation to z within the absorber-cavity region. For RCE PD, the only nonzero components E y , H x and S z are independent of x, so we plotted the graphs of |E y | 2 , |H x | 2 and |S z | vs. z, shown in Fig. fairly linear in z across the absorber. For TE-or TM-dual-GLS PDs, E y , H x , H z = 0 or H y , E x , E z = 0, respectively, and S = (0, 0), so we plotted the surface graphs of the fields' components modules squared and the quiver maps of S vs. x, z (Figs. 4, 5), where the plots' domains are rectangles in the (x, z) plane. Due to Λ-periodicity of the physical quantities in x, any interval of the length Λ might be suitable to eventually pick out the "microcatity" x-range. Our initial choice is with [0, Λ] overall, but it may further be revised depending on the structure. For the presentation convenience, of the above chosen z-range we visualize the "microcatity" slices with 10% of the front cavity in the 2GLS-TE PD, and with 20% of the back cavity in the 2GLS-TM PD case, which contain the real lateral cavity-absorber interfaces and dummy vertical ones, reminiscent of the real gratings' lamella-groove interfaces. All nonzero We will start with visualizing the EM power flow in the 2GLS-TE structure using the quiver plot of the Poynting vector S in Fig. To symmetrize the vortex picture and thus to force the center of the boundary adjacent vortex to lie just on the vertical boundaries of the "microcavity" the latter can be rigidly shifted left to a distance of 0.0125Λ. Anyway, as can be inferred from Fig. In addition, as can be inferred from the zoomed inset in Fig. Next, we proceed to the 2GLS-TM structure. In this case the "microcavity" assisted absorption enhancement mechanism operates very differently from that of the 2GLS-TE structure considered above. While in the latter, we observe both vertical light flow traversing the absorber back and forth by reflection from one GLS to another, similarly to the case of the RCE absorber, and a persistent lateral light flow along the absorber layer, in the present case the light flow is predominately lateral, see quiver plot in Fig. In a detail, as seen from Fig. relative thickness of those areas and rather small values of the S components in them as well. The main function of these real channels is to convert the mostly vertical flow of the incoming light into a predominantly lateral x/Λ = 0.475 is the inner grating lamella-groove interface derived line, (0, 1) × (0.972μm, 1.047μm) is the absorber cut within the "microcavity". x/Λ = 0.562 is the inner grating lamella-groove interface derived line, (0, 1) × (5.959μm, 6.034μm) is the absorber cut within the "microcavity". flow inside the absorber. The above noted mid-lines between the "microcavity" vertical boundary lines and the gratings' lamella-groove interface-derived lines cross the absorber just in the middle of those channels. Concerning the other two "channels", upon the shift note above, the interior one moves to the redefined "microcavity" center and the boundary adjoint channel halves will start and end at the redefined "microcavity" vertical boundary lines. In the central "channel" there seen a very small S x component vanishing at the middle, as a result of the counter propagating lateral light flow which arrive from two real channels discussed previously. At the same time, the left and right parts of the boundary split "channel" serve as flow "sources" draining the light off the (redefined) "microcavity" to the adjacent ones. When crossing the absorber's boundary lines z = 5.959μm and z = 6.034μm in the z-direction, S x exhibits jumps both in the magnitude and direction which is due to the discontinuity of the E z component as a function of z. Due to this peculiarity of the TM case, the absorber layer as a whole turns out to act as a laterally periodic absorbing waveguide. In spite of the lateral infiniteness of the structure, the periodicity dictated by the presence of the gratings, creates an evident lateral resonance the same in any "microcavity" so that the nearly 100% absorbance is acquired within it. In addition, in the back cavity, there occurs a twist of S, which points to a positive z direction becomes more and more lateral until zeroing at a point lying on the lamella-groove interface derived line x/Λ = 0.562 (or x/Λ = 0.531 in the redefined "microcavity") and then returns to having the initial direction. Again, the EM power flow strongly senses the presence of the gratings even remotely of them, in the smoothly layered "microcavity" part. The surface plots of the relevant EM fields amplitudes squared in the 2GLS-TE structure are shown in Fig. One can observe some behavioral trends making it possible to relate the fields amplitudes and S while this relationship may be not completely equivocal. It can be seen, e.g. that the decrease of |H x | (H x enters S z ) inside the absorber layer, which is seen in Fig. There is a topological difference between the fields amplitude squared surfaces, and the EM power flows, for the TE and TM cases. Nevertheless, some regularities as concerns geometrical positions of critical lines and points and the appearance of "microcavity" boundary adjoint patterns of the EM fields z components, remain similar with the circular replacement of E ↔ H. However, in the TM case there is a much more pronounced EM fields' vertical (along with lateral) confinement and electrical isolation of the "microcavities". In addition contrary to |H x | 2 in the TE case, the maximum of |E x | 2 in the TM case seen in Fig. Note that E z in a contrast with H z is not continuous when crossing the absorber-cavity interfaces as seen in Fig 7b . That discontinuity of function |E z | 2 does not affect its steep descent occurring when its argument move away the maxima locations along the z-axis towards the boundary line of the back cavity slice (z = 5μm) under consideration. In a detail, |E z | 2 jumps down just in the absorber layer, then acquires a local maximum and next starts to continue the descent. As in the TE case some qualitative relationship between the EM fields' amplitudes and S can be stated. For example, it can be seen that the decrease of the H y and E x components' amplitudes towards the absorber layer, would affect the S z , which is indeed seen decreasing while steeply changing the S direction from being mostly vertical to predominantly lateral within the absorber layer. Moreover, due to the similar behavior of |E z | and |H y | that have maximum regions corresponding to minimum regions we can observe an opposite direction of the Poynting vector along the x-axis. The above noted "channels" in which S is vanishingly small, correlate well with the regions around the maxima of |E z | and minima |H y | as seen from a comparison of Fig. Last but not least is the fabrication tolerance issue which is of primary importance for practicality of the proposed PD structures. Therein, for manufacturing such devices needs only few layer deposition steps, the grating fabrication accuracy is most critical. Hitherto testing the sensitivity of the η spectra of the designed one-GLS mirror RCE PDs to changes in the grating's etch depth and width around the design values, we found a Above ∆t bg /t bg , ∆t fg /t fg and ∆W/W are the relative fabrication errors in the gratings grooves' depths and width, respectively, allowed for the etching; ∆λ0 is the shift of the wavelength of the η(λ) maximum and ∆ηmax is the absolute change of the peak efficiency, which result from the fabrication errors. The single + orsign abbreviates the relative error of +10% or -10%. For the dual-GLS PDs under study, we performed similar inquiry, varying t fg , t bg and W around their optimal values in Table II by ±10% of each. The variations are similar to adopting such minimal absolute errors in etching the grating grooves as ±9.6nm of the depths and ±70.1nm of the widths. The tolerance tests' results for the dual-GLS PD structures exhibiting the best peak efficiency upon TE-and TM-polarized light irradiation, are shown in Tables III and IV, respectively. Table The concept of RCE PD responded the challenge of thinning the PD light absorbing layer while outperforming the efficiency of respective monolithic PD. However, for many relevant absorber materials, meeting that challenge with the RCE absorption requires so unrealistically many layer deposition steps that the fabrication faults become quite inevitable and the high efficiency at goal hardly attainable. Under this circumstance, we suggested to search PDs with the same absorber layer as in respective RCE PDs, but concurrently being much thinner and topmost performing. In the above quest, we proposed a renewed PD structure which alike RCE PD contains the cavity-absorber arrangement but surrogates the DBR mirrors by two GLSs. By the design based on the in-house software, we showed the theoretical feasibility of such dual-GLS PDs of ∼ 100% efficiency for the linearly polarized (TE or TM) MWIR radiation with thickness in the range ∼ 7.0μm-8.5μm, see in Table The EM fields' amplitudes and Poynting vector over a cavity-absorber area were visualized. As a result, it is inferred that the EM fields' confinement in the designed structure, which is a key to their upmost efficiency, is 2D one combining in-depth vertical resonant-cavity like confinement with the lateral microcavity like one set by the presence of gratings. The 2GLS-TE structure EM power flow showed vorticity like behavior as a direct consequence of the continuity of S. The dense persistence of the S x component overall the absorber layer, and both vertical light flow traversing the absorber back and forth by reflection from one GLS to another, similarly to the case of the RCE absorber, and a persistent lateral light flow along the absorber layer seem the keys to the near 100% efficiency of the 2GLS-TE structure. In the 2GLS-TM case, the "microcavity" assisted absorption enhancement mechanism was shown to operate very differently from that of the TE structure. The EM power flow is predominately lateral bouncing back and forth between the vertical absorber layer boundaries. Due to the discontinuity of the E z component as a function of z, the absorber layer as a whole turns out to act as a laterally periodic absorbing waveguide. Despite the lateral infiniteness of the structure, the periodicity dictated by the presence of the gratings creates an evident lateral resonance the same in any "microcavity" so that the nearly 100% absorbance is acquired within it. In both TE and TM cases, the EM power flow strongly senses the presence of the gratings even remotely of them as shown by the twist of S around the lamella-groove interface derived line in the smoothly layered "microcavity" part. Although the relationship may be not completely equivocal, there exist some behavioral trends relating the fields' amplitudes to S. Because of a high light-polarization sensitivity of the optical response from 1D gratings, and its lesser tolerance to the gratings dimensions' variation in the TMpolarization case, the thin PD designs like those carried out in this study may unequivocally benefit replacing the 1D gratings by 2D ones. PDs of the proposed type may have high potential in integrated multidetector arrays such as FPA, for the high capability of which highly efficient thin PD elements are vital. FIG. a