The conception of new metamaterials showing unorthodox behaviors with respect to elastic wave propagation has become possible in recent years thanks to powerful modeling tools, allowing the description of an infinite medium generated by periodically architectured base materials. Nevertheless, when it comes to the study of the scattering properties of finite-sized structures, dealing with the correct boundary conditions at the macroscopic scale becomes challenging. In this paper, we show how finite-domain boundary value problems can be set-up in the framework of enriched continuum mechanics (relaxed micromorphic model) by imposing continuity of macroscopic displacement and of generalized tractions, as well as additional conditions on the microdistortion tensor and on the double-traction. The case of a metamaterial slab of finite width is presented, its scattering properties are studied via a semi-analytical solution of the relaxed micromorphic model and compared to finite element simulations encoding all details of the selected microstructure. The reflection coefficient obtained via the two methods is presented as a function of the frequency and of the direction of propagation of the incident wave. We find excellent agreement for a large range of frequencies going from the long-wave limit to frequencies beyond the first band-gap and for angles of incidence ranging from normal to near parallel incidence. The case of a semi-infinite metamaterial is also presented and is seen to be a reliable measure of the average behavior of the finite meta-structure. A tremendous gain in terms of computational time is obtained when using the relaxed micromorphic model for the study of the considered meta-structure. The present paper is an important stepping stone for the development of a theoretical paradigm shift enabling the exploration of meta-structures at large scales. Recent years have seen the rapid development of mechanical metamaterials and phononic crystals showing unorthodox behaviors with respect to elastic wave propagation, including focusing, channeling, cloaking, filtering, etc. At the current state of knowledge, little effort is made to model large metamaterial structures (which we will call meta-structures), due to the difficulty of imposing suitable boundary conditions in the framework of homogenization theories (see Stemming from a variational procedure, the relaxed micromorphic model is naturally equipped with the correct macroscopic boundary conditions which have to be applied on the boundaries of the considered metamaterials. This implies that the global refractive properties of metamaterials' boundaries can be described in the simplified framework of enriched continuum mechanics, thus providing important information while keeping simple enough to allow important computational time-saving. Very complex phenomena take place when an incident elastic wave hits a metamaterial's boundary, resulting in reflected and transmitted waves which can be propagative or evanescent depending on the frequency and angle of incidence of the incident wave itself. The primordial importance of evanescent (non-propagative) waves for the correct formulation of boundary value problems for metamaterials has been highlighted in We will show that the proposed framework allows to describe, to a good extent, the overall behavior of the reflection and transmission coefficients (generated by a plane incident wave) of a metamaterial slab of finite width treated as an inclusion between two semi-infinite homogeneous media. We obtain the scattering properties of the slab as a function of the frequency and angle of incidence of the plane incident wave. To the authors' knowledge, a boundary value problem which describes the broadband and dynamical behavior of realistic finite-size metamaterial structures via the introduction of enriched macroscopic broad-angle boundary conditions, is presented here for the first time. The results show very good agreement (for a wide range of frequencies extending from the lowfrequency Cauchy limit to frequencies beyond the first band-gap and for all the possible angles of incidence) with the direct FEM numerical implementation of the considered system in COMSOL, where the detailed geometry of the unit cell has been implemented in the framework of classical linear elasticity. We observe a tremendous advantage in terms of the computational time needed to perform the numerical simulations (few hours for the relaxed micromorphic model against weeks for the direct FEM simulation). The paper is structured as follows: In Section 1 we present an introduction together with the notation used throughout the paper. Section 2 briefly recalls the governing equations describing the motion of Cauchy and relaxed micromorphic continua, with specific reference to the definition of the energy flux for both cases. In Section 3 the plane-wave solutions for the Cauchy and relaxed micromorphic continua are obtained as solutions of the corresponding eigenvalue problems. In Section 4 we provide essential information concerning the correct boundary conditions which have to be imposed at the metamaterial's boundaries, in the relaxed micromorphic framework. In Sections 5 and 6 the problems of the scattering from a relaxed micromorphic single interface and relaxed micromorphic slab of finite size, respectively, are rigorously set up and solved. Section 7 presents the detailed implementation of the microstructured metamaterial slab based on classical linear elasticity and implemented in the commercial Finite Element software COMSOL Multiphysics. Section 8 thoroughly presents our results by means of a detailed discussion. Section 9 is devoted to conclusions and perspectives. Let R 3×3 be the set of all real 3×3 second order tensors which we denote by capital letters. A simple and a double contraction between tensors of any suitable order is denoted by • and : respectively, while the scalar product of tensors of suitable order is denoted by •, • . We denote by B L a bounded domain in R 3 , by ∂B L its regular boundary and by Σ any material surface embedded in B L . The outward unit normal to ∂B L will be denoted by ν as will the outward unit normal to a surface Σ embedded in B L . Given a field a defined on the surface Σ, we define the jump of a through the surface Σ as: and a + := lim where B - L , B + L are the two subdomains which result from splitting B L by the surface Σ. Classical gradient ∇ and divergence Div operators are used throughout the paper. 2 Moreover, we introduce the Curl operator of the matrix P as (Curl P ) ij = jmn P in,m , where jmn denotes the standard Levi-Civita tensor, which is equal to +1, if (j, m, n) is an even permutation of (1, 2, 3), to -1, if (j, m, n) is an odd permutation of (1, 2, 3), or to 0 if j = m, or m = n, or n = j. The subscript , j indicates derivation with respect to the j-th component of the space variable, while the subscript , t denotes derivation with respect to time. Given a time interval [0, T ], the classical macroscopic displacement field is denoted by: In the framework of enriched continuum models of the micromorphic type, extra degrees of freedom are added through the introduction of the micro-distortion tensor P denoted by: 2 Governing equations and energy flux The equations of motions in strong form for a classical Cauchy continuum are: where σ = 2μ sym ∇u + λ tr(sym ∇u)1, is the classical symmetric Cauchy stress tensor for isotropic materials and μ and λ are the classical Lamé parameters. The mechanical system we are considering is conservative and, therefore, the energy must be conserved in the sense that the following differential form of a continuity equation must hold: where E is the total energy of the system and H is the energy flux vector, whose explicit expression is given by (see e.g. The kinetic energy density of the anisotropic relaxed micromorphic model considered here is where u is the macroscopic displacement field, P ∈ R 3×3 is the non-symmetric micro-distortion tensor and ρ is the apparent macroscopic density. Moreover, J micro , J c , T e and T c are 4th order inertia tensors, whose precise form will be specified in the following. An existence and uniqueness result for models with these types of generalized inertia terms is given in where C e , C micro , C c , L e and L c are 4th order elasticity tensors, whose precise form will be given in the following and μ macro is a scalar stiffness weighting the curvature term. Moreover, L c is a characteristic length, which may account for size-effects in the metamaterial. These size-effects are known to be important for metamaterials in the static regime (see e.g. In this paper, we start exploring the role which L c may play in dynamical size-effects. Nevertheless, these results are preliminary and new modeling tools will need to be developed in order to comprehensively unveil non-local effects arising in finite-sized metamaterials. Let t 0 > 0 be a fixed time and consider a bounded domain B L ⊂ R 3 . The action functional of the system at hand is defined as where J is the kinetic and W the strain energy of the system, defined by (2.5) and (2.6), respectively. The minimization of the action functional provides the governing equations for the anisotropic relaxed micromorphic model ρ u ,tt -Div σ ,tt = Div σ, where we set (2.9) Conservation of energy for an anisotropic relaxed micromorphic continuum is formally written as in equation (2.10) We are interested in plane-strain solutions of the system and , and P ij,3 = 0, i = 1, 2, j = 1, 2. (2.12) Following , 4 For example, the 4th order tensor Ce is written as Ce in Voigt notation. where we denoted by a star those components, which work on out-of-plane macro-and micro-strains and do not play any role in the considered plane-strain problem. 3 Bulk wave propagation in Cauchy and relaxed micromorphic continua We make the plane-wave ansatz for the solution to (2.1): where k = (k 1 , k 2 ) T is the wave vector and ω is the angular frequency. where The algebraic system (3.2) has a solution if and only if det A = 0. This is a bi-quadratic polynomial equation which has the following four solutions: where we denote by L and S the longitudinal and shear waves and by r and t whether they travel towards -∞ or +∞, respectively. We plug the solutions (3.4) into (3.2) to calculate the corresponding eigenvectors Normalizing these eigenvectors gives: Then, the general solution to (2.1) can be written as: x 2 -ωt) + a S,r ψ S,r e i(k S,r x 2 -ωt) + a S,t ψ S,t e i(k S,t where a L,r , a S,r , a L,t , a S,t ∈ C are constants to be determined from the boundary conditions, k L,t and k S,t 1 = -k S,r 1 , according to while if we are considering the x 1 > 0 half-space, then the solution to (2.1) reduces to: x 2 -ωt) + a S,t ψ S,t e i(k S,t x 2 -ωt) . (3.9) We start by collecting the unknown fields for the plane-strain case in a new variable: The plane-wave ansatz for this unknown field reads: where φ ∈ C where , ω and all the material parameters of the plane-strain tetragonal relaxed micromorphic model (see A.2 for an explicit presentation of this matrix). In order for this system to have a solution other than the trivial one, we impose det A = 0. The equation det A = 0 is a polynomial of order 12 in ω and it involves only even powers of ω. This means that, plotting the roots ω = ω(k) gives 6 dispersion curves in the ω -k plane (see Fig. 1 (k2, ω) = -k 1 (k2, ω). We plug the solutions (3.13) into (3.12) and calculate the eigenvectors of A, which we denote by: φ (1) , φ (2) , φ (3) , φ (4) , φ (5) , φ (6) , φ (7) , φ (8) . We normalize these eigenvectors, thus introducing the normal vectors := 1 | φ (5) | φ (5) , φ (6) := 1 | φ (6) | φ (6) , φ (7) := 1 | φ (7) | φ (7) , φ (8) := 1 | φ (8) | φ (8) . Considering a micromorphic medium in which all waves travel simultaneously, the solution to (2.8) is: where α j ∈ C are unknown constants which will be determined from the boundary conditions. If, on the basis of the particular interface problem one wants to study, only some waves travel in the considered medium, then the extra waves must be omitted from the sum in while if we consider waves only traveling in the x 1 < 0 direction, the solution to (2.8) is given by We will consider two types of interface problems: (i) a single interface separating a Cauchy and a relaxed micromorphic medium, both assumed to be semi-infinite and (ii) a micromorphic slab of finite size embedded between two semi-infinite Cauchy media. In the following, we will simply denote "single interface" and "micromorphic slab" the first and second problem, respectively. In the single interface problem, two homogeneous infinite half-spaces are occupied by two materials in perfect contact with each other. The material on the left of the interface is an isotropic classical Cauchy medium, while the material on the right is a microstructured tetragonal metamaterial modeled by the tetragonal relaxed micromorphic model (see Fig In the micromorphic slab problem, two homgeneous infinite half-spaces are separated by a micromorphic slab of finite width h. Three materials are thus in perfect contact with each other: the material on the left of the first interface is a classical linear elastic isotropic Cauchy medium, the material in the middle is an anisotropic relaxed micromorphic medium, while the material on the right of the second interface is again a classical isotropic Cauchy medium (see Fig. As is well established in previous works For the displacement, we have: where u -is the macroscopic displacement on the "minus" side (the x 1 < 0 half-plane, occupied by an isotropic Cauchy medium) and u + is the macroscopic displacement on the "plus" side (the x 1 > 0 half-plane, occupied by an anisotropic relaxed micromorphic medium: the first two components of the vector v, defined in (3.10)). As for the jump of generalized traction we have: where t is the Cauchy traction on the "minus" side and t is the generalized traction on the "plus" side. We recall that in a Cauchy medium, t = σ • ν, ν being the outward unit normal to the surface and σ being the Cauchy stress tensor given by (2.2). The generalized traction for the relaxed micromorphic medium is given by where σ, σ are defined in (2.9). In order to impose suitable boundary conditions for the micro-distortion tensor P , we need the concept of the double traction τ which is the dual quantity of the micro-distortion tensor P and is defined as where m is given in (2.9), is the Levi-Civita tensor and ν is the outward unit normal to the interface. In this case, the macroscopic displacement and generalized tractions are continuous while the microstructure of the medium is free to move along the interface This is the case in which we impose that the microstructure on the relaxed micromorphic side does not vibrate at the interface. The boundary conditions in this case are We have previously shown that conservation of energy for a bulk Cauchy and relaxed micromorphic medium is given by equation (2.3), where the energy flux is defined in (2.4) and (2.10), respectively. It is important to remark that the conservation of energy (2.3) has a "boundary counterpart". This establishes that the jump of the normal part of the flux must be vanishing, or, in other words, the normal part of the flux must be continuous at the considered interface (this comes from the bulk conservation law and the use of the Gauss divergence theorem). In symbols, when considering a surface Σ separating two continuous media, we have We want to focus the reader's attention on the fact that, in the framework of a consistent theory in which the bulk equations and boundary conditions are simultaneously derived by means of a variational principle, the jump conditions imposed on Σ necessarily imply the surface conservation of energy (4.7), as far as a conservative system is considered. We explicitly show here that this is true for an interface Σ separating a Cauchy medium from a relaxed micromorphic one. The same arguments, however, hold for interfaces between two Cauchy or two relaxed micromorphic media. To that end, considering for simplicity that the interface Σ is located at x 1 = 0 (so that its normal is ν = (1, 0) T ) we get from equation (2.10) that the normal flux computed on the "relaxed micromorphic" side is given by: By the same reasoning, the flux at the interface on the "Cauchy" side is computed from (2.4) and gives: ( Equation (4.7) can then be rewritten as: It is clear that, given the jump conditions (4.5) or (4.6) the latter relation is automatically verified. As we will show in the remainder of this paper, when modeling a metamaterial's boundary via the relaxed micromorphic model, we only need a finite number of modes in order to exactly verify boundary conditions and, consequently, surface energy conservation. This provides one of the most powerful simplifications of the relaxed micromorphic model with respect to classical homogenization methods, in which infinite modes are needed to satisfy conservation of stress and displacement at the metamaterial's boundary (see The boundary conditions to be satisfied at the two interfaces separating the slab from the two Cauchy media in Fig. As for the continuity of generalized traction, we have: where t ± = σ ± • ν ± are classical Cauchy tractions and t is again given by (4.3). Furthermore, we need the additional free or fixed microstructure boundary conditions to be satisfied at both interfaces. These are given by: or were the expression for the double traction τ is given in (4.4). We remark once again, that only the tangential parts of the double traction τ or the micro-distortion tensor P must be assigned in order to fulfill conservation of energy. In this section, we study the two-dimensional, plane-strain, time-harmonic scattering problem from an anisotropic micromorphic half-space (see equations (2.8)), occupying the region x 1 > 0 of Fig. =: u L/S,i + u L,r + u S,r , ( where we write L or S in the incident wave depending on whether the wave is longitudinal or shear and i and r in the exponents stand for "incident" and "reflected". Analogously, the solution on the right half-space, which is occupied by a relaxed micromorphic medium, is (1) 2 x 2 -ωt + α5 φ (5) e i k (5) where we have kept only terms with positive k 1 's in the solution (3.13), since transmitted waves are supposed to propagate in the x 1 > 0 half-plane. Since the incident wave is always propagative, the polarization and wave-vectors are given by: where, according to (3.4), |k L | = ω c L and |k S | = ω c S , with c L = (2μ + λ)/ρ and c S = μ/ρ the longitudinal and shear speeds of propagation and θ L and θ S the angles of incidence when the wave is longitudinal or shear, respectively (see Fig. The continuity of displacement condition (4.1) provides us with the generalized Snell's law for the case of a Cauchy/relaxed micromorphic interface (see 2 . Generalized Snell's Law Having calculated the "transmitted" flux, we can now look at the reflection and transmission coefficients for the case of a Cauchy/relaxed micromorphic interface. We define where T is the time period of the considered harmonic waves, ) and H t = H + 1 (v), with H + 1 and H - 1 defined in (5.6). Then the reflection and transmission coefficients are (5.8) Since the system is conservative, we must have that R + T = 1. As pointed out, in this case there are three media: the first Cauchy half-space, the anisotropic relaxed micromorphic slab and the second Cauchy half-space. The two Cauchy half-spaces are denoted byand +, while the quantities considered in the slab have their own notation. The solution on the first Cauchy half space is given, as in the case of a single interface, by u -(x 1 , x 2 , t) = a L/S,i ψ L/S,i e i( x,k L/S,i -ωt) + a L,r ψ L,,r e i( x,k L,,r -ωt) + a S,r ψ S,r e i( x,k S,r -ωt) . (6.1) In the case of a relaxed micromorphic slab, when solving the eigenvalue problem we must select and keep all the roots for k 1 , as given in (3.13), both positive and negative. This is due to the fact that there are waves which transmit in the micromorphic part from the first interface (x 1 = -h/2), upon which the incident wave hits and waves which reflect on the second interface (x 1 = h/2). This means that the solution of the PDEs in the slab is v(x1, x2, t) = α1 φ (1) e i( x,k (1) -ωt) + α2 φ (2) e i( x,k (2) -ωt) + α3 φ (3) e i( x,k (3) -ωt) + α4 φ (4) e i( x,k (4) -ωt) + α5 φ (5) e i( x,k (5) -ωt) + α6 φ (6) e i( x,k (6) -ωt) + α7 φ (7) e i( x,k (7) -ωt) + α8 φ (8) e i( x,k (8) -ωt) . (6.2) Finally, the solution on the right Cauchy half-space is u + (x 1 , x 2 , t) = a L,t ψ L,t e i( x,k L,t -ωt) + a S,t ψ S,t e i( x,k S,t -ωt) . (6. 3) The continuity of displacement conditions (4.11) again imply a generalized form of Snell's law for the case of the micromorphic slab (see 2 . Generalized Snell's law in a micromorphic slab In this case, the reflected flux is evaluated at x 1 = -h/2 and the transmitted flux at x 1 = h/2. Both the reflected and the transmitted fields propagate in isotropic Cauchy media, so that the quantities J i , J r , J t defined in (5.7) are given by (see k j,r 1 a j,r 2 ω , (6.6) where, J = {L, S}, a j,i , a j,r , a j,t ∈ C and ψ j,i , ψ j, (2) , ψ j,t ∈ C 2 with j ∈ J , are the amplitudes and polarization vectors for incident, reflected and transmitted waves, respectively (see also equation (3.6)), μ -, λ -and μ + , λ + are the Lamé parameters of the left and right Cauchy half-spaces, respectively. The reflection and transmission coefficients for the slab can then be defined as: Since the system is conservative, we must have R slab + T slab = 1. In this section, we consider the scattering of in-plane elastic waves from a slab containing cross like holes drilled in an isotropic linear elastic material (see Fig. where the index j ∈ {L, S} denotes longitudinal and shear waves, respectively. Accordingly, k j = ω/c j (sin θ, -cos θ, 0) T , with j ∈ {L, S} and θ the angle of incidence, c L = (λ Al + 2μ Al )/ρ Al and c S = μ Al /ρ Al are the longitudinal and shear wave speeds for aluminum. The Lamé parameters λ Al , μ Al uniquely define the fourth order stiffness tensor C Al , whose Voigt representation is where the stars denote the components which do not intervene in the plane-strain case. In equation ( where we have introduced the traction vectors ν being the normal unit vector (see black arrow line in Fig. Using the fact that u j,i (x, t) is a solution of the PDE in equation ( with j ∈ {L, S} and where we have canceled out time-harmonic factors. The analytical expressions for the boundary conditions for the scattered field (see right-hand side of the boundary conditions in equation (7.7)) are given by: 2 e2 e i k j,i ,x , (7.8) with j ∈ {L, S} for vertical boundaries of ∂ (-) Ω(n 1 , n 2 ) with normal vector parallel to e 1 (see Fig. Similarly, for vertical boundaries with normal vector anti-parallel to e 1 we have f (ū j,i ) = -f j v (x). In addition, for horizontal boundaries in ∂ (-) Ω(n 1 , n 2 ) whose normal vector is parallel to e 2 we have: 2 e1 e i k j,i ,x , (7.9) with j ∈ {L, S}. Similarly, for vertical boundaries with normal vector anti-parallel to e 2 we have f (ū sc ) = -f j h (x). We recall that the primitive vectors of a square lattice are defined as: where a is the side of the unit-cell (see Fig. Although the x 1 extension of the homogeneous part of the domain γ is infinite in our model problem, in the finite-element implementation of the boundary value problem we are of course restricted to finite computational domains. In order to annihilate the reflection from the sides of γ with constant x 1 , we use perfectly matched layers The time-averaged Poynting vector associated with a 2D time-harmonic displacement field u(x, t) = ū(x) e -iωt is defined as where " * " denotes complex conjugation and σ = C Al sym ∇u is the Cauchy stress tensor associated with the elastic field u. From equation (7.12), and using equation ( Similarly, we define the flux F sc of the scattered field to be as in equation ( The reflectance associated with incident shear waves (R S ) differs from that associated with incident longitudinal waves (R L ). The Poynting vector is evaluated at a given x 1 -aN/2 away from the slab to avoid the contribution from the near elastic field close to the microstructure. Provided the condition x 1 -aN/2 is satisfied, we have verified that the reflectance (7.14) does not depend on the exact value of x 1 . In this section we present the comparison between the refractive behavior of the finite microstructured metamaterial's slab (see Fig. 2.33 10.92 0.67 5.27 12.8 8.33 1.74 5.89 0.62 Table 2: Summary of the numerical values for the elastic (top) and inertia (bottom) parameters of the tetragonal relaxed micromorphic model in the 2D plane-strain case. The macroscopic parameters of the resulting homogenized Cauchy material (see We will show that the performed fitting allows the description of the average reflectance of the metamaterial slab even if the Bloch-Floquet patterns are not exactly reproduced point by point (see Fig. The choice of the metamaterial parameters is made according to the procedure presented in We start by comparing the reflection coefficient of the relaxed micromorphic slab as a function of the frequency for two fixed directions of propagation of the incident wave (θ = π 2 and θ = π 4 ) and for both longitudinal and shear incident waves with the fully resolved linear elastic microstructured model. Figures It is immediately evident that the relaxed micromorphic model is able to capture the overall behavior of the reflection coefficient for a very wide range of frequencies. More particularly, for lower frequencies and up to the band-gap region, oscillations of the reflection coefficient due to the finite size of the slab are observed in both models. The band-gap region is also correctly described and corresponds to the frequency interval for which complete reflection (R = 1) is observed. Few differences can be found between the two types of imposed boundary conditions (free and fixed microstructure). This indicates that the characteristic length L c has little effect in the dynamic regime and it remains a quantity that mainly influences the static behavior of the metamaterial by allowing to obtain the homogenization formulas for the identification of static micromorphic stiffnesses After the band-gap region, a characteristic frequency can be identified corresponding to which almost complete transmission occurs. This phenomenon is related to internal resonances at the level of the microstructure. It is easy to see that the relaxed micromorphic model is able to correctly describe also the internal resonance phenomenon. The internal resonance is clearly visible in both the discrete and the relaxed micromorphic model at normal incidence. It is, however, lost in the discrete simulation at 45 • notwithstanding the presence of a zero group velocity mode in both models. Similar arguments can be carried out for an S incident wave with reference to Figs. In the relaxed micromorphic model, the first optic mode is flat if we set L c = 0, which means that there would be no propagation in the frequency interval of interest. On the other hand, setting L c > 0 gives a non-zero group velocity to the first optic mode, thus allowing to catch some transmission in this frequency interval (see Figures We depict in Figure Figure A first threshold value of the angle of incidence can be identified (around 5π/24), for which the two (green and blue) acoustic modes start to couple and energy starts being transmitted. More remarkably, a second threshold value of the incident angle exists (around π/3), for which the amount of transmission suddenly increases, approaching a total transmission pattern. This is due to a stronger coupling between the two acoustic modes which are activated by an S incident wave for incident angles beyond the second threshold. This impressive pattern is clearly associated to the tetragonal symmetry of the metamaterial: the need for introducing "generalized classes of symmetry" in an enriched continuum environment becomes thus evident. We deduce that the agreement is very satisfactory for all the considered angles (going from normal incidence to incidence almost parallel to interface) and for the considered range of frequencies. This fact corroborates the hypothesis, which has been made according to Neumann's principle and which states that the class of symmetry of the metamaterial at the macroscopic scale is the same as the symmetry of the unit cell (tetragonal symmetry in this case). We conclude this section by pointing out that the simulations performed to obtain Figures 8 and 9 ), while the angle of incidence decreases towards the right until it reaches the value θ = 0, which corresponds to the limit case where the incidence is parallel to the interface. The band-gap region is highlighted by two dashed horizontal lines, where, as expected, we observe no transmission. The dark blue zone shows that no transmission takes place, while the gradual change from dark blue to red shows the increase of transmission, red being total transmission. In this subsection we show the results for the reflection coefficient obtained by using the single interface boundary conditions for the relaxed micromorphic continuum as described in section 4.1. Figure In this paper we presented for the first time the scattering solution for a metamaterial slab of finite size, modeled via a rigorous micromorphic-type boundary value problem describing its homogenized behavior. The correct macroscopic boundary conditions (continuity of macroscopic displacement, of generalized tractions and of micro-distortion/double-traction) are presented and are intrinsically compatible with the used macroscopic bulk PDEs. The scattering properties of the considered finite-size meta-structures, as obtained via the relaxed micromorphic model, are compared to a direct microstructured simulation. This latter simulation is obtained by assuming that the metamaterial's unit cell is periodic and linear-elastic. Excellent agreement is found for all angles of incidence and for frequencies going from the long-wave limit to the first band-gap and beyond. Further work will be devoted to applying the relaxed micromorphic model validated in this paper to the scattering of metamaterial obstacles that have finite size in both the x 1 and x 2 directions. The results presented in this paper clearly indicate the need of a new mindset with respect to classical homogenization to open new possibilities for large-scale meta-structural design. These results will serve as a starting stepping stone for the development of new modeling tools for the mechanics of finite-sized metamaterials enabling the design of large-scale meta-structures. Geometric parameters of the unit-cell (left), and its constitutive material (right). For example, (A • v) i = A ij v j , (A • B) ik = A ij B jk , A : B = A ij B ji , (C • B) ijk = C ijp B pk , (C : B) i = C ijp B pj , v, w = v • w = v i w i , A, B = A ij B ij , etc. The operators ∇, curl and Div are the classical gradient, curl and divergence operators. In symbols, for a field u of any order, (∇u) i = u ,i , for a vector field v, (curl v) i = ijk v k,j and for a field w of order k > 1, (Div w) i 1 i 2 ...i k-1 = w i 1 i 2 ...i k ,i k We could consider more complex expressions for the curvature term, which would also include anisotropy and in fact, such expressions will be explored in further works. Here we want to show that curvature terms provide small corrections to the overall behavior of the metamaterial and so, we limit ourselves to a simplified isotropic expression. As we will show in the following, k 2 , which is the second component of the wave-number, is always supposed to be known and is given by Snell's law when imposing boundary conditions on a given boundary. This choice for the sign of k 1 always gives rise to a solution which verifies conservation of energy at the interface. This particular choice, which at a first instance is rather intuitive, is not always the correct one when dealing with a relaxed micromorphic medium. Here again, as in the case of a Cauchy medium, k 2 will be fixed and given by Snell's law when imposing boundary conditions. We remark that, in the relaxed micromorphic model, only the tangent part of the double traction in (4.5) or of the micro-distortion tensor in (4.6) must be assigned, see We denote by v the first two components of the micromorphic field v defined in equation(3.11). We suppose here that, for the transmitted wave we have to consider only the positive solutions of (3.13). In order to easily compute these coefficients in the numerical implementation of the code, we employ Lemma 1 given in Appendix B. The index j ∈ {L, S} for the elastic field u j indicates the fact that u j is the solution field generated by an L or S incident wave, respectively. Nevertheless, u j typically contains in itself coupled L and S waves as a result of scattering. We limit ourselves to the plane-strain case, so that we set u j i,3 = 0, j ∈ {L, s}, i ∈ {1, 2, 3}.