With the usage of two transparent electrodes, organic solar cells are semitransparent and may be combined to parallel-connected multi-junction devices or used for innovative applications like powergenerating windows. A challenging issue is the optimization of the electrodes, in order to combine high transparency with adequate electric properties. In the present work, we study the potential of sputter-deposited aluminum-doped zinc oxide (AZO) as an alternative to the widely used but relatively expensive indium tin oxide (ITO) as cathode material in semitransparent polymer-fullerene solar cells. Concerning the anode, we utilized an insulator/metal/insulator structure based on ultrathin Au films embedded between two evaporated MoO 3 layers, with the outer MoO 3 film (capping layer) serving as a light coupling layer. The performance of the ITO-free semitransparent solar cells is systematically studied as dependent on the thickness of the capping layer and the active layer, as well as the illumination direction. These variations are found to have strong impact on the obtained photocurrent. We performed optical simulations of the electric field distribution within the devices to analyze the origin of the current variations and provide deep insight in the device physics. With the conventional absorber materials studied herein, optimized ITO-free and semitransparent devices reached 2.0% power conversion efficiency and a maximum optical transmission of 60%, with the device concept being potentially transferable to other absorber materials. Recent developments in the field of organic photovoltaics (OPV) led to promising power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) around 7-9% for single-junction devices on a laboratory scale. Another approach are insulator/metal/insulator (IMI) structures consisting of semitransparent metal films embedded between two dielectric layers, In this article, we report on the realization of ITOfree, semitransparent BHJ solar cells by combining AZO and IMI layers as bottom and top electrodes in an inverted device configuration. To demonstrate the applicability of this concept, BHJ blend layers consisting of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl-C 61butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) were employed. The AZO electrodes were grown via magnetron sputtering and additionally covered with an interfacial layer of (intrinsic) ZnO nanoparticles (nc-ZnO), which is found to promote significantly improved electron collection properties. For the IMI electrodes, we employed an evaporated MoO 3 /Au/MoO 3 multilayer structure, based on ultra-thin Au films with a thickness of 10-12 nm. The inner MoO 3 layer was implemented as hole injection/ extraction layer with a fixed thickness, whereas the thickness of the external MoO 3 light coupling layer (capping layer) was systematically varied. It is well known that due to the thin layers used in OPV, thin film interference effects have a strong influence on the spatial distribution of the optical electric field intensity in the devices. For example, the insertion of an optical spacer between the photoactive layer and the reflective back electrode has been established as a powerful tool to optimize light absorption in conventional polymer-fullerene solar cells. AZO films of varying thickness (370-1270 nm) were fabricated by DC magnetron sputtering on precleaned glass substrates from a ceramic ZnO target with 2 wt.% Al 2 O 3 content. The deposition was carried out under an O 2 /Ar gas mixture with an O 2 /Ar ratio of 0.5/100 at a pressure of 6 • 10 -3 mbar and a temperature of 350 • C. P3HT was purchased from Merck KGaA (94.2% regioregularity, Mw = 54 200 g/mol, Mn = 23 600 g/mol) and PCBM from Solenne BV (99.5% purity). 1:1 (wt:wt) mixtures of P3HT:PCBM were dissolved with varying total concentration in 1,2-dichlorobenzene (Sigma-Aldrich, anhydrous, 99%) and stirred at 80 • C over night. Colloidal ZnO nanoparticles were synthesized from zinc acetate dihydrate (Sigma-Aldrich, 98%) and potassium hydroxide (Carl Roth, 85%) according to previous reports. UV-Vis transmission spectra were recorded with a spectrophotometer (Varian Cary 100). Sheet resistance was measured with a source measurement unit (Keithley 2400) using the four-point probe method either in linear (AZO, ITO) or van der Pauw configuration (ultrathin metal films). Further details regarding the resistivity measurements can be found in the Supplemental Material. Glass substrates, coated either with AZO or ITO, were partially etched with hydrochloric acid, cleaned with water, detergent, acetone, and 2-propanol in an ultrasonic bath, and transferred in a N 2 filled glove box. Subsequently, a ∼ 40 nm thick layer of ZnO nanoparticles was applied via spin-coating. Without further treatment of the nc-ZnO layer, the P3HT:PCBM blend was spincoated at 600 rpm from solutions with varying concentrations ranging from 10:10 to 25:25 mg/ml, resulting in a layer thickness of 60, 100, 140, and 200 nm, respectively. Afterwards, the samples were annealed on a hot plate at 150 • C for 10 min. Finally, the transparent multilayer anode was thermally evaporated under high vacuum (10 -6 mbar) in the sequence MoO 3 (12 nm)/Au (10-12 nm)/MoO 3 (x nm) with x = (0, 25, 50, 75). Film thicknesses were monitored in situ using an individually calibrated quartz crystal microbalance. The photoactive area of the cells (∼0.3 cm 2 ) was delimited by the geometric overlap of the bottom (AZO or ITO) and top (MoO 3 / Au/MoO 3 ) electrode and precisely measured for every individual cell with a stereoscopic microscope. Current density-voltage (J-V ) characteristics were recorded in ambient air with a semiconductor characterization system (Keithley 4200). Four individual cells on each substrate were measured simultaneously. To study the photovoltaic performance, the samples were illuminated with a class AAA solar simulator (Photo Emission Tech.), providing a simulated AM1.5G spectrum. The illumination intensity was adjusted to 100 mW/cm 2 using a calibrated Si reference cell. Spectral mismatch (≤ 5%) was not taken into account. External quantum efficiency spectra were measured with a custom-built system (Bentham PVE300). The samples were illuminated by monochromatic light, chopped with a frequency of 130 Hz, and the photocurrent was measured under shortcircuit conditions using a lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research Systems SR830). One-dimensional optical simulations of the semitransparent solar cells were performed using TMM modeling. Therefore, the devices were treated as a series of layers stacked on top of each other, and the electromagnetic field intensity at each position inside the layer stack was calculated based on a MATLAB program code developed by Burkhard and Hoke. A. Overview over the Photovoltaic Performance Figure Consequently, the strong dependence of the PCE on the illumination direction is mainly related to the difference in the short-circuit current density (J sc ), which is 5.6 mA/cm 2 for bottom and 3.0 mA/cm 2 for top illumination. This finding is supported by the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra shown in Figure At a first sight, the larger photocurrent upon illumination from the cathode side appears reasonable because of the higher far-field transmittance of AZO (see Supplemental Material, The electric field intensity obtained from the TMM simulations serves as input for the calculation of device characteristics such as the active absorption, which is the fraction of incoming photons being absorbed throughout the active layer. Assuming that each absorbed photon is converted into one single exciton, the exciton generation rate can be estimated from the active absorption by convolution with the energy distribution of incident photons (e.g., the AM1.5G solar spectrum). Using this procedure, we simulated the exciton generation rate profiles in the active layer for the optimized device configu- ration upon AM1.5G illumination, either from the anode or the cathode side (Figure Integrating the exciton generation rate over the thickness of the active layer and making assumptions on the fate of the photogenerated excitons, one can also calculate the photocurrent density to be expected. In an ideal case, every generated exciton would be converted to extracted charge carriers. This corresponds to an internal quantum efficiency (IQE) of unity and the photocurrent density expected in this case would be 6.2 mA/cm 2 (top illumination) and 7.1 mA/cm 2 (bottom illumination), respectively. It can clearly be seen that the experimentally obtained values of J sc are below these calculated values. In first place, this simply means that the IQE is not 100%, which is not surprising for real solar cells. Several electrical loss mechanisms that are neglected in optical simulations can lead to IQE values below unity, including exciton recombination prior to charge separation and the (non-geminate) recombination of separated charge carriers during charge transport, either being mono-or bimolecular. Nevertheless, under the assumption that the IQE is independent on wavelength, as it is usually observed for organic BHJ solar cells, To gain deeper understanding of the photocurrent generation in our semitransparent solar cells, we report in the following sections on systematic variations of the bottom electrode (Section III B), the top electrode (Section III C), and the active layer (Section III D). As an alternative to ITO, cathodes based on AZO were developed in this work. The AZO films were prepared via magnetron sputtering on glass substrates. Figure To study the general applicability of the AZO electrodes, we first investigated non-transparent inverted solar cells with an opaque MoO 3 (12 nm)/Ag (100 nm) top contact. Figure A similar effect has been reported by Ihn et al., To investigate, whether the AZO/nc-ZnO system can compete as transparent electrode with the established material ITO (here more precisely ITO/nc-ZnO), both electrodes were compared in one series of solar cells. Two thicknesses of the AZO layer were tested in these experiments, 625 nm and 1270 nm. Figure In contrast, the photocurrent was found to depend only slightly on the nature of the cathode and we obtained very similar values of the PCE for all three configurations under consideration. The small enhancement of J sc in case of the thin AZO electrodes (625 nm) may be related to their higher average transmittance (see Supplemental Material, 45 Figure To corroborate the observations made in the electric measurements, we simulated the spatial distribution of the electric field intensity in the devices. Figure It is well known that the conductivity and transparency of ultra-thin metal films are highly sensitive to the film thickness. As can be seen from Figure With the help of TMM simulations, we also studied the influence of the capping layer on the transparency of the whole solar cells. Figure To study the effect of the additional capping layer on the electrical performance of the semitransparent solar cells, we built devices with systematically varied capping layer thickness and illuminated them through the bottom and top electrode, respectively. The corresponding J-V curves are shown in Figure The effect of the capping layer thickness on the photovoltaic performance upon top and bottom illumination has also been studied for semitransparent solar cells with other structurally similar IMI top electrodes, including MoO 3 /Ag/MoO 3 , 31,35 MoO 3 /Ag/V 2 O 5 , To corroborate our experimental results, we simulated the distribution of the electric field intensity as a function of the capping layer thickness (see Figure Based on the simulated exciton generation rate profiles, we calculated the photocurrent densities to be expected in dependence of the capping layer thickness, and Figure Additionally, we performed the optical modeling for different thicknesses of the inner MoO 3 layer (see Supplemental Material, 45 Figure If we relate our experimental findings concerning the capping layer thickness to the simulated generation rate profiles (see Figure First, the IQE could be reduced due to the (nongeminate) recombination of spatially separated charge carriers during charge transport. If this is the case, and comparable mobilities for electrons and hole are assumed, it would be favorable to minimize recombination losses, if the generation rate is maximized in the middle of the active layer, so that electrons and holes will on average have balanced distances to travel to the electrodes. According to Figure Another possible explanation is given by Moulé and Meerholz, Finally, the variation of the IQE could also stem from vertical composition profiles within the polymerfullerene blend layer. It has been found in numerous studies that the nanomorphology of the binary polymerfullerene blends in the active layer of organic BHJ solar cells can strongly depend on preparation parameters like the blend composition, the regio-regularity of the polymer, or applied annealing conditions. Thus, to conclude on this section, electrical losses, either during exciton separation or charge transport, as well as vertical composition gradients within the active layer are suggested as possible reasons for the strong variation of the photocurrents (i) between top and bottom illumination and (ii) with the capping layer thickness upon bottom illumination. The optical simulations provided a reasonable understanding of these findings in terms of the spatial distribution of the exciton generation rate. However, to finally judge which of the proposed effects play the dominating role in our case would require further investigations and is beyond the scope of the present study. One of the most crucial issues for photocurrent generation is the thickness of the active layer. On the one hand, the active layer must be thick enough to absorb enough light in order to achieve efficient light harvesting. On the other hand, too thick active layers may lead to increased electrical losses during charge transport because of the limited charge carrier mobility. In the present work, we prepared a series of semitransparent solar cells with the optimized electrode configuration and different active layer thicknesses ranging from 60 nm to 200 nm. The thickness variation has been obtained by adjusting the concentration of the P3HT:PCBM solutions used for spin-coating. Figure To investigate, whether the different behavior can be explained by optical effects, we performed TMM simulations. Figure In principle, it is well known that charge transport can become a limiting factor in organic solar cells, if the absorber layer becomes too thick. The question arises, however, why this should lead to a reduced photocurrent only under bottom illumination. Here, the optical simulations reveal a significant difference: If the devices are illuminated through the anode, the exciton generation rate profile has a pronounced maximum close to the anode and then decreases inside the absorber layer (see Figure The statement that the performance is mainly limited by charge transport in case of thicker active layers is also supported by the decreasing values of FF with increas-ing active layer thickness. This points to electrical losses around the maximum power point for thick active layers and may be reasonably connected to non-geminate recombination, e.g., of bimolecular nature. However, it is noteworthy that vertical phase separation could also be of importance here, which would make the situation more complex. Detailed studies of the charge transport through the active layer might provide deeper insight, but would go beyond the scope of the present work. Thus, the optical simulations cannot directly explain the experimentally found maximum of the photocurrent for devices with 140 nm thick absorber layers under bottom illumination, but provide at least a hint that the effect may be related to the nature of the exciton generation rate profiles. An important issue related to polymer solar cells is the light-induced degradation of the active layer. During continuous operation, significant alterations of the active layer morphology have been recognized, In summary, we have investigated the optimization of the electron and hole contact in ITO-free semitransparent organic solar cells. Concerning the cathode, sputterdeposited AZO electrodes were demonstrated to be comparably suitable as ITO in combination with an addi-tional layer of (intrinsic) nc-ZnO. At the anode side, MoO 3 /Au/MoO 3 multilayer systems with sheet resistances lower than 9 Ω/sq could be produced and successfully applied to the semitransparent solar cells. The additional MoO 3 capping layer was found to enhance light coupling and increase the transparency of the devices in the spectral range above 650 nm. Furthermore, the capping layer increased the performance of the solar cells, mainly related to an improvement of the photocurrent. Systematic variations of the thickness of the capping layer and the active layer were performed, and the device performance was investigated as dependent on the illumination direction. Finally, we can report on a power conversion efficiency of 2.0% for optimized semitransparent ITO-free organic solar cells based on P3HT:PCBM with a maximum transmittance of 60% for wavelength above 650 nm. The experimental work was accompanied by optical simulations of the optical electric field intensity distribution within the semitransparent solar cells. From the field intensity distribution, the overall transmittance of the solar cells could be calculated as well as spatially resolved profiles of the exciton generation rate and, finally, the expectable photocurrent densities. In some cases, the simulations provided direct explanations for the experimentally observed current variations. For example, the photocurrent density showed a pronounced maximum for capping layers thicknesses of about 25-50 nm if the devices were illuminated through the anode. This maximum could be explained by the optical interference effects. In other cases, differences were observed between experimental and calculated photocurrent densities, which indicates that the device performance is not governed by optical effects alone. Nevertheless, the simulations turned out to be still a useful tool, because the generation rate profiles provided a theoretical basis for the development of interpretations for the experimentally observed dependences of the photocurrent density on layer thickness parameters, especially concerning the recombination of photogenerated charge carriers. Finally, from a more general point of view, we would like to emphasize that the electrode concepts as well as the simulation approach are expected to be transferable also to organic solar cells with other absorber systems than P3HT:PCBM. SE measurements were performed on a rotating analyzer ellipsometer (J. A. Woollam VASE) for wavelengths between 280 and 1700 nm. The samples were prepared either on glass substrates or Si wafers with a 2 nm native oxide layer on top. The optical constants The series resistance was derived from the J-V characteristics using a method introduced by Hegedus and Shafarman. S4 Hence, the derivative dV /dJ is plotted against the inverse current density (J + J sc -G sh V ) -1 . To account for the additional photocurrent under illumination, the current density was corrected by J sc . Further correction has been made by the non-zero shunt conductance G sh (i.e., a finite parallel resistance R p ), which effectively quantifies the steepness of the J-V curve around J sc . The series resistance is then given by where A is the diode ideality factor, k Boltzmann's constant, T the absolute temperature, and q the elementary charge. A linear fit of the data gives an intercept of R S and a slope AkT /q. In Figure In Figure a Anode: a