The only alkali metal known to be superconducting at ambient pressure is Li at 0.4 mK. Under 30 GPa pressure T c for Li rises to 14 K. In addition, nearly 50 years ago the heavy alkali metal Cs was reported to become superconducting near 1.3 K at 12 GPa. In the present experiment the superconductivity of Cs under pressure is confirmed. In addition, strong evidence is presented in electrical resistivity measurements that neighboring Rb also becomes superconducting near 2 K at 55 GPa as it enters the oC 16 phase, as for Cs, where T c decreases under the application of pressure. It would seem likely that under the right temperature/pressure conditions all alkali metals, including metallic hydrogen, will join the ranks of the superconducting elements. With the addition of Rb, 55 of the 92 naturally occurring elements are superconducting at ambient or high pressure. At first glance the alkali metals would appear to be rather mundane compared to the other elemental solids in the periodic table: none of the alkalis are magnetic and only one, Li, is known to be superconducting at ambient pressure, but then only at the exceedingly low temperature of T c ≃ 0.4 mK The large atomic volume and very high compressibility of all alkalis lead to significant changes in their properties under the application of very high pressures. The atomic volume of Cs metal shrinks five-fold under ∼ 50 GPa Superconductivity in Cs near 1.3 K was reported many years ago by Wittig In the present electrical resistivity studies on Rb the pressure range of previous work has been extended to ∼ 80 GPa for temperatures above 1.3 K. Strong evidence is given for the appearance of superconductivity in Rb near 2 K following a sluggish phase transition at 50 GPa from the tetragonal tI 4 to the orthorhombic oC 16 phase. Rb thus becomes the 55th elemental superconductor in the periodic table. Polycrystalline Cs (99.98 % pure) and Rb (99.75 % pure) samples were obtained in sealed glass ampules from Alfa Aesar. A diamond anvil cell (DAC) made of conventional and binary CuBe Whereas a small, thin lanthanide sample was normally placed on top of the four Pt strips (see Fig The DAC was inserted into an Oxford flow cryostat capable of varying temperature from ambient to 1.3 K. Pressure was determined at room temperature using the diamond vibron In Fig 2 the resistance of Rb at ambient temperature (295 K) is plotted versus both increasing and decreasing pressure. Initially the pressure was slowly increased along the black line to 73 GPa, then decreased to 34 GPa, followed by an increase along the red line to 75 GPa, then decreased to 48 GPa. The many structural phase transitions that occur in pure Rb over this pressure range are shown at the top of the graph In Beginning at lowest pressure, data are taken along black line to point 7, followed by pressure decrease to 34 GPa. The red line then tracks second increase in pressure to point 16 followed by decrease to point 17. Beginning with data point 1 on black line, all further data points R(T) were measured between 295 and 1.3 K. For blue data points superconductivity was observed near 2 K; for black data points no evidence for superconductivity was found above 1.3 K. Numbers give order of measurement for blue data points first on the black line, then on the red line. Crystal structures at top of graph from Ref transition. As discussed below, it is common in superconducting alkali metals that the resistivity fails to disappear completely in high-pressure experiments. A marked negative curvature is evident in the temperature dependence of the resistance, a hallmark of transition metals. This is clear evidence for strong d -character in the conduction electrons of Rb at these very high pressures arising from s-d electron transfer. In Fig 4 a sharp drop in the resistance is also observed for Rb at 71 GPa. As the magnet field is increased to 480 G, the sharp drop is seen to shift to progressively lower temperatures at the rate ∼ 1 mK/G. The sharp resistance drop plus the shift of the transition to lower temperatures in a magnetic field give strong evidence that Rb metal becomes superconducting for pressures above 56 GPa. In the inset in Fig , the critical field at 0 K, H 0 , can be estimated for Rb to be H 0 ≈ 1370 and 1310 G at 71 and 77 GPa, respectively. In the Supple- mental Material In Fig [26] a prominent peak structure already appears in the density of states near the Fermi level for pressure near 16 GPa, the conduction electrons taking on a significant dcharacter. At the fcc → oC 52 phase transition a sizable enhancement in the density of states occurs. Perhaps the sudden appearance of superconductivity in Rb near 55 GPa is the result of a similar enhancement at the tI 4 → oC 16 phase transition. In the next lighter alkali metal K the tI 4 → oC 16 transition also occurs, but not until the much higher pressure of 96 GPa In all three heavy alkali metals Cs, Rb, and K the importance of the pressure-induced s-d electron transfer has been emphasized. It is likely responsible for the transition from tetragonal tI 4 to the lower symmetry orthorhombic oC 16 structure. McMahan 