Here we introduce a versatile stereolithographic route to produce three different kinds of Si-containing thermosets that yield high performance ceramics upon thermal treatment. Our approach is based on a fast and inexpensive thiol-ene free radical addition that can be applied for different classes of preceramic polymers with carbon-carbon double bonds. Due to the rapidity and efficiency of the thiol-ene click reactions, this additive manufacturing process can be effectively carried out using conventional light sources on benchtop printers. Through light initiated cross-linking, the liquid preceramic polymers transform into stable infusible thermosets that preserve their shape during the polymer-to-ceramic transformation. Through pyrolysis the thermosets transform into glassy ceramics with uniform shrinkage and high density. The obtained ceramic structures are nearly fully dense, have smooth surfaces, and are free from macroscopic voids and defects. A fabricated SiOC honeycomb was shown to exhibit a significantly higher compressive strength to weight ratio in comparison to other porous ceramics. In industrial applications, ceramics are most commonly formed by slip casting, injection molding and various pressure-assisted techniques. As all of these methods rely on the usage of molds, the shape of ceramic parts is restricted to relatively simple geometries. The machining of complex shapes is further hindered by the high hardness and brittleness of ceramic materials. Additive manufacturing (AM) heralds a new era in the fabrication of ceramics. As AM technologies are based on the layer by layer consolidation of ceramic powders, they neither require molds nor are they limited by the hardness and brittleness of ceramics. This in turn allows for the fabrication of complex parts that utilize the exceptional properties of ceramics such as high strength, thermal stability and chemical resistance The preceramic polymers used in this work are a liquid methylvinylhydrogen polysiloxane (polyramic SPR-212) and allylhydrydopolycarbosilane (StarPCS TM SMP10), bought from Starfire Systems (USA), as precursors for SiOC and SiC ceramics respectively. For SiCN, a liquid methylvinylhydrogen polycarbosilazane (Durazane 1800) bought from Merck, Germany) was selected. 1,6-hexanedithiol, phenylbis(2,4,6-trimethylbenzoyl)phosphine oxide (BAPOs), Sudan Orange G, and hydroquinone were purchased from Sigma Aldrich , Germany. All chemicals were used without further purification. Formulation of photopolymerizable preceramic resins for stereolithography was conducted as follows: The preceramic resin was prepared by mixing preceramic polymers with phenylbis (2,4,6-trimethylbenzoyl) phosphine oxide (BAPOs) as photoinitiator (PI), Sudan Orange G as photoabsorber and hydroquinone as free radical scavenger. In order to homogenize the resin, it was treated in an ultrasonic bath for 2 hours, followed by degassing under vacuum. After that, 1,6-hexanedithiol (2T), which provides the thiol groups to react with the alkene functionalities of preceramic polymers, was dissolved in the resin mixture via mild stirring for 1 hour. The prepared resin was subsequently stored in a brown glass bottle to avoid exposure to light. Upon exposure to light with wavelengths below 450 nm, which are included in the emitted white light from the projector, the PI undergoes a cleavage process generating free radicals (see Fig. Stereolithography of preceramic polymer resins was conducted in an Open 3D Resin Printer LittleRP2 (LittleRP, USA) using an Acer X152H projector as a light source. The lens system of the projector was modified for short distance focusing. The z-axis resolution, namely the layer thickness of each print, was set at 100 μm to enable rapid printing. As a result, objects with 2 cm height could be fabricated in approximately one hour. The printing parameters including the exposure time are reported in Table at 1100 °C under N2 atmosphere. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) in Attenuated Total Reflection (ATR) mode carried out in an Equinox 55 (Bruker, Germany) in the range of 500 -4000 cm -1 was used to characterize the free radical initiated thiol-ene polymerization as well as the polymer to ceramic transformation. In-situ Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) under exposure to UV light in the range between 350 and 600 nm (100 mW/s) was utilized in a DSC Q2000 (TA Instruments) to characterize the heat flow and reaction kinetics during photopolymerization. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (K-Alpha TM, Thermo Scientific) was used to determine the elemental composition of printed parts. The polymer to ceramic conversion was investigated in nitrogen with a heating rate of 10 °C min -1 with thermal gravimetry/differential thermal analysis (TG/DTA) on STA 409 PC LUXX (Netzsch, Germany) coupled with a mass spectrometer OMNi Star GSD 320 (Pfeiffer Vacuum, Germany). Solid-state 29 Si NMR spectra was recorded with a Avance 400 MHz spectrometer (Bruker, Germany) operating at 79.44 MHz to characterize the chemical environment of silicon in polysiloxane derived SiOC ceramics. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was used to prove the amorphous nature of SiOC. X-ray imaging (radiography) was performed using a microfocus X-ray source and a flat panel detector (Hamamatsu, Japan) with an area of ~ 120 x 120 mm2 and a pixel size of 50 μm as reported in Mechanical tests were conducted on SiOC honeycombs additively manufactured from polysiloxane SPR212 and pyrolyzed at 1100 °C for 2 hours under flowing nitrogen. Nanoindentation of SiOC honeycomb that had been embedded in epoxy resin and polished to a 1 μm finish, was conducted using a TI 950 TriboIndenter (Hysitron Inc., USA) with a tetrahedral Berkovich diamond tip at a load of 10 mN and a load rate of 50 μN/s. The elastic modulus and hardness are calculated by evaluating the slope of the curve dP/dh upon the elastic unloading with 200 indents. The compressive strength of SiOC honeycombs was determined using a universal test machine RetroLine (Zwick/Roell, Germany) with a cross-head speed of 0.1 mm/min. For this test, samples were first ground to achieve relatively parallel surfaces and a thickness of 2.78 mm. These were then sandwiched between two steel face sheets with epoxy glue to prevent horizontal movement. The solid cell wall density (ρs) of SiOC honeycombs was determined via Archimedes' method using distilled water, while the cellular density of this honeycomb (ρ * ) was calculated according to To demonstrate the versatility of our approach we applied three commercially available Sicontaining polymers from three different classes as precursors for three different ceramic compositions, i.e. polysiloxane SPR212 as precursor for SiOC, polycarbosilane SMP10 as precursor for SiC and polysilazane Durazane1800 as precursor for SiCN. The thiolene click reaction assisted AM process is schematically illustrated in Fig. Wang, X., Schmidt, F., Hanaor, D., Kamm, P.H., Li, S. and Gurlo, A., 2019. Additive manufacturing of ceramics from preceramic polymers: A versatile stereolithographic approach assisted by thiol-ene click chemistry. Additive Manufacturing, 27, pp.80-90. The evolution of the thiol-ene click reaction can be observed using FTIR spectroscopy by monitoring the intensity of bands associated with vinyl groups at 1407 cm -1 (=CH2 scissoring) and 1597 cm -1 (C=C stretch) and with thiol groups at 2570 cm -1 . Fig. As shown by the black lines in Fig. To transform the cross-linked thermosets into ceramics, they were subjected to further processing steps. First, they were rinsed with organic solvents (isopropanol for polysiloxane and anhydrous cyclohexane for polycarbosilane and polycarbosilazane), to remove the remaining non-polymerized resin, and post cured under UVA light between 350 -400 nm to enhance their mechanical stability. In the next step they were transferred to a tube furnace and pyrolyzed in N2 at 1100 °C. During pyrolysis the cross-linked preceramic polymers decompose into amorphous Si-containing ceramics; this transformation is accompanied by the release of hydrogen, methane and other carbon-and hydrogen-containing species. This process entails mass loss, isotropic volume shrinkage and densification of the material. Upon the pyrolytic conversion of cross-linked polymers to the corresponding ceramics, a linear shrinkage of roughly 30 % is observed (see Fig. From XPS data, it is clear that ceramics with targeted compositions of SiC and SiCN possess significant oxygen content and these materials further demonstrate broad absorption bands around 1100 cm -1 in the FTIR spectra attributed to Si-O-Si stretching vibrations. Since the additive manufacturing process was performed in ambient air, the silane (-Si-H) and silazane (Si-N-Si) bonds contained in the preceramic polymers reacted with atmospheric oxygen and moisture rapidly leading to an increased oxygen content. Consequently, "reacted" SMP10 and Durazane 1800 polymers are thermally converted into SiC(O) and SiCN(O) ceramics with deviated properties and microstructures compared to those in the intrinsic oxygen free SiC and SiCN ceramics. To minimize oxidation in stoichiometric SiC and SiCN ceramics, the entire fabrication process would have to be conducted under an inert atmosphere. We thus focus on the representative SiOC ceramics fabricated from polysiloxane SPR212. As described above and as verified by TEM, the SiOC formed by pyrolysis at 1100 °C in flowing nitrogen is amorphous. Further insight into the SPR212-derived SiOC microstructure is provided by solid-state 29 Si-NMR characterization (Fig. Corresponding SEM images at higher magnification showing the step-like surfaces as well as the crack free struts. The hardness and elastic modulus of the SiOC ceramics were evaluated in nanoindentation experiments (Fig. Since our manufacturing methods allow for the fabrication of 2D and 3D periodic cellular structures, in the following step we evaluate the out-of-plane compression strength of 2D SiOC honeycombs as a representative example of a material with high strength to density characteristics, and apply Gibson and Ashby's model Gibson and Ashby's model relates the mechanical properties of a cellular solid to its relative density ρrelative (the density ρ* of the foam divided by the density ρs of the solid which the foam is made of) and its solid strength/bulk modulus (σs ,Es). The strength (σ) as well as the modulus (E) of the cellular material can then be expressed as follows: where C is a dimensional constant and the exponent m depends on the cell morphology. In the case of a 2D honeycomb carrying loads on the faces normal to X3, equation ( In this case the Young's modulus of the 2D honeycomb simply reflects the solid modulus scaled by the load-bearing area. Using equation (3) with calculated relative density of 0.29 and the Young's modulus of 106±6 GPa from the nanoindentation experiments, we obtain 31±2 GPa for the theoretical honeycomb stiffness. Because of the measurement error, which occurred when evaluating the true strain of SiOC honeycomb under compression, we are unable to compare the measured Young's modulus with this calculated theoretical value here. More detailed explanation can be found in SI with Table In Fig. We have closely examined the utility of thiolene click chemistry towards additive manufacturing using preceramic polymers. We demonstrated a versatile stereolithographic manufacturing route whereby high performance polymer-derived ceramics are obtained with well controlled geometry. The developed approach can be applied for the entire range of known PDC systems. For precursors to be used in thiol-ene click assisted stereolithography they should exhibit an inorganic backbone, unsaturated carbon bonds and the photoinitiation of thiyl radicals. High levels of hydrogenated groups in precursors are detrimental as the evolution of a significant volume of hydrogen gas during pyrolysis can cause failure under certain firing conditions. The photocurable preceramic polymers of this method are easily prepared and can be applied in any SLA/DLP printer, as well as techniques like microstereolithography and two-photon polymerization to produce microstructures beyond the resolution limit of DLP techniques. The additively manufactured polysiloxanederived SiOC components fabricated here are nearly fully dense, achieving 97 % of theoretical density. 2D SiOC honeycombs with a cellular density of 0.61 g/cm 3 exhibit a compressive strength of 216 MPa, surpassing the performance of comparable porous ceramics and stretching the boundaries of material property space in terms of strength to weight ratio under compression. The presently developed methods represent a flexible and rapid route towards high-performance additively manufactured polymer-derived ceramics that can find broad application in various engineering fields, particularly for load bearing materials applied in harsh environments and high temperatures. With appropriate AM techniques, ceramic components can be produced with the developed methods across a range of length-scales with high precision, representing a valuable new capability for industries such as aerospace, automotive, energy conversion and chemical engineering.