Andreev reflection (AR) in ferromagnet/superconductor junctions is an indispensable spectroscopic tool for measuring spin polarization. We study theoretically how the presence of a thin semiconducting interface in such junctions, inducing Rashba and Dresselhaus spin-orbit coupling, modifies AR processes. The interface gives rise to a momentum-and spin-dependent scattering potential, making the AR probability strongly asymmetric with respect to the sign of the incident electrons' transverse momenta. This skew AR creates spatial charge carrier imbalances and transverse Hall currents in the ferromagnet. We show that the effect is giant, compared to the normal regime. We provide a quantitative analysis and a qualitative picture of this phenomenon, and finally show that skew AR also leads to a widely tunable transverse supercurrent response in the superconductor. Due to the extraordinary properties occurring at their interfaces, ferromagnet/superconductor (F/S) heterostructures attract considerable interest While early efforts focused on detecting spin-polarized quasiparticles in superconductors via spin transport experiments While SOC in bulk materials plays the key role for intrinsic anomalous Hall effects In this Rapid Communication, we consider F/SC/S junctions, in which the N electrode is replaced by a S. We demon-strate that, analogously to the tunneling picture in the normalconducting case, skew reflection [49] of spin-polarized carriers at the barrier leads to TAHEs in the F. Due to the presence of a S electrode, we distinguish two skew reflection processes: skew specular reflection (SR) and skew Andreev reflection (AR). By formulating a qualitative physical picture including both processes, we assert that skew SR and skew AR can act together and significantly enhance the TAHE compared to all previously studied (normal) systems. Special attention must be paid to skew AR, which transfers Cooper pairs across the barrier into the S. The electrons forming one Cooper pair are thereby also subject to the proposed skew reflection mechanism. We discuss that the result is a transverse supercurrent response, initially deduced from a phenomenological Ginzburg-Landau treatment We consider a biased ballistic F/SC/S junction grown along the ẑ-direction, in which the two semi-infinite F and S regions are separated by an ultrathin SC barrier [see Fig. The system can be modeled by means of the stationary Bogoljubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian where Ĥe = [-2 /(2m) ∇ 2μ] σ0 -(∆ XC /2) Θ(-z) ( m • σ)+V SC d SC σ0 δ(z)+ ĤSOC SC δ(z) represents the single-electron Hamiltonian and Ĥh = -σy Ĥ * e σy its holelike counterpart ( σ0 and σi indicate the 2 × 2 identity and the ith Pauli matrix; σ = [ σx , σy , σz ] is the vector of Pauli matrices). The F is described within the Stoner model with exchange energy ∆ XC and magnetization direction m = [cos Φ, sin Φ, 0] , where Φ is measured with respect to the x-axis. Following earlier studies β (k y σx + k x σy ), where the first part accounts for SOC of the Rashba type and the second part resembles linearized Dresselhaus SOC [57], both with the effective strengths α and β, respectively. Inside the S electrode, the S pairing potential, ∆S (z) = |∆ S | Θ(z) (|∆ S | is the isotropic energy gap of the S), couples the electron and hole blocks of the BdG Hamiltonian. Note that although writing ∆S in that way is a rigid approximation, neglecting proximity effects, this approach still yields reliable results for transport calculations Assuming translational invariance parallel to the barrier, the solutions of the BdG equation, ĤBdG Ψ σ (r) = E Ψ σ (r), can be factorized according to Ψ σ (r) = ψ σ (z) e i (k •r ) , where k = [k x , k y , 0] (r = [x, y, 0] ) denotes the in-plane momentum (position) vector and ψ σ (z) are the BdG equation's individual solutions for the reduced one-dimensional scattering problem along ẑ. The latter account for the different involved scattering processes at the SC interface: incoming electrons with spin σ [σ = +(-)1 for spin up (down), which effectively indicates a spin parallel (antiparallel) to m] may either undergo AR or SR, or may be transmitted as quasiparticles into the S. Due to the presence of interfacial SOC, electrons incident on the ultrathin SC are exposed to an effective scattering potential that incorporates besides the usual barrier strength (determined by the barrier's height and width) also the in-plane momentum-and spin-dependent contribution of the SOC. To extract valuable qualitative trends from our model, we first focus on the simple situation in which only Rashba SOC is present (α > 0, β = 0), the F's magnetization is aligned along ŷ (Φ = π/2), and k y = 0. In this case, the effective scattering potential reads where the first part represents the usual barrier strength and the second the SOC-dependent part. Assuming that SOC is weak and spin-flip scattering becomes negligible, only spinconserving AR and SR are allowed inside the F, each with certain probabilities. The latter, extracted from an extended Blonder-Tinkham-Klapwijk (BTK) model If the junction becomes superconducting, AR comes into play. Although the AR probability generally decreases with increasing V eff , the crucial point is that AR involves holes. Consequently, skew AR produces simultaneously an electron excess also at negative k x , and both skew AR and SR act together to noticeably increase the transverse Hall current. Another important observation relies on the reflection probabilities at large V eff . In both junction scenarios, the SR probabilities approach unity at V eff ( 2 k F )/(2m); this happens much faster in the superconducting case than in the normal state. The scattering potential is then mostly determined by the usual barrier height and width, and the spin-dependent contribution only barely impacts V eff . Therefore, both skew reflection and the Hall currents are expected to be strongly damped in the presence of strong barriers, in superconducting even more than in normal-conducting junctions. As a clear fingerprint to experimentally detect skew AR, our qualitative picture suggests a significant enhancement of the superconducting junctions' TAHE conductance, compared to the normal-state regime. To evaluate the TAHE conductances along the transverse η-direction (η ∈ {x; y}), we follow a generalized BTK approach where G 0 = (2e 2 )/h abbreviates the conductance quantum, A stands for the cross-section area, k σ z = k 2 F (1 + σP) -k 2 represents the ẑ-component of the particles' wave vector in the F with spin polarization P = (∆ XC /2)/μ, and k F = 2mμ/ is the Fermi wave vector. The reflection coefficients r σ,σ e (r σ,-σ e ) correspond to SR (spin-flip SR), while r σ,-σ h (r σ,σ h ) indicate AR (spin-flip AR). Unlike for the (longitudinal) tunneling conductance To elaborate on the TAHE conductances' main features, we evaluate Eq. (3) for Fe/GaAs/V like model junctions. The spin polarization in Fe is P = 0.7 (Fermi wave vector k F ≈ 8 × 10 7 cm -1 Our simulations reveal all the TAHE conductances' important properties. First, we observe the sinelike (cosinelike) variation of G x,z (G y,z ) with respect to the F's magnetization angle. Those dependencies follow from symmetry consider- ations To resolve AR and SR, Fig. AR is the crucial scattering process at metal/S interfaces; it transfers Cooper pairs, converting normal into supercurrents, plays an important role in experimentally quantifying Fs' spin polarization To conclude, we investigated the intriguing consequences of skew AR and SR at SC interfaces of superconducting tunnel junctions. We predict that the interplay of both skew reflection processes can constructively amplify their effects. Furthermore, also the Cooper pairs transferred into the S via AR cycles are subject to interfacial skew reflections. As a result, both sizable TAHE conductances in the F and characteristically modulating transverse supercurrents in the S are generated, opening new venues for experimental and theoretical studies. As introduced in the manuscript, we consider a three-dimensional tunnel junction composed of a semi-infinite F region and a semi-infinite S region, spanning z < 0 and z > 0 half-spaces, respectively. Both electrodes are separated by an ultrathin SC, which breaks the space inversion symmetry and simultaneously gives rise to interfacial Rashba The single-particle Hamiltonians for electrons and holes, Ĥe and Ĥh , as well as the S pairing potential, ∆S (z), are defined in the manuscript. As particles are solely scattered along the ẑ-direction, we can assume the wave vector parallel to the interface, k = k x , k y , 0 , to be conserved. Therefore, in order to obtain the BdG equation's eigenstates, we substitute the general ansatz with r = x, y, 0 , into Eq. (S1), to effectively reduce our problem to finding the one-dimensional scattering states ψ σ (z) for a given spin σ [σ = +(-)1 for spin parallel (antiparallel) to the magnetization unit vector, m, in the F; note that we simultaneously also use the established terms spin up and spin down for σ = 1 and σ = -1]. For an incoming electron with spin σ from the F electrode, ψ σ (z) is found to be As we mentioned in the manuscript, the SR coefficients without and with a spin-flip are denoted by r σ,σ e and r σ,-σ e (the first σ refers to the incoming electron's spin and the second one to the spin of the reflected electron), while we use the coefficients r σ,-σ h and r σ,σ h for AR and spin-flip AR. Note that in the ordinary AR process (without a spin-flip), the retroreflected hole has by definition opposite spin compared to the incident electron. Analogously, ψ σ (z) in the S electrode can be written as ). The ẑ-components of the electrons' and holes' wave vectors in the F are given by while those in the S are In a typical situation, the (quasi)particle excitation energies, E, as well as the superconducting gap, |∆ S |, are both much smaller than the chemical potential, i.e., E μ and |∆ S | μ. Therefore, we can use the commonly approximated wave vectors )/μ is an effective measure for the F's spin polarization] and q z,e ≈ q z,h ≈ q z = k 2 F -k 2 to dramatically simplify the further theoretical treatment of our junction; k F = 2mμ/ is the Fermi wave vector, which we assumed to be the same in all constituents. The factors u = u(E) and v = v(E), appearing in the S's scattering states, are the usual BCS coherence factors, satisfying To obtain the so far unknown scattering coefficients-which generally depend on the particle energy via the coherence factors and on the parallel momentum via the wave vectors-the states need to fulfill the interfacial (z = 0) boundary conditions where η = diag[ σ0 , -σ0 ]; Ω = αk yβk y , -αk xβk x , 0 contains the Rashba and Dresselhaus spin-orbit fields. The resulting eight-dimensional system of equations can then be numerically solved for a generic bias voltage V by setting the excitation energy E = eV. However, at zero bias (E = eV = 0), the coherence factors simply reduce to u(E = 0) = 1/ √ 2 and v(E = 0) = -i/ √ 2, and we can easily find analytical expressions for the reflection coefficients. In the (superconducting) F/SC/S junction, those "zero-bias reflection coefficients" read with the common denominator Thereby, the dimensionless "tilde wave vectors" are obtained by dividing the above given ones by the Fermi wave vector k F , i.e., k±σ z = k ±σ z /k F and qz = q z /k F ; we further omitted the energy argument in the notation of the coefficients since we are only considering the particular case E = eV = 0 here. The impact of the tunneling barrier is hidden in the dimensionless BTK-like It is easy to check that in the case of absent Rashba and Dresselhaus SOC, Ω = 0, the spin-flip reflection coefficients immediately vanish. In a similar manner, we can analytically compute the reflection coefficients for the (normal-conducting) F/SC/N junction. Within our model, the scattering states in the superconductor reduce to the well-known ones for a N when substituting u = 1 and v = 0. Solving the system of equations following from the boundary conditions in that particular scenario yields with the common denominator The fact that the AR coefficients become zero in the normal-conducting system is physically clear since AR naturally appears just at metal/S interfaces. As above, the spin-flip SR coefficient, r σ,-σ e , vanishes in the absence of SOC (Ω = 0). In the manuscript, we argued that assuming weak SOC justifies to restrict our considerations in the F on spin-conserving AR and SR as the only allowed scattering processes; transmissions are only possible if the S is in the normal-conducting state or at energies above the S gap. Due to the interfacial SOC, incident electrons feel at the SC interface not only the usual potential barrier's strength (determined by the barrier's height and width), but also an additional in-plane momentum-and spin-dependent scattering potential; see Eq. (2) in the manuscript for the limiting case of β = 0, k y = 0, and Φ = π/2. Transferring the resulting effective scattering potential into the dimensionless BTK-like Z-parameter, see Sec. I, i.e., Z → Z eff = Z -(2σmαk x )/( 2 k F ), allows us to write the BTK-like reflection probabilities for SR and AR as with and The dimensionless "tilde wave vectors" are the same as defined in Sec. I. Figures Once all reflection coefficients are known, the tunneling (longitudinal) current in the F electrode can be obtained from the imbalance between the distributions of right-propagating and left-propagating charge carriers. The full calculation is rather technical and therefore, we only state the main points here. Throughout this work, we use the convention that positive current flows from left to right and negative current from right to left; the (positive) elementary charge is represented by e. For an incident spin σ electron from the left F electrode, the net resulting current flow is given by The first summand refers to the incoming electron propagating from left to right with the positive (longitudinal) velocity v σ z = ( k σ z )/m; the specularly and Andreev reflected electrons and holes propagate along the opposite direction, which we generally account for by using negative (longitudinal) velocities for the reflected parts. As the incident electron undergoes SR or AR only with certain probabilities, the respective current contributions need to be weighted by fractional parts which indicate that the corresponding scattering process occurs at all, i.e., by the related absolute squares of the reflection coefficients (which are themselves proportional to the reflection probabilities). Finally, appropriate products of Fermi-Dirac distribution functions [generally abbreviated with f 0 (E)] are introduced to ensure that there are indeed occupied states for electrons (and likewise unoccupied ones for holes) in the left and unoccupied (occupied) states to tunnel into in the right electrode. Thereby, the longitudinal voltage drop V along the junction has to be carefully included into the Fermi-Dirac functions. In the same way, we can also compute the current associated with an incoming spin σ electron(like quasiparticle) from the right electrode. Instead of dealing with quasiparticles in the S, it is more convenient to simply suppose an incident hole with spin σ from the left (F) region; both descriptions are fully equivalent for computing transport properties. The related net current is found to read Note that the reflection coefficients for an incoming hole can in general be different from the ones we obtained for an incident electron in Sec. I; to stress this difference, we used "tilde reflection coefficients" in Eq. (S25). Particularly in the case of antisymmetric junctions, e.g., by having finite-size electrodes, the reflection probabilities for the different injection processes can indeed strongly differ and one should really proceed with the given general formulas when calculating the total current. However, owing to our junction's symmetry, we find that the total SR and AR probabilities averaged across the whole crosssection area are the same for incoming electrons and holes, i.e., This allows us to obtain a rather simple expression for the total current by combining Eqs. (S24) and (S25), rewriting the sums over k and k σ z as integrals within continuum approximation (A is the interfacial cross-section area), and finally summing over V both spin channels, Equation ( with the usual conductance quantum G 0 = (2e 2 )/h. Equation (S29) is the generalization of the BTK conductance formula To derive the transverse currents, J η (η ∈ {x; y}), and the related transverse TAHE conductances, G η,z , we follow a similar procedure. The most crucial point in the derivation is to properly replace the velocities along the ẑ-direction by those along the η-direction without messing up the signs. Taking into account the contributions of an incident spin σ electron from the F and another one from the S (which is again equivalent to having an incoming hole from the F) yields for the transverse currents The physical meaning of the different contributions is illustrated and explained in Fig. As before, we can express the SR and AR coefficients in the case of an incident hole via the known ones for an incoming electron by exploiting the symmetries in our system; specifically, we unravel which simplifies the total transverse currents to In the first case, the reflected electron's transverse velocity does not change, while in the second scenario, the reflected hole has opposite transverse velocity. In contrast to the incoming electron, the reflected particles propagate away from the barrier (along -ẑ) and thus, in order to get a balanced current flow in the barrier region, we have to subtract their contributions from the incident current (green negative signs). Both processes only occur with certain probabilities, which we account for by multiplying the contributions by the reflection coefficients' absolute squares. Panels (d)-(f) show analogous considerations for an incoming electron(like quasiparticle) from the S. As mentioned in the text, instead of dealing with quasiparticles in the S, it is more convenient to suppose an incident spin σ hole from the F; we followed that approach in Eq. (S30), which particularly means that processes (e) and (f) gain an additional negative sign in Eq. (S30) when compared to the depicted situation (as we need to transfer the shown processes' scattering coefficients from the electron-into the hole-picture). This is also the deeper reason behind the notation of the "tilde reflection coefficients". Finally, all described parts must be properly multiplied by Fermi-Dirac distribution functions in Eq. (S30), ensuring that the incoming and scattered states are indeed occupied and unoccupied as the different scattering processes require. Note that there are several other ways to construct an ansatz for the transverse current, which are all equivalent to ours and lead to the same final result [see Eq. (S34)] in the end. At zero temperature, the transverse TAHE conductance components, G η,z = dJ η /dz, can again be approximated as in the last step, we used d 2 k k η /k σ z = 0 due to symmetry. The final result is given as Eq. ( For the data presented in Figs. At finite bias voltages [see Figs. Given the general form of the TAHE conductances, Eq. (S34), we may have a closer look at the underlying symmetries to extract valuable information about the conductances' characteristic scaling behavior, for instance, with respect to the magnetization angle Φ; see also Ref. with the single constituents Let us at first focus for a moment on G x,z . Substituting polar coordinates, k x = |k | cos θ and k y = |k | sin θ, and writing out the two-dimensional integral results in By inspecting the different factors' parities with respect to changing the sign of k , we can immediately deduce which of the integrals finally entering Eq. (S36) leads to nonzero contributions (to lowest order). There are only two parts with odd k -parity: As a consequence, only those G (i) η,z 's in Eq. (S36) containing odd powers of m • Ω can give rise to a totally even k -integrand and will hence not vanish after performing the k -integration over the whole two-dimensional space parallel to the interface. In our case, only G (1) x,z fulfills all these requirements to lead to a nonzero conductance contribution. After plugging in the explicit form of Ω, we obtain in polar coordinates G x,z ≈ G (1) x,z ∼ In the last step, we again relied on our parity argumentation: the integrand's first summand has odd k -parity and vanishes after performing the k -integration. The characteristic scaling behavior of G x,z with respect to Φ, G x,z (Φ) ∼ -(α + β) sin Φ, solely follows from symmetry arguments and is a characteristic fingerprint of the TAHE conductance as stated in the manuscript; it has already been found in the normal-conducting TAHE [S13, S14] and remains unaffected in superconducting systems. An analogous treatment of G y,z suggests G y,z (Φ) ∼ (αβ) cos Φ. Therefore, the interference of simultaneously present Rashba and Dresselhaus SOC leads to a clearly pronounced magnetoanisotropy between G x,z and G y,z as stated in the manuscript; the maximal conductance amplitudes scale as a function of the SOC strengths as respectively. If Dresselhaus SOC is absent and only Rashba SOC remains finite, the anisotropy between G x,z and G y,z disappears and the maximal amplitudes become equal (up to a relative sign). All our analyzed (numerical) calculations reflect exactly the expected symmetries. We stated in the manuscript that interpreting the existence of TAHEs in magnetic tunnel junctions in terms of momentumand spin-dependent skew AR and SR of particles at the SC interface suggests that also the Cooper pairs transferred into the superconducting electrode of our junction via the AR processes must encounter a similar effect, eventually leading to a spontaneously generated transverse supercurrent response there. To compute transverse supercurrents in the S layer (for simplicity, at zero external bias), we follow the well-established Green's function-based technique, which was firstly introduced by Furusaki and Tsukada (S40) and the BCS coherence factors, as well as the wave vectors, are the same as declared in Sec. I. The calligraphically written scattering coefficients are again obtained by applying appropriate boundary conditions, similarly to Eqs. ( Equation (S42) can be derived from the system's Matsubara Green's function In the manuscript, we analyzed the TAHE conductances at zero external bias voltage. Nevertheless, our presented analytical approach is general enough to treat also the situation of finite bias. Figure Particularly at the gap edge, eV/|∆ S | = 1, both the AR and SR probabilities approach constant values and get completely independent of the effective interfacial scattering potential. In the ideal case of a N/S junction, BTK Similarly to our analysis in the manuscript, we illustrate in Fig. Up to now, we have not answered the questions how changing the strength of the interfacial Rashba SOC (Dresselhaus SOC is determined by the material) by electrical gating [S17-S21] or designing different interface geometries, altering the barrier's strength (height and width), or replacing the F by one with different spin polarization might impact the investigated TAHEs. To address the first question, Fig. FIG. Another indirect evidence for the striking interplay between skew AR and SR can be extracted by studying the impact of the spin polarization, P, on the TAHE conductances'; so far, we always considered the special case of an iron electrode (P = 0.7). Panels (a) and (b) of Fig. 