In recent years, metal halide perovskites have generated tremendous interest for optoelectronic applications and their underlying fundamental properties. Due to the large electron-phonon coupling characteristic of soft lattices, self-trapping phenomena are expected to dominate hybrid perovskite photoexcitation dynamics. Yet, while the photogeneration of small polarons was proven in low dimensional perovskites, the nature of polaron excitations in technologically relevant 3D perovskites, and their influence on charge carrier transport, remain elusive. In this study, we used a combination of first principle calculations and advanced spectroscopy techniques spanning the entire optical frequency range to pin down polaron features in 3D metal halide perovskites. Mid-infrared photoinduced absorption shows the photogeneration of states associated to low energy intragap electronic transitions with lifetime up to the ms time scale, and vibrational mode renormalization in both frequency and amplitude. Density functional theory supports the assignment of the spectroscopic features to large polarons leading to new intra gap transitions, hardening of phonon mode frequency, and renormalization of the oscillator strength. Theory provides quantitative estimates of the charge carrier masses and mobilities increase upon polaron formation, confirming experimental results. Overall, this work contributes to complete the scenario of elementary photoexcitations in metal halide perovskites and highlights the importance of polaronic transport in perovskite-based optoelectronic devices. Metal halide perovskites (MHP) are attracting enormous interest as solution processed Among these are the electrical conductivity exhibiting characteristic power-law temperature dependence, The electronic and vibrational structure of semiconductors are strongly affected by polaron formation: i. half-filled electronic states appear within the gap, giving rise to new optical transitions; ii. vibrational mode frequencies are renormalized by the change in bond geometry, including modes of the inorganic lattice and of the organic moiety that "feel" a deformed environment (spectator modes), Figure ii) Mobility anisotropy of polarons is smaller than their effective mass anisotropy. iii) Theory compares reasonably well with data in the literature reporting mobilities of perovskite single crystals from 2.5 to 600 cm 2 V -1 s -1 . MAPbI3 precursor solutions with concentration 20 wt% and 40 wt% were prepared by dissolving stoichiometric amounts of methylammonium iodide (MAI, Dyesol Inc) and lead iodide (PbI2, 99.99%, TCI) in anhydrous N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, Sigma-Aldrich). Calcium Fluoride and intrinsic Silicon substrates were sonicated in acetone and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) for 15 minutes followed by 30 minutes of UV/ozone treatment. The substrates were then transferred into a N2 filled glovebox with H2O and O2 levels <1 ppm. The precursor solution was spin-coated on the substrates at 4000 rpm for 30s; toluene dripping was performed after 4s to obtain smooth, high-quality films. The substrates were subsequently annealed at 100 o C for 15 minutes. 40 wt% solutions were utilised in PIA measurements to improve the signal to noise ratio while 20 wt% solutions were used for transient absorption and fast photocurrent measurements. Photoinduced absorption measurements were carried out in a Bruker V80v FTIR spectrometer using a solid-state pump laser (λ=532 nm) with intensity of ~200 mW/cm 2 . 40 wt% sample was utilized for measurement in the MIR and NIR range while 20 wt% sample was utilized for the visible regime. cw-PIA measurements were carried out at low temperature (78 K) using a Helitran cryostat cooled by liquid nitrogen, pumped at a base pressure of ~5.0×10 -5 mbar. Four different detectors were used to probe the 3 distinct spectral regimes: Deuterated Triglycine Sulfate (DTGS) and Mercury Cadmium Telluride (MCT) to probe the mid-infrared regime, Indium Gallium Arsenide (InGaAs) to probe near-infrared, and Silicon to probe the visible regime. A notch filter at 532 nm was used for measurements in the visible regime to eliminate pump laser scattering, while a 650 nm band pass filter or a double-polished Silicon wafer were utilized for NIR and MIR measurements, respectively. The FTIR spectrometer operated in rapid scan mode. Transmittance spectra were recorded under photoexcitation, Ton, and without photoexcitation, Toff. PIA spectra were then derived as -ΔT/T = -(Toff-Ton)/Toff ≈ Δα•d. where Δα is the differential absorption coefficient and d is the film thickness. Total 8000 Ton and Toff scans each were collected and averaged to obtain the desired signal-to-noise ratio. A commercial regenerative amplifier system (Quantronix Integra-C) was used as the laser source at the repetition rate of 1 kHz at 810 nm and pulse width of around 100 fs. A commercial spectrometer, Jobin Yvon CP140-104, equipped with a silicon photodiode array was used to record the transient absorption spectra (Entwicklungsbüro Stresing). A portion of the laser beam was split to generate the 400 nm pump beam using a 1 mm thick BBO crystal cut at 29.2 o . White probe light was generated using a sapphire crystal coupled with a 750 nm short pass filter just sufficient to attenuate 800 nm generation beam without saturating the camera and thus, the output spectrum was sensitive from 550 to 830 nm. Another long pass filter with cutoff wavelength of 450 nm was used after the sample to avoid saturation of the camera by the intense pump beam. Global fitting of the resulting spectral decays was performed using the R-package TIMP on Glotaran interface, Measurements were performed using conventional amplitude modulation technique in a setup equipped with a Xe lamp source, a monochromator (Horiba iHR550) which disperses light in the wavelength range of 300-900 nm, a mechanical chopper (Stanford SR570), a voltage source (Keithley 6487), and a lock-in amplifier (Stanford SR830). The chopper modulation frequency was 138 Hz, and the lock-in time constant was 300 ms, corresponding to 0.42 Hz equivalent noise bandwidth. Before the measurement, the monochromatic light power/intensity was obtained using a reference calibrated Si photodiode. The responsivity (Ri) so obtained is the product of incident power on the sample surface (Pi) and measured photocurrent (iPh). Trap-limited (long-time) charge carrier mobility was estimated using the classical Drude model, according to which the steady-state photocurrent is given by J PC The infrared and Raman vibrational mode positons and intensities, at the Γ point of the first Brillouin zone, were calculated on orthorhombic-phase MAPbI3 using the Phonon code as implemented in the Quantum Esppresso package. The electron-phonon coupling is described by the dimensionless Fröhlich parameter α, defined as: where ε0 is the dielectric constant of vacuum; ε ∞ and εs are optical and static dielectric constants, respectively; e is the charge of carrier; 2πħ is Planck's constant; m is the bare electron band effective mass; and ω is the characteristic angular frequency of the longitudinal optical (LO) phonon mode, which is calculated from the Im[1/ε(ω)] spectra in far-infrared region, as presented in Figure Ōsaka provided the finite-temperature free energies of the coupling electron-phonon system by extending Feynman's athermal variational solution. The self-free energy of polaron, F, under the phono occupation factor β = ω/kBT was calculated with two parameters v (a unit of ω, the frequency of relation motion between a charge and a coupled LO phonon) and w (a unit of ω). The free carrier mobilty was calculated by the semi-classical Boltzmann transport theory. 