How to evaluate and compare image quality from different sub-micrometer (subμ) CT scans? A simple test phantom made of polymer microbeads is used for recording projection images as well as 13 CT scans in a number of commercial and non-commercial scanners. From the resulting CT images, signal and noise power spectra are modeled for estimating volume signal-to-noise ratios (3D SNR spectra). Using the same CT images, a time-and shape-independent transfer function (MTF) is computed for each scan, including phase contrast effects and image blur (MTF blur ). The SNR spectra and MTF of the CT scans are compared to 2D SNR spectra of the projection images. In contrary to 2D SNR, volume SNR can be normalized with respect to the object's power spectrum, yielding detection effectiveness (DE) a new measure which reveals how technical differences as well as operator-choices strongly influence scan quality for a given measurement time. Using DE, both source-based and detector-based subμ CT scanners can be studied and their scan quality can be compared. Future application How should we judge and compare image quality in subμ computed tomography (CT) scans? The term "subμ" designs CT scans which a. employ spatial (voxel) sampling in the sub-micrometer range, i.e. 100 nm to 999 nm, and b. achieve spatial resolutions which justify this sampling. While the number of installations of subμ scanners keeps on growing (many in materials science laboratories) discussions about scan quality rarely surpass the visual comparison of fancy pictures. Medical imaging traditionally offers many quantitative measures which could be applied to turn the comparison of different subμ CT scanners into a more scientific argument. Modulation transfer functions (MTF), signal-to-noise ratio (SNR, commonly defined as the temporal mean divided by the standard deviation) or detective quantum efficiency (DQE) all have their justification and usefulness for evaluating the performance of an imaging system such as CT, but each measure only covers a specific part and not the device in total The most prominent difference between medical CT and subμ CT is X-ray inline phase contrast. The latter stems from Fresnel-type near-field diffraction and was first reported by the inventors of the X-ray shadow microscope, Cosslett and Nixon with z SOD the source-object distance (SOD), z ODD the object-detector distance (ODD) and M the geometric magnification. We define two limit cases. First, sourcebased scanners: Second, detector-based scanners: For the symmetric case (M = 2) z is maximal: Subμ CT scanners are different from medical CT and industrial inspection (NDT scanners). The latter typically spatially resolve hundred micrometers at best and they employ much higher photon energies (implying weaker phase contrast) for penetrating large objects. Under these conditions phase contrast is generally not observed. The latter can however be realized for moderate resolutions by increasing z. This has been proposed recently for medical applications using 20 μm spatial sampling and z = 408 mm at λ avg ≈ 0.02 nm average wavelength Wilkins et al., who took up Nixon's and Cosslett's concept of the X-ray shadow microscope, stated correctly that monochromaticity (temporal coherence) is no stringent requirement for observing X-ray phase contrast Two different concepts of scanners have evolved. While Carl Zeiss (Versa scanners, former X-radia Inc.) and Rigaku (former Reflex Ltd.) advertise detector-based subμ CT Traditionally source-based systems feature a small focal spot (typically < 2 μm) and strong geometric magnification, similar to Cosslett's Shadow Microscope. However, many micro-focal systems employ CCD detectors (RXS and Bruker) which imply a lesser magnification. Detector-based scanners feature larger focal spots, higher anode power, and geometric magnification M < 2 Both scanner types have their benefits and drawbacks. Producing a small focal spot requires micrometer-thin transmission targets. The heat-load as well as the electron transparency are the two factors limiting the brightness of micro-focal X-ray sources. Microscope X-ray detectors employ microscopic-thin scintillator screens (single crystal or polycristalline) for converting X-rays to visible light. These screens preferably convert softer Xrays (< 20 keV) while harder X-rays mostly pass through. Light collection efficiency is limited by the aperture of the microscope lens. Optimizing either MTF (modulation transfer function) or temporal SNR generally does not yield the best image quality. For a detailed review of the underlying problem refer to While the universality of SNR(u) can be questioned because it depends on the object's power spectrum, using the same or perfectly similar objects allows for comparing the performance of different imaging systems (or different parameter settings in one system) by measuring and comparing their polychromatic SNR spectra. Admittedly, evaluating CT scanners should include CT images. Therefore extending MTF(u) and SNR(u) to 3D is desirable. Three-dimensional object coordinates are meant by "3D" (real-and reciprocal space), whereas "2D" refers to horizontal and vertical axes in transmission images. Furthermore, we introduce detection effectiveness (DE) which includes MTF and noisiness while being independent of the object's structure. DE(u) requires exact knowledge of the object's power spectrum S object (u). This study uses a simple and reproducible test object (mixture of two sizes of microbeads) in order to calculate MTF 3D , SNR 3D and DE 3D for each scanner and for each parameter setting. We thereby approximate CT imaging to be a linear time-invariant (LTI) system with a single real Fourier kernel that applies to any object of similar X-ray interaction. This approximation implies isotropy while neglecting non-linearities and local effects which arise during back-projecting beam intensities, known as fan-beam artifacts Except for the hint that no attenuation filter was necessary we did not give precise instructions to the machine operators. Instead we wanted them to parametrize and perform the scans in the way they considered optimal. This test therefore invokes not only different scanners but also significantly different parameter settings, sometimes on the same scanner. Admittedly, "optimal" leaves at least two choices open: a. employing the scanners' best resolving power (best MTF), or b. making the best CT image of the phantom in the shortest scan time (best SNR). In the outcome of this study we shall see that both choices were made by different operators. Consequently, those scans with an optimal MTF 3D are distinct from those with better SNR 3D and DE 3D . Table In addition to the commercial scanners, this study includes three systems which have been developed by the Fraunhofer Development Center X-ray Technology (EZRT): The ntCT (based on Excillum's nanotube source), the LMJ-CT (based on Excillum's Liquid-Metal-Jet source) and the new compact Click-CT scanner For most scanners we were able to measure SNR 2D (u) from series of transmission images before proceeding with the CT scan. Table According to Assuming additive noise , i.e. d τ,j = s τ + n τ,j , we can compute power spectra for deterministic signal (s τ ) and random noise (n τ,j ) separately (cf. The denominator of these two cancels out when SNR is computed (same for 2D and 3D): The resulting 2D SNR is given by: The correction term A(u) corresponds to artificial signal contributions (e.g., arising from the detector dark current and flatfield images power spectra). It is derived in the appendix. Similar to SNR 2D (u) which is deduced from series of transmission images, measuring SNR 3D (u) would require series of 5 to 10 identical CT scans, or 5 to 10 projection images at each angular position, from which corresponding volume images and volume signal and noise power spectra can be computed. Because this acquisition scheme could not be applied due to a lack of flexibility in commercial CT scanners' software, we chose to estimate SNR 3D (u) from a single CT scan, by the following procedure: The detected power spectrum D 3D of the CT contains effects of modulation transfer (MTF, i.e. blur and phase contrast) and of additive noise: Fit parameters are determined for the models of MTF 3D and N 3D (cf. eq. 14 and 21). Note that for the (high) frequency band where D 3D is pure noise, the ratio D 3D /S object ≈ N 3D /S object resembles a ragged curve which may even increase towards high frequencies. The model fit for N 3D is then used for computing SNR 3D : The approximation which is hereby made is the model fit of the volume NPS. The latter therefore constitutes the main uncertainty for the estimation of SNR 3D (u). In order to make SNR 3D independent of the object structure, it is normalized with respect to S object , yielding detection effectiveness DE 3D (u) While SNR 3D is strongly governed by the structure (shape) of the object, MTF 3D and DE 3D are not. The latter are independent of the object's structure while they remain dependent of everything else: E.g. the object's interaction strength (attenuation and phase shift) which in turn is weighted with the X-ray energy spectrum (including beam hardening). Image quality is intrinsically application-specific, and so is DE. We define the modulation transfer to include both the effects of image blur and phase contrast. Both for 2D and 3D, MTF can be written as: MTF 3D,blur in eq. 11 is modeled by the product of an exponential with a Gaussian function, which is usually a good approximation. r is the radial real space coordinate, μ and σ are the widths of the Lorentzian and Gaussian functions respectively (eq. 15). Due to the radial symmetry of these functions eq. 16 is equally valid for 2D and 3D Fourier transforms. Meanwhile, phase propagation is approximated by a parabola For a given wavelength λ the phase strength p depends on the material-specific X-ray interactions as well as on the propagation length z where δ and μ abs are the interaction strengths for phase shift and attenuation, respectively. Note that eq. 14 results in a peaked shape of MTF 3D . While the definition of MTF blur for 2D transmission images is the same as for 3D CT images, we shall refer to MTF 3D and MTF 3D,blur for those curves which are computed from 3D power spectra. In the appendix MTF 2D,blur is estimated from slanted edge line profiles. While the latter appear consistent with MTF 3D,blur it would be wrong to assume that both are identical (one relates to the test object, the other to a tungsten edge). Fig. Because both MTF phase and MTF blur are determined by the fit, the latter can be compared to MTF noise (see section 2.4). Concerning the latter, an accurate estimate of MTF noise requires a sufficiently large (high) frequency band in which pure noise can be estimated. Consequently, MTF noise is less accurate for those scans with very high spatial resolution (Easytom and ntCT). The model for the shape of the projections' noise power spectra includes a scaling factor a, conversion to and collection of optical photons c as well as noise effective blur MTF noise (u) Here, a scales with the detected intensity. This equation can be used for estimating X-ray conversion c of the detector from the DC and the Nyquist amplitudes in N 2D (u), i.e. by assuming MTF noise (u ny ) ≈ 0 and MTF noise (0) = 1: Note that MTF noise and MTF blur remain fundamentally different quantities. The former is a property of the detector alone whereas the latter refers to the blurring of an actual object both by source and detector. Note that MTF noise ≥ MTF blur . Concerning N 3D , tomographic back-projection adds convolution and linear interpolation to the image process chain resulting in an altered model for volume NPS This model for N 3D (u) was deduced from a CT reconstruction of simulated noise images. The exponent 3.4 thereby results from spherical averaging whereas an exponent 4 would result from bilinear interpolation. Note that additional corrections O(u 6 , u 12 ) apply for the high frequencies while additional low frequency noise is caused by tomographic imaging artifacts, such as ring artifacts, etc. Defining an appropriate test object for evaluating different subμ CT scanners, that is easy to replicate and still produces meaningful universal results, requires some thought. Generally, during setup and commissioning of new scanners different test structures are scanned in order to validate the image quality visually (e.g. foams, granules and organic composites). While these structures are rich in detail at different length scales and produce nice images they do not allow for determining their exact shape (ground truth). Data power spectra can be calculated from such scans and a good noise model can even yield SNR 3D spectra. However, problems arise when object-independent descriptors are required, i.e. MTF 3D and DE 3D . Consequently, scan performance can only be compared when the exact same test object is used. In order to allow for quick and reliable evaluation of the object structure the latter has to be simple enough, while maintaining a high level of detail and general isotropy. We chose a mixture of polymer microbeads of two (monodisperse) sizes (10 μm and 20 μm in diameter, courtesy of Ralf Nordal, Microbeads Norway). The microbeads are perfectly spherical and made of crosslinked PMMA. They were mixed 50wt%-50wt% which should yield a number ratio of 8 : 1. The mixture was poured into a thin glass capillary of ≈ 1 mm outer diameter. Due to the common use of these capillaries in X-ray powder diffraction the wall thickness (20 μm) and hence the X-ray transmission of the container is highly constant. The latter in combination with the inner diameter of the capillary are part of the sample definition, i.e. its polychromatic X-ray transparency. Using this test object has several advantages: • The spheres are easily detected and their size can be determined, e.g. by computing the Euclidean Distance Transform (EDT) from a binary volume image. • From the histogram of the sphere diameters we obtain an absolute scale for the volume image and can correct erroneous estimates of its voxel size. • The object is composed of a single material and therefore easy to segment after applying phase retrieval and Wiener-deconvolution to the CT scans • Computation of the virtual object structure by placing spheres at the center coordinates which are obtained from the EDT maxima is fast and accurate. • The noise power spectrum is monotonously decreasing, whereas the signal power spectrum shows distinctive structural peaks from the harmonics of the two sphere diameters. From the shape of the data power spectrum we can therefore easily derive scaling and distinguish signal and noise. • Mixing of two sizes yields good isotropy by preventing long-range ordering of the spheres which has to be expected for a single size. • Instead of having one unique object and carrying it around we could send out many similar objects to the users of subμ CT scanners and we would replace them if one accidentally broke. This happened frequently. While profiting from all these benefits we have to point out that the PMMA microbeads are quasi "pure phase" objects, hence the sample shows negligible X-ray attenuation in subμ scan mode. The performance for higher-Z materials (e.g. metal) is different. Except for three scans (RX Easytom) all volume reconstructions were done with our free python X-ray imaging toolkit (pyXIT) Before looking at SNR 3D and DE 3D , the corresponding two-dimensional measures are investigated from transmission images which are recorded for the same settings as the CT scans (see eq. 9). Figure Figure The form factor of the microbeads (harmonics in the spectrum) is more pronounced for the detector-based systems. With the exception of the Skyscan 2214 the sourcebased scanners show much less harmonics in their SNR 2D spectra. This observation is explained by the close proximity of the sample to the focal spot, i.e. different magnifications of sample parts which are closer and parts which are further away from the source. Among the detector-based scanners, SNR 2D (u) of the Versa 20x lens (KIT and FIBRE) as well as the Click-CT (which also uses a 20x lens) appear very similar. From their NPS spectra we find that both Versa 20x scans feature identical light conversions, yet the system at FI-BRE has a slightly sharper detector MTF and therefore a better SNR 2D,10 s = 10 at ≈ 1.5 μm while 1.7 μm can be claimed for Click-CT and Versa 20x KIT. Note that this difference mostly stems from a gain in exposure time thanks to the much shorter SDD at FIBRE. Compared to the Versa 20x both Click-CT and Versa 4x have lower light conversions. Meanwhile, the Click-CT shows a sharper detector MTF compared to all Versas. When the Versas are using their 4x lens the resulting SNR 2D is lower at high frequencies and higher at low frequencies (≈ 2.5 μm for SNR 10s = 10), compared to the 20x lens. Judging from SNR 2D , three source-based systems, i.e. Concerning N 2D of the source-based scanners, the Easytom Flatpanel detector is significantly sharper compared to the CCD detector in this system (cf. Fig. Figure The fit is very robust for those scans which display pure noise in a high frequency band. Note that for the Easytom RXS scans this band is somewhat short, therefore the fit is less certain. Particularly, the Easytom INPG scan did not have a pure noise band in its spectrum at all. Therefore, corresponding SNR 3D has to be discussed with a lot of care. Signal and noise spectra appear distributed over a broad range of magnitudes (10 1 -10 10 ). This is mainly due to differences in phase contrast and attenuation strengths. SNR 3D (u) spectra are computed according to eq. 12 (cf. Fig. Model fits of MTF 3D including blur and phase contrast are displayed in Fig. For the two nanotom scans the phase contrast is cut off by strong image blur at relatively low spatial frequen- cies, hence their imaging capability is limited to structures well above 1 μm size. Note that phase contrast enhances the imaging capability of a system beyond the mere resolving power in terms of MTF 3D,blur . The latter is lowest for the nanotom scans with the nanotom m resolving slightly smaller structures compared to the nanotom s (2.9 μm and 3.7 μm respectively). On the other hand, the three Easytom scans show the best MTF 3D among the commercial scanners. The Easytom RXS scan with the Flatpanel detector has the best resolution, covering even structures below 1 μm size (MTF 3D,blur,10% ≈ 0.9 μm) while the scans with the CCD detector reach MTF 3D,blur,10% ≈ 1.25 μm. Because of its lower energy and shorter propagation length, MTF 3D of the INPG Easytom CCD scan shows a peak which is shifted towards lower spatial frequencies compared to the peaks of the RXS scans (higher energy and longer propagation). Despite these differences, all three scans feature high spatial resolution (MTF 3D,blur,10% ). Among the detector-based systems the Versa 20x scan from FIBRE and Click-CT show the best MTF 3D,blur . Meanwhile the phase contrast peak of the 20x scan from KIT is shifted towards larger structural sizes despite using a longer propagation and the same energy as the 20x scan from FIBRE. This difference in MTF 3D between the 20x scans at KIT and FIBRE is likely due to their different resolving powers: The Versa at FIBRE reaches MTF 3D,blur,10% ≈ 1.6 μm while only ≈ 1.9 μm are obtained at KIT. Among the detector-based systems Click-CT has the best MTF 3D,blur ≈ 1.5 μm, whereas the LMJ-CT resolves only ≈ 2.0 μm. The transfer function of the source-based Skyscan 2214 resembles the MTF of the Versa 20x at KIT while its resolving power is visibly better (≈ 1.5 μm). MTF 3D of the two Versa 4x scans cover a somewhat lower frequency band (≈ 2.7 μm). MTF 3D and MTF 3D,blur of the ntCT extend beyond this figure. The phase contrast peak of the MTF is centered around 0.6 μm structure size. Judging from MTF 3D,blur,10% the ntCT resolves even structures down to 0.4 μm size. Finally, DE 3D is computed by normalizing the estimated SNR 3D (u) (Fig. While MTF favored the Easytom scans with the better resolving power and stronger phase contrast (Fig. Among the detector-based systems the LMJ-CT scan reaches the highest DE, but only for structures larger than 2.4 μm. For smaller structures the Versa 20x scan at FIBRE as well as the Bruker Skyscan 2214 yield a better DE. The two Versa 20x scans again show significantly different DE. The FIBRE scan is an order of magnitude better than the KIT scan. This effect results mostly from the much shorter SDD but also from the higher resolving power of the FIBRE scan (cf. Fig. The two nanotom scans clearly show the lowest DE. Hereby, the nanotom m achieves better results than the nanotom s. The DE peak of the nanotom scans is two orders of magnitude weaker than the DE of the LMJ-CT, and one order of magnitude weaker than the Click-CT. A lot can be deduced about the capabilities and the performance of subμ CT scanners from transmission images alone. From N 2D and and SNR 2D spectra we could evaluate and compare the resolving power, the signal strength and the noisiness of these machines simply from a series of sample images. In order to evaluate the signal (not noise) MTF and to estimate the latter independently for detector and source, additional images of a slanted edge can be used (see Appendix). Already at this level (projection) we find significant differences between sourcebased and detector-based scanners. While the noise spectra of detector-based scanners look relatively similar, featuring a steep MTF, N 2D of the source-based systems show higher X-ray conversions with different resolving powers. Scintillators and screen thicknesses as well as the choice between Flatpanel and CCD all contribute to those detectors' performances. As it would be expected, volume SNR 3D spectra of the 13 scans mainly reproduced the results of the transmission SNR 2D spectra. One flaw of this study shows in the number ratios of 10 μm spheres vs. 20.3 μm spheres. While some scans come very close to the theoretical value, others show much lower values. The most extreme example is the test sample from the nanotom s scan which contained more large than small spheres. Also the two RXS scans show a significantly lower portion of small spheres (most likely the mixing of the two powders was incomplete). While these deviations certainly alter the object spectrum and thereby SNR, MTF and DE should remain unaffected by this cause. Even though the envelope of the object spectra from the nanotom m and s does not appear different, more care should be taken to prevent demixing. SNR spectra (transmission and volume) scale with the object's power spectrum. For our test phantom, which was designed to characterize all subμ CT scanners, we compared SNR 3D of all scans at ≈ 1.5 μm structure size, finding that two scans performed best: Both Versa 520 20x FIBRE and Skyscan 2214 could resolve this level of detail in 3.1 hrs scan time. Yet, this result is only a tiny part of the full imaging capabilities which can be estimated from SNR 3D and DE 3D . In retrospect, using somewhat coarser spheres and estimating the potential imaging quality of the systems in terms of SNR 3D was a good choice, because a. the two types of quasi mono-disperse spheres well allowed for extrapolating SNR 3D , MTF 3D and DE 3D into the submicrometer range, and b. smaller spheres would have excluded the nanotom systems entirely from this study. On the one hand, the volume transfer function MTF 3D has been shown to reflect the systems capacities in terms of spatial resolution and hence phase contrast. Note, MTF does not depend on the object structure, nor does it include noisiness: Any MTF is shape-and timeindependent. On the other hand, SNR 3D spectra reflect the resolving power as well as the noisiness of a scan, yet they inevitably contain the object structure and are therefore shape-dependent by definition. The newly defined detection effectiveness (SNR normalized with respect to the object spectrum) is the only measure which includes modulation transfer and noisiness (SNR) while being independent of the object structure. Generally, DE 3D is very weak for the nanotom scanners, more or less strong for the detector-based systems (depending on the resolving power of their detector) and very strong for the Easytom XL and ntCT. Note that SNR and DE are invariant under any Fourier-filter, such as Paganin-type phase retrieval. Therefore even though the raw CT data does not show linear attenuation coefficients, resulting SNR and DE spectra can be interpreted as if they did. Most operators were aware of phase contrast being the main signal source in X-ray subμ imaging, particularly for weakly attenuating objects. All scans feature different propagation lengths: While LMJ-CT, Versa 20x KIT and the Skyscan 2214 scan by Bruker feature relatively large z, a shorter propagation is used for Versa 20x FIBRE, Click-CT and Easytom INPG. The latter feature better DE, whereas scans with a larger SDD have a better MTF. This difference is explained by the phase contrast strength increasing linearly, while intensity decreases quadratically with z SDD . Note that X-ray phase contrast further scales with the X-ray energy ∝ E -2 . In some cases z SOD was limited, e.g. the test object used by RXS had a glue bulb sealing the glass capillary which was 2 -3 mm large, thus preventing the operator from shortening SOD below 3 mm (in contrast to the 1.8 mm for the Easytom INGP). The Versa 4x scans make a special case: Both at KIT and at FIBRE the object magnification was M > 2, yet remained moderate (5.2 and 6.5 respectively) thus allowing for relatively long SOD. Since the focal spot in this setting is similar but slightly smaller than the detector resolution (see Appendix) this particular object position allows for undercutting both contributions yielding an MTF with strong phase contrast and good spatial resolution at relatively short scan times. The strong DE of the LMJ-CT mainly stems from the superior brilliance of the X-ray source. Note that in addition to the high target power, the Gallium anode in this system emits quasi monochromatic X-rays which always yield higher DE compared to polychromatic imaging. Meanwhile the high DE of the Easytom INPG scan, in particular with respect to the lower DE of the two RXS scans (which feature better MTF), stems from a number of interesting operator choices. Setting the voltage to 40 kV instead of 100 kV has two consequences: a. Low energies contribute significantly more to the signal, whereas high energies contribute more Poisson noise than signal thereby worsening SNR and DE, and b. Using 100 kV acceleration produces a smaller focal spot, i.e. better resolution, by narrowing the electron interaction bulb in the transmission target (1 μm tungsten). Compared to the 4x lens, the 20x lens increases spatial resolution which is limited by noise and by the X-ray conversion c. In that respect, the 20x lens has a double advantage over the 4x lens: Its lens has a higher resolving power and a higher light collection efficiency (the resulting conversion c is about twice the value of the 4x lens including likely different scintillator thicknesses). It is surprising that both operators -when given the choice -first selected the 4x lens for imaging the test phantom because of its larger field-of-view. Using the 4x lens also implies shorter exposures due to coarser pixel sampling and higher stopping power of the thicker scintillator screen. Note, the latter mostly adds high-energy X-rays to the detection and does not necessarily benefit image quality (SNR). The Versa 20x FIBRE scan shows a better MTF 3D than the corresponding scan from KIT, even though the latter should have less penumbral blurring due to a stronger source demagnification. MTF 2D indicates that the 20x lens at FIBRE resolves more detail (yet, we determined 1.0 μm for the 20x at KIT). The two systems show the same X-ray conversion. Additionally, the FI-BRE source may have a smaller focal spot, but this was not measured in this study. The LMJ-CT scan suffered from focal spot drift which was corrected through linear drift correction. The latter resulted in a slight deformation of the microbeads. Not visible to the eye, this deformation became visible in the signal spectrum and was corrected by a slight elongation of the spheres in the virtual object image (see section 2.6). The Click-CT and the Versa 20x detectors do not employ the exact same technology. The Versa system has a light conversion which is twice as high, yet it resolves less details than the Click-CT (MTF). While the Click-CT uses a thin transparent scintillator crystal as it is common at synchrotron beamlines These systems show much different performance in terms of SNR, MTF and DE. These differences mostly stem from different focal spots sizes. The latter are determined by the corresponding X-ray sources whose spot size can be altered, e.g. by choosing different cathodes, different acceleration voltages and transmission anodes of different thickness. From our obersvations we roughly estimate a focal spot of 3 -4 μm size for the nanotom sources whereas (according to the data sheet) the Easytom source with LaB6 cathode has a focal spot of ≈ 0.6 μm which would be a factor 6 smaller. The ntCT employs the Nanotube source by the Swedish company Excillum which reaches a focal spot below 0.3 μm (knife edge scan) This report is meant to bring quantitative arguments into a discussion which has recently been very lively but also very qualitative. It began with the assumption that all commercial subμ CT scanners shared similar perfor-mances in terms of resolving power and image quality and that experienced operators would always choose the optimal settings. This study shows that for each system two kinds of optima can be achieved: a. The optimal resolving power (best MTF), or b. the optimal signal-tonoise ratio for a given object and scan time (best SNR). While our results reveal technical limits for source-and for detector-based scanners, they show that operatorchoices were either made to achieve best MTF or best SNR. Concerning MTF, source-based scanners have the upper hand over detector-based systems. Yet, only if a. the operator chooses the optimal settings (most importantly anode voltage and source-detector distance), and b. the X-ray focal spot is smaller than the optical resolution limit of the microscope lens in state-of-the-art detector-based systems. We estimated the latter to be ≈ 1 μm, therefore only smaller focal spots achieve a better MTF. In that respect the ntCT (0.4 μm) certainly qualifies as the gold standard for subμ X-ray imaging. Concerning SNR, this study showed that setting up a high-resolution CT scan with optimal parameters is a highly complex task. Consequently, the need for experimental optimization and guided scan parameterization is very high. Setting the anode voltage too high may decrease SNR (despite improving resolution), while choosing a less magnifying lens in a detector-based system may reduce light conversion as well as spatial resolution. Note that SNR spectra, most importantly those based on simple transmission images, also include the resolving power of a system. Meanwhile MTF defines resolution as an object-and time-independent frequency cutoff, i.e. at MTF 10% . In most real-life cases detection is not limited by MTF but by SNR which includes the object's power spectrum as well as the noisiness of the scan. Therefore, the latter makes a perfect tool for carrying out an automated optimization for any given setup and task. Optimal SNR 2D implies optimal SNR 3D which in turn implies optimal DE 3D . Note, here volumetric descriptors were estimated from single volume images. Consequently, SNR 3D and DE 3D both relied on model fits of the CT noise power spectrum which ideally would have been measured. SNR 3D and DE 3D serve for defining and comparing any scanners' performance. Measuring N 3D for CT scans could work the same way as measuring N 2D from transmission images. Therefore, a special CT scan acquisition has to be employed which unfortunately was not available for the commercial scanners. MTF certainly provides a basis for quantitative comparison of imaging systems' performances, from a point of view which is independent of object and exposure time. Yet, it is precisely because of these properties that MTF should not be employed solely for system optimization and comparison. Unlike MTF 3D , SNR 3D and DE 3D simultaneously include all effects influencing image quality (noisiness, blur and phase contrast). Given a reproducible test object, their measure is an absolute, quantitative scale. For system comparison and optimization they should be measured as well as whenever new systems are introduced. For the Zeiss Versa 4x and 20x settings at KIT two series of six transmission images from a slanted tungsten knife edge (thickness 25 μm, ≈ 7 • tilt to ensure oversampling) were recorded at increasing magnification, i.e. at six different positions between source and detector, while keeping the source-detector distance z SDD constant. Eq. 14 was used to create a model fit to each MTF. At each position we obtained an accurate measure of the pixel sampling by shifting the slanted edge sideways, i.e. a precise horizontal displacement (0.2 mm or 0.5 mm) and counting the latter in pixels. By assuming a known detector pixel size we obtained z ODD as well as the z SOD at every sample position. For the 20x and the 4x lens source-and detector blurring were thus estimated in a consistent manner. Figure the RX Easytom XL, the Skyscan 2214 as well as the ntCT, clearly outperform GE's nanotom scanners. Using its CCD detector the Easytom achieves 1.4 μm detail (SNR 2D,10s = 10) for 10 s exposure while 20 s exposure are required when using the system's Flatpanel detector. The ntCT resolves 1.4 μm for 17 s exposure whereas the Skyscan 2214 requires more than one minute. Note that for 100 s exposure time both Easytom RXS scans (CCD and FP) could resolve ≈ 0.7 μm detail, ntCT even more. Meanwhile SNR 2D of the nanotom m scan reaches only about 4 μm detail visibility for 10 s exposure, the nanotom s performing even worse. S object varies over many orders of magnitude, thereby making a model fit of D 3D difficult.