In the vast majority of cases, superconducting transition takes place at exponentially low temperature Tc out of the Fermi liquid regime. We discuss the problem of determining Tc from known system properties at temperatures T Tc, and stress that this cannot be done reliably by following the standard protocol of solving for the largest eigenvalue of the original gap-function equation. However, within the implicit renormalization approach, the gap-function equation can be used to formulate an alternative eigenvalue problem, solving which leads to an accurate prediction for both Tc and the gap function immediately below Tc. With the diagrammatic Monte Carlo techniques, this eigenvalue problem can be solved without invoking the matrix inversion or even explicitly calculating the four-point vertex function. A conventional Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory of s-wave superconductivity and its extensions to other pairing symmetries, and to strong coupling, assume that the pairing interaction is attractive in at least one pairing channel. In the BCS theory, the attraction comes from phonon exchange, in theories of non-ordinary s-wave superconductivity (e.g., d-wave superconductivity in the cuprates, s +-superconductivity in Fe-based metals, etc.), the attractive interaction between fermions is believed to originate from screened Coulomb interaction between electrons. In itinerant models of the electronic pairing, the attraction comes from an exchange of collective bosonic excitations in either spin channel (the spin-fluctuation exchange for superconductivity near the onset of magnetism Recent interest in s-wave superconductivity in SrTiO 3 where g is positive and 0 < f < 1 [i.e., the interaction (1) is of repulsive character]. This V RS has three values: g(1 -f ) at small frequencies, g at larger frequencies, and zero at very high frequencies. In the limit when l = ln[E c /Ω] is large, the analysis of the linearized gap equation shows This paper has two goals. First, we want to analyze superconductivity for more realistic repulsive interaction. Several recent studies of superconductivity in SrTiO 3 and Bi argued that V eff (q, ω) can be viewed as the sum of a screened Coulomb interaction and an interaction with a gapped boson, dressed by the Coulomb potential, where a boson is a hybridized mode between a longitudinal phonon and a plasmon where ω is a running transferred Matsubara frequency, Ω is the frequency of a bosonic mode, and Ω a ≤ Ω, i.e., Ω 2 1 = Ω 2 -Ω 2 a < Ω. In the limiting case Ω a = Ω, i.e., Ω 1 = 0, the model reduces to the modified Bardeen-Pines model The pairing interaction V eff (ω) is similar to V RS (ω) in the sense that it reduces to a larger repulsion g at large frequencies and to a smaller repulsion g(Ω 1 /Ω) 2 < g at small frequencies. However, in distinction to V RS (ω), the V eff (ω) form smoothly interpolates between the two limits, and is a function of a single variable ω = ω m -ω n , rather than a separable function of ω m and ω n . We analyze superconductivity in this model analytically, in the weak coupling limit of small g. We show that the results are qualitatively similar to those of the Rietschel-Sham model in that at Ω 1 = 0, T c is non-zero for arbitrary weak g, and for 0 < Ω 1 < Ω, there is a threshold on g, below which superconductivity does not develop. However, the threshold value and the value of T c above the threshold are different from those in the Rietschel-Sham model. The absence of a threshold on g at Ω 1 = 0, i.e., at Ω a = Ω can be understood as the consequence of the fact that this is a boundary between a repulsive and an attractive interaction: at infinitesimally larger Ω a the interaction becomes attractive at the smallest frequencies, in which case T c is finite at any g, like in BCS theory. In most of realistic cases, an analytical solution is not possible and one has to rely on a numerical procedure of determining T c and the gap function immediately below T c . This brings us to the second goal of our work-to set up the computational protocol to obtain critical parameters in the generic case of frequency and momentum dependent interaction. In general, one has to solve for the largest eigenvalue λ max of the gap-function equation and obtain T c from the condition λ max = 1 We argue that, while this approach works well for the case of an attractive potential, when the gap function does not change sign as a function of frequency, it fails for the case of a frequency dependent repulsive interaction, like V RS (ω m , ω n ) or V eff (ω). The key reason is that for a repulsive interaction, the ratio of the gap function in the frequency range where it is positive, and the one where it is negative, by itself depends on the logarithm of temperature, and this additional logarithmical dependence cannot be neglected in the extrapolation procedure. This leads to a non-linear dependence of λ max on ln[Ω/T ], and makes the extrapolation from T T c unreliable for determining T c . We show this explicitly for both the Rietschel-Sham and V eff (ω) models. We introduce the new protocol, which overcomes this complication. We call it an implicit renormalization approach. Specifically, we re-formulate the eigenvalue problem in such a way that the new largest eigenvalue, λmax (T ), which still obeys λmax (T c ) = 1, remains linear in ln[Ω/T ] in the whole T range between Ω and much smaller T c . We show that this allows one to determine T c with high precision by the extrapolation from higher T . Furthermore, the eigenvector of the implicit renormalization protocol is straightforwardly related to the critical gap function. After re-weighting its low-frequency part with the factor λmax (T ), the former becomes equal to the latter. We apply the implicit renormalization method to both the Rietschel-Sham model and the model with V eff (ω) and in both cases find that it works with a remarkable accuracy. The structure of the paper is the following. In the next section we present the analytical solutions for T c , first for the exactly solvable Rietschel-Sham model and then for the model with more realistic V eff (ω). In Sec. III we discuss the extrapolation problem and introduce the implicit renormalization approach to determine T c in both models. In Sec. IV, we explain the method in more general terms and how to apply it to metals, when the irreducible interaction in the Cooper channel is given by a four-point vertex Γ, which depends on both frequency and momentum deviations from the Fermi surface. We argue that even a static repulsive interaction, which is weaker near the Fermi surface than away from it, may give rise to a finite T c . In this Section we also discuss the Diagrammatic Monte Carlo (DiagMC) method and explain that to successfully apply the implicit renormalization scheme one does not need to know Γ explicitly-all computed objects are no more complex than the single-particle Green's function while all integrals and summations over the diagrammatic space are performed stochastically. In Sec. V, we provide further discussion and present conclusions. Here Γ is a four-point vertex with zero incoming momentum and frequency, irreducible in the particle-particle (Cooper) channel, ω n = πT (2n+1) and ω m = πT (2m+1) are fermionic Matsubara frequencies, G (2) is the product of two single particle Green's functions, G p,m ≡ G p,m G -p,-m . To simplify the discussion, we consider swave pairing and assume that Γ k,n p,m depends on frequencies ω n and ω m , but does not depend on momenta; for the Green's function we take the form G p,m = 1/(iω m -ξ p ) and assume that the quasiparticle dispersion ξ p can be linearized around the Fermi surface for all |ξ p | ≤ E c . Under these assumptions, the momentum integration can be carried out exactly, and the eigenvalue problem reduces to We first consider the exactly solvable Rietschel-Sham model with V (ω m , ω n ) = V RS (ω m , ω n ) and then discuss analytical approach to the model with frequencydependent repulsive interaction V eff (ω n -ω m ). The pairing interaction in the Rietschel-Sham model, V RS (ω m , ω n ), is given by Eq. ( For such pairing potential, the gap function ∆(ω n ) also displays a step-like behavior and can be parameterized as ( The eigenvalue problem is then reduced to solving the quadratic equation for the ratio a/b. It is convenient to define To logarithmic accuracy, Here L is a conventional Cooper logarithm, for which α = 0.882 is the factor that one needs to add to convert the discrete sum 2πT Using these notations and assuming that both L and are large, one can cast the eigenvalue problem into a compact form The transition temperature is determined by the condition λ max (T c ) = 1, where λ max is the largest eigenvalue of We see that λ max is positive and monotonically increases with decreasing temperature, as long as f is non-zero, i.e., as long as the interaction varies between small and large frequencies. However, we also see that λ max (T ) is not simply proportional to L, i.e., the increase of λ max (T ) with decreasing T is not simply logarithmical. Moreover, at T = 0, when L → ∞, λ max saturates at λ max (T = 0) = g f /(1 -f ). When this limiting value drops below unity, i.e., when the system remains in the normal state down to T = 0. This holds when f is non-zero and l is finite. If we fix f and keep increasing l, we find that for large enough l, i.e., for large enough separation between E c and Ω, T c is still finite. Setting λ max (T c ) = 1 in (9), we obtain The existence of a finite T c at large enough agrees with the general reasoning that at E c /Ω 1, a repulsive Coulomb interaction gets strongly reduced at energies comparable to Ω and does not overshadows an attraction due to phonon exchange. We next discuss how the results get modified if we replace separable step-like V RS (ω n , ω m ) by V eff (ω) from Eq. ( The equation for the gap function now reads: The continuous-frequency version of ( It is instructive to consider separately the case Ω 1 = 0, like in Bardeen-Pines model We first solve for T c , for which λ max (T c ) = 1, and then obtain λ max (T ). To find T c , we compare the gap equation at ω = 0 and at a finite ω. Setting λ = 1 in (13) yields At zero frequency we have Because the interaction vanishes at x = 0, the lower limit of integration over x can be safely set to zero. At a finite ω, we single out logarithmically divergent term from dx/x and write One can easily make sure that the last term is free from infra-red singularity, hence the lower limit of the integration over x can be set to zero. This last term scales as ω 2 at small ω Ω and reduces to ∆(0)g at ω Ω. When Ω E c and = ln[E c /Ω] is large, it can be approximated, to logarithmic accuracy, by g∆(0) ω 2 /(ω 2 + Ω 2 ). It then cancels out the equivalent term in the first line in Substituting this ∆(ω) into the r.h.s. of Hence, One can verify that this is exactly the same expression as in Eq. ( Returning to = O(1), the analysis of T c becomes more involved as the prefactors for g and g 2 terms in x Ω. One way to proceed is to solve the gap equation ( where At large E c /Ω, we have β 1 ≈ β 2 ≈ 2β 3 ≈ . Keeping terms of order g but neglecting terms of order g, we reproduce Eq. Eq. ( The parameter δ is determined self-consistently, by substituting ( Substituting further ( Equations ( and where and are numerical coefficients of order unity (approaching, respectively, 3/2 and 1/12 in the E c /Ω 1 limit), and For small g and large = ln[E c /Ω], Eqs. ( To compare the two formulas, we estimate T c for the same parameters that were used in Fig. The perturbative and the self-consistent computational schemes can be easily extended to obtain temperature dependence of the largest eigenvalue λ max (T ). All one needs to do is to substitute g with g/λ(T ) in Eq. ( The computations at a non-zero Ω 1 in V eff in Eq. ( One can easily check that this is equivalent to Eq. ( For Ω ≤ E c , we again obtain T c in direct perturbative expansion in g. The perturbative analysis is only valid at small Ω 1 /Ω, otherwise small g are below the threshold. Expanding in g and in Ω 1 /Ω, we obtain where β i are the same as in (21) -corrections to β i due to non-zero Ω 1 account for the terms, which are smaller than the ones that we kept in We now discuss in more detail the numerical solution for T c . Like we said in the Introduction, the hallmark of the weak-coupling BCS theory is logarithmic in temperature flow of the largest eigenvalue, λ(T ), of the linearized gap-function equation Even if T c is extremely small, one can predict its value from higher temperature data by using linear in ln[Ω/αT ] extrapolation. Such an extrapolation appears to be an indispensable part of any fully ab initio approach in view of the technical challenge of explicitly dealing with the energies/frequencies ranging from the bandwidth down to T c . However, in the case of frequency dependent repulsive interaction, the behavior of the largest eigenvalue λ max (T ) is not purely logarithmical with T , see Eq. ( So far, all our considerations were done for momentumindependent Γ. However, the singular part of the G (2)function is fully symmetric with respect to its frequency dependence and the dependence on the distance to the Fermi surface. An immediate conclusion then is that systems with substantial dependence of the s-wave component of Γ on the magnitude of the momentum will feature similar properties, if a repulsive interaction is weakened near the Fermi surface. If this is the case, then even a static repulsive interaction may give rise to a finite T c by exactly the same mechanism as the one we discussed above. At this point one might get an impression that the idea of numerically extracting T c from an eigenvalue/eigenvector problem in terms of genuine Γ and G (2) at T T c is hopeless, and the only meaningful way to proceed is the pseudopotential (explicit renormalization) approach (see Refs. The Rietschel-Sham model ( This way we separate ∆ into two distinctively different parts: the high-frequency part, |ω n | > Ω, (fully described by the parameter a) and the the low-frequency part, |ω n | < Ω, (fully described by the parameter s). With the new parameterization-but precisely the same eigenvector and eigenvalue, the problem (8) is reformulated as Make the formal replacement λ → 1 in the second equation: Now make a straightforward observation that the requirement λ(T c ) = 1 leads to precisely the same T cwith precisely the same eigenvector [a(T c ), s(T c )]-as the original system The flow of λ is obviously linear in L. While the value of T c is, of course, independent of the method, see Fig. By the very fact of eliminating the high-frequency part we understand that Eq. ( We indeed see that the structure of g eff reproduces the Tolmachov-McMillan logarithm While for the utterly simple Rietschel-Sham model ( So far, we discussed the protocol of extracting T c , but not the critical gap function. It turns out, however, that the desired solution is immediately related to the eigenvector/eigenvalue problem of the implicitrenormalization scheme, by simply multiplying the lowfrequency part of the eigenvector, obtained at a given temperature T , by the factor λ(T ). This relationship is readily traced with the model ( where, by construction, g eff = λ(T )/L. The problem 2. The model with V eff (ω) The same computational scheme can be use to obtain T c in the model with V eff (ω), Eq. ( First, the gap function is decomposed into two complementary parts (low-and high-frequency projections), ∆ ≡ ∆ (1) + ∆ (2) , such that ∆ ( Along the same lines, the relationship between this problem and the explicit renormalization approach is readily established by formally substituting ∆ (2) = -[ Î + Â( where B = Â(11) -Â( When the problem ( In Fig. Finally, we want to make sure that the vector [ ∆ (1) * , ∆ (2) ], wehre [cf. yields the critical gap function. Rewriting the problem The structure of this problem is similar to that of Fully ab initio calculation of T c in metals using Eq. ( To begin with, the vertex function has two four-dimensional (momentumfrequency) indexes and its full tabulation, including highenergy scales E F , is challenging; without simplifying assumptions the effort is about the square of what is required for tabulating the Green's function G p,m . [Here we work with the extended momentum space; otherwise p has to be understood as a composite label based on the momentum in the first Brillouin zone and band index.] Suppose that this problem is taken care of. Next, we need to solve the equation for ∆ (2) [the second equation of the system (see, for example, Ref. ∆ (1) (j) = -B ∆ (1) (j -1) , λ(j) = || ∆ (1) (j)|| , ∆ (1) (j) → ∆ (1) (j)/ λ(j) . Here B ∆ (1) is a short-hand notation for the r.h.s. of the first equation of the set (42) once we use for ∆ (2) the solution of the second equation in In practice, we have two (internal and external) cycles and work with the original matrix Â. In the internal (damped iterations) cycle, Â ∆ multiplication involves the full vector ∆ but the result is used to compute and average only the high-frequency components; the low-frequency part remains intact. After convergence, the same Â ∆ multiplication is used in the external cycle to obtain the new vector, estimate the eigenvalue λ, and normalize the low-frequency components. The norm || ∆ (1) || can be defined in a number of ways, say, through the inner product. To improve efficiency, all equations should be projected on different symmetry channels, and their largest eigenvalues be determined independently. This is important for correctly predicting the outcome of close competition between two or more channels, because the order of the largest eigenvalues can potentially change with temperature. Within the DiagMC approach, where statistics is accumulated and averaged as a matter of principle, damped iterations are realized naturally The DiagMC approach also circumvents the difficulty of tabulating the vertex function explicitly. Formally, the Γ-function is represented by the series of Feynman diagrams and thus its evaluation involves summation over diagram orders and topologies, as well as multidimensional integrals and sums over internal momenta and frequencies. In DiagMC, all diagrammatic space parameters, including external variables, are sampled stochastically without systematic bias. In this sense, the r.h.s. of Eqs. ( In this communication we considered superconductivity in systems where the interaction is repulsive, but depends on frequency, and is weaker at smaller frequencies than at larger ones. This is a typical systems in a metal, where the interaction in the particle-particle channel is a combination of a stronger repulsion due to Coulomb interaction, and a weaker attraction due to electronphonon interaction. There are at least three characteristic energy scales in metals: the Fermi energy E F , the plasmon frequency ω p , and the Debye frequency Ω D . Screening of the Coulomb interaction develops at frequencies below ω p , but for small momenta q k F it is not complete down to ω ≤ v F q, where v F is the Fermi velocity. The electronphonon interaction becomes important at ω Ω D . In the conventional pseudopotential approach, all effects of repulsive Coulomb interaction, including its momentum and frequency dependence, are absorbed into a single semi-phenomenological dimensionless coupling μ * (see Ref. In our analysis of superconductivity somewhat different approach, inspired by recent studies of s-wave superconductivity in SrTiO 3 and Bi. Namely, we assumed, following earlier studies We considered the two models: the Rietschel-Sham model with a step-like pairing interaction, and the model with a continuous pairing interaction V eff (ω) (Eq. ( We also discussed in all detail the protocol for numerical computation of T c for systems with frequency dependent repulsive interaction, particularly for the cases when T c is small, and one needs to extrapolate the results for the largest eigenvalue of the gap equation, λ max (T ), from temperatures T T c to T = T c . We demonstrated that within the standard setup, used for the systems with frequency independent attractive interaction, such an extrapolation is not possible due to non-linear dependence of λ max (T ) on the logarithm of temperature. This nonlinear dependence emerges because frequency-dependent repulsive interaction undergoes significant changes at intermediate energy/momentum scales. To set the new protocol, we noticed that the numerical calculations necessary involve the energy cutoff at Ω c . In most calculations, this cutoff is set at Ω Ω c E F . This is made for purely technical reasons-to have better momentum resolution near the Fermi surface. However, with this choice of Ω c one faces the problem of extrapolating non-linear in ln(ω D /T ) data towards low temperature, if T c happens to be much smaller than the lowest possible temperature in the calculation. Another, more general drawback, is that for Ω c E F , the effects of Coulomb interactions are no longer included at the fully ab initio level and the subsequent calculation contains an unknown systematic error, not to mention that momenta satisfying q < Ω c /v F are treated inadequately. Moreover, in multi-band or strongly anisotropic systems the effects of Coulomb interaction cannot be described by a single parameter. We argued that accurate evaluation of T c from Fermiliquid properties at T T c in correlated systems, where the BCS regime is an emergent phenomenon involving multiple energy scales, cannot be achieved unless the renormalization scale Ω c is made smaller (much smaller) than Ω. This choice, however, brings about two technical problems when it comes to the practical implementation of the method following the protocol described in Ref. Throughout the paper, the separation of the gap function into the low-energy part ∆ (1) and the higher-energy part ∆ (2) was performed in the frequency domain. Our approach, however, can be readily extended to include this separation for both the frequency and momentum variables. For example, the condition on the "lowenergy" regime, where ∆(p, ω) = ∆ (1) (p, ω) can be as simple as ξ 2 p + ω 2 ≤ Ω 2 c . Outside this range, ∆(p, ω) = ∆ (2) (p, ω).