Layered transition metal chalcogenides are promising hosts of electronic Weyl nodes and topological superconductivity Here, we show that this critical pressure range is characterized by unique coherent quantum oscillations, indicating that the change in topology between two phases give rise to a new topological interface state. A rare combination of topologically nontrivial electronic structures and locked-in transformation barriers leads to this counterintuitive situation wherein quantum oscillations can be observed in a structurally inhomogeneous material. These results open the possibility of stabilizing multiple topological superconducting phases, which are important for solving the decoherence problem in quantum computers. Topologically protected electronic states at material interfaces are attractive because they cannot be destroyed by many types of perturbations The first-order structural transition separating the T' and T d phases in MoTe 2 has a distinct pressure dependence (Fig. The basic components underlying the Weyl semimetallic state of the T d phase are a large hole pocket centered on the Brillouin zone and two neighboring electron pockets along the Γ -X direction Modeling of the SdH oscillations yields a remarkably good fit (Fig. Throughout the T' phase, instead of two frequencies, a single frequency F η is observed, increasing from 600 T to 700 T over the measured range of pressure (Fig. The mixed region exists in a range of pressures and temperatures between the bulk T d and T' phases (Fig. No other structural phases or ordered superstructures are apparent from neutron diffraction measurements. Naively, it might be expected that any measured SdH oscillations in the mixed region would consist of a superposition of T d and T' signals. However, we do not observe either. A natural explanation is that increased scattering typically weakens quantum oscillations. The mixed region is heterogeneous and sufficiently disordered that SdH oscillations from both the T d and T' phases are suppressed. In light of this, it is completely unexpected that a new set of unique SdH oscillations appears (Fig. In the TIN, due to the layered structure of both T d and T' phases, the ab plane is preserved, and the largest grain boundaries fall along the ab plane, which is the orientation probed by the SdH measurements ( Fig. The pressure-tuned progression of different topological states raises the exciting possibility of studying several different types of topological superconductivity. Whereas superconductivity of the T d Weyl semimetal has received most attention, it is filamentary, and it has only recently been realized that bulk superconductivity exists in the T' phase. The topological classification of this superconducting state has not yet been explored. Additionally, the exact nature of the interfacial electronic states is a rich new direction of study, including possible new classes of superconductor. As we have demonstrated that the TIN can be readily stabilized, we can look forward to making use of these states in future topological quantum computation schemes and other applications. First-principles Calculations. The total energy, structure optimization under pressure, and band structure and Fermi surface calculations were performed by Quantum Espresso Crystal Synthesis. Powder samples were prepared using the standard solid state synthesis method using high purity Mo powder (5N metals basis excluding W, Alpha Aesar), and Te shot (6N, Alpha Aesar). Large single crystals were grown using the Te self flux method as described in using the same source metals as for the powder samples. High sample quality has been confirmed by x-ray and neutron diffraction, stoichiometry has been confirmed by wavelength dispersive spectroscopy, and the samples measured have residual resistivity ratios greater than 1000. Structural Measurements. Determinations of the temperature and pressure dependent crystal structure were made using elastic neutron scattering measurements at 14.7 meV on the BT-4 triple axis spectrometer at the NIST Center for Neutron Research using a collimation and filter setup of open-pg-40'-pg-s-pg-40'-120' where pg refers to pyrolytic graphite. Single crystals were mounted in a steel measurement cell aligned in the H0L M zone and He was supplied as a pressure medium to maintain hydrostatic pressure conditions as described elsewhere GPa in the all T d or T' condition, as well as in the mixed region region at both 0.8 and 1 GPa to look for possible superstructure reflections. None were observed. Transport Measurements. A non-magnetic piston-cylinder pressure cell was used for transport measurements under pressure up to 1.8 GPa, choosing a 1 : 1 ratio of n-Pentane to 1-methyl-3-butanol as the pressure medium and superconducting temperature of lead as pressure gauge at base temperature. For transport measurements, we prepared a 110 μm thick sample of MoTe 2 using four point contacts curing contacts with silver epoxy. Transport measurements up to 20 T were performed in Oxford Heliox insert and taken using in magnetic fields up to 14 T and down to 1.8 K in Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS). For superconducting temperature below 1.8 K, resistivity measurements down to 25 mK in a dilution refrigerator were taken using a Lakeshore LS370 AC resistance bridge. The resistivity values were taken by the average of 60 seconds stable and successive measurements. Quantum oscillations from networked topological interfaces in a Weyl semimetal Supplemental Material I-Lin Liu, 1,2,3 Colin Heikes, 1 Taner Yildirim, 1 Chris Eckberg, 2 Tristin Metz, 2 Sheng Ran, 1,2,3 William Ratcliff II, 1 Johnpierre Paglione, 2 and Nicholas P. Butch 1,2 I. ELASTIC NEUTRON SCATTERING Structural phase determination and phase transition implications: The stated relationship between quantum oscillations and crystal structure is based on our pressure and temperature dependent elastic neutron scattering measurements. As is described in our previous work 1 , we determine the T d and T' phase fractions from the scattering intensity at the (201) reflections of the monoclinic unit cell for the T' phase. For the T d phase, this is for a unit cell with a β-angle of 90 0 . The scattered intensity is determined from the integrated intensity of transverse scans centered at the nominal peak positions for each phase. We used the BT-4 triple-axis spectrometer at the NIST Center for Neutron research with a monochromatic 14.7 meV neutron beam and a collimation and filter geometry of Open-pg-40'-pg-s-pg-40'-120 where pg refers to an oriented pyrolytic graphite filter used to remove higher order neutrons. The temperature dependent integrated intensity of each phase, taken upon warming, is given in Figs. Kinetic freezing in a first order thermal structural phase transition: Critical to our discussion of phase coexistence and our interpretation of the cause of the arrested transition is that despite an apparent suppression of a phase transition temperature to zero temperature at a specific pressure, we do not believe this should be described as a quantum structural phase transition. We attribute the effective "freezing" of the transition to the reduction of the structural transition temperature into a temperature regime where thermal fluctuations cannot overcome the energy barrier between the phases. We can draw an analogy between this behavior and the kinetic freezing observed in the low temperature first order magnetic transitions in (La,Pr,Ca)MnO 3 between a ferromagnetic and charge-ordered antiferromagnetic state 2 . In the magnetic case the complex energy landscape is attributed to competition between magnetic order, structural and chemical disorder, and inter-grain strain, which is consistent with other observations of similar transistions in magnetocaloric materials with magnetostrictive coupling 3 . Given the previously established sensitivity of the MoTe 2 structural phase transition to pressure and strain as well as the known structural disorder in van der Waals materials, it is reasonable to assume that inter-grain strain and disorder may dominate the phase transition kinetics in this system as well 1,4 . At 0.8 GPa where we first observe a broad mixed region, the transition temperature is still high enough that it is possible to undercool the sample such that it eventually completes the phase transition, but at 1 GPa the transition temperature is further suppressed and no sufficient undercooling is possible leading to the mixed region as the ground state structure. Structure in the mixed region: Given the coherent oscillations in the mixed region, we considered whether this could be evidence of a new bulk structural phase driven by stacking disorder during the phase transition. If this were the case, we might expect to observe new reflections along the stacking direction. We performed [00L] scans along [20L] at 0.8 GPa at temperatures corresponding to the T d phase and the mixed region. These are shown in figure In this section, we discuss the details of our first-principles electronic structure calculations of MoTe 2 as a function of pressure for both 1T -and T d -phases, respectively. The total energy, structure optimization under pressure, and band structure and Fermi surface calculations were performed by Quantum Espresso, 5 , which is based on density-functional theory (DFT), using a plane wave basis set and fully relativistic allelectron projected augmented wave (PAW) potentials 6,7 . The 4s, 4p, 4d, and 5s electrons of Mo and the 4d, 5s, and 5p electrons of Te were treated as valence. We used 0.02 Ry Methfessel-Paxton smearing with wavefunction and charge density cut-off energies of 100 Ry and 800 Ry, respectively. The exchange-correlation interactions were described by the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof exchange-correlation functional 8 . The Brillouin-zone integration were performed using Monkhorst-Pack grids of special points with 16 × 8 × 4 for total energy and structure optimizations and 32×16×8 with tetrahedra method for electronic density of states and Fermi surface calculations. The spin-orbit (SO) interactions and the weak inter-layer van der Waals (vdW) interactions were all included in our calculations. We used grimme-d2 9 vdW correction with parameter london -s6 = 0.6. The effect of electron correlations are included within DFT+U method with U=3.0 eV for the Mo 4d-states. Including electron-correlation brings the calculated band structure and Fermi-surface into excellent agreement with Quantum Oscillation and ARPES measurements as found in very recent studies 10,11 . Fermi-surface sheets and SdH orbits are visualized by our custom python code using Mayavi 12 . The quantum oscillation frequencies/orbits and their angle dependence were calculated using the skeaf code 13 . Recent studies 10,11 found that electron correlations are essential for a precise description of the bulk electronic structure of T d -MoTe 2 as revealed by angular resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) 10 and the angular dependence of the Fermi surface by quantum oscillation (QO) experiments 11 . Hence, in our study we adopted DFT+U scheme to describe the electron correlations within the Mo 4d-states. The overall best agreement with ARPES and QO data is obtained for U=3 eV 10,11 , which was also used in our calculations in this study. Figures In our calculations, besides the Hubbard term U , there are other parameters such as lattice constants and atomic positions that we need to determine. One way is to use experimental parameters or to determine them self consistently within the DFT+U structural optimization at any given pressure. FigureS5 shows the Fermi surface of T d -and 1T phases of MoTe 2 for both experimental and DFT optimized structures with and without electron correlation effects (i.e. U). We note that the Fermi surface is very sensitive to the lattice parameters and the atomic positions. Our optimized lattice parameters and atomic positions are within 1% the experimental values as shown in Tables In this section, we present our results related to the pressure dependence of the Fermi surface and quantum oscillation orbits as a function of applied pressure for both phases of MoTe 2 . In both phases, we have similar Fermi surface and orbits which are summarized in Figure We have carried out full structure optimization at a given pressure and then calculate the Fermi surface over a dense k-grid to determine the orbit frequencies using skeaf code 13 . Our results are summarized in Tables The topology of the Fermi surface pretty much stays the same with applied pressure up to 16 kbar (i.e. 1.6 GPa). Due to smaller lattice constants the band overlap gets larger with increasing pressure which in turn increases the orbit frequencies. However at pressures larger than 1.6 GPa, due to strong inter-layer interaction, the hole-band with the square box shape starts to have an opening at the top/bottom of the box-surface as shown in Figure In order to understand this weak angle dependence of the SdH oscillations, we have calculated the extreme orbits as the magnetic field is turned as in our measurements. The results are summarized in Figure The angle dependence of SdH oscillation at ambient pressure maps out two 3D topological Fermi surfaces of two electron pockets from multiband model applied with LK fit in equation NIST center for Neutron Research, NIST, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899, USA. 2 Center for Nanophysics and Advanced Materials, Department of Physics, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742 USA. 3 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742 USA. (Dated: May 23, 2019)