conventional optics Phonon polaritons (PhP) in thin films of hBN behave as confined guided optical modes, which extend as evanescent waves into the semi-spaces above and below the hBN. Therefore, the propagation of PhPs is affected by the refractive indices of the superstrate and substrate Therefore, the excitation wavelength can be controlled to the point where the polariton is affected even by the very first few nanometres of the substrate and superstrate A heterostructure comprising the phase change material Ge3Sb2Te6 (GST) and isotopically pure h 11 BN (referred to hBN hereinafter) is the ideal system for a proof-of-concept demonstration of substrate engineered polariton optics: hBN possess low-loss polaritons with large propagation lengths While GST has been previously employed to demonstrate switchable phonon polariton resonators in quartz Here, we show an hBN-GST heterostructure in which arbitrary patterns can be written, erased, and rewritten to control the PhP propagation. We achieve this by defining several structures, ranging from waveguides to diffraction-limited focusing metalenses. Specifically, we use low-loss PhPs in isotopically pure hBN ( 11 B isotopes with >99% purity Figure As PhPs are strongly confined, a thin layer of 55 nm of GST below hBN (195 nm of thickness) is sufficient to significantly alter polariton propagation. To create the heterostructure, we sputter a thin film of GST on a CaF2 substrate (in an amorphous phase as-deposited), protect it with a 15 nm layer of ZnS:SiO2 against oxidation and then transfer exfoliated hBN to form the top layer. A pulsed laser diode is used to write and erase patterns by selectively crystallising or re-amorphising GST The PhP mode profile is affected by the state (either crystalline or amorphous) of the GST beneath it (Figure Polariton propagation in heterostructures with a-or c-GST is analogous to light propagation in two different materials (such as air and glass). The continuity of the electric field at the boundary between two regions implies Snell's law where θ is the propagation angle in corresponding regions with respect to the interface normal. Many conventional optical devices (such as lenses and prisms) are governed by Snell's law, suggesting that similar components can be implemented in our hBN-GST heterostructure. The first example to illustrate this principle is a refractive lens, specifically, a plano-convex semi-circular lens to focus PhPs (Figure We write and erase a semi-circular plano-convex lens (radius (R) = 5 μm) twice and subsequently replace it with a plano-concave lens of the same radius (Figure Information for more details on measurements and image processing). The resulting images confirm focusing, which is shown by the narrow waist in the transmitted beam (Figure After erasing, only polaritons with linear wavefronts that are launched by the hBN edge are visible, whereas focusing is fully restored when the lens is rewritten (Figure The waveguides consist of c-GST lines with widths (0.7 and 1.1 μm) smaller or comparable to the guided polariton wavelength. They provide additional in-plane confinement such that the propagating mode is truly one-dimensional and is confined along the waveguide. Here, the c-GST line acts as the waveguide core, while a-GST serves as cladding. The s-SNOM measurement in Figure Metasurfaces have recently emerged as a novel and versatile method for engineering light propagation by using arrays of discrete elements, which locally alter the phase of transmitted light. By changing the size and shape of these elements, arbitrary predetermined phase profiles can be implemented where y is the element position in y-direction and f is the focal length (Figure Quantitative analysis (see Supplementary Information) of both metalenses confirms that we were able to achieve spherical aberration free, diffraction-limited focusing using both approaches: the lateral size of the focal spots are 1.6 μm and 2 μm respectively, which is in good agreement with the respective Abbe limits (1.66 μm and 1.90 μm respectively). The focal spots are 23 % and 29 % of the free space wavelength respectively. In summary, our results clearly establish that the hBN-GST heterostructure used in this work can serve as a versatile platform to arbitrarily control polaritons at the nanoscale to achieve freeform, transformation, and meta optics Sample Fabrication: A 55 nm GST-326 film (with 15 nm of ZnS:SiO2 protection layer) was sputter-coated onto a 1 mm thick CaF2 substrate. Lithography was performed to define alignment markers (positive tone photoresist S1813 spin coated at 3000 RPM and baked at 115 °C for 90 seconds) followed by Pt sputtering (30 nm) and lift-off at room temperature. Isotopically pure h 11 BN flakes were mechanically exfoliated onto the substrate after plasma activation (5 minutes of O2 plasma at 100 W) using a standard Scotch tape process. We removed traces of the glue from the Scotch tape by placing the sample in acetone for 10 minutes followed by an isopropyl alcohol rinse for 5 minutes and drying with nitrogen. Afterwards, samples were further cleaned with O2 plasma (10 minutes of O2 plasma at 100 W). The thicknesses of the flakes and of GST were confirmed through AFM measures (Cypher AFM from Asylum Research). Reconfigurable Pattern Writing: see Supplementary Method 3 for details on the technique used to write and erase patterns in GST. Lens and metalens parameters: see Supplementary Method 2 for a summary of the fabricated lens parameters. Numerical Simulations: Numerical simulations were performed using Lumerical Mode solutions and Lumerical FDTD. 1D simulations in Mode Solutions were used to calculate the effective indices n eff,a , n eff,c . A mesh size of 1 nm was used to compute the fundamental mode profile and effective indices of the hBN-GST-326 heterostructures in the RS2 band of h 11 BN. Here, hBN was modelled as an anisotropic dielectric with its permittivity values obtained from the Lorentz model (Supplementary Method 1). The effective indices of the waveguides were calculated via 2D simulations of their cross-sections, also done in Modes Solutions. Metalenses were designed by first simulating numerically each element in a periodic environment with full wave 3D simulations performed in FDTD. The result was a library of elements, used to implement the required phase profile. The final metalens was also completely simulated to verify the focusing behaviour. For 3D simulations we used a mesh size smaller than 50 nm along x-and y-axes and 5 nm along the z-axis. A series of dipole sources were used to excite the polariton modes in hBN in the RS2 band. The near field scans were obtained using a commercial system from NeaSpec. Tapping-mode AFM is used (tapping amplitude of 130 nm, Pt-Ir coated tips with resonant frequency of ~300 kHz, tip diameter of ~20 nm). A quantum cascade laser (QCL) array from Daylight Solutions was used as a tuneable mid-IR source for imaging. The phase-amplitude images are obtained using a pseudoheterodyne demodulation. The images of lenses and metalenses were processed using the technique shown in the Supplementary Method 4 to isolate the polaritons focused by the structure. In all cases polaritons are self-launched by the edges 