Neutrons are a unique probe for investigating the structure and the dynamics of matter from the microscopic down to the atomic scale. The neutrons strongly interact with nuclei via nuclear reactions and scattering. This particle is unstable outside the nucleus and it decays through a weak interaction, the β-decay. Furthermore, neutrons undergo electromagnetic interaction because of the spin coupling with their magnetic moment. Although neutrons suffer all four fundamental interactions, they mainly interact with nuclei through the strong force. These reactions are more unusual compared with the Coulomb interactions, because of the short range of this force. Neutrons are chargeless and their electric dipole moment has a maximum upper limit of ≈ 10 -26 e•cm. Thanks to these properties, neutrons are rather weakly interacting with matter and are more penetrating than charged particles. The big advantage of neutrons is that the sample is not strongly affected by the interactions with them and the distortions can be considered as a small fluctuations from the equilibrium state. Investigations of samples under extreme conditions, e.g., high temperature, pressure and electromagnetic fields, are possible. Also, the high penetration depth of the neutrons allows the study of large or bulk samples and buried interfaces. On the other hand, this makes them, also, difficult to detect. Both the rare interaction and limited available intensity of neutron sources lead to a poor signal generation for the neutron scattering techniques. This represents a challenge not only for the development of new generation, high-intensity neutron sources, but also for the design of new flexible instrumentation able to meet the needs of better performance. At the European Spallation Source (ESS), presently under construction in Lund (Sweden), an intensity increase is foreseen of at least one order of magnitude with respect to the current neutron facilities. The peculiarity of the long pulse and low repetition rate time structure of the proton pulse, offer an unprecedented possibility to perform experiments exploiting neutron energy in the cold and thermal range (0.1 meV to 50 meV), thus focusing on slow dynamics and large-scale fluctuations of complex systems. The high brightness of the source will allow to employ smaller samples, which are typically more homogeneous, moreover it is not always possible to produce big sample and they are usually available in nature only in small volumes; the high intensity will allow as well faster measurements, increased use of polarized neutrons and detection of weaker signals. The demands of better performances drive the development of design and operation for the instruments. The measurement of structures and dynamics over a wide length or time scales enforces a flexibility of the instrument to allow exchanges between brightness and better resolution, optimization of signal-to-noise ratio and the use of polarized neutrons as needed. In order to probe smaller sample, the instrument must be designed combining the high flux of the source and advanced neutron optics. The possibility of using the neutron polarization technique leads, instead, to improvements in different applications of physics, chemistry, biology etc. It therefore appears clear that the improvement of the detectors response is of a crucial importance to fulfil the requirement of increasing performance, since the 3 He-based detector is at the limit of its technology. In addition to that, the 3 He crisis of the past few years, opened up to the research for alternative solutions in order to replace the 3 He-based neutron detector technology. This PhD project fits in this context of instrumentation development, focusing the attention on the research and the investigation of new neutron detector technologies. Two different solutions are discussed in the manuscript: a Boron-based thermal neutron gaseous detector for neutron reflectometry and a solid state Si-based thermal neutron detector coupled to a Gadolinium converter. The work regarding the first project has been carried out at the European Spallation Source (ESS) in Lund (Sweden) in the Detector Group (DG), while the second project was realized at the Department of Physics of the University of Perugia (Italy). The Detector Group is in charge of the development of new technologies for thermal neutron detection for the instruments at ESS, and it based its research mainly on the 10 Boron technology. 10 B has a relative high natural abundance (∼ 20%), if compared with the one of 3 He (1.4 parts per million), and has a large neutron absorption cross-section, even if lower than that of 3 He. The Boron-based detector developed at ESS is in an advanced design phase, therefore not only a specific technical characterization can be performed, but also scientific cases can be studied. Further aspects can be investigated in order to have a full understanding and to validate this class of new neutron detector technology. Among others, the characterization of the background is a fundamental feature to study in order to understand the limit of the best signal-to-noise ratio available. Of particular interest, especially considering that the increase in flux leads to an increase of the background as well. The project developed at the University of Perugia is based on a prototype of a solid state thermal neutron detector started few years ago. The appealing feature of the neutron capture through Gadolinium, which has one of the highest neutron cross section, and the production of electrons instead of heavy charged particles, pushes several research programs to study possible alternatives employing the Gd. The work on the Silicon-based neutron detector, on the other hand, is in a conceptual phase. The aspects of the work mostly focus on the improvements of the different part of the design based on both basic operation measurements and simulations. The difference on the status of the two projects reflects in the separation of the work. The Multi-Blade is a Boron-based gaseous detector, currently under development at ESS. It has been previously introduced at ILL in 2005, but never implemented until 2012. The Multi-Blade is a small area detector for neutron reflectometry applications. The most challenging requirements of the detector, set by the instruments and the research of new physics, are the spatial resolution and the counting rate capability. Neutron reflectometry is a technique to study surfaces and interfaces on typical length-scales on the order of nano-meters. The limits are imposed by the measurements range and the instrumental resolution. Currently a typical dynamic range for reflectivities measurements is below 10 -6 . Strong limitations are set by the available flux. In specular reflectivity measurements, the neutron phase space is considerably reduced, indeed, the beam must be highly collimated and, monochromatized in the case of fixed wavelength spectrometers, or chopped on a time-of-flight reflectometer. Both techniques lead to an enormous waste of flux. The objective is to increase the available flux, both with the construction of new high-intensity sources, and with the development of new instruments layout able to exploit it. From the point of view of detectors, the challenge is to achieve the better spatial resolution, about 3 times smaller than the state-of-the art, and higher counting rate capability, about 2-3 orders of magnitudes. The inclined geometry of the Multi-Blade leads to an improvement of both features and the use of a 10 B 4 C converter layer at grazing angle increases the detection efficiency as well. The neutron is absorbed in the boron layer and, in the conversion process, α and Li particles are emitted. This charged particles travel across the detection medium releasing their energy. The detection medium is a gas mixture of ArCO 2 (80/20) at atmospheric pressure. The Multi-Blade is a modular detector and each unit works as a Multi Wire Proportional Chamber (MWPC), it employs, indeed, a plane of wires (anodes) and a plane of strips (cathodes), which ensure a 2-dimensional read out. The whole process has been followed for this PhD work, from the assembling of a new demonstrator till the measurements on instruments. Several preliminary tests have been performed both at Source Testing Facility (STF) in Lund University (SE) and at the Budapest Research Center (BNC) in Budapest (HU). A complete system, mechanics, electronics and data acquisition system has been set up and finally tested on a real neutron reflectometer at ISIS in UK. The experiment concerned the technical characterization of the detector, i.e., uniformity and linearity, spatial resolution, stability, efficiency, but also it was proved the establishment of this technology for neutron reflectometry by performing, for the first time, science measurements using the Multi-Blade detector. To validate the effectiveness of this detector technology it has been investigated, for the first time on this class of devices, the response to fast neutrons. Previous works on γ-ray sensitivity have been carried out. The background discrimination is, indeed, a fundamental feature to investigate, in order to reduce as much as possible the effect of background events on the efficiency of the detector. A detailed study on the different types of interaction between fast neutrons and several materials is described. In order to quantify the fast neutron sensitivity of the Multi-Blade, the procedure of energy discrimination has been applied to the measurements. Different fast neutron sources has been used for this work, also some measurements with γ-ray sources has been performed, so to have a direct comparison between the γ-ray and fast neutron sensitivity. Although the measurements refer to the Multi-Blade, this detector is based on a MWPC geometry, thus the results obtained and the discussion of the underlying physical mechanisms are more general and can be extended to other gaseous-based neutron detectors. Some measurements have been performed with an 3 He-tube, in order to compare the two technologies. Due to the difficulty in decoupling the thermal neutron contribution from the fast neutron events, using the same experimental method adopted for the Multi-Blade, only preliminary and qualitative results can be discussed. The Silicon-Pin detector coupled with a Gadolinium converter is a project for future application in neutron scattering, under development at the University of Perugia. The basic design is to couple a silicon microstrip sensor, well-know and widely used in particular for high-energy physics applications, together with a Gd converter. The results of the performances for this class of devices for thermal neutron detection is presented. The improvements on the design regard especially the way in which the two components, the silicon sensor and the neutron converter, can be linked. At present no optimized deposition technique for Gadolinium is available, a study of the evaporation deposition method has been performed. The requirements for large area and flexible shape detectors with submillimetric resolution could be satisfied by resorting to the technology based on solid state Si devices. The main advantage is the possibility to exploit the Integrated Circuit technology, in order to meet the demand for high-density readout electronics. Moreover, the high spatial resolution and high counting rate, typical of the Si p-n junction diode, make it a promising alternative in neutron detection, when operating under the intense neutron fluxes expected at future facilities. The development of a suitable electronics is a work in progress for the present prototypes. For solid state Si detectors the charge signal is rather small, therefore a better data processing is relevant in the case of these kind of devices where the electronic noise becomes an important issue, in addition to the background rejection. The ability to operate in high noise environment, where the low signal from Si detectors is a limitation, would be a major step forward for this technology. To this purpose it has been developed a new approach for a real time analysis of the detector pulses. A pulse shape analysis method is proposed and tested both on simulations and measurements. The promising performances and the capability to couple high integration electronics push forward the development of real time and single event analysis systems. Neutron scattering applications, e.g., diffraction or spectroscopy, can benefit by employing such kind of solid state Si-based neutron detectors, together with the pulse shape analysis method. The intent of this work is to show the effectiveness of the detector technologies proposed, not only from the technical point of view, but also to demonstrate how the science can benefit by employing these new classes of devices. Neutron interaction with matter 1.1 Basic properties of the neutron Neutrons together with protons are the the components of the nucleus of an atom. The neutron is made up of three quarks, (up, down, down) and it has a mass slightly larger than that of a proton (m p = 938. where m p is the proton mass. The principal means of neutron interaction is through the strong force with nuclei. These reactions are much rarer in comparison with the Coulomb interactions, because of the short range of this force In the non-relativist limit the energy E of a neutron can be described in terms of its wavelength λ through the De Broglie relationship: where is the Plank's constant and m n is the mass of the neutron. The wavevector k of the neutron has a magnitude From equation 1.3 and 1.4 the energy E of the neutron can be written as: The energy can be related to the temperature T as well where k B = 1.281 • 10 -23 J/K is the Boltzmann constant. Due to the strong energy dependence of neutron interactions, neutrons are classified according to their energy, although no specific boundaries are prescribed. In table (i) Elastic scattering from nuclei, namely A(n, n)A, which is the main mechanism of energy loss for neutrons in the MeV region. (ii) Inelastic scattering, e.g., A(n, n )A * , A(n, 2n )B, etc. In this reaction, the nucleus is left in an excited state which may later decay by γ-ray or some other form of radiative emission. In order to occur, the neutron must have sufficient energy to excite the nucleus, usually on the order of 1 MeV or more. Below this energy threshold, only elastic scattering may occur. (iii) Radiative neutron capture, i.e., n + (Z, A) → γ + (Z, A + 1). In general, the cross-section for neutron capture goes approximately as 1/v with v the neutron velocity. Therefore, absorption is most likely at low energies. (iv) Other nuclear reactions, such as (n,p), (n,d), (n,α), (n,t), (n,αp), etc., in which the neutron is captured and charged particles are emitted. The energy range of these reactions is typically between eV and keV. Like the radiative capture reaction, the cross-section falls as 1/v. (v) Fission occurs most likely at thermal energies. (vi) High energy hadron shower production. This occurs at very high energy, above 100 MeV The total probability for a neutron to interact in matter is given by the sum of the individual cross-sections for the processes listed above: If we multiply σ tot by the density of atoms we obtain the macroscopic crosssection Σ, thus the mean free path length l which is the inverse of Σ: where ρ is the material mass density, A is the atomic number and N A is the Avogadro's number. If we consider a narrow beam of neutrons passing through matter, the number of detected neutrons will fall off exponentially with absorber thickness. In this case the probability for a neutron of wavelength λ to interact with a nucleus of the matter at depth x in a thickness dx is given by: I(x, λ)dx = Σe -xΣ(λ) dx (1.9) The number of neutrons that pass through a layer of thickness d is obtained by the integration of equation 1.9, as shown in equation 1.10: where N 0 is the initial incoming neutron flux. For a more general case of noncollimated source, equation 1.10 is no longer an adequate description. A more complex neutron transport computation is then required to predict the number of transmitted neutrons and their distribution in energy. The probability per unit path length is conventionally expressed in terms of the cross-section σ per nucleus for each type of interaction, i.e., the processes listed in section 1.1. We consider a beam of particles incident on a target with the particles in the beam uniformly distributed in space and time. We define Φ as the flux of incident particles per unit area and per unit time, and dΩ as the solid angle per unit time. Due to the randomness of the impacts, the number of particles scattered into dΩ will statistically fluctuate over different finite periods of measuring. However, in average this number will tend towards a fixed dN s /dΩ, where N s is the average number scattered per unit time. The differential cross-section is then defined as the ratio dσ dΩ is the average fraction of the particle scattered into the considered solid angle per unit time and per unit flux. In general, the value of dσ dΩ will vary with the energy of the reaction and the scattering angle. It is possible to calculate the total cross-section for any scattering at an energy E as the integral of the differential cross-section over all solid angles as follows: In a real situation the target is usually a slab of material containing many scattering centres. Thus we want to know how many interaction occur on the average. Assuming that the target centres are uniformly distributed and the slab is not too thick so that the likelihood of interaction is low, the number of centres per unit perpendicular area which will be seen by the beam is n • δx where n is the volume density of centres and δx is the thickness of the material along the direction of the beam. The average number of scattered particles into dΩ per unit time is defined as: where A is the total perpendicular area of the target. The total number scattered into all angles is simply: Considering now the more general case of any thickness x, we define the probability P (x) for a particle not to suffer an interaction in a distance x of the target. The probability to have an interaction in the interval (x, x + dx) is given dividing equation 1.14 by the total number of incident particles per unit time (Φ • A). By the definition of the macroscopic cross-section (eq. 1.8) we can substitute it and we obtain: The probability of not having an interaction between x and x + dx is then: note that the integration constant C = 1, because it is required that P (x = 0) = 1. It is straightforward to define the probability of suffering interaction in the distance x from equation 1.16 as: (1.17) The mean distance travelled by a particle without suffering any collision is known as the mean free path l. From equation 1.8, it is defined as the inverse of the macroscopic cross-section. The probability of interaction can be expressed as: Some of the possible mechanisms to produce neutrons and the activity of a source will be described here, in order to define the units that will be useful for the experimental discussions (chapters Spontaneous fission can occur in many transuranic elements, releasing neutrons along with the fission fragments. These products can promptly decay emitting β and γ radiation. When used as a neutron source, the isotope is generally encapsulated in a sufficient thick container so that much of the radiation can be absorbed leaving only the fast neutrons, which are more penetrating particles. The most common spontaneous fission source is 252 Cf which has a half-life of 2.65 years. The dominant decay mechanism is the alpha decay (∼ 97%) compared to spontaneous fission (∼ 3%). The neutron yield is 0.116 n/s per Bq, combining both decay rate. The energy spectrum of neutrons is continuous up to about 10 MeV and exhibits a Maxwellian shape. The distribution can be described by the expression: where the constant T = 1.3 MeV for the 252 Cf A more convenient method of producing neutrons is through the nuclear reactions (α, n) or (γ, n). Such sources are generally made by mixing a strong α or γ emitter with a suitable target material. The most common target material is beryllium. It undergoes a number of reactions which lead to the production of free neutrons under bombardment by alpha-particles, such as: The excited compound nucleus 13 C * is formed, then it decays through a variety of modes depending on the excitation energy. In general, the dominant reaction is the decay to 12 C. Most of the α-particles simply are stopped in the target and only 1 in about 10 4 reacts with a beryllium nucleus. The actinide elements are the most diffused alpha emitters, a stable alloy can be made in the form MBe Figure In the case of the photo-reaction (γ, n) only two target nuclei, 9 Be and 2 H, are suitable. The emission of a free neutron arises if, by the absorption of a γ-ray photon, the target nucleus is in a sufficient excitation energy state. The advantage of these kind of sources is that if the gamma-rays are mono-energetic, the neutron are, also, emitted nearly mono-energetic. On the other side the reaction yield per γ is lower than that of the α-type sources and the gamma-ray background is much more intense. The activity of a radioisotope source is defined as the mean number of decay processes it undergoes per unit time. Note that the activity measures the source disintegration rate, which is not necessarily synonymous with the amount of radiation emitted in its decay. The relation between radiation output and activity depends on the specific nuclear decay scheme of the isotope. The radioactive decay law asserts that the activity of a radioactive sample decays exponentially in time. In term of quantum mechanics, this can be derived by considering that a nuclear decay process is expressed by a transition probability per unit time, λ d , characteristic of the nuclear species. If a nuclide has more than one mode of decay, λ d is the sum of each constant per mode. The activity can be defined as: where N is the number of nuclei and λ d the decay constant. Integrating equation 1.21 it results in the exponential: N(0) is the number of the radioactive nuclei at the time t = 0. The activity can be expressed as the inverse of the decay constant λ d , the mean lifetime τ = 1/λ d , i.e., the time it takes for the sample to decay 1/e of its initial activity. Equally the half-life, t 1/2 , can be used to define the activity. It is the time in which the source decay to one half of its original activity, thus t 1/2 = τ •ln 2. It is possible to calculate the activity at the time t by knowing the original activity (A 0 ) at time t = 0 as: The traditional unit of activity has been the Curie (Ci), defined as 3.7 × 10 10 disintegrations/second, which is the activity of 1 g of pure 226 Ra. The laboratoryscale for radioisotope sources is usually on the order of μCi, thus for practical aims this unit has been replaced by the Becquerel, defined as one disintegration per second. Thus 1 Bq = 2.7 × 10 -11 Ci. We consider now the nuclear scattering by a general system of particles. We derive a general expression for the cross-section d 2 σ/dΩdE for a specific transition of the scattering system from one of its quantum states to another N is defined as the number of nuclei in the scattering system, R j (j = 1, ...N ) the position vector of the jth nucleus and r the position vector of the neutron. The differential cross-section (dσ/dΩ) λ→λ represents the sum of all processes that involve the change of the scattering system state from λ to λ and the state of neutron changes from k to k . From the equation 1.11 is obtained: ρ k is the number of momentum states in dΩ per unit energy range for neutron in state k . The matrix element can be explicit as: where χ denotes the wave-function of a scattering system (i.e., λ λ ), dR j is an element of volume for the jth nucleus and dr is an element of volume for the neutron. In order to calculate ρ k , can be adopted a standard device in quantum mechanics, the box normalisation where A is the volume of the box. The final energy of the neutron is The number of states in dΩ with energy between E and E +dE is, by definition, ρ k dE , which can be expressed in terms of number of wave-vector points in the element of volume k 2 dkdΩ. A sketch is shown is figure 1.2. Substituting equations 1.28 and 1.30 in equation 1.31 we obtain: We now assume that there is one neutron in the box of volume A, so that the neutron intensity is 1/A. The wave-function ψ k is a plane wave, it can be expressed as: The matrix element in 1.27 thus can be written as follows. Note that the flux of the incident neutrons is the product of their density and velocity, namely: By substituting equations 1.26, 1.32, 1.34 and 1.35 into 1.25, the following expression for (dσ/dΩ) λ→λ is obtained, which is the cross-section for neutrons scattered into dΩ in the direction of k . (1.36) Note that since k, λ and λ remain constant in the element of volume considered in figure We now want to evaluate the matrix element in equation 1.37, integrating with respect to the neutron coordinate, r. The potential of the neutron due to the jth nucleus has the form V j (r -R j ), thus the potential for the whole scattering system is the sum of V j over j; we also define x j = (r -R j ). The matrix element is: = j e -ik (x j +R j ) χ * λ V j (x j )e ik(x j +R j ) χ λ dRdx j (1.39) The transition between equation 1.38 and 1.39 is made in order to simplify the calculation. For each j term in the sum, integrating with respect to r or to x j gives the same result, because both integrations are done at fixed R j over all space. The next step of the calculation is to insert a specific function for V j (x j ). In order to find a suitable solution we consider only one term, j = 1, of the sum in equation 1.38 and the differential cross-section dσ/dΩ for a single fixed nucleus can be calculated. Since the nucleus is fixed at the origin, R 1 = 0 and λ = λ, moreover from the exponential terms in equation 1.38, we define κ = kk', which is known as the scattering vector. In these conditions the matrix element which describe the transition is: As already mentioned, the nuclear forces for scattering have a range of about 10 -15 m while the wavelength of a thermal neutron is of the order of 10 -10 m. The potential is non zero only in a short range on the scale of wavelength. It can be written as a three-dimensional Dirac delta function, δ(r), of intensity a, which is a real constant: V (r) = aδ(r) V (r)e iκr dr = a δ(r)e iκr dr = a (1.44) Therefore, (1.45) As we are considering the scattering of neutrons by a single fixed nucleus, the angular distribution for the wave scattering is spherically symmetric. Then the incident neutrons can be represented by a wave-function ψ inc , and the scattered neutrons at the point r is represented by the wave-function ψ sc , given by the condition of spherical symmetry: where z is the axis along the direction of k, b is a constant and the minus sign is a standard convention which correspond to a positive value of b for a repulsive potential. Note that the magnitude of the wave-vector for the incident and the scattered neutrons is the same. The energy of thermal neutrons is, indeed, too small to change the internal energy of the nucleus. Moreover, we are taking the position of the nucleus to be fixed, the neutron cannot give the nucleus kinetic energy. The scattering is elastic, so the energy of neutron, and hence the magnitude of k, is unchanged. Considering the expression for ψ inc and ψ sc in equation 1. The flux of incident neutron is Φ = v|ψ inc | 2 = v, thus from the definition of the cross-section one obtains: Given equation 1.45 and 1.48: The quantity b is known as the scattering length, it depends on the nucleus and measures the strength of the neutron-nucleus interaction. It is possible to distinguish two types of nucleus. Typically in a strict potential scattering, b should be independent of incident neutron energy. This occurs if the compound nucleus formation, due to the scattering process with neutron, is not formed near an excited state. The majority of nuclei belongs to this category. In the second type the scattering length is complex and varies rapidly with the energy of the neutron. The scattering of such nuclei is a resonance phenomenon and the compound nucleus has an energy close to an excited nucleus. Since the imaginary part of the scattering length correspond to absorption, such nuclei show a strong absorption behaviour. The imaginary part of the scattering length is, therefore, small for the nuclei of the first type. Besides the particular nucleus, b depends on the spin state of the nucleus-neutron system as well. As already mentioned in section 1.1, the neutron has a spin 1 2 . Suppose the nucleus has a spin I not zero, then the spin of the system can be either I + 1 2 or I -1 2 . As each spin state has its own value of b, every nucleus with non-zero spin has two values of the scattering length. On the contrary, if the nucleus spin is zero, there is only one value of b which corresponds to the nucleus-neutron system with spin 1 2 . The values of b are determined experimentally, because of the lack of a theory able to calculate these values from other properties of the neutron. Inserting the value of a of equation 1.49 in equation 1.43, it gives: the potential is known as the Fermi pseudopotenial. We come back to the expression for the cross-section for a general scattering system. If the jth nucleus has scattering length b j its potential is Inserting this in the expression of V (κ), which can be derived from equation 1.40, gives From equation 1.37, 1.40 and 1.51 We recall that this derivation of the cross-section is based on Fermi's golden rule. For scattering processes, it is equivalent to the Born approximation; indeed, both methods are based on first-order perturbation theory. Consider a scattering system with a single element and where the scattering length b varies from one nucleus to another due to nuclear spin or the presence of isotopes or both. The average value of b for the system and the average of b 2 can be defined as: where ν i is the frequency with which the value b i occurs in the system. Assuming there is no correlation between the b values for different nuclei. Thus whatever the value of b for one nucleus, the probability that another nucleus has the value b i is simply ν i . In a scattering experiment a neutron beam hit on a target, which is a large amount of nuclei, therefore a large number of scattering systems. They are identical as regards the positions and the motions of the nuclei. The total number of each b i is the same for all the systems, but each one has a different distribution of the bs among the nuclei. Any combination of spins can occur, i.e., the value of b i is averaged over a large number of atoms. On this assumption of no correlation between the values of b and the different nuclei, it is possible to calculate the measured cross-section of a scattering process as the average over all the systems, i.e., nuclei. This is given by: which is obtained expressing the δ-function, in equation 1.53, as an integral respect to time. Moreover, (d 2 σ/dΩdE ) λ→λ is summed over all final state λ , and then the average over all λ is performed, for the detail see where the first term is the coherent part and the second term is the incoherent part. As one can see from the equation 1.57, the coherent scattering depends on the correlation between the positions of different nuclei at different times, and of the nucleus itself at different times as well. It therefore gives interference effects. Whereas the incoherent scattering depends only on the correlation between the positions of the same nucleus at different times. For both terms the scattering cross-section can be defined as: Note that it was assumed the non-correlation between the values of b and any nuclei. The actual scattering system has, instead, different scattering lengths associated with different nuclei. The coherent scattering can be physically interpreted as the scattering that the same system, namely same nuclei with the same positions and motions, would give if all the values of the scattering lengths were equal to b. In order to obtain the scattering that occurs from the actual system, the incoherent scattering must be taken into account. Physically it derives from a fluctuation of the scattering lengths from their mean value. As it is completely random, all interference cancel out in the incoherent part. We remind that the scattering length depends on the correlation between the neutron and its spin state. It is possible to obtain the expression for the frequencies ν i for both b 2 and b. We denote I as the nuclear spin of a system made up of a single isotope. Therefore, the spin for the nucleus-neutron system can be either I + 1/2 or I -1/2. Denote the scattering lengths associated to the two spin values by b + and b -. If the neutrons are unpolarized and the nuclear spins are randomly oriented, each spin state has, in principle, the same probability. So b + and b -occur with a frequency I+1 2I+1 and I 2I+1 respectively. In a more general system with several isotopes, the frequencies must be multiplied by the relative abundance of the isotope to obtain the relative frequency of the scattering length. The actual total scattering cross-section is then given by the sum of the two contributions of equation 1.57, σ s = σ coh + σ inc = 4πb 2 . Neutron scattering can be applied to a range of scientific questions, spanning over several disciplines from physics, chemistry, geology to biology and medicine. Neutrons serve as a unique probe for revealing the structure and function of matter from the microscopic down to the atomic scale. Neutron scattering techniques enable to study the structure and dynamics of atoms and molecules over a wide range of distances and times A brief overview of several techniques in neutron scattering is reported below: Small Angle Neutron Scattering: SANS exploits elastic neutron scattering at small angles to probe material structure on the nanometer to micrometer scale. In a SANS experiment the neutron beam is directed at a sample, either a solid, an aqueous solution, a powder or a crystal. When the plane wave ψ = e ikz hits the sample, the interaction with the elementary scatters in the sample, i.e., the nuclei, gives rise to spherically symmetrical wave, ψ = -(b/L)e ikL ; L is the detector-tosample distance and b is the scattering length as defined in the previous section. The spherical waves interfere and create a pattern on the neutron detector. For the majority of the application in SANS the scattering is isotropic, so it can be expressed as a function of the modulus of the wave vector transfer: Where r is the distance of the spot of the scattered beam on the detector from that of the direct beam, λ the neutron wavelength. Neutron reflectometry: It is a technique to study planar structures with a wide variety of materials from magnetic layers to biological systems. This method not only allows to investigate the material structures perpendicular to the plane, but also to observe eventual in plane correlations when the measurements are not performed in the elastic regime. A more detailed discussion of this technique is provided in section 1.5.1, because it is the technique for which one of the two detectors, the subject of this PhD project, is designed for. Neutron diffraction: Neutron diffraction or elastic neutron scattering is the application of neutron scattering to determine the atomic and/or magnetic structure of a material. Through diffraction is possible to see the ordered part of systems, e.g., for ordered systems (crystals) their average structure, but also deviations from this order. With respect to the kind of interaction, two diffraction methods can be defined: nuclear diffraction when the neutrons interact with the atomic nuclei, and magnetic diffraction due to the interaction between the magnetic moments of neutrons and atoms. Two class of instruments for diffraction can be separated: powder and single crystal diffractometer. The measurement principle of this technique is based on the Bragg equation. Bragg diffraction occurs when a particle wave with wavelength comparable to atomic spacings hits a crystalline sample, it is scattered in a specular way by the atoms of the system and undergo constructive interference following Bragg's law: In a ToF instrument the wavelength and the time-of-flight are related by the expression λ = ht m n L , where L is the total flight path. By using the Bragg's law we obtain the relationship between ToF and d-spacing: Note that the measured d-spacing is directly proportional to ToF. For instance, considering a powder diffraction, we can express the Bragg's law for a monochromatic instrument as: where λ is fixed and the measurement of the various Bragg reflections hkl is performed by scanning in angle θ hkl . In a ToF instrument, instead, it is possible to measure the whole range in d-spacings at a fixed scattering angle 2θ by scanning in wavelength. The Bragg equation can be rewritten as: . Neutron Spectroscopy: In inelastic neutron scattering, the neutrons interact with the sample changing their energy, getting either more or less energetic. While neutron diffraction investigates the structural properties of the sample, neutron spectroscopy measures the atomic and magnetic dynamics of atoms. In the inelastic neutron scattering experiment the quantity measured is the double differential cross section: where S(Q, ω) is the neutron dynamic Structure Factor. The parameters of interest are the energy and the momentum transfer, ω and Q respectively. Time-of-Flight spectrometers can be divided into two classes: direct geometry spectrometers, in which the initial energy is determined by a crystal, through Bragg scattering condition, or a chopper, which allows to select a specific wavelength, while the final energy is defined by the time-of-flight. Indirect geometry spectrometers, in which the sample is illuminated by a white incident beam, E i is determined by time-of-flight, while E f is defined by a crystal or a filter. On a steady-state source pulsing devices to monochromatize the incident and scattered beam are required. For instance, in a triple axis spectrometer the incident and scattered wave vectors, k i and k f , are selected by Bragg diffraction on the monochomator and analyser crystals respectively. Neutron Spin-echo: This technique is a particular form of spectroscopy that relies on the precession of a spinning neutron. Neutron spin-echo is a time-of-flight method. Polarized particles with a magnetic moment and spin s = 1/2 behaves like a classical magnetic moment. When entering a region of magnetic field perpendicular to their magnetic moment, the particles will undergo Larmor precession. In the case of neutrons: where B is the magnetic field, ω is the frequency of rotation and γ is the gyromagnetic ratio of the neutrons. The Larmor precession of the neutron spin, in a zone with a magnetic field before the sample, encodes the individual velocities of neutrons in the beam into precession angles. When the magnetic field changes its direction with respect to the neutron trajectory, it is possible to identify two limits: if this change is slow compared to the Larmor precession, the parallel component of the polarized beam will be maintained. On the contrary if the change is fast compared to the Larmor precession, the polarization will not follow the field direction. This effect is used to flip the de-phase of the incoming neutrons. A symmetric decoding zone will follow in such a way that the precession angle accumulated is compensated and all spins rephase to form the spin-echo. If an analyser is put after the second precession field at an angle φ between the polarization of a neutron and the analyser direction, the probability that a neutron is transmitted is cos(φ). At a given Q, the probability of the scattering with ω energy exchange is by definition S(Q, ω). The neutron spin-echo directly measures the intermediate scattering function F (Q, t), which is the Fourier transform of the scattering function. Where: and it is proportional to (1/v 3 )λ 3 , so the resolution in time increases very rapidly with λ. Neutron imaging: It is a non-destructive technique, which exploits the penetration of neutrons, to investigate the internal structure of many materials and engineering components. Neutron imaging is complementary to other non-destructive imaging methods, in particular X-ray imaging. While X-rays are scattered and absorbed by electron cloud of an atom, neutrons interact with the atomic nuclei. Thus, neutrons are more sensitive than X-ray to light elements, i.e., hydrogen, lithium, boron, carbon and nitrogen. From some polycrystalline materials, a strong dependency of the attenuation is observed in the cold neutron range, because of the Bragg scattering from the crystal lattice. The instrument layout is quite simple, apart from the source, which can be either a reactor, a spallation source or a neutron emitting isotope, a collimator is needed to determine the geometric properties of the beam, and could also employ filters to modify the energy spectrum of the beam. The image resolution depends much on the collimator geometry and can be expressed by the ratio L D , where L is the collimator length and D is the diameter of the aperture of the collimator on the side facing the source. The beam is transmitted through this device and recorded by a plane position sensitive detector, able to measure the 2 dimensions perpendicular to the beam direction. Neutron tomography can be obtained combining measurements at different angles. Also dynamic processes can be detected with a high neutron flux and with a neutron detector fast enough to acquire images at sufficiently high frame rate. In this section the attention is focused on the neutron reflectometry technique, in order to set the theoretical principles on which the experimental work illustrated in chapter 4 is based on. Neutron reflection follows the same fundamental equations as optical reflectivity, but different refractive indices. As mentioned in section 1.4, in the quantum mechanical approach, the neutron can be described by a wave-function. The dynamical theory, which takes into account the change in the incident wave within the scattering system, describes this phenomenon. The theory proceeds by solving the time-independent Schrödinger equation for the wave-function of the neutron, Ψ , which represents the neutron wave inside and outside of the reflecting surface, matching the continuity of the two wave-functions and their derivatives at the boundaries. The potential V in the equation 1.63 represents the effect of the interaction between the neutron and the nuclei in the medium. - From the discussion in the previous section, we obtained the expression for the Fermi pseudopotential (equation where N b is the scattering length density of the medium through which the neutron travels as can be defined as: b i is the coherent scattering length of the nucleus i and n i is the number of nuclei per unit volume. We consider a neutron beam approaching an ideal flat surface with a bulk potential V , as shown in figure where r and t are the probability amplitudes for reflection and transmission. The perpendicular component of the incoming wave vector k i⊥ is the normal component of the kinetic energy E i⊥ that determines whether the neutron is totally reflected from the barrier θ i is the incoming neutron angle with respect to the surface and q = 2k i sin(θ i ) is the momentum transfer, as depicted in figure The angle at which it happens is called critical angle. The reflectivity of neutrons of a given wavelength from a bulk interface is unity for angles below the critical one and it falls sharply at larger angles In case of elastic scattering the momentum is conserved, k i⊥ = k r⊥ , thus the incident and reflected beam angle has the same value and the reflection is specular. On the contrary, if E i⊥ > V , the reflection is not total and the neutrons can be both reflected or transmitted into the bulk of the material. The transmitted beam, k t , changes direction because the potential acts on the normal component of the kinetic energy reducing it. This change is given by E t⊥ = E i⊥ -V and correspond to: This relation allows to derive the refractive index n: where λ is the neutron wavelength. As N b << 1 for most materials, it is possible to approximate equation 1.70, in the thermal neutron energy range, as The neutron refractive indices of most condensed phases are slightly less than that of air or vacuum. The total reflection, as with light, may occur when neutrons pass from a medium of higher refractive index to one of lower refractive index. Unlike that with light, where the total internal reflection is more common than the external one, with neutrons the total external reflection is mostly observed. Measurements of the critical angle for total reflection for pure material became an important method to determine the scattering lengths of nuclei, since the neutron refractive index is related to the scattering lengths of the constituent atoms, as shown in equation 1.70. Over the past few years neutron reflection has been used to investigate the inhomogeneities across the interface, either is composition Referring to equation in 1.66 it is possible to derive the classical Fresnel coefficients as it is in optics, exploiting the continuity and the derivative conditions of the wave-function at the boundary. We obtain: the second relation is valid only for E i⊥ > V , thus the reflection and transmission coefficients are: The reflected and transmitted intensity is a function of the quantum mechanical probability amplitude squared, i.e., R = r 2 and T = t 2 . By using the expression 1.68, 1.69 and 1.73 the reflectivity R can be related to the wave vector transfer q and q c , as follows When q >> q c , equation 1.74 can be reduced to If we consider the wave-function within the surface Ψ 1 , substituting equation 1.69, a real solution for E i⊥ < V is found: The equation shows that even when the potential barrier is higher than the particle energy orthogonal to the surface, it can still penetrate to a characteristic depth of (q 2 c -q 2 ) 1/2 . This is an evanescent wave, which decay exponentially. It travels along the surface with a wave vector k and after a very short time it is ejected out of the bulk in the specular direction. The expression of the reflected intensity has been derived considering an ideal flat interface between materials, in general the interface may be rough over a large range of lengths scales. The surface roughness must be included in the reflectivity term, equation 1.75, in the approximation q >> q c , becomes: where σ is the characteristic length scale of the imperfection between the layers. The result from constructive and destructive interference of waves, which are reflected from the interface, are the Kiessig fringes. The intensity oscillations in the reflectivity can be observed and the periodicity can be related to the thickness d of the film via 2π/d. The result can be obtained considering the condition of the Bragg diffraction in the case of diffuse neutron scattering from roughness of the interface Chapter 2 Both for nuclear or elementary particle physics several types of detectors have been developed. All are based on the same fundamental principle, the transfer of part or all of the radiation energy to the detector matter where it is converted into some form of electrical signal An overview of several detectors used in the thermal neutron enegy range applications will be presented in the next section. A general description of operation principles for both gaseous and solid state detectors will follow, the main references are In general every type of neutron detector involves the coupling of a target material designed to carry out the neutron conversion, with a typical radiation detector as used in other disciplines, whose operation is described below. The cross section for neutron interactions strongly depends on the neutron energy as explained section 1.2. Different techniques have been developed for neutron detection in different energy regions. The attention will be focused on the slow (thermal and cold) neutron energy region, below 0.5 eV, which is the cadmium cutoff. When looking for nuclear reactions that could be useful in neutron detection, several factors must be considered: (i) The cross section for the reaction must be as large as possible and greater than the scattering cross section, so to keep the detector dimensions relatively small. Of particular importance for detectors in which the target material is incorporated as a gas. (ii) The target nuclide should be either of high isotopic abundance in the natural element or, economically accessible in case of artificial manufacture. (iii) The energy liberated in the reaction is determined by the Q-value. The higher the Q-value, the greater the energy given to the reaction products, the easier the discrimination against gamma-ray events using simple amplitude discrimination. (iv) The distance travelled by the reaction yields also concern the detector design, in terms of needful active volume to detect the released energy. The most popular reactions for the conversion of slow neutrons are 3 He(n, p), 6 Li(n, α) and 10 B(n, α). All these reactions have large positive Q-values and large cross sections at thermal energies. The cross sections The 10 B(n, α) can be written as: The two branches indicate that the reaction product 7 Li can be left either in its ground state or in its first excited state. In this case the 7 Li quickly returns to its ground state with the emission of a 0.48 MeV gamma ray. In either case, the Q-value of the reaction is very large (2.31 or 2.782 MeV) compared with the incoming energy of the slow neutron, thus the energy distributed to the reaction products is essentially the Q-value itself. This also means that the the incoming linear momentum is very small, and therefore the two reaction yields must show as well a total momentum of approximately zero. Namely, the products are emitted in exactly opposite directions and the energy will always be shared in the same manner between them. In the case of 6 Li(n, α) the reaction proceeds only to the ground state of the product and can be written as: The alpha particle and the tritium must be oppositely directed when the incoming neutron energy is low. With respect to 10 B the cross section is always lower until the resonance region (> 100 keV), figure The Q-value (764 keV) is lower than the previous two cases, but the cross section for this reaction is higher than the other two. Although 3 He is commercially available, it is lately much less available and more expensive The fission reaction can be used as the basis of slow neutron detectors as well. The cross sections of 233 U, 235 U and 239 Pu are, indeed, rather high at low neutron's energies. The main feature of the fission reaction is its extremely large Q-value (≈ 200 MeV) compared with the reactions mentioned above. Detectors based on fission reaction generally give output signals orders of magnitude larger compared with the competing interactions or incident gamma rays. A clear discrimination can be achieved. Almost all fissile nuclide are naturally alpha radioactive, thus any detector will exploit this kind of reaction will also show an output signal due to the alpha decay. However, the energy of the alpha particles is always much smaller compared with the one induced by a fission reaction. Also in this case these events can be easily discriminated by pulse amplitude discrimination. Radiative capture Another important mechanism for low energy neutrons, is the radiative capture. The target nucleus absorbs the neutrons and goes in an excited state, the de-excitation into the ground state most probably occurs via emission of γ-ray. Although it is possible to re-emit the neutron, for heavy nuclei and very low energy incident neutrons, this mode of decay of the compound on resonant state is suppressed Figure The isotopic compound of the target changes because the neutron is not reemitted, following the reaction, The excitation energy E x of A is simply S n + E n , the neutron separation energy plus the energy of the incident neutron. E x is typically 5-10 MeV for low-energy neutrons. Neutron capture reactions can be used to determine the energy and spin-parity assignments of the capturing states and the parities are correlated by the relation: For incident neutron in the thermal energies, only the s-wave capture will occur, for which I = I ± 1 2 and π = π. A very interesting radiative capture process is the one of Gadolinium; the cross section for thermal neutron capture is about 2.5 • 10 5 barns in 157 Gd, one of the largest nuclear cross section in any material. This isotope is 15.7% abundant in natural Gadolinium, and upon neutron absorption in Gd, γ-rays over a wide keV energy range, and a cascade of conversion electrons with an energy spectrum extending from 20-30 keV up to ∼250 keV, with a main peak at about 70 keV The 3 He(n, p) reaction with the highest cross section (5330 barns) among the interactions described here, is an attractive alternative for slow neutron detection. In a large detector one would expect each thermal neutron reaction to deposit the 764 keV for the sum of both tritium and proton. However, the range of these particles is comparable with the dimensions of a typical 3 He tube. The wall effect must be taken into account for such kind of counters. In figure The two steps correspond to the energy of the proton (573 keV) and the tritium (191 keV) respectively, while the continuum in the pulse height spectrum is due to the wall effect. Several considerations can be taken into account in the design of 3 He tube to minimize the wall effect. The simplest one is to enlarge the counter diameter as much as possible, so that most of interactions occur far from the walls. Another way to reduce the wall effect is to increase the pressure of the 3 He gas in order to reduce the range of the charged particles. One method of reducing the range is to add a small amount of a heavier gas to the 3 He to achieve an enhanced stopping power. Similar to the behaviour of boron-based detectors, the efficiency drops off with increasing neutron energy because of the decrease of the cross section. The probability of observing a pulse will be greater for those cases in which the neutron passes through the maximum distance in the gas. Often, a dead area is observed at the ends of a tube, where the charge collection is poor. Thus, the true active length may be less the the physical length of a tube. To give an idea of typical efficiencies, a 2 cm path length through a tube at 1 atm pressure corresponds to an efficiency of 25% for 0.025 eV neutrons. This value rise up to 76% for a tube pressurized to 5 atm. The rise time of the output pulse observed from either a 3 He tube or a BF 3 tube will depend both on the position of the neutron interaction and the orientation of the charged particle tracks with respect to the tube axis The natural abundance of 3 He on earth is about 1.4 parts per million of all helium. It is, therefore, manufactured through nuclear decay of tritium: 3 H(t 1/2 = 12.3y) → 3 He + e -+ ν e The main suppliers of 3 He are USA and Russia. The most common source comes from the US nuclear weapons program. The tritium is produced for use in nuclear warheads, over time it decays into 3 He and must be replaced for the maintenance of the warheads. The 3 He is a byproduct of the tritium supply. In the past decade the consumption of 3 He has grown rapidly. After the terroristic attacks of September 11, 2001, the federal government installed neutron detectors at the US border for homeland security reasons. Not only the shortage of 3 He [24], but also the demands of better performances in neutron science, see chapter 3, opened to the research for alternative solutions in order to replace the 3 He-based neutron detector technology. A lithium tube is not available, because a stable lithium-containing gas does not exist. Moreover the lithium is highly hygroscopic, thus it cannot be exposed to water vapor. Commercially available crystals are hermetically sealed in a thin canning material with an optical window provided on one face. Because of the high density of the material, crystal sizes need not be large for very efficient slow neutron detection. Nevertheless, the large Q-value of the lithium reaction offers some advantage in the case of discrimination against gamma-ray and other low-amplitude events. Moreover, the energy imparted to the yields is always the same, because the lithium reaction goes uniquely to the ground state of the product nucleus. The resulting pulse height distribution is therefore a single peak. Some applications of gas-filled detectors with solid lithium-based converters can be found Although the ideal lithium-based converter layer would be pure 6 Li metal, the highly reactive chemical properties of the metal limits its use. The stable compound LiF has been widely employed, model calculations The boron-based detectors can use the boron in the gaseous form, e.g., BF 3 or in the form of a solid film The discrimination against background is convenient for these kind of devices, because of the amplitude difference between real events and background signals. For instance, gamma rays interact primarily in the wall of the counter and create secondary electrons that may produce ionization in the gas. As the stopping power for electrons in gases is quite low, in general an electron will deposit only a small fraction of its energy. Thus, one expects that most of the gamma-ray interactions will have a low amplitude, left tail in figure The most popular fission detector is a ionization chamber with the inner surface coated with a fissile deposit. The pulse height spectrum expected in a fission chamber depends mainly on the fissile deposit thickness and on the geometry condition in which the fragments will be collected. If the deposit is thin compared to the fragments ranges, the fission fragment energy spectrum shows a double peak, with the light and heavy fragment distributions peaking at about 100 and 70 MeV, respectively. In case the deposit is made thicker to enhance detection efficiency, the energy loss of fragments within the deposit will reduce the average fragment energy and distort the shape of the measured distribution The dimensions of these kind of devices is similar to that of alpha particles detectors. The fission fragments average range is approximately half the range of 5 MeV α particles. The energy loss of the fission fragments is at its maximum at the beginning of the track, because the fragments have a very high initial charge, and it will decrease as the yields slow down. The exact opposite happens in the case of light particles, for which the rate of energy loss peaks at the end of the track (see section 2.2.1). In those detectors that do not fully stop the particle, fission A 2π detector is considered in order to get the fragments emitted from all direction by the deposit surface. Figure from fragments will deposit a larger fraction of their total energy than alpha particles or protons of the same range. The two fission fragments are always emitted in opposite directions for slow-neutroninduced fission, therefore detectors with a solid coating will detect only the single fragment directed toward the active area of the chamber. More complex geometry and design have been built to higher the detection efficiency by employing, for instance, multiple layers of fissile deposits. There have been also developed fission chambers capable to detect both fission fragments. A small overview of neutron detectors has been presented. The principles of operation for two classes of device will be now described: gaseous and solid state detectors. Note that the considerations on signal formation are valid for both cases. A boron-10-based detector and a Silicon-pin detector are subject of study of the thesis; we will, therefore, rely on the theoretical basis discussed in this chapter, when presenting the two detectors later. In general the passage of charge particles through matter can be characterized by two main features: a loss of energy by the particle and its change in momentum. These effects are mainly due to two processes, the electromagnetic interaction with the atomic electrons of the material and the elastic scattering from nuclei. Other processes include the nuclear reaction (in case of neutrons), the emission of Cherenkov radiation and bremsstrahlung. Compared with the atomic collision interactions, which occur almost continuously in matter, they are very rare The inelastic collisions with the electrons are mainly responsible for the energy loss of heavy particles in matters. Through these processes, energy is transferred from the particle to the atom giving rise to an ionization or excitation of the latter. Although in each collision only a small fraction of the particle's total kinetic energy is transferred, the number of collisions per unit path length is so large, that the cumulative energy loss is observed even in a relative thin layer of material. Elastic scattering from nuclei occurs frequently even if not as often as electron collision. In general the energy transferred in these processes is very little since the masses of the nuclei of most materials are typically large compared to the incident particles. As the inelastic collisions are statistical in nature, they occur with a certain quantum mechanical probability. Nevertheless, the fluctuations in the total energy loss are small, because of the large numbers of collisions. It is possible, hence, to work with the average energy loss per unit path length; usually one refers to it as the stopping power or dE dx . First it was derived classically by Bohr, later by Bethe and Bloch using quantum mechanics. The obtained formula is: For the full derivation see where E 0 is the initial energy of the particle. In figure Like heavy charged particles, electrons and positrons suffer an energy loss due to the atomic inelastic collisions when passing through matter. However, because of their small mass an additional energy loss mechanism should be considered: the emission of electromagnetic radiation arising from the scattering in the electric field with nucleus (bremsstrahlung). This radiation is produced by the deceleration of an electron (or positron) when deflecting by the electrical attraction of an atomic nucleus. The total energy loss of electron and positron is composed of two parts: The first term in equation 2.5 refers to the bremsstrahlung radiation energy loss, its contribution can be considered negligible below a few MeV. The loss of energy by radiation is comparable to or greater than the collision-ionization loss above a few 10's of MeV, as shown in figure As a fast charged particle passes through a gas volume, it interacts with it by ionizing and exciting the molecules along its path. As shown in section 2.2.1, when a neutral molecule is ionized, the resulting positive ion and free electron, the so called ion-pair, represents the basic constituent of the electrical signal employed in a gaseous detector. The mobility is the ability of charged particles to move through a medium under the effect of an electric field, E, with a velocity v: Due to the greater mobility of electron and ions, a gas is the obvious medium to use for the collection of ionization from radiation. Typically the electron mobility is 1000 times greater than that for ions. The basic configuration of a gas device consists of a container, a cylinder can be considered for simplicity, with conducting walls and a thin end window. The cylinder is filled with a suitable gas, usually a noble gas. Along the axis is suspended a conductive wire to which is applied a positive voltage relative to the walls. A radial electric field is established: where r is the radial distance from axis, b is the inside radius of the cylinder and a is the radius of central wire. When a radiation penetrates the cylinder, a certain number of election-ion pairs will be created. Directly, if the radiation is a charged particle or through secondary reactions if the radiation is neutral. Regardless of the detailed processes involved, the practical quantity of interest is the total number of ion-pairs created along the track of the radiation. Both the excitation and ionization potential for several gases are listed in table 2.1. The total number of ion-pair, n pair , can be expressed by: where ∆E is the charged particle energy loss, and w i is the effective average energy to produce one pair The positive ions can also collide with a negative one, thus both ions are neutralized. The understanding of these mechanisms is also important to choose the gas mixture. Despite the presence of electronegative gases, e.g., O 2 and CO 2 , strongly diminish the amount of electron charge collected, it has been, also, observed that a small amount of CO 2 does not affect significantly the detector performances and helps to stop more efficiently the ionizing particles. On the other side, noble gases such as He, Ar, etc., have negative electron affinities and are a suitable choice for application in gaseous detectors Applied voltage (linear scale) Charge collected (log scale) The first flat region in figure As the voltage increases the electric field will be strong enough to accelerate free electrons to an energy adequate to ionize the gas molecules in the cylinder. The electrons created in these secondary ionizations are accelerated as well and are capable to produce more ionization and so on. The effect is known as ionization avalanche or cascade. From equation 2.7 the electric field is stronger near the anode, this avalanche occurs very quickly and almost completely within a few radii of the anode wire. In this region the number of ion-pairs in the avalanche is directly proportional to the number of primary electrons. The current amplification is proportional, with a multiplication factor depending on the applied voltage. A detector operating in this domain is a proportional chamber. The output signals are much larger than that from an ionization chamber, indeed the multiplication factor can go up to 10 6 , but proportionality with the original radiation is still preserved. The proportional chamber is widely used for neutron detection or for low energy X-ray applications. A further voltage increasing leads to the loss the proportionality, indeed, the amount of ionization created through multiplication becomes large enough that the space charge effect deforms the electric field. This is defined as the region of limited proportionality. Higher voltage values produce discharge in the gas, instead of a localized avalanche along the anode wire, many multiplication processes occur and spread out along the entire length of the electrode. The secondary avalanches are generated by photons emitted by de-exciting molecules of the gas. The output signals are saturated and the information about the energy of the initial event is completely lost. The discharge can be stopped using a quenching gas, with a low ionization potential and a complex molecular structure, that can absorb these photons. Devices working at these voltages are called Geiger-Mueller counters. They can be employed only as simple counter of radiation-induced events and cannot be applied in direct radiation spectroscopy because all information on the amount of energy deposited by the incident radiation is lost. Above the Geiger region a continuous discharge occurs, and it is not useful for any application. Based on the principles of a proportional counter, in 1968 Charpak where V is the applied voltage, s is the wire spacing and C the anode-cathode capacitance. L is defined as the anode to cathode gap distance and d as the anode wire diameter, if L s d, then C is given by Equations 2.9 and 2.10 are usually a good approximation for a real MWPC, despite the assumptions are not met in a real chamber. Note that, since d s the value given by equation 2.10 is always smaller than the capacitance of the plane condenser with the same surface (2 s/L). In general it can be seen that the capacitance is quickly decreasing with the wire spacing, while it does not depend much on the wire diameter. Near the anode wires the field takes on a 1/r dependence similar to the single wire cylindrical chamber described above. If electrons and ions are now liberated in the constant field region they will drift along the field lines toward the closest anode wire and opposing cathode. When reaching the high field region, the electrons will be accelerated to produce an avalanche. The positive ions released in the multiplication process induce a negative signal on the anode, the neighbouring wires are also affected, however the signals induced are positive and of a small amplitude. The signal from one anode plane gives information on one coordinate, the second coordinate may be obtained by adding a second plane whose wires are perpendicular to the first, or arranging the cathode as a series of strips perpendicularly to the wires. In the case of neutron detectors, to generate charged particles some conversion mechanism must occur. However, not all the neutron capture reaction can lead to yields that, carrying hundreds of keV, produce enough charge to be amplified by standard devices. In order to increase the ion-pair production it is possible to exploit the gas multiplication process, as pointed out in section 2.2.2. The average energy of the electron between collisions increases with the electric field, thus, it is possible to set a threshold value for the field above which this mechanism take place. In typical gases, at atmospheric pressure, this value is of the order of 10 7 V/m. The multiplication of ionization is known as Townsend avalanche, and is described by the first Townsend coefficient α. The number of electrons per path ds is given by The coefficient is determined by the excitation and ionization cross section of the electrons that have acquired sufficient energy in the field. It is zero when the electric field is below the threshold value and typically increases very quickly with the increasing of the electric field. If the gas density φ is changed while keeping the distribution of the collision energy (ε) fixed, then α changes proportionally with the density because all the linear dimensions in the gas scale with the mean free collision length. The amplification factor on a wire is calculated by integrating equation 2.11 between the point where the field is just enough to start the avalanche (s min ) and the wire radius a: where n and n 0 are respectively the final and initial number of electrons in the avalanche; dE/ds is the electric field gradient. The electric field near a wire whose radius is small compared with the distance to other electrodes is given by the charge per unit length, λ, as a function of the radius: By inserting now equation 2.13 into 2.12, one obtains: The ratio n/n 0 is usually called gain, by assuming α to be proportional to E it is possible to derive an expression for G = n/n 0 β can be related to the average energy e∆V required to produce one more electron. By solving the equation 2.12, the potential difference between r = a and r = s min is obtained: This gives rise to a number Z of generations of doubling the electrons in the avalanche Z = [Φ(a) -Φ(s min )]/∆V which means G = 2 Z . The expression of the gas gain 2.15 can be then written as: The constant β has a physical meaning of the inverse of the average potential required to produce one electron in the avalanche multiplied by ln 2. Considering now the relation between the minimal field E min and the gas density ρ to be E min (ρ) = E min (ρ 0 )(ρ/ρ 0 ), with ρ 0 the normal gas density. We finally obtain a relation for the gas gain proportional to the voltage and the charge density: In a proportional counter, as the one described in 2.2.2, the charge density λ is related to the voltage V by Equation 2.18 can be expressed, in the so-called Diethorn's formula, by substituting this term: Experimentally G can be measured varying ρ/ρ 0 , the wire radius a and V / ln(b/a). The gain variation with the gas density is of particular interest since typically this kind of chambers are operated at atmospheric pressure and the gas density changes proportionally to it. Indeed, from equation 2.18, it can be observed that a small relative change dρ/ρ of the density results in a change of amplification of: In practical cases the factor that multiplies dρ/ρ ranges between 5 and 8. The fractional variation of the gas pressure causes a global variation of the gain typically 5 to 8 times larger than this. Nevertheless the gas pressure can be well monitored, and these variations can be corrected. Referring to equation 2.18 we denote that the gain depends on the local charge density of the wire λ. A relative change dλ/λ will modify the amplification by the following factor: The two multiplying factors in the parentheses are of the same order of magnitude and their sum is approximately of 10-20. The total relative variations of the charge density cause, then, a local relative variations of the gain that are in general 10-20 times larger. The moving charges in a chamber give rise to electrical signals on the electrodes that can be read out by an amplifier. The electrons created in the avalanche close to the wire move to the wire surface within a time much less than a nanosecond, thus resulting in a short signal pulse. The ions, instead, move away from the wire with a velocity (v ∝ μ) about 1000 times smaller, which result in a signal with a long tail (with a duration on the order of several microseconds). The movement of these charges induce a signal both on the wire and on the cathode, which can be divided into several parts for the purpose of coordinate measurements The electric field on the metal surface is given by: and the surface charge density is σ(x, y) = ε 0 E z (x, y). The integration of σ(x, y) gives the total charge induced on the metal plate: and it is independent of the distance of the charge q from the metal plate. We consider now the plate segmented into strips of width w, and each one is grounded, a scheme is shown in figure 2.12b. The surface charge density can be integrated over the area of the strip, from equation 2.23, to obtain the charge induced in one strip: This charge depends now on the distance z 0 of the point charge from the metal surface. Considering now that the charge moves with a velocity v according to z 0 (t) = z 0 -vt, it is possible to find a time-dependent induced Q 1 (z 0 (t)) and therefore an induced current of One observes that the movement of a charge induces a current which flows between the electrode and the ground. This method of calculating signals is the same for more realistic geometries, but become more complex as well. Some theorems are introduced to allow a simpler way of calculating signals induced on grounded electrodes. We refer to 'metal' electrode to meet the condition that the charges on the electrode can move and that the electrode surface is equipotential. N metal electrodes are set to voltages V n , the potential is uniquely defined by the conditions that Φ(x) satisfies the Laplace equation and that Φ(x) = V n on the electrode surfaces. The voltages and the charges on the electrodes are related by the capacitance matrix of the electrode system as The capacitance matrix is defined by the electrode geometry and for the capacitance matrix elements c nm hold the relations: By inverting this relations and multiplying it by equation 2.27, a relation called reciprocity theorem is obtained: Together with this relation, we consider another one which concern the sum of all the charges of an electrode system. An electrode surrounding the N metal electrodes is taken into account. By applying Gauss law to the volume between the electrodes, the sum of all charges within this volume is equal to ε 0 times the integral of E(x) over the surface surrounding it. As this integral over a metal electrode is equal to the charge of this electrode, one finds that the sum of all charges on the metal electrodes is equal to the sum of all charges in the volume between the electrodes. In the case there are no charges in the volume between the electrodes, the sum of Q n on the electrodes must be zero for any applied voltages. Considering the capacitance matrix we find the relation Note that the capacitance matrix elements c nm are different from the capacitances C nm . They are indeed related to the voltage difference between circuit nodes. The relation between the two can be expressed as The current signal read from electrodes arises from the motion of the charge carriers and not from their physical collection. This applies both for gas-filled detectors and for semiconductor detectors. The output pulse begins to form as soon as the carriers start their motion to the electrodes and it finishes once the last of the carriers reach its collecting electrode. Thus the pulse is fully developed during this motion and the time evolution of the signal is of primary importance to understand the timing properties of detectors We consider a set of three grounded electrodes in the presence of a point charge Q 0 = q at position x and we imagine that the net charge is sitting on an infinitely small metal electrode. In total the system consists of four metal electrodes. A sketch is illustrated in figure Choosing another configuration, figure 2.13(b), where the charge q is removed and the first electrode is set to voltage V w (V 1 = V w ) while keeping the other two electrodes grounded, the above relation becomes: V 0 is the potential of the uncharged small electrode for this configuration. Since an infinitely small uncharged electrode is the same as having no electrode, V 0 is the potential at point x when the point charge q is removed. We refer to V 0 = ψ 1 (x) as weighting potential of electrode 1, thus the induced charge Q 1 is given by In case the point charge q is moving along the trajectory x(t), as shown in figure We call E n (x) = -∇ψ n (x) the weighting field of electrode n as stated in Ramo's theorem It is possible to conclude that this induced charge is a conservative quantity, indeed, it depends only on the end points of the trajectory and is independent of the specific path. e.g., if a pair of charges q, -q is produced at point x 0 at t = t 0 and they arrive at two different position x 1 , x 2 respectively, after a time t 1 , the resulting charge on electrode n is given by In the case the charge q moves to the surface of electrode n and -q moves to the surface of some other electrode, the total induced charge on electrode n is equal to q, since ψ n = V w on electrode n and ψ n = 0 on the others electrodes. When both charges move to other electrodes, the total induced charge on electrode n is zero. Therefore, it is possible to conclude that when all the charges have arrived at different electrodes, the total induced charge on electrode n is equal to the charge that has arrived at that specific electrode. Note that it also leads to the conclusion that the current signals on electrodes that do not receive any charge are strictly bipolar. For simplicity we consider a planar electrode geometry operating in ionization mode, see section 2.2.2, the electric field inside the chamber is E = V w /d. If N pairs are produced by a charged particle, then the -q electrons will drift to one anode, while the +q ions to the opposite one, and the charge produced is q = eN . A scheme is shown in figure ) ) The current will be the same but with opposite sign on the other electrode. Note that both the charged particles, positive and negative, give the same contribution to the induced current. The total induced charge on the specific electrode can be calculated following equation 2.37, in this case one obtains: If the ion-pair is produced at distance z 0 from one of the two plane than t e and t i can be rewritten as t e = (d -z 0 )/v e and t i = (z 0 )/v i . Substituting these values in equation 2.41 we obtain: This is the Shockley-Ramo theorem, whereby the total induced charge on the electrodes is equal to the charge that has arrived at that electrode. A sketch of both curves for induced current and induced charge as a function of time is depicted in figure Considering now a wire chamber with cylindrical geometry operating in proportional mode, we will observe that the main contribution to the signal on electrodes is due to positive ions. A scheme of the geometry is illustrated in figure The electric field in a cylindrical geometry is given by equation 2.7. In typical chamber b a, so that the electric field rises in a region close to the wire, the multiplication region. Therefore, most of the ion-pairs are formed close to the anode wire. Considering a voltage V 0 = 1000V, a wire radius a = 10μm and a tube of radius b = 4mm, an electric field of 170 kV/cm is obtained. Given q = eN • G, where G is the gain due to the proportional mode operation (section 2.3), the total charge created by the avalanche process and by considering that it take place at a distance d = 2μm from the wire anode, the charge induced on the anode can be calculated using the Schokley-Ramo theorem (eq. 2.37): The contribution of electrons and ions can be addressed separately. In the first case q i = -q, while for the ions the charge will be positive (q i = +q). As we have As expected, almost all the signal is due to the ions contribution. In a more general case, one can calculate the sum of the signals induced on several electrodes either using the weighting fields and induced currents for the individual electrodes and add the currents or the weighting fields can be calculated for the entire set of electrodes by setting all of them to voltage V w and grounding the remaining ones. Referring to figure 2.17 we assume that one electrode encloses the others. ψ tot , sum of all induced currents, is defined by setting all electrodes to potential V w . This results in ψ tot = V w in the considered volume and consequently a weighting field of E tot (x) = 0. It is possible to conclude that the sum of all induced currents on grounded electrodes is zero at any time if there is one electrode enclosing all the others. Let us consider now a plane of anode wires situated between two plane electrodes facing each other at distance D, as in case of a MWPC, the scheme is shown in The wire radii (in general 10 -30 μm) are small compared to the distance between the wires and the distance between the wires and the cathode, D, typically of a few millimetres. This results in a coaxial electric field close to the wire, as mentioned in previous sections. We set the wires to potentials V n which results in charges q n on the wires, determined by the capacitance matrix through q n = N m=1 c nm V m . As depicted in figure so at a point with distance r 1 and r 2 to two wires carrying charge q 1 and q 2 , the electric field is: In case r 1 r 2 the field is dominated by the charge on this wire as long as the charge q 1 and q 2 are of similar magnitude. It is possible to conclude that the electric fields at distance r from wire n is approximately coaxial and its magnitude is given by This is valid in case r < D. Under these assumptions the trajectory of the avalanche ions is: where a is the wire radius and μ is the ions mobility (v = μE). Knowing the ion trajectory r(t) we need to calculate the weighting field of the wires in order to find the induced current signals. The weighting field of the wire 2, where the avalanche takes place, is found by setting the wire to voltage V w and grounding all others wires and electrodes. That is a charge q 2 = c 22 V w on this wire, and the magnitude of the weighting field in the coaxial approximation is Thus the current induced by N tot ions of charge e 0 , moving away from the wire surface is Note that the signal on the avalanche wire is negative because from equation 2.28 c 22 > 0. The weighting field of the closest wire (electrode 3) is given by setting wire 3 to potential V w and grounding all other wires, thus q 3 = c 23 V w and the current signal is I 3 = -N tot e 0 4πε 0 c 23 t+t 0 . The cross-induced signal has the same shape as the signal on the avalanche wire but it is positive because c 2n < 0 with n 2, see equation 2.28. The other wires have the same polarity and shape with their relative amplitudes c 24 , c 25 , etc. Using the relations in 2.31 we can express the relative signal amplitudes respect to the capacitances C nm : The amplitude of the cross-induced signal from the avalanche wire to wire n is given by the mutual capacitance between the avalanche wire and wire n divided by the sum of all mutual capacitances of the avalanche wire to the other electrodes As the two cathode planes completely enclose the wires the sum of all capacitance matrix elements N m=1 c nm is zero. The sum of all wires signals thus has a negative polarity, if the same voltage U is set for each of them, the characteristic time constant from equation 2.47 becomes: When the wires are enclosed by the two cathode planes, like in figure N tot e 0 4πε 0 As mentioned above it is possible to localize the avalanche in the direction perpendicular to the sense wire subdividing the cathode into a series of strips or pads. In this case the weighting field of the cathode strip is calculated by setting the strip to potential V w while grounding all other strips and wires. The method to derive the expression for the weighting field and induced signal can be found in detail in where λ = x/D is the distance of the infinitesimal strip from the avalanche position. The expression for Γ (λ) can be calculated by investigating the weighting field of an infinitesimal cathode strip, and can be found at The parameter K 3 depends on the chamber geometry, while K 1 and K 2 are uniquely defined by K 3 . Thus for a strip of finite width w centred at position λ, the signal I(t, λ, w) is obtained by integrating equation 2.54: where P 0 (λ) is the pad response function and depends on the strip width w and on the parameters K 1 , K 2 , K 3 . It determines the fraction of the total cathode signal induced in the strip as a function of the distance between the centre of the strip and the avalanche position in the cathode plane. The strip width w and the anode-cathode distance D have to be chosen such that the typical pulse height induced on two or three adjacent strips falls into the dynamic range of the readout electronics. If the limitation in position resolution along the wire is given by the electronic pulse-height measurement, the best position resolution is then given for a strip width near the cathode-anode distance, namely w ≈ D. Semiconductor, or solid state, detectors are based on crystalline semiconductor materials, typically silicon and germanium. The basic operating principle of solid state detectors is analogous to gas ionization devices. However, instead of a gas, the medium is a solid semiconductor material. The passage of ionizing radiation creates electron-hole pairs, instead of electron-ion pairs, which drift and produce signal when an electric field is applied. The semiconductor benefits from a small energy gap between their valence and conduction bands One of the main characteristics that identifies the semiconductor materials is the small gap between the electronic conduction and valence band. e.g., in case of silicon the amount of energy needed to excite an electron from the valence band into the conduction band is E g = 1.12 eV. This is in contrast to insulators that have an energy gap of E g > 5 eV and conductors that have their valence and conduction bands in contact. The hole left by an electron in the valence band under some excitation has a positive electric charge. If an electric field is applied, the passage of electrons from the valence into the conduction band, generates holes moving in the valence band in a opposite direction to that of electrons in the conduction band. The motion will be the combination of a random thermal velocity and a drift velocity parallel to the direction of the field. Since electrons move in an opposite direction to the electric field vector, holes move in the same direction as the electric field, as expected for a point positive charge. The charge carriers drift velocity is proportional to the applied electric field through the mobility as follows: (2.57) where the quantity μ e and μ h are the electron and hole mobility, respectively. In the case of silicon hole mobility is smaller than the electron mobility (μ h = 450 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , μ e = 1350 cm 2 V -1 s -1 ) where q is the electronic charge. At a given temperature, an equilibrium between generation and recombination of free electron and holes is established. Crystals are not perfect, but present defects and various impurities, which reduce the mean free carrier lifetime. The addition of electrically active donor and acceptor impurity atoms forms n-type and p-type conductivity semiconductors. They have an excess of electron and holes, respectively. At temperature T , the product of concentrations of electrons and holes remains constant and is given by where n int (cm -3 ) is the intrinsic carrier concentration, e.g., at T = 300 K in silicon n int ≈ 1.45 × 10 10 cm -3 . It can be expressed as: where N c is the number of states in the conduction band and N v is the number of states in the valence band, E g the energy gap at 0 kelvin and K is the Boltzmann constant. N c and N v can be calculated from Fermi-Dirac statistics and each vary as T 3/2 . A is a constant independent of temperature. Since the semiconductor is neutral, the positive and negative charge densities must be equal so that N D + p = N A + n, where N D and N A are the donor and acceptor concentrations. In a n-type material, where N A = 0 and n p, the electron density is therefore n = N D and the electrical conductivity is determined almost exclusively by the flow of electrons. The resistivity, ρ or conductivity, σ, can be calculated from the dopant concentration and the mobility of the majority carrier as: The p -n Junction When a n-type region in a silicon crystal is put adjacent to the p-type region in the same crystal, a p -n junction is formed. Basically, such a junction is built by diffusing acceptor impurities into a n-type silicon crystal or vice versa donors in a p-type silicon crystal. For instance, a p + -n junction results from an acceptor density on the p-type side being much larger than the donor density on the n-type side. The formation of a p -n junction creates a special zone about the interface between the two materials. This region is created as the result of the diffusion of electron from n-type material into p-type material and diffusion of holes in the other direction. The diffusion is the consequence of the motion of carriers from regions of high concentration to regions of low concentration. Thus, the diffusing electrons fill up the hole in the p-region while the diffusing holes capture electrons on the nregion. Since the p-side is injected with extra electrons, it becomes negative and the n-region becomes positive. This create an electric field gradient across the junction. The space-charge region is called depletion region. The shape of the electrostatic potential (Ψ ), the electric field and the width of the depletion zone of a function can be obtained by solving the Poisson equation: where ε is the dielectric constant. The equation 2.63 can be solved in onedimension, for an abrupt junction with a charge density ρ(x) given by: where x n and x p are the depletion length on the n-side and p-side, respectively, a sketch is shown in figure By integrating equation 2.63, one obtains the electric field E generating from the charges separation, considering as boundary condition The electric field is only due to the different concentrations of electrons and holes at the junction, when no external voltage is applied. The diffusion process will move n-type material electrons into p-type material and holes in opposite direction. This process is slowed down by the generation of an electric field due to the ionized dopants, which pushes electrons back to the n-type side and holes to the p-type side, until a dynamical equilibrium is reached. Free charges can be generated in excess of the equilibrium by ionizing particles traversing the diode in this depletion region. For instance, in silicon the energy required to produce an electron-hole pair is E ion = 3.62 eV. The charges produced by ionization in the depletion zone are separated and induce an electron hole signal. The integration of equation 2.66 leads to the calculation of the electrostatic potential. We define the integration constant Ψ (-x p ) = Ψ p and Ψ (x n ) = Ψ n , one obtains the electrostatic potential as shown in figure The contact potential is defined by: e.g., for silicon at T = 200 K is ≈ 0.3-0.6 V. The depletion depths are calculated by imposing the continuity of V 0 , the potential at x = 0 [Ψ n (0) = Ψ p (0)] and using equation 2.65: (2.69) and Summing equations 2.69 and 2.70 one obtains the total depth of the depletion region X: Note that without external polarization, the depletion depth is typically a few microns. The capability of the junction for particle detection is strongly limited, therefore an external voltage between the n-and p-regions is applied. V 0 will be replaced by V 0 + V b in equations 2.69 and 2.70. The depletion zone grows for increasing values of V b until it reaches the total thickness of the detector. Silicon detectors can be used to detect neutral particles via measurement of indirect ionization for photons, or secondary radiation for neutrons. Typically the active area of the detector, the silicon component, is coupled to a neutron converter layer, in which the neutron interacts giving rise to secondary heavy charged particles either via nuclear reactions or as energy recoils from elastic scattering of neutrons on nuclei. These secondary charged particles generated in the converter must have a range larger than the distance between the interaction point in the converter and the converter layer-detector interface, in order to reach the silicon layer where they deposit the energy. Charge carriers are then generated in silicon producing a signal. Different converters means different mechanism of charged secondary particles generation, the choice depends on the neutron energy. i.e., thermal neutrons have large nuclear cross section, thus converter as 10 B, 113 Cd, 155 Gd, 157 Gd, 6 LiF are in general the most used for neutrons of these energies. However, the neutron capture reactions have a cross section dropping strongly for higher energies of neutrons, e.g., fast neutrons. Another type of converter has to be used, and therefore, another mechanism of charged particles generation has to be exploited. Fast neutrons can be detected via energetic recoils produced from their elastic scattering on nuclei of a converter. Converters with high hydrogen content and with a restraint amount of heavier atoms must be selected. In the case of thermal neutrons the heavy charged particles produced in the converter material have their direction of emission kinematically constrained. The reaction products are emitted in opposite directions, hence, only one can cross the converter layer-detector interface into silicon. The range, R i (E), of travelling of the secondary particles can be calculated from SRIM where S i = N -nN i σ i R i P and the factor P represents the total or integrated geometrical probability that any charge particle generated in the converter reaches the detector and produce a signal. Referring to figure 2.20, the probability P can be calculated. Considering A the interaction point of neutron conversion, the product particles are emitted in a cone of opening angle α and a particle emitted at this angle stops after the range R in the converter when its energy reaches zero. If the distance from the point A and the cone basis is x, one has α = arccos(x/R). The solid angle of particle emission is then: The probability that a particle emitted at point A with a range R in the converter reaches the interface between the converter layer and the silicon detector at a distance x is, then, the ratio between the solid angle, SA and the total sphere solid angle, SA sphere = 4π: Introducing the variable η = x/R and integrating from η = 0, origin of the particle at x = 0, up to η = 1, origin of the particle at x = R, we obtain: On the contrary, the probability that any charged particle generated in the converter goes in a opposite direction of the interface can be expressed as: Equation 2.76 is needed in the case of a silicon detector inserted in between two converter layers. The detection efficiency increases with increasing converter thickness because more neutrons are captured in the converter material. Nevertheless, the detection efficiency starts to decrease at a value, d o , of the thickness, when the range of the charged particles cannot reach the detector active area. To calculate it, we consider the detection efficiency, dP det , of a neutron by a system as the one shown in figure where μ dx is the probability for the interaction of a neutron with nucleus in the converter material at depth x. The exponential term represents the probability that a neutron will traverse a path of length x without interaction. 1/2(1 -(d -x)/R) is the probability that the products of the neutron reaction will escape into the silicon sensor. It can be expressed as the ratio between the solid angle defined by the cone of emission and the total solid angle (equation 2.76). Integrating equation 2.77 over the converter thickness, d, we find Imposing the condition dP det /dd = 0 the optimal thickness d o can be found: Chapter 3 Neutron Scattering Science: beyond the state-of-the-art The increasing complexity in science investigations driven by technological advances is reflected in the studies of neutron scattering science which enforces a diversification and an improvement of experimental tools, from the instrument design to the detector performance. It calls as well for more advanced data analysis and modelling. The operation of new generation, high-intensity neutron sources is therefore necessary; like the Spallation Neutron Source The high brightness opens up the possibility of studying currently not solved problems. Interesting samples are, indeed, often available only in limited quantities and may be unstable over the time. Furthermore, smaller samples tend to be more homogeneous, increasing the precision of the results obtained and making possible more advanced and conclusive investigations Neutron sources are low-brilliance particle sources compared to the electron or photon sources. The reactor technology, developed in the 1940s and 1950s, reached a plateau in neutron performance in the 1970s with the construction of ILL where ν is the repetition rate. This structure will open the possibility of using long-wavelength neutrons with an unprecedented brightness. This feature will allow instruments to achieve a wider dynamic range, bispectral beams and tunable resolution as needed. The investigations of real-world sample in real-world conditions often require demanding or extreme conditions, i.e., high magnetic fields, low or high temperatures and pressures. These conditions can be achieved through massive sample environment set-ups that limit the available volume for the sample itself. In order to investigate smaller samples, larger intensity is required. ESS with the high brightness, long pulses structure and the real world capabilities, is of crucial importance to push forward the present limitation in the neutron scattering science, allowing a wider and a clearer investigation of the structure and dynamics of materials. Soft condensed matter is an interdisciplinary area of research regarding system that respond to weak external stress or thermal fluctuations. It includes the study of polymers, surfactants, gels, foams and many other biological materials. During the last decades of the twentieth century, neutron scattering has played an important role in this area, based on the fact that neutrons scatter differently from hydrogen than from deuterium. This distinguishability, unique to neutrons, enable to label various part of soft matter systems so that their structure and dynamics can be investigated. Moreover, the cold neutrons provide simultaneous access to the relevant length (micro and mesoscopic scale) and time scales (10 -9 -1 s) useful to soft matter research. Soft matter can be easily deformed through applications of weak external stresses or thermal fluctuations, and therefore, a non-invasive characterization is mandatory. It is important to understand the equilibrium and non-equilibrium properties of soft condensed matter not only in a well defined model system, but also in everyday life and industrial applications. The typical techniques to study soft matter are small angle neutron scattering (SANS), reflectometry, neutron spin-echo spectroscopy and quasi-elastic neutron spectroscopy. In order to make progress on this front, it is necessary to probe smaller volumes within larger and complex samples, over a wide range of length scales and with high temporal resolution. For example, time-resolved studies are needed to detect how surfactant molecules self-assemble into micelles and how such structures transform into different shape The investigation of magnetic and electronic phenomena is a crucial activity for both basic and applied research. It represents, indeed, a key point to improve fundamental knowledge about quantum matter and identifies the static and dynamic properties in a broad range of materials, i.e., magnetic hetero-structure, molecular magnet and magnetic nano-particles that can be used in advanced technologies devices. The long pulse flexibility of ESS will allow to use the high neutron flux, in order to carry out higher precision measurements, and providing simultaneous coverage of length and time scales. The possibility to exploit the polarized neutron scattering with an high neutron flux, will provide quantitative information unavailable with any other measurement technique. The direct microscopic information obtained by using neutron spin as a quantitative probe makes neutron scattering very useful for benchmarking theoretical models against experimental results The optimization of the instruments for small samples, i.e., bispectral chopper spectrometer, cold-crystal analyser spectrometer, will be a key component together with the need of high brightness neutron source. A variety of these nano-sized structures can be observed using vertical reflectometer or general purpose polarised SANS instrument while dynamics can be probed using cold chopper spectrometer The mechanistic study of complex biological systems at atomic and molecular scale is of high impact on understanding modern life science, from healthy ageing to food security. Neutrons have many advantages as a probe for structure and dynamics in biological systems. The biological samples are typically hydrogen-rich materials, and they can be easily damaged by X-ray or electron-scattering techniques. The capability of neutrons in isotope labelling and non-destructive mechanism can be exploited for these kind of investigations. Nowadays, the most limitations are given by the relatively low source brightness and the number of appropriate neutron instruments for biological samples. A bright source, like ESS, will allow the investigation of small samples, moreover the long neutron pulses are well suited for several neutron techniques relevant for biological systems. A macromolecular diffractometer (NMX) addresses the challenge in studying systems with smaller crystals or larger unit cell volumes. Neutron crystallography offers, indeed, the possibility to determine the positions of hydrogen atoms in the complex structure of proteins. The determination of these hydrogen positions is crucial in many biological processes, i.e., enzyme mechanisms protein-ligand interactions or proton transport across membranes, not only for chemical interest but for applications in pharmacy and industrial engineering. The instrument length allows a wavelength frame of ∼ 1.8 Å and, thanks to the Time of Flight method, it is possible to disentangle the signal from the background while making full use of the integrated intensity of the long pulse. An adequate and flexible detector system must be employed to fulfil the sub-millimetre spatial resolution requirements. The possibility to change both the sample-detector distance and the 2θ angle at the center of the detector allows the reflections from larger unit cells to be better separated on the detector plane. A suitable technology is under development at ESS Energy materials such as polymer solar cells, batteries, fuel cells and thermoelectric materials, are rich of light atoms, i.e., oxygen, lithium and hydrogen. The high penetration depth of the neutron can be used to investigate the structural and dynamic processes responsible for relevant macroscopic properties in these materials. The advantage of isotopic contrast provided by neutron-based techniques and their sensitivity to light atoms are fundamental characteristic for carrying mechanistic studies, which are difficult to perform with X-ray scattering techniques. In the case of fuel cells, of great interest in a number of energy end-use sectors, from electric vehicles to power plants, the main challenge is to optimize their energy efficiency. A tunable resolution in space and time is required to have a better understanding of the relationship between proton diffusion and chemical structure. At ESS will be possible to exploit the long pulse structure to make versatile instruments, i.e., vertical reflectometer, thermal powder diffractometer, bispectral powder diffractometer, that can cover and extend spatial domains needed for the efficiency optimization of fuel cells. Batteries are the most widely available solution to energy storage in a large range of applications. Many of these devices are based on the ion exchange and the ionic conductivity properties of lithium and hydrogen, suitable features for using neutron-based techniques. Time-dependent studies can be performed using pulsed monochromatic powder diffractometer and multi-purpose imaging instruments, to-gether with the bispectral powder diffractometer. Diffusion mechanism can be directly investigated by quasi-elastic neutron scattering on the weakly scattering lithium ions. This kind of experiments can be performed using chopper spectrometers, while dynamic properties can be probed using neutron spin-echo spectrometer. The use of neutron scattering is widely used for engineering materials and geosciences, from application in industrial research to analysis of geomaterials. Neutron scattering can provide information about the composition, microstructure and stresses in materials, in ambient conditions and as a function of different external parameters. The deep penetration capability of neutron is of primary importance allowing to carry out non-destructive investigations of inner structure, properties and mechanisms locally within bulk materials and complex systems with high precision and sensitivity. One of the most challenging features that characterize these kind of investigations is the complex sample environment which reproduce realistic or extreme operating environments of the samples. Typically they are multi-component systems with sensitivities to different physical and thermal interactions, in contrast to the well defined and isolated samples used for fundamental studies. A key component of such research will be the possibility to combine several methods as diffraction, SANS and imaging. Moreover the high brightness of the neutron beam will enable to analyse smaller samples respect to the existing facilities, or to analyse large samples with larger spatial resolution under more extreme conditions, over shorter time scales and with higher precision. Higher spatial resolution, down to the sub-millimetre region, is needed for further progress in monitoring residual stress, i.e., high pressure and high temperatures conditions, and for detecting diffusion and reactions at interfaces in metals. High intensity will allow in situ real time experiments, and investigation of fast, timedependent phenomena with isotope sensitivity. The suitable instruments are multipurpose imaging and polarized SANS instruments together with diffractometers, which allow the study of structure property relationships in mineral phases as well as the physical properties of multi-components fluids. The increased performance expected for the new neutron sources and the resulting extent of scientific studies drive the development of design and operation for the instruments as well. As pointed out in the previous section, many of the problems that ESS will face require the measurement of structures and/or dynamics over several length or time scales. It is crucial to be able to adapt the resolution and bandwidth of the measurement to the sample. Such flexibility of instrument performance takes advantage of the long-pulse concept foreseen at ESS. Indeed, the resolution can be set by controlling the opening time of a pulse-shaping chopper, instead of hardwiring the resolution into the moderator line shape as it is done for instruments at a short-pulse source. Furthermore the full time-frame is accessible by using the repetition-rate and the wavelength-frame multiplication, tuning the bandwidth of the measurement according to the requirements of each experiment. The instruments must be designed to probe smaller sample volumes, by combining the high flux of the source with advanced focusing optics. ESS's source brightness and time structure are well suited to cold neutrons, providing high flux and a wide dynamic range. As shown in section 3.2, cold neutrons are required to deeper investigate structure and dynamics of soft-matter and biological systems. Instruments using a bispectral extraction system will profit of these characteristics by accessing a dynamic range in wavelength, which is unattainable nowadays. Moreover, thanks to the high flux, instruments using the neutron polarization technique can be widely exploited leading to an enhance in several applications throughout physics, soft matter, chemistry and biology. The unique property of the pulse provided by ESS (figure A short overview of the instruments class is shown below, pointing out the characteristics of each one, this part is mainly based on the ESS TDR Small angle neutron scattering: SANS provides access to the largest length scales possible with neutron scattering. SANS instruments are white-beam instruments that require large pulse-width. Compared with the present-day SANS instruments the counting rate for the ESS instrument will be higher by an order of magnitude, as well as the Q-range covered in a single measurement. The general-purpose polarized SANS instrument simultaneously will cover the Q-range of current conventional SANS instruments, 10 -3 Å -1 to 0.1Å -1 , using multiple detector banks. The instrument will have flexible resolution and bandwidth and will make available the option of reaching very low Q. While a broadband small sample SANS instrument will be optimized for very high counting rates and smaller samples, because of its shorter length it is a lower-resolution instrument, but it can cover a very large Q-range in a single measurement. Neutron imaging: This is a real-space technique, by looking at the transmitted beam it is possible to examine the inner structure of complex systems. The imaging beam-line will push spatial resolution down to the micron range thanks to brightness of ESS, in parallel with the development of an adequate detector technology. The instrument concept takes full advantage of the flexibility made possible by the ESS time structure, allowing wavelength resolution, bandwidth and collimation to be tuned for each application. Neutron reflectometry: Neutron reflectometry is used to probe the structure of surfaces and interfaces in the Å to micron range. The horizontal reflectometer uses an inclined beam to measure horizontal surfaces. It is possible to cover the full Q-range of interest without moving the sample. The instrument is optimized especially for very fast measurements while keeping a good resolution. The vertical reflectometer is a versatile instrument for measuring solid interfaces with high resolution and on small samples. A novel double-elliptical mirror guide will allow flexible arrangement of the beam divergence leading to fast measurements with high flux intensity. In order to fulfil these demanding requirements an appropriate detection system is mandatory. Powder diffraction: ESS's pulse structure makes possible very wide dynamic range, while the long-pulse flexibility allows the resolution to be tuned with respect to the requirements of each experiment by adjusting the opening time of the pulse-shaping chopper. The thermal powder diffractometer will cover the in situ processing science case and crystallography for thermal neutron up to a Q ∼ 25 Å -1 . With a tunable wavelength resolution, which in the best case can achieve a resolution < 0.01%. The bispectral power diffractometer can access longer wavelengths and in situ experiments in the intermediate Q range (Q max < 13 Å -1 ). The pulsed monochromatic powder diffractometer will use a set of crystal monochromators with access to a wide range of angles to tune the Q range, flux and instrument resolution. Single crystal diffraction: The single-crystal magnetism diffractometer will exploit a polarized incoming beam, optimized for the determination of complex magnetic structure, spin density distributions, diffuse scattering. By taking advantage of the high flexibility and low background long-pulse structure, it will be possible to measure very small samples. Moreover, the choice of a 156 m long instrument will allow to access the full long source pulse. The thermal spectrum of the pulse can be adapted using the pulse-shaping chopper to provide a wavelength-dependent pulse length. The macromolecular diffractometer is dedicated to biological crystallography and it is optimized for sub-millimetre single-crystal samples with large unit cells. Time-of-Flight and crystal spectroscopy: Time-of-flight and crystal spectroscopy is carried out by two types of instruments: chopper spectrometers and crystalanalyser instruments. All the chopper spectrometers are designed for optimized repetition-rate multiplication (RRM) using multiplexing chopper systems. The range of incident energies will be adapted to the range of time scales that need to be covered, and the spacing between adjacent energies will be set in order to cover the width of the inelastic scattering. The ESS peak brightness and the use of the RRM system will allow a total flux on the sample up to more than an order of magnitude larger than what is possible today. Moreover, a wider dynamic range in both Q and energy can be simultaneously probed. The cold chopper spectrometer will focus in the cold neutron energy region with an energy resolution of 50 -200 μeV. It is a low background and high resolution instrument well suited for probing weak signals and collective excitations. The background from the prompt pulse neutrons will be minimized by avoiding direct line from the moderator through the use of an S-shaped ballistic guide which provide a spatially homogeneous beam distribution at the sample position and a very clean short-wavelength cut-off. The bispectral chopper spectrometer will provide a simultaneous measuring technique that covers dynamics over a wide energy range of 0.1 -100 meV. The bi-spectral extraction is possible either via the use of a supermirror switch to reflect cold neutrons into the guide, or by pointing the guide to the edge of the cold moderator to access a warmer spectrum. It is an instrument optimized for quasi-elastic scattering on small samples (mm 3 size), allowing to cover more than three order of magnitude in fluctuation times in a single measurement. The thermal chopper spectrometer is designed for broad mapping of thermal excitations with high energy and spatial resolution in hard condensed matter. Via RRM will be possible to probe in a single measurement an energy range between approximately 11 and 160 meV. The beam optics are tunable, allowing efficient focusing for small samples as well high Q-resolution single-crystal measurements. The cold crystal-analyser spectrometer is a very high intensity, indirect geometry instrument covering wide Q-range (0.04 -7.8 Å -1 ). It is especially suited for studies of excitation spectra as function of wavevector transfer for several applications in geoscience and materials studying. The instrument will use graphite crystals as analysers covering an energy range from 2.5 meV and 8 meV. Backscattering: The backscattering spectrometer will provide access to a unique combination of high energy resolution, intermediate Q and large dynamic range. It will employ Si analyses crystals arranged in near-backscattering geometry and a flexible chopper system to match the source time structure, in order to allow a continuous variation of the energy resolution from 2 to 300 μeV with a variable dynamic range down to ∼1 meV. This combination results in an order of magnitude performance increase compared to currently world-leading backscattering instruments. Spin-echo spectroscopy: Spin-echo spectroscopy reaches the longest time scales accessible with neutrons, allowing the measurement of polymer and protein dynamics, complex soft matter systems and magnetism. The high-resolution neutron spinecho spectrometer uses the neutron spin to encode very small changes in the velocity of the neutron, thus decoupling the energy resolution and intensity. The instrument covers a broad energy, 10 ps -1 μs, and Q-range, 0.01 -2 Å -1 . It is optimised to provide maximum flux on the sample, reaching higher Q-values. Due to the large wavelength bandwidth a very large time and spatial range can be covered within one experiment. Compared with this instrument, the wide-angle spin echo spectrometer is a medium energy resolution instrument for large scattering angles and with a large detector solid angle. It will provide measurements for a very broad simultaneous Q-range, up to 4 Å -1 , with a very high count rate. The spectrometer will have a longer moderator-to-sample distance compared to the high-resolution spin-echo instrument. Note that the instrument will have a smaller usable wavelength band, but it provides a better wavelength, and hence Q-resolution, improving performance for studies of crystalline samples. Compared to currently world-leading instruments, it will lead to improvement in performance of up to an order of magnitude, especially at the shorter wavelength. A gain in performance will arise from the use of a wide detector bank as well. In this chapter a short summary of how the neutron scattering science will benefit from the operation of new generation, high-intensity neutron sources, and in particular from the construction of ESS is presented. The enhancement of available flux leads to the need to develop new instruments design able to exploit it, in order to further extend scientific investigations. The increase in performance demands represents a challenge not only for the instruments, but for the neutron detector technology as well. Besides all the possible extended investigations in neutron scattering, some of which are discussed above, the availability of new instrumentation opens the possibility to new science, which is outside the core science case, and enabled by the possibility of better measurements. Thus, better instrumentation is a crucial driver for novel sci-entific fields. The improvements in resolution, count rate and signal-to-background, achievable with the new instrumentations, also drive the possibility to new investigations that could not be done before. Several detector technologies can be used with respect to the different techniques, based on the need for each one: a boron-based gaseous detector both for perpendicular of parallel neutron incidence geometry, lithium-based scintillator detectors, for instance for powder diffraction of small angle scattering, and gadolinium-based detectors where high resolution is needed and gamma rejection can be relaxed Chapter 4 The chapter provides the description of a Boron-10-based gaseous thermal neutron detector, the Multi-Blade detector technology The Multi-Blade is a gaseous thermal neutron detector based on 10 B solid converters for neutron reflectometers. The design of the Multi-Blade detector has been driven by the requirements set by the two reflectometers foreseen at the European Spallation Source (ESS The Multi-Blade is a stack of Multi Wire Proportional Chambers (MWPC) operated at atmospheric pressure with a continuous gas flow (Ar/CO 2 80/20 mixture). A sketch of the Multi-Blade detector is shown in figure The coating thickness on the blades of this demonstrator is 4.4 μm. The detec- tion efficiency is saturated above 3 μm and any extra film thickness will only help to absorb neutrons. A neutron that crosses the layer and reaches the substrate, can be scattered causing unwanted spurious events within the detector. The cassettes are mounted on an array plate which gives the alignment and matches the circle of 4 m radius which is needed for ESTIA; this distance is measured from the centre of the sample to the first wire of each cassette (wire no. 1 in Figure With respect to the previous demonstrator, the new detector does not employ any charge division readout Front-end on wires 9 boards (32x9ch) Front-end on strips 9 boards (32x9ch) Moreover, less charge means smaller space charge effects A cluster is defined as a group of events in the file with the same time-stamp within a time window of 6 μs. This window is defined from the first active wire of a cluster since the strip signals arrive at the same time or later. The information of a cluster, or a hit, is given by a triplet such as (X,Y,ToF). As already shown in Note that the multiplicity depends on the applied thresholds and the gas gain at which the detector is operated. Hence a systematic variation of these values are expected, without qualitative change of the confirmed behaviour. Figure The fact that wires and strips have in general different multiplicity where D 0 depends on the instrument geometry and in our case is the distance from moderator to the first wire (front wire) of the Multi-Blade corresponding to Y 1 = 1, p = 4 mm is the wire pitch and β = 5 o is the inclination of each blade with respect to the sample position. The detector requirements are set by the two reflectometers that are being designed for the European Spallation Source (ESS Neutron reflectometry and off-specular scattering are powerful techniques to study depth profiles and in-plane correlations of thin film samples where θ is the angle between the beam and sample surface (which is the same for incident and reflected beam, The optical properties of neutron propagation arise from the fact that quantummechanically the neutron is described by a wave-function. We remind that the potential (V ) in the Schrödinger equation, which is the averaged density of the scattering lengths of the material, plays the role of a refractive index: The reflectivity of neutrons of a given wavelength (or given q) from a bulk interface is unity at angles smaller than the critical one and falls sharply at larger angles. As with light, interference can occur between waves reflected at the top and at the bottom of a thin film, which gives rise to interference fringes in the reflectivity profile CRISP is an horizontal neutron reflectometer at ISIS, Target Station 1, that uses a broad band neutron Time-of-Flight (ToF) method for determining the wavelength, (and hence q), at fixed angles (θ). A detailed description of the CRISP reflectometer can be found in The beam can be well-collimated using adjustable slits along the beam line, a sketch is shown in figure The results on threshold choice and background scattering, dynamic range, detection efficiency, stability and uniformity along with the study of the reconstruction algorithms are part of the measurements performed on CRISP, that concern the technical characterization of the detector, together with the stability test performed at the STF at the Lund University. The scientific results from the test on CRISP are shown in the dedicated section 4.6. Three standard and well-known samples have been used in the tests: an iridium (Ir) sample, slightly bent, deposited on a silicon substrate (4 × 4 cm 2 ), a bare silicon (Si) sample (≈ 8 cm diameter) and a Fe/Si super-mirror (≈ 4 cm diameter) which is used in neutron optics to deliver neutrons to the instruments. The Ir sample has been used to study the effect of the spatial resolution of the detector on the measured reflectivity curve and it will be shown in section 4.6.1. The Si sample has been used to study the collimated and divergent modes. This will be discussed in details in section 4.6.2. The Fe/Si super-mirror has been used to study the off-specular scattering with the Multi-Blade and it will be discussed in section 4.6.3. In this section, a full characterization of the detector performance is provided. The measurements refers to the direct beam, hence no sample have been used. Comparisons with the results obtained with the 3 He-tube installed on the instrument are presented as well. The section on stability concern a set of measurements performed at the STF at Lund University. We recall that the hardware thresholds are applied to the individual channels of the digitizers (either wires or strips) and it is needed to reject the electronic noise. Note that these values have been set not to fully discriminate against low energy events, e.g., background γ-rays. Therefore, a software threshold can be applied to filter these events directly in the data. The triplets (X, Y, T oF ), that identify an event and were described in section 4.2, can be represented by two-dimensional plots: the 2D image of the detector which corresponds to the (X, Y ) coordinates and the ToF image of the detector which corresponds to the (Y, T oF ) coordinates and it is integrated over the other spatial coordinate (X, the strips). The (X, T oF ) image can also be used but it is not relevant for the purpose of this work. Moreover, the 2D image (X, Y ) can be either integrated over the ToF coordinate or gated in any range of time. A ToF of 6 ms corresponds approximately to 1.8Å, 8 ms to 2.5Å and 12.5 ms to 4Å. Figure where n f is the number of acquisitions, n T oF is the number of ToF per file, t b is the bin size in time and A is the illuminated area. Note that if no software thresholds are applied nor the wires are requested to be in coincidence with the strips, a constant background is visible and it is mostly due to γ-rays. This background almost disappear if the coincidences are selected, although no software thresholds are applied. When a software threshold is applied, the plot on the right in figure The constant background, which can be attributed to the γ-rays, vanishes. However a background at short wavelengths (< 4Å, 12.5 ms) is still visible and reproduces the shape of the direct beam. The plot on the left in Figure On the right side of figure Figure In order to quantify the spatial and time dynamic range of the detector the direct beam was directed to the lower cassette of the Multi-Blade. The spatial dynamic range is related to the ability of the detector to measure in different pixels (adjacent or not) two different counting rates at the same time: the difference between the The red line corresponds to 0.5Å which is the lower limit of the second gated range, the blue line (2.5Å) represents the lower limit of the third range, and the black line at 4Å is the lower limit of the highest range. counting rates defines the actual spatial dynamic range of the detector. Equivalently, the time dynamic range defines the ability of the detector to measure in the same pixel two different counting rates in subsequent time bins. The ToF spectra in Figure The measured dynamic range with the Multi-Blade detector is the actual dynamic range of the CRISP instrument The detection efficiency is defined as the ratio of detected neutrons over the incoming neutrons in the beam in a defined area. A set of data is recorded with the Multi-Blade detector using the direct beam. Software thresholds were applied to the data in order to discriminate against background events. The same configuration was used to illuminate the 3 He-detector of CRISP which was previously calibrated, thus its efficiency, as a function of the neutron wavelength, is known. The data for the 3 He-tube efficiency can be considered valid up to 3.5Å (11 ms) due to high background at larger wavelengths. Figure Multi-Blade by normalizing to the 3 He detector efficiency calculated from the 3 He pressure (3.5 bar). The measured efficiency shifts systematically toward higher values at larger wavelengths, this is also visible in the measured 3 He detector efficiency which propagates in the Multi-Blade efficiency normalization. The overall trend is as expected; the measurements are consistent with calculation The gas gain of a MWPC is well described by the Diethorn's formula In either cases of gas renewal of 1 or 2 volumes per day, no contamination of the gas due to pollutant in the detector has been observed. A steady decrease of the counts would be visible otherwise. The trend in detector counts is clearly influenced by the atmospheric pressure. Although the atmospheric pressure variation was comparable in the two configurations of flow, the detector counts are influenced more when the flow is lower. This has to do with the higher over-pressure set in the detector to allow a larger flow. A larger over-pressure in the detector is affected by the variation of the atmospheric pressure to a minor extent. The counting rate in the detector is stable within ±1.7% during several days with a flow that replace approximately 2 detector volumes per day. In order to further improve the detector stability in time, the gas gain or thresholds must be adjusted according to the atmospheric pressure and temperature variations. Thus, an active feedback on the signal thresholds or on the high voltage as shown in Due to the blade geometry the gas gain differs for different wires within a cassette. Each cassette has 32 wires and 32 strips. The wire no.1 is labelled as the one closer to the sample position (see Figure over the 3 cassettes with no threshold correction applied: the counts drop due to the gain variation in the two overlap regions scanned. The pink curve is then obtained if the thresholds are adjusted for individual channels and this results in the reduced sensitivity region of about 0.5 mm. This meets expectation but it can be improved. The scan was repeated across the strips in steps of about 20 mm. Figure A set of images of BN (Boron-Nitride, HeBoSint C100 If two, or more, adjacent channels are firing at the same time and belong to the same cluster, the position of the hit is calculated weighting the energies (areas or amplitudes) of the channels. i.e., if two adjacent strips are firing at the same time and they perfectly share the energy in two identical parts, the hit will be placed exactly in the middle of the two. In the case of CoG are used 128 bins instead of 32 . The CoG is an continuous quantity and the resolution improves independently from the binning but it has been chosen to bin it in 4 times more bins. In the reconstructed position of the wires there is not much difference if the MAX or the CoG algorithm is used since the multiplicity of wires is often 1. It has been shown that the spatial resolution improves from ≈ 0.6 mm to ≈ 0.55 mm All the images shown in this section are gated in ToF above 8 ms (2.5Å). As the direct beam at the instrument is narrow and not enough to illuminate entirely the masks, a super-mirror (Fe/Si multi-layer) at the sample position was used. During the acquisition the sample angle was changed steadily in order to scan across the mask positioned at the detector window. The first mask used in the tests is shown in figure A figure of merit (f om) of the improvement of using the CoG algorithm with respect to the MAX algorithm can be defined as the average ratio between the counts at the peaks and the counts between the peaks. For the top image in figure A series of scientific measurements with several samples have been performed on the CRISP reflectometer. The results presented in the manuscript refer to the paper published on this topic As described in section 4.5.1 the triplets (X, Y, T oF ) that identify a neutron event, can be represented by two-dimensional plots. Referring to figure 4.11, it is possible to integrate the ToF over the X coordinate and to gate in the Y coordinated around the direct beam area. Thus, the spectrum of the direct beam in ToF is obtained and it is used to normalize the reflectivity measurements of the samples described in the following sections. The time binning of 100 μs is chosen to match the ISIS-Target Station 1 pulse length. The gate in ToF is applied in order to reject the background arising from the spurious scattering from the substrate of the cassettes (the blades). This effect is due to the neutrons that cross the 10 B 4 C layer without being absorbed. They are scattered by the substrate and detected in the other cassettes. The background is explained in detail in section 4.5.1. In the last paragraph some results from the first test carried out with the actual demonstrator at the the Budapest Neutron Centre (BNC) where Y 0 is the position of the bin corresponding to α f = α i , Y i is any other position in the integration range, L is the distance between the sample and the detector (2.3 m) and p s is the pixel size of the detector. Note that the pixel size of the Multi-Blade is p s = p • sin(β) ≈ 0.34 mm, where p = 4 mm is the wire pitch, is finer than the spatial resolution of the detector ≈ 0.6 mm. The factor f = 1/2 has to be introduced, as the curvature of the sample surface acts as a change in sample angle and leads to a change in reflection angle by 2θ. Different combinations of λ and θ correspond to the same q z in a diagonal cuts of the (θ, λ) space; this leads to an improvement of the resulting reflectivity profile. Figure The sample is a layer of Ir of 550 Å deposited on a Si substrate. The roughness between the two interfaces is ≈ 10Å with scattering length density N b = 7.3 • 10 -6 Å -2 (see equation 4.3). The top panel of figure For a system with several interfaces, the Fresnel coefficients r j,j+1 are related to the reflection amplitudes of each interface, e.g., r 0,1 , r 1,2 etc., after a combination with an appropriate phase factor, e ik i 2∆ , where ∆ is the thickness of the thin film. The period of the oscillations in figure with the Fresnel coefficients as expressed in equation 1.73. For a n-interface system on a semi-infinite substrate, the recursion stars with R n+1 = 0, and all X j can be calculated afterwards. The roughness can also be taken into account by a factor: Where σ j is the inter-facial roughness. Note that the roughness must be much smaller than the thickness to be interpreted as an interface width and ∆ as a layer thickness. A comparison between the conventional analysis and the θ-corrected reduction is shown in figure The aim of the measurements presented in this section is to demonstrate the Multi-Blade detector capabilities in a setup as similar as possible to the ESTIA working configurations as described in section 4.4. The instrument was operated in two configurations (collimated and divergent modes, see figure On the other hand the divergent mode exploits the full divergence available at the instrument by only constraining parts of the beam that would not impinge on the sample with the slits. The position of the neutron on the detector is used to encode θ in a similar manner as described in the previous section, according to equation 4.5. Now the factor f is not needed as the sample surface is flat and the change in reflection angle corresponds to the same change in incidence angle. By allowing a wider divergence of the beam, the sampled θ-range is also larger; the available flux at sample increases and thus the measuring time is reduced. This method for the data reduction refers to the one that will be used with ESTIA to allow measurement from very small samples. A detailed description is reported in Although the geometry used for these measurements on CRISP is only an approximate reproduction of the focusing concept used in ESTIA The total acquisition time for the three angles in the collimated mode is 120 minutes. The same result is obtained in 14 minutes by performing the measurements in the divergent mode. The acquisition time is thus improved by about one order of magnitude. Figure from Despite the high background due to the poor shielding of the Multi-Blade setup on CRISP, a dynamic range of ≈ 4 orders of magnitude with the three angles was achieved. With a further measurement at 1.2 degrees, one extra order of magnitude in the dynamic range was achieved, which is shown in figure It is expected with the Multi-Blade to measure a deeper dynamic range in a better shielded instrument operating environment. The specular reflectivity allows to probe the structure of a sample across the depth, indeed the scattering vector q is perpendicular to the sample surface. It is possible to probe the in-plane structure of a sample introducing a small parallel component of the scattering vector Neutron off-specular scattering probes the in-plane structure at the μm length scale. The limitation of this technique is set by both the limited available neutron flux and the small scattering probability. Similarly correlations at the nm length scale can be reached with a collimated beam in both directions, so called grazing incidence small-angle scattering (GISANS), which is described in detail in The collaboration between the ESS Detector Group and the Wigner Research Centre for Physics in Budapest allows for beam time at the Budapest Neutron Centre (BNC) to perform tests on the detector prototypes. In the case of the Multi-Blade this collaboration is mainly based on the development of electronics. The measurements performed at the Budapest Neutron Centre served to test the operation of the detector in all its aspects, from the mechanics to the electronics. Indeed, a new prototype have been assembled with several modifications with respect to the previous version and to normalize the two set of measurements. Figure The several tests performed either at the Source Testing Facility in Lund, at the Budapest Research Centre and the experiment carried out at ISIS provided a full overview of the status of the project. This part of the work is, instead, dedicated to some of the design implementations arisen from these tests, in order to improve the detector performances. One of the main issues of the present device is the non-uniform response of the wires due to the geometrical effects. The wires are placed at 4 mm distance in between two adjacent blades. In the edge of the blade (knife) this distance is not constant any more. The ions drifting to the cathode have to travel more, this leads to a decreasing of the collected charge, because the electric field is not uniform and as discussed in section 2.3, these effects reflect on the gas gain amplification. Referring to figure 4.39, the spectrum of α and Lithium particles across the wires (x-axis) obtained by the measurements of the direct beam, is shown together with the simulated gas gain map. The measurement has been performed during the test at the BNC, while the simulations have been carried out with Garfield [145], which is a software for detailed simulation of drift chambers. In the measured plot there are two spots clearly visible. The highest intensity of the two, refers to the corresponding peak of the Li and α particles generate from the neutron conversion with the B 4 C layer. The missing parts are dead channels. The slight slope between wire 9 and 31 is expected. Remember that the cassettes are arranged over a circle around the sample, thus they are placed at a relative angle of 0.14 degrees from each others. Also, the last wire has approximately a double gain compared with the rest of the wires. The higher gain is foreseen because there is no neighbour wire that shield the electric field. It must be noticed that the first wire has a double gain compared to the last one. Moreover, even if the track of the yield particle is oriented toward the outside of the wire plane, the total charge is collected by the wire. The simulation is shown on the right side of figure Chapter 5 This part of the work is based on a campaign of measurements performed at the Source Testing Facility (STF) The science progress in neutron physics is made possible thanks to the development of both sources and instrumentations, including neutron detectors. The European Spallation Source (ESS) will be a prominent infrastructure in this regard It is recalled that the Multi-Blade is a stack of Multi Wire Proportional Chambers (MWPC) operated at atmospheric pressure with a continuous gas flow (Ar/CO 2 80/20 mixture in volume). A sketch of the cassette is shown in figure Three neutron sources: 252 Cf, 241 Am/Be, 238 Pu/Be, were used to perform the measurements. A further measurement was performed with a 60 Co gamma source, in order to have a comparison with the previous work on gamma sensitivity The thermal reaction mediated by a 10 B layer is 10 B(n, α)Li : 3 Li(0.84M eV ) + α(1.47M eV ) + γ(0.48M eV ) 94% (5.1) The range of the product particles are of the order of a few μm in solids and a few mm in gasses at atmospheric pressure. A preliminary study was performed on the nuclear processes that may occur between neutrons of energy range 1-10 MeV and nuclei present in the detector material. This investigation gives a qualitative indication which reactions are significant for the fast neutrons sensitivity of the detector. For this study the main materials in the Multi-Blade detector (5.2) where x is the path length and r is the range of the particle travelling in the medium and Σ = N σ is the macroscopic cross section. Σ defines the probability per unit path length for a specific process, described by the microscopic cross section σ; N is the number of nuclei per unit volume. The number of interactions decreases exponentially with the absorber thickness. The relation of attenuation is described as I I 0 = e -Σx . P(r) = P(x) for the gas. The macroscopic cross section has been calculated from the number density n p and the microscopic cross section. In the case of a gas, the calculation starts from the ideal gas law P V = nRT . The number of moles n can be written as N p /N A , where N p is the number of particles and N A is the Avogadro constant. By knowing that R/N A = K B , which is the Boltzmann constant, per volume unit it is obtained: where P is the pressure, T is the temperature of the gas. For the solids n p = N A M • ρ, where M (g/mol) is the molar mass and ρ (g/cm 3 ) is the density of the material. In a proportional chamber the gas is the detection medium, for the Multi-Blade detector, this is an 80/20 mixture of Ar/CO 2 operating at atmospheric pressure and room temperature. Considering the weight w and the fraction f of the two compounds. The number density for the Ar/CO 2 is shown in table 5.1, while for pure materials the n p is listed in table 5.2. The Kapton (ρ = 1.42 g/cm 3 ) is composed of several elements, the macroscopic cross section is Σ mix = i N i σ i , the 10 B 4 C layer (ρ = 2.45 g/cm 3 ) as well. This density differs from the material data and refers to a measured value for the films employed in this detector A neutron can have many types of interaction with a nucleus. In the detector these can give rise to charged products that can release an amount of energy in the detection medium and can be interpreted as real thermal neutron events, instead of being rejected. For this work the fast neutron energy range between 1 and 10 MeV is taken into account, see subsection 5.2.1. In this range several interactions between neutrons and nucleus may occur. Our focus is on two main types: Scattering and Absorption. When a neutron is scattered by a nucleus, the scattering interaction transfers some portion of the neutron kinetic energy to the target nucleus resulting in a recoil nucleus. The total kinetic energy of the neutron-nucleus system remains unchanged by the interaction, i.e., the Q-value of the reaction is zero. In the considered energy range the maximum possible recoil energy of the nucleus is where A is the mass of the target nucleus , E R the recoil nucleus kinetic energy and E n the incoming neutron kinetic energy An important difference between the fast neutron interaction and the γ-rays interaction is the final products. When a γ-ray interacts with a medium, it can generate a detectable signal, via an electron, typically in a photoelectric or Compton interaction, while for fast neutrons protons, α and heavier particles can also be emitted. The range of protons and heavier particles in a medium is typically much shorter than that of electrons for a given energy. Therefore the amount of energy released per unit path in the gas is much larger for heavy particles than for electrons Figure from in the energy range 1-10 MeV In the considered energy range, the elastic scattering interaction has the largest cross sections and the higher probability of deposition in the gas P (r) (eq. 5.3). The inelastic scattering and (n,γ) processes are comparable for each considered material and they have the lowest probability. The most relevant absorption processes taken into account are [160, 161, 162]: 27 Al(n, p) 27 M g Q = -1.8M eV (5.5) In general these absorption processes are: For each reaction the energy threshold (E th n ) is calculated for the incoming neutron to generate the reaction as where m n is the neutron mass and M X is the mass of the element X in equation 5.8. The energy of the produced particles (E y ) is calculated from the definition of the Q-value and the conservation of energy and momentum as where M Y and m y are respectively the mass of the elements Y and y in equation 5.8. Q n = E n + Q is the sum of the incoming energy of neutrons and the Q-value. In order to compare these results to a theoretical prediction, an incoming neutron energy of E n = 5 MeV has been chosen for the calculations, because it is the average value of the energy range of interest and is approximately the average of the emission spectrum of the fast neutron sources used for the measurements (see section 5.2.1). The probability of deposition P (r) (eq. 5.3) summarized in table 5.4 has been calculated considering the average of the cross sections σ for each interaction in the given energy range and the number density n p for each material, in the detector. For the elastic scattering and the absorption interactions E R and E y were calculated respectively, as described above. These energies have been used as an input in a SRIM simulation A direct comparison between the materials is possible because the probability of deposition in the gas is normalized by the density. An interaction in the solid generates charged particles that have to escape the surface and reach the gas to be detected. With the SRIM calculation has been quantified the portion of surface involved in the process (maximum range r). A direct comparison is then possible between solids and gas components as well. Referring to figure 5.6, the energy released by the elastic process of the gas elements is dominant (≈ 40 times larger) compared to the same contribution of the several solid components. The energy deposited by the various elastic reactions is 1-2 orders of magnitude larger than the contribution of the absorption interactions. Although the 10 B 4 C layer is not present in the detector or this experimental setup, from the calculation has been understood that its contribution would be approximately 1/20 of that of the Ar/CO 2 . The comparison between Aluminium and Titanium is crucial for the Multi-Blade design, because it concerns the choice of the blade material, aiming at an improved detector performance. A difference emerges from the calculation of the probability of deposition for elastic scattering. For Aluminium, P(r) is approximately 4 times larger than for Titanium and about 6 times higher than for Copper. Cu has one of the largest microscopic cross sections among the studied materials (section 5.2) in the energy range (subsection 5.2.1), but it is the heaviest element among them. It is then less probable for a particle to escape the surface and release energy in the gas. Referring to the absorption processes described above, the deposition probability of the (n,p) process for Aluminium is 1 order of magnitude larger than for Titanium. Figure As a qualitative cross validation of the theoretical conclusions on the shape of the PHS, a GEANT4 The implemented detector geometry and the sources placement match the experimental setup and are depicted in figure The neutron source emits isotropically and is placed 5 cm from the edge of the readout wire plane as shown in figure 5.10. The particle generator produces only neutrons, without photons or other sources of background included. No detector vessel, kapton, tungsten wires or copper strips are present in the particular geometry model either. Their impact has been studied in a separate set of GEANT4 simulations and as the results have fully matched the experimental findings, a simplified detector geometry model is utilised for the results presented here. The material chosen for the gas composition is a mixture of Ar and CO 2 with an 80:20 by mass ratio. The material of the blades is either pure Al or Ti of natural isotopic composition with a poly-crystalline structure. The latter is enabled via the use of the NCrystal library [166] and will properly treat the interactions of low energy neutrons with the crystalline material of the blades, in case thermalization occurs in the setup. In terms of physics list, the standard QGPS_BIC_HP covers the processes of interest. Assuming perfect energy resolution, the energy deposited by any particle in the gas volume is collected by applying the experimental condition of a 100 keV threshold per wire volume. All wire volumes are included in the formation of the simulated PHS to gain a statistical advantage, as the gas amplification stage is excluded, thus equalizing their response. The individual contributions to the deposited energy in the gas are identified and the shape of the PHS can be explained by them. Figure A closer study at the individual components between the spectra for Al and Ti blades leads to the conclusion that the difference is mostly attributed to the proton energy loss in the gas and the elastic reaction (see figure A set of measurements have been performed with three neutron sources: 252 Cf, 241 Am/Be, 238 Pu/Be, and with a gamma source, 60 Co. The latter measurement work as a comparison with the study concerning the gamma sensitivity A background measurement was performed without any sources. These measurements provide information about the possible differences on the PHS caused by the choice of a source (section 5.2.1). While the Am/Be and Pu/Be sources spectra are similar both in shape and in energy, the distribution of a Cf source has a quite different shape in the same range of energy. Figure Once normalized, the PHS of the 241 Am/Be, 238 Pu/Be are in a good agreement because their emission energy spectra are similar both in shape and energy. The difference peak at low energy (<100 keV) is expected because the 241 Am has a higher gamma emission (∼60 keV) than that of 238 Pu (figure 5.15). Moreover the shape of both PHS is similar to that of 252 Cf, which differs from the former by a factor in intensity, and a variation in shape at high energy, above 1 MeV, due to the difference between the emission energy spectrum of the sources, see figure 5.15. As described in section 5.2.1 the emission distribution of the Cf peaks at lower energy compared to the Actinide/Be sources. Both from calculations and simulations it emerges that the main contribution to the energy deposition spectrum in this region is attributed to the absorption interactions which require more energy to occur, see equations 5.4 and 5.10. It can be concluded that although the sources differ in energy distributions, they do not produce any relevant effect on the spectrum. Moreover, a common feature is visible around 800 keV, predicted by the theoretical calculation, figure Referring to section 5.3.1, a significant difference between the materials of the detector is expected. The cassette configuration has been changed according to figure 5.2, performing the measurements for the configurations a, b and c. The PHS for each one is showed in figure The fast neutron sensitivity of a thermal neutron detector is defined as the probability for a fast neutron to generate a false count in a thermal/cold neutron measurement. Along with the γ-ray sensitivity son between the Multi-Blade detector and the 3 He-tube 5.7.1 Fast neutron sensitivity of the Helium-3 detector Following the same proceedings used for the fast neutron sensitivity measurements performed with the Multi-Blade detector, a set of measurements have been carried out with a 3 He-tube. As for the experiment performed with the Multi-Blade detector, several sources have been used: Am/Be and Pu/Be for the fast neutrons and Co-60 for γ-rays. A background measurements was performed as well. The pulse height spectra, normalized over time, are depicted in figure The effect is clearly visible in the picture, where the gammas only contribute to the PHS below 200 keV (green curve). In the region (<100 keV) the PHS measured with the Am/Be source is, indeed, about one order of magnitude more intense than the spectrum obtained with the Pu/Be source. Because of this and for consistency with the previous work, it has been chosen to carry out the measurements with the Pu/Be source. In the case of the measurements with the Multi-Blade detector, it was possible to ensure that the thermal neutron contribution was negligible by using blades without the boron coating, as described in section 5.5.1. On the other hand, it is not possible to have a good separation between the different neutrons contribution, when using the 3 He-tube. For this reason the measurements were performed in several configurations, a sketch of them is shown in figure The measurements presented here refers to the test performed at the CRISP reflectometer, which is described in section 4.4. In particular these results are obtained with the same set-up described for the efficiency measurements reported in subsec-tion 4.5.3, namely by placing both the Multi-Blade detector and the 3 He-tube in the direction of the direct beam. The only difference is the working speed of the chopper, which in this case is half of the nominal speed, i.e., 25 Hz instead of 50 Hz. In this configuration the range of wavelength is extended up to 13 Å, compared to 6.5 Å at 50 Hz. A sketch of the spectrum in a time window of 0.18 ms is shown in figure Considering now the second region of interest, a first discrimination between the γ-rays contribution and the rest of the background signals can be investigated by analysing the events above and below the applied software threshold. These values are, indeed, set in order to discriminate the real events from the spurious ones (see subsection 4.5.1). The events below threshold are less energetic, thus most probably are mainly gammas. The fast neutrons have a much broader energy spectrum, this leads to events with higher energy. A detailed discussion on the fast neutron contribution for boron-10-based detectors is reported in chapter 5. The ToF spectra below and above threshold are depicted in figure Solid state Si-Gd detector for neutron scattering In this chapter the description of a solid state thermal neutron detector as an alternative to 3 He-based thermal detectors is presented. This class of detectors have been developed in the early 1960s The chapter is mainly based on a paper The enormous growth of the experimental opportunities [178] at neutron sources, despite the limited increase of the source brightness since the 1960s, has been enabled by the development of instrumentation like large position-sensitive detectors, new focusing optics and innovative exploitation of neutron polarization. The oper-ation of new generation, high-intensity neutron sources like the Spallation Neutron Source Overall reviews of the progress made in neutron detectors are available It is reasonable to expect novel concepts to translate into new detector applications in the near future, coupled to improved data collection techniques as prompted by an extended use of time of flight techniques. The requirements for large area, and simultaneously flexible shape, detectors with sub-millimeter resolution could be satisfied by resorting to the technology based on solid state silicon devices. Prototypes of solid state neutron detectors were proposed in the past decades In particular, several pulse shape and real time analysis approaches were proposed The PIN diode (Hamamatsu, S3590-09), the principles of operation for this class of device is described in section 2.5, 0.3 mm thick and 10 x 10 mm 2 area, was coupled to a 157 Gd 2 O 3 converter layer, 3 μm thick, coated on a 2 μm thick mylar foil to get a removable converter. As described in section 2.1, the Gadolinium is a suitable converter for cold and thermal neutrons, because of its large absorption cross section. Through the radiative capture process, γ-rays over a wide keV energy range, and a cascade of conversion electrons are emitted The output signal was digitized using a pico scope 2000 (Pico Technology, UK) with a bandwidth of 100 MHz and selecting a sampling time T =100 ns. Note that the front-end electronics coupled to the PIN diode is relatively slow. This choice was dictated by the selection of the isotopic converter 157 Gd 2 O 3 whose non-uniform thickness, due to a layer production procedure aimed at minimizing the loss of the expensive isotopic material, introduces a further source of noise. An alternative deposition technique has been tested and it will be presented later in section 6.4. By coupling a faster electronics, which is possible, the noise will be higher and a more powerful discriminating factor would be necessary. Indeed, electron-hole pairs produced inside the Si depletion region by the secondary electrons are swept to the electrodes by the applied electric field. The so-generated electric signal can be transformed into a useful signal for analog or digital processing to discriminate against noise and to define the neutron arrival time. The collected charge can be either negative or positive with a collection time shorter for electrons and longer for holes, typically below 20 ns for a standard 300 μm thick n-type high-resistivity Si sensor operated at ∼100 V reverse bias. Due to the relatively low energy of the conversion electrons, charge collected in silicon is rather small, ranging from 1 fC to 10 fC, and therefore a low noise front-end electronics must be employed. Differently from the use of Si sensors as particle trackers in high energy physics experiments, where an external trigger is normally available and charge collection takes place over a short period corresponding to the expected occurrence of the event, in neutron scattering applications the detector needs to be self-triggered, i.e., it must be able to discriminate the neutron signal against noise and background radiation. In figure In a standard acquisition system the front-end of the detector is a charge preamplifier, with appropriate filters, followed by a shaper amplifier and a simple threshold discriminator to produce a short pulse used to determine the arrival time of a neutron, as showed in the previous section. In presence of noise, the discriminator threshold is set higher and part of the neutron counts can go lost while some noise pulses can be counted as neutrons. These kinds of problems are more severe for solid state Si detectors with a Gd converter as the charge signal is small. For a more accurate identification of neutrons, it is in general preferable to employ a window discriminator as most of γ-rays produce a signal much higher than the neutrons. Indeed, as described in section 2.1, the maximum energy of the electrons emitted by Gd on capturing a neutron is lower than 250 keV, while γ-rays, normally present in the neutron source environment, have energies in excess of 500 keV, like, for instance, those emitted by 10 B present inside the shielding. Considering the low thickness (typically 0.3 mm) of Si sensors, the general sensitivity to γ-rays is not very high The general principle of the acquisition system turns out to be completely different when using an FPGA connected to the very front-end of the detector, a description can be found in For an optimal discrimination of the real neutron signals from the whole of the other signals arising from either electronic or ambient noise or due to γ radiation, some analysis of the signal is necessary. A shape analysis is a very useful tool to control the effect of noise and to reject the γ contribution by a full pulse height analysis when the shape of the γ-ray signal were too close to that of neutron. Indeed, a more specialised acquisition electronics would be desirable for the specific needs of a neutron counter for low energy scattering applications. In particular, some flexibility in optimizing the real time signal analysis can be crucially relevant. The ability to operate also in a high noise environment, where the low signal from Si detectors is a limitation, would be a major step forward for this technology. To this purpose a new approach for a real time analysis of the detector pulses has been developed . It is briefly recalled here the basic approaches, either analogical or digital, currently used to single out the true neutron signals and to define the neutron arrival time with enough accuracy. A first analysis can be based on a filtering of the signal to get a properly shaped pulse, as it is done using standard hardware front-end electronics. The pulse amplitude is proportional to the energy released after neutron capture inside the detector. Filtering, usually accomplished by the detector preamplifier, can be obtained through a digital elaboration of the sampled signal. For example, a simple low-pass filter is formally obtained in the time domain by the following integral: where v i (t) and v u (t) are the input and output signals respectively and τ is the decay time of the filter. A general linear filter is simply given by: where T f (t) is the transfer function of the filter. If the signals are sampled with a period T , the integral can be transformed into a series that, in practical cases, reduces to a finite sum: where t k is the running sampling time and T d f (t k , t i ) is the transfer matrix. In the case of a low-pass filter, the transfer matrix is readily obtained: where T is the sampling time. In real cases the series must be substituted by a finite sum in a way that t k -t i τ . This equation is useful for practical purposes. Interestingly, low order filters are relatively simple to be implemented in hardware and numerical solutions. Note that all the analog linear electronic filters are infinite impulse response (IIR), namely the output signal lasts ideally forever after the arrival of a short pulse at the input. On the contrary, almost all the digital filters are finite impulse response (FIR), that is the output signal lasts for a given period after the arrival of a short pulse at the input. A real time digital analysis can use FIRs of practically any shape. Of course, IIR filters can be implemented on FPGAs for digital signal processing, but FIR filters can be more accurate when fast signals are analysed, while the (real time) computational cost is similar. For real applications, it can be important to introduce more complex data treatments to extract the cleanest information from the signal produced by the detector. A better data processing is certainly more relevant in the case of solid state detectors coupled to Gd converters where charge collection is fairly low and the electronic noise becomes an important issue, in addition to the point of γ-ray rejection. Also a specifically tailored data treatment can be valuable in the case of detectors where scintillators are coupled to SiPMs for light collection. SiPMs .4: Block description of the proposed acquisition system for real time pulse shape analysis and single event acquisition, and control of additional components like ToF systems. The n blocks AMP-ADC are wide band amplifiers followed by the analog to digital converters. The FPGA is programmed in such a way to have specific calculation elements C 1 ...C k to perform the different steps of the pulse shape analysis. The RC is the rotation control system used to drive different components. The Clock is the same for all elements. Figure from To increase flexibility, it has been developed a procedure intended to perform all the data treatment by special programming in an FPGA. The block diagram of the proposed system is shown in figure The effectiveness of the proposed pulse shape analysis was first tested by computer simulation. The present approach relies on a full pulse shape analysis, instead of turning to a filter to identify the correct signals. The correct shape of the reference neutron signal V r (t) is defined by comparison with the measured signal V m (t), sampled at N time points t i . The comparison can be carried out in real time if the sequence V m (t i ), t i , i = 1, ..., N is stored into an appropriate buffer. This is easily carried out in the simulation phase but, for real time applications, a proper procedure has to be implemented on an FPGA. Of course, with the goal of real time applications on measured data, a preliminary decimation protocol is considered: the data to be analysed starts when V m (t) -V m (t -T ) > V tl , where V tl is a threshold to be defined according to the noise level. Each time this condition is fulfilled, the procedure starts and the sequence is tested to check if the shape is the correct one. A high threshold was also introduced in the procedure to ignore the case of large signals coming from some background radiation, e.g., γ radiation in the case of Si/Gd detectors. The high threshold V th enables starting the analysis only if the sequence, after crossing the low threshold, verifies V (t i ) ≤ V th ∀ i. To establish if the sequence V m (t i ), t i , i = 1, ..., N refers to a genuine neutron signal, one can search for sequences such that: where t c is a shift with respect to the starting point and A s is the normalization constant determined from the reference and the measured signals using the following simple equation: Obtaining A s implies just two simple operations, once the fixed reference signal V r (t) is stored in a given buffer. One has to calculate i V m (t i ) and then the ratio to the fixed sum i V r (t i ) which is also stored. A real time application can be simplified by a proper choice of V r (t) such that i V r (t i ) = 2 n , and the calculation of the ratio i V m (t i ) i V r (t i ) is much faster. Indeed, dividing a binary number by 2 n is equivalent to the shift of all the bits of the numerator by n position to the right, an operation much faster than the true division. The determination of t c is performed by repeating in parallel the test by using a small set of values t c 1 , ..., t c K and using the minimum value of S. Holding the above relationships, it can be assumed that the sequence starting at t 1 indicates the collection of a neutron in the detector at the time t c . After the procedure finds a neutron event in the detector at time t c , the threshold search routine is re-activated to begin anew the search for the next neutron in the data. Once V r (t) and N are properly chosen, the whole procedure is much more efficient than a linear filtering technique, even implemented on a FPGA after digitizing the data. By using available low cost FPGA industrial cards, it is already possible to implement a real time acquisition. Preliminary simulation tests demonstrate that the complete process above described can be performed in about 20 clock cycles. If the clock is running at 200 MHz the dead time is of the order of 100 ns, therefore it is possible to work with a local peak counting rate of 1 MHz with an average 10% loss The outlined procedure was tested using simulated signals, randomly generated as to arrival time and amplitude and slightly fluctuating pulse length. The following equation has been employed to generate the pulses with random values for the arrival time t o and b and multiplying V r (t) by a random amplitude. A Gaussian random noise, whose amplitude is about 20% of the average signals amplitude, was added to the so generated signals to simulate a real output from the present detector system. Additional peaks with fluctuating length were added to the data to simulate signals of similar shape and comparable amplitude produced by possible background radiation or other sources. The simulation enabled to identify the error level of the analysis based on the described approach. Indeed, the correct neutron signals were located at the known time positions and the false signals were identified as well. The results of the simulation are shown in figure The histogram of the S values of the false peaks is shown in figure To complete the simulation, several different sequences were produced in order to get better statistics. The values for the low and high threshold, V tl and V th , are 0.1 V and 2 V respectively, while it has been set S = 0.6. The error level estimated with this approach is ≈ 7 • 10 -5 with only 5 false signals when more than 72400 peaks were analysed. Further simulations were carried out also varying the pulse length. A set of at least 10 5 randomly generated pulses, 50 % of which are true pulses with an average amplitude equal to 70 % of the false pulses, plus a Gaussian noise of the order of 20 % of the true pulses, were analysed. It was found that the selection of peaks characterized by S < S o with amplitude A s smaller than 0.8 is very good at all values of the pulse length, even when the pulse length of true and false pulses is the same. Note that the present selection efficiency is not the detection efficiency of the device, as here the output signal from the amplifier is analysed. In conclusion, according to the results of the simulations, one can be quite confident that the outlined procedure can help in obtaining a good real time discrimination of the neutrons even in the worse environment and working conditions of the detector. The same method as checked in the simulation was applied to the data collected in neutron test measurements using two different devices, namely a Silicon PIN diode, described above, and a SiPM. The data were collected on the three-axis spectrometer IN3, at the ILL It can be observed that the findings of the experiment on the Si PIN, which also aimed at testing the efficiency of the isotopic converter The choice of S = 0.6 is a reasonable compromise between the amount of counts collected when the Gd neutron converter is employed and the background configuration, i.e., when it is removed from the PIN surface. The value is in agreement with the computer simulations, as described in subsection 6.2.1. The amplitude distribution, as a function of S, is shown in figure For V tl = 0.01 V the total counts analysed in the PIN diode/Gd set-up is 569 while the only PIN diode counts 226 events, so the signal-to-background ratio is about 2.5. If is taken V tl = 0.1 V, the neutron counts are 354, and the background counts are 90. Although a lot of neutron signal are discarded with respect to the previous case, the signal-to-background ratio = 3.93 is highly improved. The pulse shape analysis procedure described in section 6.2 and tested via computer simulations, was applied also to the measurements. As shown above, a good agreement between the simulation and the measurements has been verified. Therefore, the same analysis method has been applied to the SiPM. The SiPMs are quite fast devices adequate for applications over the ns time scale A typical signal at the SiPM load resistor is shown in figure The procedure to analyse the data worked smoothly and the data were analysed by applying a low-and a high-level threshold and by varying S o , as in the case of the Si PIN diode. After various trials, the low-level threshold is set at 9 mV and at 40 mV the high-level threshold. Finally, a set of 32 acquisitions, lasting 1 ms each, was stored with both 'beam open' and 'beam closed' operation. Both sets of data were analysed applying the same procedure, to isolate the contributions coming from noise and environmental background. The results are shown in figure To state that a SiPM based system is adequate as a neutron detector on a real neutron instrument, more tests are necessary. Also, every potential use of this prototype on a larger scale requires new effort in designing and testing proper readout electronics. As mentioned in the main Introduction, the project on the Silicon-based neutron detectors is under development at the Department of Physics in Perugia. In the past few years, several studies have been performed and different designs have been implemented and tested Remind that what has been performed was a feasibility investigation of the devices. The aim of the work was to understand if is possible to grown better, i.e., more uniform, samples compared with the one was used for the measurements with the Si PIN diode presented in section 6.3, which affect significantly the efficiency of the device, and with a low-cost effectiveness solution. The goal is to customize the production of Gd samples for the testing phase of the detector, in order to have Gd converters available and at a relative low price. Several studies on deposition techniques empoying the Gadolinium have been performed; some literature references are reported in Many deposition techniques have been developed to grow thin film in a controlled way. A widely used method is the sputter deposition, which is a Physical Vapour Deposition (PVD) by ejecting material from a target, due to the bombardment of the target by energetic particles, onto a substrate. Several type of deposition exploit the sputtering, such as ion-beam sputtering, reactive sputtering and magretron sputtering. Another technique is the sol-gel deposition, where a sol is a dispersion of a solid particles in a liquid and a gel is a state where both liquid and solid are dispersed in each other, presenting a solid network with liquid components. This process usually consists of four step: a colloidal solution is formed and it is coated on a substrate by spraying, dipping or spinning; the particles in sol are then polymerised and produce a gel in a state of a continuous network, finally the gel is heated to separate the two phases and form an amorphous or crystalline coating One of the common methods of physical vapour deposition is the Thermal Evaporation, which is a method of thin-film deposition of pure materials to the surface of various objects. The coatings are usually in the thickness range of angstroms to microns. The thermal evaporation involves heating a solid material inside a high vacuum chamber, the temperature must be high enough to produce some vapour pressure, which is related to the evaporation rate of a liquid or a solid. Inside the vacuum, indeed, even a relatively low vapour pressure is sufficient to raise a vapour cloud inside the chamber. This evaporated material stream crosses the chamber and hits the substrate, sticking to it as a coating or film With this set-up the crucible can reach a temperature of 1250 • C and it is directly proportional to the current provided by the power supply, as shown in figure Temperatue (°C) Three measurements have been performed, two of which using the natural gadolinium (Deposition I and II), because it is less expensive than the isotopic gadolinium, and one with a gadolinium trichloride as a source material (Deposition III). The melting point of natural gadolinium is T m ≈ 1300 • C , while T m ≈ 600 • C in the case of the GdCl 3 . The vacuum chamber was at a pressure on the order of 10 -6 mbar for all the three deposition tests, the pressure trend is shown in figure In Deposition I a temperature of the crucible T c = 1100 • C was reached with a current i = 8A, in Deposition II T c = 1220 • C (i = 9A) while in Deposition III T c = 830 • C (i = 6A). Note that only in the case of GdCl 3 the temperature of the crucible is above the melting point of the material. Due to the feature of the set-up it is not possible to reach T c of the Gd, the crucible is at about 200 • C and 100 • C below the melting point in Deposition I and II respectively. Although the GdCl 3 melting temperature is suitable for our experimental equipment, it is a hygroscopic material. Therefore, once in air the coated layer absorbs water and it separates from the substrate. On the other hand, even if was not reached the exact T c value with the Gd, some evaporation is still possible. In order to verify the coating the substrate were weighted, which is a silicon slab (2 × 7 cm 2 ) as sketched in figure where V dep is the volume of the deposited material, ρ = 7.901 g/cm 3 in the case of Gd and S = 21 cm 2 is the area of the silicon slab. In table 6.1 is reported the calculated thickness in Deposition I and II. M Si (g) M SiGd (g) V dep (cm 3 ) T h (nm) Dep. I 1.5026±1 • 10 -4 1.5028±1 • 10 -4 0.25 • 10 -4 ± 0.17 • 10 -4 12 ±8.4 Dep. II 1.5066±1 • 10 -4 1.5077±1 • 10 -4 1.39 • 10 -4 ± 0.17 • 10 -4 66 ±8.4 The Deposition I lasted approximately 24 hours, while Deposition 2 measurement run for about three days. Due to the increased temperature and the duration of the measurement, the second test shows a thickness about 6 times higher than the value calculated in the first experiment. To ensure that the deposition has occurred, an X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) experiment was performed. This is one of the most common technique used to determine the materials in a sample. The X-Ray fluorescence is the emission of secondary X-ray from a material, when its atoms are externally excited by high-energy short-wavelength radiation, such as X-rays. This may lead to the ejection of one or more electrons from an inner orbital, thus the atomic structure becomes unstable, leading to electrons from higher orbitals to transition into the lower orbital to fill the hole left by the ejected electron. These high-energy electrons must release energy to fill the lower energy vacancies, and this energy is emitted as photons with an energy/wavelength characteristic of the difference between the initial and the final energy state of the electrons in the two orbitals. The wavelength of emitted wave can be calculated using Plank's law: The electrons of an atom are distributed in energetic levels, shell, which are named corresponding to the quantum number n = 1, 2, 3, 4..., respectively K, L, M, N, ..., a sketch is shown in figure Gd lines E(keV) The experiment has been performed with the samples obtained after the gadolinium deposition and with the only silicon slab without the coating. The spectrometer has been calibrated using well know sample materials, thanks to the relation λ(Å) Three set of measurements have been performed, with the two silicon sample coated respectively in the Deposition I and Deposition II test, and the relative reference measurement with a silicon sample without the coating. Figure As mentioned before, this was a feasibility test to investigate the possibility of growing gadolinium coatings on silicon substrate. Due to the limitation of the equipment operation, especially the maximum temperature achievable by the crucible, it was not possible to grow samples in a controlled way. Nevertheless, this preliminary study provides a promising result, even if further and more detailed studies are needed. Of particular importance will be to measure, with an electron microscope, the actual thickness of the gadolinium layer and the flatness of the deposition on the substrate. A dedicated study must be performed, and it is not the topic of the present work. However, from the X-ray fluorescence measurements, it has been verified that the gadolinium has been deposited on the silicon substrate, and that thermal vapour deposition is a viable technique. Neutron scattering techniques offer a unique combination of structural and the dynamic information of atomic and molecular systems over a wide range of distances and times. The increasing complexity in science investigations driven by technological advances is reflected in the studies of neutron scattering science, which enforces a diversification and an improvement of experimental tools, from the instrument design to the detector performance. It calls as well for more advanced data analysis and modelling. The operation of new generation, high-intensity neutron sources, is therefore necessary. Among all, the European Spallation Source (ESS), which is presently under construction in Lund (Sweden). The high brightness opens up the possibility of studying currently not solved problems and to do new science, which is outside the core science case, enabled by the possibility of better measurements. The improvements in resolution, count rate and signal-to-background ratio, achievable with the new instrumentation, also drives the research of alternative technologies to replace the 3 He-based detector technology. In addition to the 3 He storage crisis of the past few years, this technology is, indeed, unable to fulfil the requirement of increasing performance. Two different alternatives have been presented in this manuscript: a boron-based, and a solid state silicon-based thermal neutron detector technologies. The boron-based gaseous detector, the Multi-Blade, is currently under design at ESS, but it has been introduced at ILL in 2005. The Multi-Blade is a small area detector for neutron reflectometry application and the most challenging requirements for the detector are the spatial resolution and the count rate capability. Several tests have been performed to validate the demands established by the experimental technique. The technical aspects and characterization of the detector have been mainly explored at the Source Testing Facility at Lund university and at the Budapest Research Centre. Whereas a scientific campaign of measurements have been carried out in a real reflectometry environment at the CRISP reflectometer at ISIS, for the first time. The sole improvement in resolution of the detector are not enough to ensure the better performance of the instruments, the signal-to-background ratio affects the figure-of-merit for most instruments. Therefore, the study of background is fundamental to reach a better background rejection, which can improve the figureof-merit, leading to significant impact on an instrument's operation, especially at the new high-intensity sources. A full characterization of the Multi-Blade detector is reported, technical and scientific, together with a dedicated study on fast neutron sensitivity performed for the first time on a boron-based thermal neutron detector. The solid state silicon-based detector is a relative new technology in the neutron field, these devices are already widely used in high-energy physics application, and in the last decades several studies have been performed to examine the use of solid state detectors for neutron detection. A Si-PIN diode couple to a Gadolinium converter layer has been described. It is under development at the University of Perugia, together with a description of the Pulse Shape analysis method proposed, for this class of devices, to optimize the discrimination of the neutron signals from the noise and background radiation. This analysis has been applied to the measurements and a set of simulations has been built up to reproduce a realistic data-set to test the effectiveness of the algorithm. The method was also applied to a SiPM, tested together with the PIN diode at ILL, which is very demanding in terms of signal analysis, because of the very high noise and the low light output of the scintillator. Both the devices are potentially suitable in application of large area detector in neutron scattering with a sub millimeter resolution and high counting rate. One of the most challenging technique in neutron scattering is the neutron reflectometry, it is particularly demanding in terms of instrument design and detection performances. Nowadays several methods have been proposed to increase the incoming flux leading to improvements for specular neutron reflectivity measurements. Along with the instruments operation the detectors response must be refined. The current detector technology is limited mainly as regards the spatial resolution, 3 times better than the state-of-the-art, and counting rate capability, 10 2 -10 3 times better than the state-of-the-art. A Multi-Blade detector has been built and it has been tested on the CRISP [94] reflectometer at ISIS (Sciente & Technology Facilities Council in UK The spatial resolution of a detector is, indeed, deeply connected to the achievable q-resolution of the instrument. The calculated q z is a combination of the neutron wavelength and the scattering angle, the latter can be corrected taking into account the spatial resolution of the detector and thus a higher q-resolution is achieved. When measuring the specular reflectivity from a sample which shows interference fringes in q z , such as the Iridium on Silicon, the fringes get more visible as the spatial resolution of the detector improves. The result has been compared to a conventional non-position sensitive detector and with a state-of-the-art detector with 2 mm resolution. It is possible to obtain the same results only using a very fine collimated beam, which leads to a considerable increasing in the measurement time. It has been shown that the CRISP instrument can be operated, thanks to the Multi-Blade, in the REFocus mode The overall test on the CRISP reflectometer demonstrates that the detector is matching the requirements to perform neutron reflectometry measurements, and that the Multi-Blade detector technology is mature, and ready for implementation on neutron reflectometers. Not only the ESS reflectometers, but also other reflectometers at other facilities in the world, can profit from the Multi-Blade detector technology. Two papers have been published on this work The new generation high-intensity sources lead to benefit in neutron science, because of the high brightness available. Higher intensities mean higher signals, but higher background as well. The signal-to-background ratio is an important feature to study, in order to achieve the best background rejection. Fast neutrons and γ-rays are among the major sources of background. In particular, in a pulsed source, which exhibits a strong component of epithermal and fast neutrons. The γ-ray sensitivity for the boron-based neutron detector has been previously studied The physical effects that affect the fast neutron sensitivity in boron-10-based gaseous detectors for thermal neutrons which are being developed at ESS have been investigated. The investigation of the physical mechanisms, cross section and the theoretical calculation of the probability of interaction in several materials, together with the simulations of the same processes provide an overview and an overall understanding of the presented work. The fast neutron sensitivity of the Multi-Blade has been measured for three fast neutron sources ( 252 Cf, 241 Am/Be, 238 Pu/Be) and it was found that for a fixed software threshold of 100 keV, which leads to the optimal neutron efficiency, it is approximately 10 -5 , with an uncertainty no more than a factor two dominated by the calculation of the solid angle. A comparison between the γ-ray sensitivity and the fast neutron sensitivity has been performed. It has been used for the γ-ray measurements a 60 Co source. A value for the γ-ray sensitivity (below 10 -8 ) was obtained, about 3 orders of magnitude lower than the fast neutron sensitivity for the same threshold. The value for gamma sensitivity comes from both a low interaction cross section and from a low probability of detection of a signal over a threshold. For the fast neutron sensitivity, only the low interaction probability helps keep the sensitivity low. The measurements presented here, and published in Solid state Si-based detector technology is nowadays a viable alternative in neutron detection which can find application at the instrumentation of future sources. The promising performances and the capability to couple to high integration electronics push forward the development of real time and single event analysis systems. This is a significant advance bringing in the potential to achieve higher performances and to meet the requirements of future applications in high brilliance neutron beams. Here the results of neutron test measurements on two different Si-based devices have been presented, and a pulse shape analysis approach that was applied to both simulated and measured neutron data has been discussed. The final goal of this work is to propose a solution to the use of Si-based detectors as neutron counters with on-line and real time, pulse shape analysis system. The Si PIN diode couple to a Gadolinium converter have a potential to improve detection efficiency beyond ≈ 30% by optimising the deposition technique of the converter and by coupling two diodes to the same in-the-middle converter. A set of simulations has been built up based on the data acquired with this detector. The pulse shape method has been applied both to simulation and measurements. It has been shown that this method works in both cases, and a good agreement on the different parameters of the algorithm has been achieved. The measured efficiency of about 30% is reached with the present prototype, further implementations include a better deposition of the gadolinium layer, a discussion of a feasibility test is reported in this work, and the use of integrated circuit technology for high density readout electronics, which can lead to improve the detection efficiency and the detector performance. The pulse shape analysis has been also applied to the SiPM device, which has a spatial resolution of ≈ 3 x 3 mm 2 and resolutions of ≈ 1 mm 2 can be achieved without difficulty. A system composed of many such devices, with individual plexiglass light guides and reflectors (for example, teflon tape as in the present case) does not have cross talk. Local instantaneous counting rates up to at least 500 kHz, per cm 2 , with 10% of dead time are already accepted as the pulse length is below 200 ns. The pulse shape method here proposed responds well to the requirements of the signal analysis necessary for this detector technology when applied to neutron counting, and the implementation of this method leads to improved detector performances. The approach can be implemented on FPGAs, adopting simplified numerical calculation as well. A paper has been published on this work Each of the presented results represents a step forward and a point for further developments, mandatory for the final installation of these new neutron detector technologies in a real instrument. Two suitable alternatives for neutron detection have been presented, which are able to fulfil the increased performance demands on neutron detectors, driven by the operation of new generation high-intensity sources with improved instrument design. Better instrumentation is a core driver of novel scientific fields, it has been shown, indeed, how the science and the technical aspects are strongly correlated and the improvements deriving from it, in real experimental conditions. 6 