Coupling of atoms is the basis of chemistry, yielding the beauty and richness of molecules. We utilize semiconductor nanocrystals as artificial atoms to form nanocrystal molecules that are structurally and electronically coupled. CdSe/CdS core/shell nanocrystals are linked to form dimers which are then fused via constrained oriented attachment. The possible nanocrystal facets in which such fusion takes place are analyzed with atomic resolution revealing the distribution of possible crystal fusion scenarios. Coherent coupling and wavefunction hybridization are manifested by a red shift of the band gap, in agreement with quantum mechanical simulations. Single nanoparticle spectroscopy unravels the attributes of coupled nanocrystal dimers related to the unique combination of quantum mechanical tunneling and energy transfer mechanisms. This sets the stage for nanocrystals chemistry to yield a diverse selection of coupled nanocrystal molecules constructed from controlled core/shell nanocrystal building blocks. These are of direct relevance for numerous applications in displays, sensing, biological tagging and emerging quantum technologies. Colloidal semiconductor Quantum Dots (CQDs) that contain hundreds to thousands of atoms have reached an exquisite level of control, side by side with gaining fundamental understanding of their size, composition and surface controlled properties leading to their implementation in technological applications Coupled quantum dots were prepared by means of molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) To this end we introduce a facile and powerful strategy for coupled CQD molecules with precise control over the composition and size of the barrier in between them to allow for tuning their electronic coupling characteristics and optical properties. This entails the use of core/shell CQDs as artificial atom building blocks. In terms of the band gap engineering, in first instance, tuning the core size is used to manipulate the wave-functions and energies of the electron and hole. On top of this, further control is afforded by the synthesis of shells on these cores. While the chemical bond is the basis for combining atoms in molecules, connecting CQDs has to occur through adjoining of their crystal faces to form a continuous crystal. Thus, fusing two core/shell CQDs yields a homodimer with a tailored barrier dictated by the shell composition, thickness and fusion reaction conditions. With such control, using high resolution aberration corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy, we observed and analyzed the orientation relationships including homo-plane-attachment and hetero-plane-attachment in the fusion process. Moreover, the manifestations of quantum coupling were revealed by the broadening and red shift of the band gap transition observed in absorption and photoluminescence, in agreement with the quantum-mechanical calculations for the system. The scale of the hybridization energies and corresponding shifts are significantly lower as compared to diatomic molecules. This is expected considering the much larger dimensions of the CQD building blocks compared to atoms and the different potential energy landscape within the CQD molecule. The coupling also leads to broadening of the excited state transitions of the CQD dimers and the absorption spectrum for the high energy bands is modified as well. The emerging attributes of coupling are also revealed by single nanoparticle spectroscopy studies yielding modified electron-hole recombination rates and single photon statistics in CQD dimers in comparison to monomers. The approach introduced herein, serves as a basis for a wide selection of CQD molecules utilizing the rich collection of the artificial atom core/shell CQD building blocks. Such CQD molecules bear significant promise for their utilization in numerous applications, including in light-emitting devices, displays, photovoltaics and sensors. For example, the controlled formation of heterodimers consisting of CQD monomers with varying core sizes is of direct relevance for dual color emission. Similarly, forming a heterodimer with a staggered (type-II) band alignment between the two CQD building blocks is envisioned for electric field sensing. Additionally, there is high potential for CQD molecules to be used in emergent quantum technologies such as quantum computation CQD molecules offer enhanced coupling efficiency by their smaller sizes and by the small distances between the QDs resulting in quantum mechanical coupling an order of magnitude larger than prior MBE grown QD systems that is well resolved even at room temperature. This advance significantly widens the scope of quantum technologies applications of coupled quantum dot systems. Exemplary coupled homodimer molecules were generated from CdSe/CdS core/shell Next, the SiO2 template nanoparticles were selectively etched by HF treatment. Size-selective precipitation was used to separate out the monomers and obtain a highly dimer enriched sample (Fig. The dimerization procedure yields a dimer structure with an organic insulating barrier. Hence, to achieve a coupled system, a last step of fusion is required. The fusion procedure was performed while adding Cd-oleate and heating to 180 °C for 20 h. Fig. After the fusion step, the resultant CQD dimer leaves an interesting optical signature of a red-shift in the absorption and photoluminescence spectra along with broadening of the band gap and excited state spectral features (Fig. To this end, we have employed quantum mechanical calculations to visualize the wavefunction hybridization and to calculate the expected red-shift in the different CQD dimers. The changed potential energy landscape upon fusion leads to hybridization of the monomer QD wave-functions in the dimers (Fig. to calculate the energy levels and wave-functions of the fused CdSe/CdS dimer and monomers within an effective-mass based approximation (Supplementary Discussion and Supplementary Table The conduction band in this system is demonstrating the fundamental textbook example of hybridization. According to this model, when the distance between two atoms is decreased, their wave-functions will hybridize to form a symmetric bonding state and anti-symmetric anti-bonding state with energy difference of twice the hopping energy. The bonding and anti-bonding electron wave-functions, which, respectively, are in-phase and anti-phase superpositions of the monomer wave-functions, are presented in Fig. Considering the case of one exciton residing in the dimer and taking into account the Coulombic interaction between the electron-hole pair, since the hole wave-function is essentially not hybridized, the hole is in one of the dots and consequently the electron does not see a symmetric double QDs' potential anymore. The calculated two lowest energy levels wave-functions of the electron including the Coulombic interaction are presented in Fig. An additional signature for the coupling in fused dimers is observed in the absorption spectra at higher energies. Figure We next consider further the nontrivial fusion stage and its consequences. Analysis by HAADF-STEM confirms that coupled dimer formation is indeed achieved based on fusion of the 1.9/4.0 nm core/shell QD monomers (Fig. (0002)||(101 ̅ 1), (101 ̅ 1)||(101 ̅ 0) (Supplementary Fig. The generality of our formation strategy is well manifested also for the other CQD homodimers. Analytical and structural STEM analysis for the 1.4/2.1 nm core/shell CQDs are shown in Fig. Further manifestations of coupling are observed in the fluorescence properties studied both in ensemble and as single particles, comparing monomers with unfused and fused dimers. For the 1.4/2.1 nm CQDs the fluorescence decays vary, with monomers showing a nearly single exponential lifetime of 25ns whereas fused dimers show nearly bi-exponential decay with a fast component of 5ns (Supplementary Table Unfused dimers show an intermediate behavior. Molecules of the larger 1.9/4.0 nm CQDs exhibit significantly smaller changes in lifetimes upon fusion, supporting the role of coupling in the variations observed for the 1.4/2.1nm CQDs (Supplementary Fig. This establishes that the fusion procedure in its entirety did not change the core/shell CQDs. We consider two possible mechanisms related to coupling, both leading to shortening the lifetime in dimers. First, resonance energy transfer between the two dots (Fig. Next, we consider the photon statistics, which in CQDs are strongly influenced by multicarrier effects. An increment in the g 2 (0) value was found in the case of dimers in general with the possibilities of either two emission centers in the excitation spot or intrinsic properties of coupled systems. Specifically, in the fused dimers, the particles absorb the light as one unit, and at low excitation regime (<N>~0.1) the possibility of emission from one of the centers is rational statistically. The full understanding of the g 2 (0) value requires more rigorous experimental studies while an interesting multicarrier configuration can be realized in these fused CQD dimers. In dimer CQD molecules, a new type of biexcitons can occur, with each exciton occupying a different core (Fig. at low excitation power] observed for the dimers versus monomers can be explained by this new type of biexciton for which the non-radiative Auger decay will be strongly suppressed increasing the biexciton quantum yield (QY) (Supplementary Fig. An additional difference relates to the fluorescence flickering in the dimers rather than distinct on-off fluorescence of the monomers (Fig. This study introduces a robust route to the realization of coupled colloidal quantum dot molecules with high purity. The construction strategy for the CQD molecules utilizes well-controlled CdSe/CdS core/shell nanocrystal artificial atom building blocks constructing homodimers fused via "constrained attachment" of the nanocrystal facets. The synthesized novel CQD dimer structures, emitting in the visible range, exhibit electronic coupling at room temperature signified by the red-shift and broadening of the band-edge transition observed both in absorption and in photoluminescence. This is attributed to the quantum coupling and hybridization of the monomer wavefunctions within the CQD molecules, as supported by quantum mechanical calculations. Broadening and modification of the absorption transitions at higher energies are also related to the coupling effects within the CQD dimer molecules. Furthermore, the photophysical properties of the CQD molecules at single nanoparticle level exhibit lifetime shortening, fluorescence flickering, and an increase in the g2 value for the photon antibunching compared to monomers. These characteristics indicate the introduction of additional recombination pathways and the rich possibilities for multiexciton configurations in the artificial CQD molecule compared with the monomers, also related to coupling within the system. Formation of coupled CQD homodimer molecules sets the stage for Nanocrystal Chemistry. Considering the rich selection of size and composition controlled CQDs emphasizes the analogy of these artificial atoms to atoms of the periodic table discovered by Mendeleev 150 years ago. As a future outcome, we foresee the formation of a diverse variety of coupled CQD molecules with prodigious promise for their utilization in numerous optoelectronic, sensing and quantum technologies applications. Oleylamine (OAm, 70%), oleic acid (OA, 99%), 1-octadecene (ODE, 90%), cadmium oxide (CdO, ≥ 99.99%), selenium (Se, 99.99%), trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO, 99%), 1-octanethiol (≥98.5%), pentaerythritol tetrakis(3-mercapto-propionate) (95%), ammonia aqueous (28.5%), tetrahydrofuran (THF, ≥99.9%), N-methylformamide (NMF, 99%), toluene (99.8%), hydrofluoric acid (HF, 48%), polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP, 10k), ethanol (99%), tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS, 98%), hexane (95%) and (3-Mercaptopropyl) trimethoxysilane (MPTMS, 95%) were obtained from Sigma Aldrich. Trioctylphosphine (TOP, 97%) was purchased from Strem Chemicals. Octadecylphosphonic acid (ODPA, >99% was purchased from PCI synthesis. All the reagents were used as received without further purification. Briefly, 60 mg CdO, 280 mg ODPA and 3 g TOPO were added to a 50 mL flask. The mixture was heated to 150 °C and degassed under vacuum for 1 hour. Under argon flow, the reaction mixture was heated to 320 °C to form a colourless clear solution. After adding 1.0 mL TOP to the solution, the temperature was brought up to 350 °C. At this point Se/TOP solution (60 mg Se in 0.5 mL TOP) was swiftly injected into the flask. The reaction was kept at 350 °C for suitable time and then stopped by removal of the heating mantle. The resulting CdSe particles were precipitated with acetone and redispersed in 3 mL hexane for use as a stock solution. For the shell growth reaction, a hexane solution containing 200 nmol of CdSe colloidal quantum dots (CQDs) mixed with ODE (6 mL) and OAm (6 mL). The reaction solution was degassed under vacuum at room temperature for 30 min and at 90 °C for additional 30 min to completely remove the hexane, water and oxygen inside the reaction solution. Then the reaction solution was heated up to 310 °C under argon flow and magnetic stirring. During the heating, when the temperature reached 240 °C, a desired amount of cadmium (II) oleate (Cd-oleate, diluted in 6 mL ODE) and octanethiol (1.2 equivalent amounts to Cdoleate, diluted in 6 mL ODE) was injected dropwise into the growth solution at a rate of 3 mL/h using a syringe pump. Upon precursor infusion, 2 mL oleic acid was quickly injected and the solution was further annealed at 310 °C for 30 min. The resulting CdSe/CdS core/shell CQDs were precipitated by adding ethanol, and then redispersed in hexane. The particles were further purified by additional two precipitation-redispersion cycles and finally suspended in ~2 ml hexane. 120 μL MPTMS precursor was mixed with 30 mL ammonia aqueous solution (1%) under strong stirring. After stirring for 1 min, the solution was stored overnight. The SiO2 NPs were collected by centrifugation and dispersed in 10 mL of ethanol. Then the SiO2 solution was mixed with PVP solvent (0.02 g/mL) for 30min. Finally, the nanoparticles were stored after the cleaning by centrifugation. The synthesis of CdSe/CdS@SiO2 1mL of SiO2 NPs (0.0079 g/mL) was mixed with 0.5 nmol CdSe/CdS NPs using vortex for 5 min. Then 5 mL of ethanol was added into the vails to precipitate and remove the unattached NPs. After three washing cycles the final SiO2@CdSe/CdS NPs were redispersed in 5 mL of ethanol. The CdSe/CdS@SiO2 was dispersed in 5 mL of ethanol. Then 330 μL of ammonia solvent (28.5% wt %) was added into the solution with stirring for 5 min. Thereafter, 50 μL of TEOS was added dropwise into the solution. After stirring for 10 h, the resulting solvent was centrifuged (6000 rpm, 5 min) and redispersed in 5 mL of THF. A tetrathiol linker ,pentaerythritol-tetrakis (3-mercapto-propionate), (200 μL) was added to the CdSe/CdS@SiO2 solution. Then 0.6 nmol of CdSe/CdS CQDs were added and the solution was stirred in an oil bath at 60 °C overnight. Samples were cleaned by centrifugation (6000 rpm,5 min) and redispersed with 10 mL of THF for storage. 1 mL of Dimer-CdSe/CdS@SiO2 CQDs was centrifuged (5000 rpm, 5 min), and later mixed with 2 mL of mixed HF/NMF solvent (10%) under stirring for 10 h. Upon etching, the color of the samples changed to light yellow, which indicates on the removal of the SiO2. Thereafter, the samples were precipitated by centrifugation (6000 rpm, 10 min) and washed twice. Finally, the samples were redispersed in 2 mL of ethanol. We utilized silica nanoparticles as a template 1. Fabrication of SiO2 nanoparticles, coated by MPTMS. This kind of SiO2 particle presents thiol groups on its outer surface, which are later used for the binding of the CQDs. 2. Core/shell CQDs binding to the SiO2 particle surface: mixing a solution of the chosen core/shell CQDs with the SiO2 nanoparticles allows their binding to the available thiol sites on the silica surface. 3. Growth of a secondary thin layer of SiO2 on the QDs@ SiO2 for masking: In this manner the CQDs are immobilized and cannot rotate or reorient while only a top hemisphere is remained exposed for further chemical functionalization of the CQDs. 4. Selective surface decoration of the CQDs by linker groups: Chemical grafting of a functional structure based on thiol group as linkers is then applied which selectively reacts only with the exposed NC hemisphere. Here, a tetrathiol ligand was added as a linker by a ligand exchange reaction on the exposed CQDs surface (for example oleyamine). 5. Forming the dimer geometry on the silica surface: Addition of a solution with the second CQDs allows their conjugation, yielding a controlled formation of a dimer structure through the binding linker. 6. Dimer release: The dimers are released from the silica surface and separated. Here, this can be achieved by selective SiO2 etching using an HF/NMF solution. 7. Fusion to form the coupled CQD molecule: The dimers are fused by addition of a suitable precursor and heated to form a continuous link between the two shell regions of the pre-made dimers. Additional optional purification (size selective separation) of the dimers from free monomer and higher linked oligomers is possible in between steps 6 and 7, or after the fusion step. The core/shell structure of the monomer is directly identified by atomic resolution STEM-HAADF imaging followed by fast Fourier transform (FFT) analysis (Supplementary Figure 