Motivated by the recent observation of correlated insulator states and unconventional superconductivity in twisted bilayer graphene, we study the dependence of electron correlations on the twist angle and reveal the existence of strong correlations over a narrow range of twist-angles near the magic angle. Specifically, we determine the on-site and extended Hubbard parameters of the lowenergy Wannier states using an atomistic quantum-mechanical approach. The ratio of the on-site Hubbard parameter and the width of the flat bands, which is an indicator of the strength of electron correlations, depends sensitively on the screening by the semiconducting substrate and the metallic gates. Including the effect of long-ranged Coulomb interactions significantly reduces electron correlations and explains the experimentally observed sensitivity of strong correlation phenomena on twist angle. Introduction-The recent discovery of strong-correlation phenomena in magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene (tBLG), namely unconventional superconductivity in proximity to insulator states To help understand the microscopic origins of strongcorrelation phenomena in tBLG, a wide range of theoretical approaches have been used. Atomistic tightbinding calculations The material-specific parameters that enter the interacting low-energy Hamiltonians of tBLG are often expressed in a Wannier function basis In this article, we investigate the dependence of electron correlations in tBLG on the twist angle. In particular, we carry out atomistic tight-binding calculations for a set of twist angles and construct WFs for each twist angle to determine the matrix elements of the screened Coulomb interaction between electrons in the flat bands. We demonstrate that both screening and the long-ranged interaction drastically reduce the range of twist-angles over which strong correlation phenomena may be expected. Specifically, the range is found to be only 0.1 • around the magic angle, in good agreement with experimental estimates Methods-To gain insights into the electronic structure of tBLG, we solve the atomistic tight-binding Hamiltonian given by where ĉ † i and ĉi are, respectively, the creation and annihilation operators of electrons in p z -orbitals of atom i, and t(r ir j ) is the hopping parameter between atoms i and j obtained using the Slater-Koster approach ) with a magic angle of θ * = 1.18 • and δ = 0.5 eV As the flat bands are separated from all other bands by energy gaps in the magic-angle regime, maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWFs) where w nR is the WF and ψ mk denotes a Bloch eigenstate of the Hamiltonian with band index m and crystal momentum k; N = 30 × 30 is the number of k-points used to discretize the first Brillouin zone; R is a moiré lattice vector; U mnk is a unitary matrix that mixes the Bloch bands at each k and represents the gauge freedom of the Bloch states. To obtain MLWFs, U mnk is chosen such that the total quadratic spread of the resulting WFs is minimised To obtain a Wannier-transformed Hamiltonian that reproduces the symmetries of the band structure of tBLG, the WFs must be centered at the AB or the BA positions of the moiré unit cell To calculate MLWFs (see SM), it is expedient to choose an initial gauge by projecting the Bloch states onto some trial guess for the WFs In agreement with previous work In the Wannier basis, the interacting part of the Hamiltonian is given by where ĉ † nR and ĉnR are, respectively, the creation and annihilation operators of electrons in Wannier state |w nR , and V {niRi} denotes a matrix element of the screened Coulomb interaction, W (rr ). The largest matrix elements are usually obtained when For this case, the Coulomb matrix element is given by We evaluate Eq. ( In the second case, we include the effect of metallic gates on both sides of the tBLG (but separated from it by the hBN substrate). The resulting screened interaction is given by [53] where ξ = 10 nm is half the distance between the two metallic gates Including the screening from the metallic gates reduces the on-site Hubbard parameter by roughly a factor of two, see squares in Fig. Figure We fit our results for the extended Hubbard parameters (including the on-site term) to a modified Ohno potential Fig. The inset of Fig. Figure We find α ∼ 1.1 provides a good description of the data in the range of twist angles studied. Again, the extended Hubbard parameters collapse onto a universal curve upon rescaling the distances, as shown in the inset of Fig. Figure Our results thus demonstrate that electron correlations in tBLG can be continuously tuned as function of twist angle from a weakly correlated to a strongly correlated regime in the vicinity of the magic angle. Calculating the phase diagram of such a system is extremely challenging as most theoretical approaches are tailored to one of the two limiting cases and are correspondingly classified as weak-coupling or strong-coupling techniques. Quite generally, it is expected that tBLG undergoes a metalto-insulator transition as the strength of electron correlations increases, but the detailed microscopic nature of the insulating phase remains controversial. Mean-field theory and strong coupling techniques predict that the gapped phase in undoped tBLG is an antiferromagnetic insulator In materials with significant, long-ranged Coulomb interactions, a different measure of strong correlations is appropriate. In particular, in such systems the energy gained by moving one electron from a doubly-occupied orbital to a neighboring orbital is not V 00 , but U * = V 00 -V 01 While gapped states in tBLG have been observed at charge neutrality Superconductivity in tBLG occurs at low temperatures in the vicinity of the correlated insulator phases Summary-We studied the twist-angle dependence of electron correlations in tBLG. For this, we calculated on-site and extended Hubbard parameters for a range of twist angles and demonstrated that the on-site Hubbard parameters depend linearly on twist angle for both dielectric substrate and metallic gate screened interaction potentials. The extended Hubbard parameters decay slowly as function of the Wannier function separation and are reproduced accurately for all twist angles with an Ohno-like potential. By calculating the ratio of the interaction energy and the kinetic energy of electrons in tBLG, we predict the twist-angle windows where strong correlation phenomena occur. When the reduction of electron correlations arising from both screening and the long range of the electron interaction are taken into account, we find a critical twist-angle window of only 0.1 • which explains the experimentally observed twist-angle sensitivity of strong correlation phenomena in tBLG. To calculate the hopping parameters, we employ the Slater-Koster approach where V ppσ (r) = V 0 ppσ exp{q σ (1 -|r|/d AB )} and V ppπ (r) = V 0 ppπ exp{q π (1 -|r|/a)} with V 0 ppσ = 0.48 eV and V 0 ppπ = -2.7 eV The Bloch eigenstates of the tight-binding Hamiltonian are given by where φ z denotes the wavefunction of the p z -orbital, t j is the position of carbon atom j in the unit cell, N denotes the number of moiré unit cells in the crystal and c jnk are coefficients obtained from the diagonalization of the Hamiltonian. As mentioned in the main text, the four flat bands near the Fermi energy are separated form all other bands by energy gaps in the magic-angle regime. Hence, these bands form a manifold that can be wannierized without a disentanglement procedure To constrain the Wannier function centres, the selective localization method was employed to calculate two Wannier functions: one centered on the AB position and the other on the BA position of the moiré unit cell positions. In this approach, one minimizes the cost function where the first two terms describe the quadratic spread of the Wannier functions (with r 2 n = w nR |r 2 |w nR and rn = w nR |r|w nR To calculate maximally localized Wannier functions, a starting guess is required We are required to calculate M k,q mn = u mk |u nk+q for the Wannier90 code where r = rt j . Here φ z is the pseudo-hydrogenic p z orbital of carbon atoms. The integral can be solved exactly, yielding , where a 0 is the Bohr radius and Z is the effective charge of the carbon atom, taken to be 3.18 The initial guess, g n , is utilised to calculate A k mn = ψ mk |g n for the Wannier90 code where f (rr 0 ) is a Gaussian function centred at r 0 and v denotes a sub-lattice and layer of tBLG. Inserting this guess and the Bloch states in a local basis set, we have Note that v i only runs over the atoms located on the layer and sublattice of v. Let's assume that only non-vanishing contributions come from the same p z orbital, and that the Gaussian is a slowly varying function, such that it can be taken outside of the integral. After evaluating these operations, we arrive at This summation over R is performed over the entire crystal. To evaluate Eq. ( Inserting Eq. (S11) into Eq. ( where v lR jR denotes the Coulomb matrix elements between pairs of p z -orbitals at positions t l + R and t j + R , respectively. For in-plane separations larger the than nearest neighbor distance, we assume v lR jR = W (t l + R -[t j + R ]). For the on-site (v 00 = 17 eV) and nearest neighbour (v 01 = 8.5 eV) terms, we used values obtained from ab initio DFT calculations 