A spin-imbalanced Fermi gas with an attractive contact interaction forms a superconducting state whose underlying components are superpositions of Cooper pairs that share minority-spin fermions. This superconducting state includes correlations between all available fermions, making it energetically favorable to the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov superconducting state. The ratio of the number of up-and down-spin fermions in the instability is set by the ratio of the up-and down-spin density of states in momentum at the Fermi surfaces, to fully utilize the accessible fermions. We present analytical and complementary Diffusion Monte Carlo results for the state. For over a century, the phenomenon of superconductivity has captured the attention of theorists, who have provided fundamental revelations about its underlying principles. Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer (BCS) In a few-fermion context, an instability Current experimental developments enable the study of exotic superconducting phases in solidstate spin-imbalanced Fermi gases In this Letter we examine the ratio of number of majority-to minority-spin fermions in communal states underlying the superconducting state of a spin-imbalanced Fermi gas, compare the energetics of communal superconductivity favorably to that of FFLO superconductivity, and present analytical and complementary Diffusion Monte Carlo results for the state. We also discuss unique experimental consequences of the proposed communal superconductor. To explore communal superconductivity we examine a two-spin fermionic system with an attractive contact interaction. The quantum partition function, Z = D(ψ, ψ)e -S[ψ, ψ] , depends on the BCS action where ψ k,σ and ψk,σ are a fermion field and its Grassmann conjugate, for momentum k and spin species σ ∈ {↑, ↓}, ξ k,σ ≡ k,σ -μ σ where k,σ and μ σ are the species-dependent dispersion and chemical potential respectively, g > 0 is the strength of the attractive contact interaction, and ω is a fermionic Matsubara frequency. In this expression the momenta q, referred to henceforth as q-vectors, give the net momenta of coupled fermions. Our strategy is to build on the original BCS and FFLO theories that are directly applicable to the solid state, and so here adopt a Debye frequency cutoff on the sums over k, however similar results are obtained in cold atom gases provided proper regularization is carried out. We perform a Hubbard-Stratonovich decoupling in the Cooper channel, using a concise matrix formalism to express the action as where the vectors ψ σ = (ψ (qσ1+ςσk),σ , ψ (qσ2+ςσk),σ , . . .) T , with ς ↑ = +1 and ς ↓ = -1, the Grassman conjugates ψσ are similar, the matrices p,σ = -iω + ς σ ξ p,σ , and where the q σi run over all the q-vectors of species σ. We label the number of fermions in the underlying instability, and hence the number of q-vectors, per species by N σ : therefore the G -1 σ are N σ × N σ matrices and ∆ is an N ↓ × N ↑ matrix. We shall find that in spin-imbalanced systems N ↑ = N ↓ , so that ∆ is rectangular rather than square, and different numbers of fermions from each species are involved in the underlying instability. In the system represented by Fig. The elements of the ∆ matrix gap the dispersion. For the Fulde-Ferrell (FF) state With this expression for the action, working in the mean-field approximation, we can carry out a Ginzburg-Landau expansion of the regularized thermodynamic potential to obtain where T is the temperature. To make progress with this expression, we symmetrize the coupling amplitudes, ∆ q = ∆. Near the second-order transition to the normal state we may neglect high-order terms in ∆ and truncate the expression for the thermodynamic potential to with To evaluate these expressions, we specialize to the case of small Debye frequency, found for many conventional superconductors where J 0 = J(q, q, q, q), J ↑ = J(q + δq ↑ , q, q -δq ↑ , q), J ↓ = J(q, q + δq ↓ , q, q -δq ↓ ), and J ↑↓ = J(q + δq ↑ , q + δq ↓ , q -δq ↑ , q -δq ↓ ). Here q is taken to represent the average q-vector for the fermions, symmetrized between species, and δq σ is half the average separation between q-vectors for species σ, which in the small Debye frequency limit is orthogonal to the vector q. We follow the prescription of Ref. where k σF is the Fermi momentum of species σ. For a free dispersion J ↑↓ may be evaluated at zero temperature as where is the average Fermi momentum, k D is the Debye frequency and k ⊥ is the average extent of k in the direction perpendicular to q such that the fermions are within the Debye frequency of the Fermi energy. Similar expressions for J ↑ , J ↓ and J 0 can be found by taking δq ↓ = 0, δq ↑ = 0, or both. For k D k F , k ⊥ ∼ √ k F k D and Eq. ( To identify the optimal ratio of number of fermions involved in the communal superconductor, we express Eq. ( where the second equality was obtained from Eq. ( In the case of cold atoms in the absence of a Debye frequency, regularization of the divergent momentum summation in α can be done by using scattering theory to replace the weak interaction coupling parameter g with a formal expression involving the scattering length and another summation with the same UV divergence characteristics, resulting in a convergent expression This result confirms that the superconducting state is indeed communal, with pairs sharing minority-spin fermions to take advantage of all available correlations in spin-imbalanced systems. Eq. ( Our conclusions do not contradict the wellknown result that FFLO superconductivity is the ground state in one dimension, obtained separately by density matrix renormalization group The same optimization procedure that gave Eq. ( For reasonable values of the |δq σ | and |q| in spinimbalanced systems this expression gives values of N ↑ N ↓ > 1, confirming that the communal superconductor is indeed made up of multiple fermions of at least one spin species. Excessively high N ↑ N ↓ is energetically penalized by the highest term in the expansion of the thermodynamic potential, which goes as (N ↑ N ↓ ∆ 2 ) n , and so we expect communal superconductivity to have both N σ being reasonably small integers. In the spin-balanced limit Eq. ( The analysis may be adapted to the number conserving canonical ensemble by constructing the Helmholtz free energy F = Ω + μ ↑ n ↑ + μ ↓ n ↓ , where n σ = -∂Ω/∂μ σ is the total particle number of spin species σ, so F = (1 -μ ↑ ∂/∂μ ↑ -μ ↓ ∂/∂μ ↓ )Ω. As the chemical potential only appears in the propagator, it suffices to note that ∂G k,σ /∂μ ν = ς σ G 2 k,σ δ σ,ν and so the net result on N ↑ N ↓ and N ↑ /N ↓ of moving from the grand canonical ensemble to the canonical ensemble is to shift the functions J as leading to the same conclusions as in the grand canonical ensemble, namely that in the canonical ensemble the superconducting state is indeed communal with Now that we have shown that the communal superconductor is energetically favourable over single-plane-wave FFLO superconductivity in a spin-imbalanced Fermi gas, we need to confirm that we have not compromised the stability of the superconducting state. We validate this by examining the phase boundaries between the communal superconductor and three competitor phases. With increasing spin-imbalance, BCS superconductivity becomes unstable against FFLO superconductivity at the Chandrasekhar-Clogston limit The phase boundary between communal superconductivity and the normal state will also remain the same as between single-plane-wave FFLO superconductivity and the normal state. In both cases the second-order phase transition occurs when α = 0, and this condition is identical between FFLO and communal superconductivity, up to an irrelevant multiplicative factor of N ↑ N ↓ in Eq. ( Stability against phase separation can be expressed as the positive-definiteness of the total particle number susceptibility matrix This is the same as the equivalent expression for FFLO superconductivity, up to a factor of (N ↑ N ↓ ) 2 that cancels between the two sides of the inequality. This indicates that the line of stability against phase separation is the same for communal superconductivity as for FFLO superconductivity to leading order. Although the discussion above focuses on nearly aligned q-vectors, comparable to the FF state, it is known that the Larkin-Ovchinnikov (LO) state We supplement the preceding analysis with numerical evidence obtained from a quantum Monte Carlo study of a finite spin-imbalanced 2D homogeneous fermion gas with attractive interactions using the casino program with both a smaller and larger number of fermions, and in systems on a square simulation cell. As the Fermi surfaces form hexagons and have a 2:1 ratio of fermions, we expect a (N ↑ , N ↓ ) = (2, 1) instability. An ultratransferable pseudopotential where s i,j ≡ r ↑,i -Θ(N ↓ -i)r ↓,j , s ≡ |s i,j |, r σ,i is the position vector of the i-th fermion of spin species σ, k l is the lth shortest reciprocal-space vector, Θ is the Heaviside step function, and the {a l }, {b m } are optimisable parameters. The Jastrow factor is given by where r σ denotes the set of position vectors for all fermions of spin species σ, r i,j ≡ r ↑,i -r ↓,j , r ≡ |r i,j |, the G m are reciprocal-space vectors through which anisotropy may be introduced, and the {u k }, {p m } are optimisable parameters. J(r ↑ , r ↓ ) is thus a function of all opposite-spin fermion separations containing a short range isotropic u term, anisotropic p terms The trial wavefunction was optimised using Variational Monte Carlo ) is the creation (annihilation) operator for a fermion of momentum k and spin σ and is the momentum density. The results display strong anisotropy of the condensate fraction at r s q = 1/ √ 3π, regardless of whether in the Jastrow factor the p m are selected to permit anisotropy, constrained to ensure isotropy, or set to zero. The state observed is therefore not an artefect of (an)isotropy of the trial wavefunction, consistent with the communal state being the robust ground state. Furthermore, we confirm the sharing of minority-spin fermions between pairs by noting that the anisotropy is consistent with the pairing scheme shown in the upper right of Fig. The lack of a strong condensate fraction at r s q = 1/2π indicates that the FFLO phase is not the major contributor to the ground state. Finally we note for completeness that while there appears to be a BCS contribution to the condensate fraction, the uncertainty in the condensate fraction at r s q = 0 was twice as large as at other points and so that peak is half as significant as the others. Similar results were seen in systems with a 3:1 and 4:1 ratio at the Fermi surface, affirming the pairing result for N ↑ /N ↓ , and for systems with the same 2:1 ratio at the Fermi surfaces but different total numbers of fermions, namely 19 spin-up and 7 spindown fermions, and 127 spin-up and 37 spin-down fermions. The results obtained for systems with different numbers of fermions give us confidence that the observed state is not an artefact of finite size effects. We note for completeness that the condensate fraction was also gathered for pairs of the same spin species in an attempt to simultaneously search for induced p-wave superfluidity Having seen that communal superconductivity is energetically favorable over FFLO superconductivity, we now consider its possible experimental con-sequences. We focus on two effects where the communal nature of the underlying instability should be directly observable. Multiple phase transitions: With increasing spin-imbalance, that is increasing ν ↑ /ν ↓ , Eq. ( Superconducting order parameter: In real space the order parameter will exhibit a beat pattern due to the interference between similar qvectors, which could allow the identification of the particular q-vectors in the superconductor. The order parameter and its spread in momentum could be determined in an ultracold atomic gas experiment through density-density correlations measured from time-of-flight experiments Andreev reflection: The elementary excitations above the proposed ground state are predicted to be well-described by the few fermion analysis Beyond these experimental signatures, communal superconductivity also introduces the notion that the building block of a superconductor may involve the sharing of fermions between Cooper pairs. In particular, there can be fluctuations in the number of fermions in the underlying instability, which could lead to the renormalization of the properties of a spin-balanced superconductor. The analysis is also generalizable to systems with multiple underlying instabilities, more akin to crystalline FFLO superconductivity We have introduced the idea of a communal superconductor, whose underlying instability is composed of multiple pairs with shared fermions, to enable the use of all available inter-fermion correlations. We have shown that communal superconductivity is energetically favorable over FFLO superconductivity in spin-imbalanced Fermi gases, both analytically and with complementary DMC results, and that a communal superconductor has clear experimental signatures. Data used for this Letter are available online 