Quasiparticle interference (QPI) provides a wealth of information relating to the electronic structure of a material. However, it is often assumed that this information is constrained to two-dimensional electronic states. Here, we show that this is not necessarily the case. For FeSe, a system dominated by surface defects, we show that it is actually all electronic states with negligible group velocity in the z axis that are contained within the experimental data. By using a three-dimensional tight binding model of FeSe, fit to photoemission measurements, we directly reproduce the experimental QPI scattering dispersion, within a T-matrix formalism, by including both kz = 0 and kz = π electronic states. This result unifies both tunnelling and photoemission based experiments on FeSe and highlights the importance of kz within surface sensitive measurements of QPI. The iron-based superconductor FeSe has recently been a focal point in the study of unconventional superconductivity. The momentum dependence of the superconducting gap, extracted from angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) In order to resolve the differences in theoretical models of the electronic structure, it is important to study the results and conclusions extracted from experimental measurements, such as ARPES and QPI. However, there is currently a discrepancy between the interpretation of the data obtained by these two techniques. QPI measurements of FeSe In this report, we address this discrepancy. We show that the ARPES-based interpretation of the electronic structure, i.e a model which has equal quasiparticle weights for all orbitals, but only has one hole pocket and one electron pocket at the Fermi level, is fully consistent with the QPI measurements of FeSe, once all electronic scattering vectors which exhibit zero Fermi velocity in the k z axis are taken into account. This result therefore provides experimental unification of the elec- The grey bands show the states that we have manually excluded from the calculation in order to reproduce ARPES measurements tronic structure of FeSe, as determined by ARPES and STM, and highlights the importance of k z within the surface sensitive measurements of QPI. arXiv:1906.02150v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 21 Oct 2019 METHODOLOGY QPI is the phenomenon which occurs when propagating quasiparticles scatter elastically from a local potential caused by an impurity, leading to interference patterns in the local density of states. This effect is observable in an STM measurement as oscillations in the spatial-dependence of the tunnelling current emanating from a defect or vacancy. The Fourier transform of these oscillations then unveils a momentum-and energy-dependent structure that may be interpreted in terms of scattering processes, q = kk , where the momentum k and k are defined by the underlying single particle electronic structure. However, it is important to note that the information obtained from this two dimensional Fourier transform comes from measurements which, in real space, are restricted to tunnelling from the top-most layer of the material. As a consequence, for defects located in the surface layer of a material, which is the dominant form of impurities in FeSe This condition restricts the detectable scattering processes, to electronic states where both k and k have zero Fermi velocity along the k z axis ( We note that Eq. ( In order to facilitate a comparison between theory and experimental data, we next calculate the normalised LDOS, L(r, ω), also referred to as the Feenstra function Here, Ñ (r, ω) is the 2D inverse Fourier transform of Eq. (1). We then plot the Fourier transform of L(r, ω), in moment space, and directly compare our results with the QPI data from Ref. To calculate Eq. ( that includes a momentum dependent broadening parameter, Γ(k). We define Γ(k) as arbitrarily large (> 100 eV) in the vicinity of k = (0, π), where our tight binding model incorrectly describes the presence of a second electron pocket. For all other momenta we set Γ(k) to 1.25 meV. The Hamiltonian, Ĥ0 (k), then describes hopping between all five d-orbitals in the presence of spin orbit coupling. This is discussed in detail in Ref. In Fig. Direct agreement between theory and experiment can also be found at positive energies. The k z = 0 model of FeSe exhibits a hole band maxima at +7 meV In Fig In this manuscript we have shown that, in a system dominated by surface defects, it is not only the k z = 0 electronic states that are detected by QPI measurements, but all states with zero Fermi velocity in k z . We have focused on the case of FeSe, however, the conclusions drawn about the nature of scattering should be general for many materials, including heavy Fermions There is great current interest in the fate of the second electron pocket of FeSe, which is predicted to exist within the nematic phase In this work, our approach has been to take the ARPES data at face value, and thus to phenomenologically exclude the second electron pocket, and its associated bands, despite the fact that they are present in any reasonable tight-binding model of FeSe. Under this assumption, our simulations correctly reproduce many features of the QPI data, which is not the case when the second electron pocket is included. Thus, this technique, which is independent and complementary to that of ARPES, seems to also indicate the presence of only one electron pocket at the Fermi surface of FeSe. Previously, we have argued that the "one-electron-pocket" scenario can also naturally account for the observed superconducting gap structure of FeSe 