Understanding thermal transport through nanoscale van der Waals interfaces is vital for addressing thermal management challenges in nanoelectronic devices. In this work, the interfacial thermal conductance ( CA G ) between copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) nanoribbons is reported to be on the order of 10 5 Wm -2 K -1 at 300 K, which is over two orders of magnitude lower than the value predicted by molecular dynamics (MD) simulations for a perfectly smooth interface between two parallelly aligned CuPc nanoribbons. Further MD simulations and contact mechanics analysis reveal that surface roughness can significantly reduce the adhesion energy and effective contact area between CuPc nanoribbons, and thus result in an ultralow CA G . In addition, the adhesion energy at the interface also depends on the stacking configuration of two CuPc nanoribbons, which may also contribute to the observed ultralow CA G . Nanostructures, such as nanotubes, nanowires, and nanoribbons, are typically assembled into large-area arrays to construct efficient electronic and photonic devices Understanding thermal transport through nanoscale vdW interfaces is crucial for addressing heat dissipation problems in those devices. Interfacial thermal conductance is related to both materials in contact and interface properties including surface roughness, interfacial bonding and dislocations Recently, metal phthalocyanines, a class of organic semiconductor materials, have attracted much attention due to their advantages of facile synthesis, low-cost availability, tunable properties and flexibility. Their optical and electrical properties have been extensively studied for applications in organic photovoltaic cells In this work, we experimentally investigated thermal transport through the vdW interface between copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) nanoribbons. Multiple thermal measurements were carefully carried out on segments cut from the same CuPc nanoribbon to determine the thermal resistance of the contact region of two segments by using a suspended thermal bridge method As shown in Fig. To determine the thermal resistance of the contact region of two CuPc nanoribbons ( CC R ), thermal resistances of CuPc segments of the non-contact region and the contact thermal resistance between CuPc nanoribbons and heat source/sink should be properly deducted from the measured total thermal resistance of two CuPc nanoribbons with a planar contact. To achieve this goal, a uniform CuPc nanoribbon with a length of tens of microns was cut into five segments. Two segments were carefully aligned to form a planar contact, bridging two membranes of a suspended device as shown in Fig. The measured total thermal resistance of two CuPc nanoribbons with a planar contact ( tot_C R ) consists of three parts: the contact thermal resistance between CuPc nanoribbons and two membranes ( CM R ), thermal resistances of CuPc segments excluding the contact region ( CuPc1 R and CuPc2 R ), and the thermal resistance of the contact region ( CC R ). Then, the CC R can be determined by where 1 L and 2 L are suspended lengths from the contact region to heat source and heat sink, respectively, , w, and t are the thermal conductivity, width, and thickness of the CuPc nanoribbon. Similarly, for each single CuPc nanoribbon, the measured thermal resistance ( tot_S R ) can be written as where S L is the suspended length of the single CuPc nanoribbon. As discussed in our previous study For heat conduction through an interface between two quasi-one-dimensional nanostructures, heat flows along the nanostructure horizontally but through the interface vertically. To determine the CA G , some approximations were commonly made by researchers An analytical model was developed in this work, which assumes one-dimensional heat conduction in each nanoribbon and a constant CA G for the interface between two nanoribbons. ) 0 ) 0 where T T and B T denote the temperatures of top and bottom nanoribbons, respectively. These equations are similar to the two-temperature model t , H T is the temperature at the joint of the top nanoribbon and the heating membrane, and S T is the temperature at the joint of the bottom nanoribbon and the sensing membrane. Thus, CC R can be determined as The CA G can be determined from the experimentally measured CC R by solving Eq. ( The calculated temperature profile in the contact region clearly deviates from the linear distribution for the segment in the non-contact region for sample C1 Compared to the analytical model we derived, the approximation approach overestimates the first term at the right hand side of Eq. ( To elucidate the underlying mechanisms responsible for the observed ultralow CA G , we performed atomistic MD simulations on thermal transport through the interface between CuPc nanoribbons (see Sec. V in Ref. [25]). The inset of Fig. It is worth noting that the surfaces of CuPc nanoribbons are assumed to be perfectly smooth in the MD simulation, however, the samples we measured always have a certain level of surface roughness. The surface roughness of CuPc nanoribbons was characterized by using a contact mode AFM (AR Cypher, Oxford, UK). The scan size is 30 nm × 30 nm with 256 pixels for each axis. which can be fitted well by using a Gaussian distribution with a mean height of -0.03 nm and a root-mean-square (rms) roughness ( ) of 0.45 nm. Since the contact between two rough surfaces only occurs at peaks, the spacing between two surfaces varies from point to point, which will affect the adhesion energy between two surfaces. We first calculated the adhesion energy (see Sec. VI in Ref. ), which is a typical value for vdW interfaces ), the average adhesion energy is 0.065 Jm -2 , only 55% of the adhesion energy between two perfectly smooth CuPc nanoribbons. In our experiments, no external force is applied on two CuPc nanoribbons, so the mean separation distance should be larger than zero. In the literature, simple approaches have been proposed to estimate the mean separation distance between two surfaces from surface roughness. For example, Rumpf et al. suggested to take the mean separation distance as 1.485 times of the rms roughness for the contact between a smooth particle and a rough surface This gives a mean separation distance of 0.95 nm and a 0 E E of 13%, as indicated by the red dot in Fig. The contact between two rough CuPc nanoribbons may be reexamined in terms of the effective contact area by taking adhesion into account. Due to their elastic nature, adhesion will occur for two contacting CuPc nanoribbons. At molecular scale, the vdW interaction pulls two surfaces into contact, which will decay quickly with the increase of the distance. When two CuPc nanoribbons form a planar contact, a certain portion of surfaces is too far away from each other to sustain the adequate adhesion due to the surface roughness. The real contact area of an adhesive contact strongly depends on adhesion strength, material properties, and roughness parameters , where h is the height profile of the rough surface. h is estimated to be 0.63 for CuPc nanoribbons according to the AFM image [Fig. Scarraggi showed that the relative contact area 0 A A is around 0.06 at zero external load for surfaces with adhesion energy of 0.1 Jm -2 , rms roughness of 0.6 nm, and h of 0.0035 CuPc nanoribbons measured in this work have adhesion energy (0.12 Jm -2 ) and rms roughness (0.45 nm) similar to the surface studied in Ref. predicted by Persson and Scaraggi It should be noted that there are several possible stacking configurations for two CuPc nanoribbons. Considering that molecular stacking may affect the adhesion between two contacting surfaces, we calculated adhesion energies for different stacking configurations of two CuPc nanoribbons using MD simulations. Figure pristine stacking, a-axis translocation, bottom up and ab-plane rotation. In the pristine stacking, the atomic arrangement at the interface is identical to the packing inside a CuPc nanoribbon. On the basis of the pristine stacking, one ribbon is turned upside down in the bottom up configuration. In the a-axis translocation, CuPc molecules in one nanoribbon are slid by half of the lattice constant along the a-axis, while one nanoribbon is rotated by 90 for the ab-plane rotation. As seen in Fig. Furthermore, some other surface phenomena such as surface reconstruction may occur in nanostructures Unfortunately, similar to many other potential functions This work sheds light on understanding thermal transport through the vdW interface between nanostructures. Distinct from the point contact between MWCNTs, surface roughness plays a pronounced role for thermal transport through the planar contact between CuPc nanoribbons. MD simulations and contact mechanics analysis reveal that surface roughness will significantly reduce the adhesion energy and the effective contact area between CuPc nanoribbons, which will result in orders of magnitude lower CA G . This explains the ultralow CA G observed for CuPc nanoribbons as well as other planar contact An interface heat transfer model is derived to extract the interfacial thermal conductance between CuPc nanoribbons ( CA G ). As shown in the schematic in Fig. ), heat rates at the left, right, and bottom surfaces can be expressed as CA ( ) where T T and B T denote the temperatures of top and bottom nanoribbons, respectively, w and t are the width and thickness of the nanoribbon. The top, front, and back surfaces of the differential control volume are assumed to be adiabatic. Applying the conservation of energy principle to the differential control volume, a heat diffusion equation can be obtained for the top nanoribbon, ) 0 Similarly, the following equation can be derived for the bottom nanoribbon, ) 0 Subtracting Eq. S2b from Eq. S2a and assuming where The general solution of Eq. S3 is where A and B are unknown constants. Combining Eq. S2a with Eq. S2b and assuming The general solution of Eq. S6 is of the form where C and D are unknown constants. Thus, temperature distributions of top and bottom nanoribbons in the contact region ( 2 2 In the non-contact region, heat diffusion equations for top and bottom nanoribbons are where 1 L and 2 L are suspended lengths from the contact region to heat source and heat sink, respectively. Adiabatic and constant temperature boundary conditions are assumed for each nanoribbon, where H T is the temperature at the joint of the top nanoribbon and the heating membrane, and S T is the temperature at the joint of the bottom nanoribbon and the sensing membrane. Applying the boundary conditions in Eq. S10 to Eq. S8 and Eq. S9, the constants can be determined as ( ) where q is the heat rate along the nanoribbon. Temperature distributions of the top and bottom nanoribbons are solved as ( 1 ) 2 Note that all the heat will be conducted through the interface between two nanoribbons. q can be calculated by integrating the heat flux over the interface, . [S13a] Thus, q can be determined as The thermal resistance of the contact region between two nanoribbons can be calculated by [S15] Compared to Eq. S14 we derived, the approximation approach overestimates the first term by a factor of 2 and assumes that the coefficient in front of 2 R is equal to 1. For the further comparison, Eq. S14 can be rewritten as ), the coefficient is equal to 1, indicating that the analytical model we derived coincides with the approximation approach. However, for CuPc nanoribbons with relatively large intrinsic thermal resistances, is always larger than zero. Thus, the coefficient will be less than 1 as seen in Fig. The per unit length thermal resistance of the CuPc nanoribbon ( CuPc R ) and the contact thermal resistance ( CM R ) are determined from the measured thermal resistances of three single nanoribbons by the linear least squares fitting: where tot_S,i R and S,i L are uncertainties in the measured thermal resistance and the suspended length, respectively. The relative uncertainty in the measured thermal resistance ( tot_S, ) is evaluated by using the Monte Carlo method and is less than 4% in the temperature range of 50-100 K, and ~2% above 100 K. The suspended length is measured from the SEM image, and the error S,i L is estimated to be 10 nm. Thus, the relative uncertainty in the thermal conductivity can be calculated by where w and t are uncertainties in the width and thickness of the nanoribbon, respectively. The width is determined from the SEM image and the uncertainty is estimated as 2 nm. The thickness is measured by atomic force microscopy, and the uncertainty is estimated as 5 nm. For two nanoribbons with a planar contact, the thermal resistance of the contact region is determined by The relative uncertainty in the CC R is estimated by Table The molecules adjacent to the fixed ones are set as heat source and heat sink, respectively, using Langevin thermostats. Temperature profiles are recorded from the MD simulation after reaching steady state and are shown in Fig. By performing a linear fitting for the cumulative energy of heat source/sink, we obtain a heat rate of 2.015 × 10 -8 W for the simulated system. With the known cross-sectional area and temperature gradient, the thermal conductivity of the CuPc nanoribbon is calculated to be 0. To determine the adhesion energy between two CuPc nanoribbons, we simulate a process of separating two nanoribbons from the equilibrium distance. The system consisting of two nanoribbons in contact is first equilibrated for 100 ps to reach the equilibrium position. Then, all atoms of one CuPc nanoribbon are fixed, while the other nanoribbon is gradually moved away up to 20 Å. The change in the potential energy for the whole system is recorded, which corresponds to the adhesion energy between two CuPc nanoribbons. The calculated adhesion energy as a function of the displacement is shown as a green solid line in Fig. (RGC Ref. No. 14238416). N.Y. acknowledges the funding support from National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51576076 and No. 51711540031), Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province (Grant No. 2017CFA046) and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (HUST: Grant No. 2016YXZD006). J.Y. acknowledges the funding support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51676036). L.L. acknowledges the funding support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51572149). The authors thank the National Supercomputing Center in Tianjin (TianHe-1 (A)) and China Scientific Computing Grid (ScGrid) for providing assistance in computations. † nuo@hust.edu.cn ‡ dyxu@mae.cuhk.edu.hk * Y.X. and X.Y. contributed equally to this work.