Monovalent metals contain half filled band (HFB) of s-electrons. Emphasizing importance of Coulomb repulsions in HFB in 2D and 1D monovalent systems we sketched a theory (2018) for ambient temperature granular superconductivity reported by Thapa and Pandey (2018) in Au-Ag nanostructures (updated by Thapa et al., 2019). Sharpening our theory, we suggest that Coulomb repulsions in certain structurally perturbed regions (atomic clusters, stacking faults, grain boundaries etc.) create nanoscale reservoirs of singlet electron pairs. These low dimensional patches are hybridized to a background 3D jellium metal and produce observed ambient Tc granular superconductivity via proximity Josephson effect. Using repulsive Hubbard model we show presence of singlet reservoirs and physics of doped Mott insulators. Needed charge transfer arises from differing electronegativities. Our theory predicts that all elemental monovalent (alkali, Cu, Ag and Au) metals, under suitable structural perturbations, are likely to exhibit ambient temperature superconductivity. Superconductivity, a remarkable macroscopic quantum phenomenon, touches unexpected and different corners of physics and science in general. Its technological implications are also profound. Discovery of such a phenomenon in Hg in 1910, by Kamerlingh Onnes and decades of developments that followed have nurtured a strong desire and dream to realize superconductivity at ambient temperatures and ambient conditions. A milestone discovery by Bednorz and Muller In this background a report of signals for ambient temperature granular superconductivity This discovery is puzzling, given the well known fact that all non-transition monovalent metals resist superconductivity, even at the lowest temperatures (Li is an exception: Tc ≈ 0.4 mK). A large Coulomb pseudo potential We present a theory, a sharpened version of our earlier work Our model focusses on certain unavoidable structural modifications present, at and away from interfaces of Ag nano particles embedded in Au matrix. They are, stacking faults, dislocations, grain boundaries, embedded clusters etc. Preparation method, differing quantum chemistry of Ag and Au, their diffusion, metallurgical intricacies etc., contribute to this. Monovalent metals are effectively single band tight binding half filled band system, created by monovalent s-orbital overlap In our theory, necessary internal charge transfer (self doping) arises from differing electronegativities. Proxim-ity effect via embedding metallic matrix is modelled as a Josephson network of granular superconductors. We also use a theoretical model of Berg, Orgad and Kivelson It also follows from our theory that elemental monovalent metals (alkali, Cu, Ag and Au), under suitable structural perturbations are likely to exhibit ambient Tc granular superconductivity. In the present paper we focuss on doped Mott insulator physics that has proven validity in the context of single band system such as cuprates and other strongly correlated superconductors, consistent with our earlier proposal of 'Five fold way to new superconductors' Our paper is organized as follows. After a brief summary of recent experimental observations we present arguments for existence of nanoscale 2D patches, 1D segments and 0D clusters in this otherwise 3D nano composite structure. Then we briefly discuss how superconducting correlations arise in these nanoscale low dimensional systems using physics of repulsive Hubbard model. Having identified the sources we present a model of Josephson coupling via proximity effect from embedding metallic matrix. II Summary of Signals for Ambient Tc Granular Superconductivity in Ag-Au NS. In the work by Thapa and Pandey Structural modifications in Ag nanoparticle embedded Au matrix arise from preparation methods and differences in solid state, quantum chemistry of Ag and Au and metallurgical complexities. From available structural information In the supplement section we identify relevant structural modifications which are potential singlet reservoirs. HRTEM image (figure Structural reconstructions are possible in Ag and Au. Indeed reconstruction of fcc lattice, via change of stacking sequence to hcp, 4H and 9R structures and other structures are known Chakraborty and collaborators In supplementary section II, we discuss a model stacking (ABA repeat) and illustrate how effective electronic decoupling of layers leading to 2 dimensionality emerge in 4H and 9R structures. In the Ag-Au composite one expects, a charge transfer from Ag to Au, close to the interface of nano crystal and bulk matrix. Electronegativity (ability to attract an electron) is higher for Au (2.54) than Ag (1.93). So we expect electron transfer from Ag to Au. Consequently, Ag will be hole doped and Au, electron doped. Metallic screening is likely to keep doping close to grain boundaries and Ag-Au interface regions. Because of structural and bonding changes near structural perturbations, local transfer is possible within Ag and Au regions. It is also known that Ag and Au (111) surfaces support 2D surface bands, which are far from half filling, with a Fermi energy of 0.5 eV and band width about 4 eV. If there is sufficient charge transfer it could support strong pairing correlations. Given the fact that size of Ag nanoparticle is ∼10 nm and inter distance ∼ 15 to 20 nm, in our estimate, a lib-eral density of 2D, 1D and 0D defects are available to give a rich granular superconductivity physics. We will see in the next section how required strong local superconducting pairing arises in Ag-Au NS. A single band repulsive Hubbard model is suitable for 3D monovalent metals, even though Hubbard U becomes irrelevant in the sense of renormalization group theory. At low energy scales we have a robust Fermi liquid, a jellium metal with nearly spherical Fermi surfaces. Situation is different in 2D, 1D and 0D clusters, where Coulomb repulsion brings in new physics. We get Mott localization in 1D for arbitrarily small repulsion. In 2D we get enhanced pairing correlations close to half filling for intermediate U, even below the Mott insulator region (figure It should be pointed out that there is no rigorous proof for existence of superconductivity in repulsive Hubbard model in 2D, in the Mott insulator regime, close to half filling. Hoever, physics motivated approaches such as RVB theory and manybody theory techniques point to possibility of strong local singlet electron pairing. They provide good estimates for pairing temperature scales, as a function of Hubbard model parameters. In what follows we take model parameters for Ag and Au from the work of Torrini asnd Zanazzi Atom Clusters as Singlet Reservoirs: Monovalent metal atom clusters, including Ag and Au have been extensively studied from the point of view of electron correlation effects and magnetism Effective Hamiltonian for a monovalent atom cluster is the Heisenberg antiferromagnetic Hamiltonian: Spin operator S i ≡ d † iα σα,β d jβ . Spin-spin interaction term has been rewritten using bond singlet operator b ), (d's are electron operators) to emphasize the fact that strongly coupled bond singlets are natural basic units (rather than spin moments) in clusters. It is the resonance of these bond singlets which is at the heart of our mechanism for superconductivity in Ag-Au NS. More importantly resonance energies of bond singlets are comparable to cohesion energy of monovalent clusters Consider a simple tetrahedral cluster, an elementary closely packed unit in fcc lattice. Two singlets resonate and stabilize a singlet ground state. Larger clusters have been studied from the point of view of equilibrium shapes of clusters. For us what is important is the singlet content and their resonance. The tetrahedral RVB system has a doubly degenerate singlet ground state. We have suggested presence of a distribution of clusters in Ag-Au NS. As we go to larger clusters there are more complex resonances, depending on size and shape of a cluster. Singlets and their resonances continue to be present till a critical size. Beyond the critical size singlets and their resonances go off the shell It is clear that clusters of various kinds, in the Ag rich, Ag rich regions and in the interfaces are very important as singlet reservoirs. We also have a very large singlet pairing energy scale J ≈ 1 eV. Chains as Singlet Reservoirs Consider isolated Ag or Au chain Resonating singlets in the spin-1 2 chain become our reservoir singlets. An organization of Ag or Au chains into weakly interacting chain and doping easily brings in ambient Tc superconductivity as discussed below. We consider a 2D array of weakly coupled (for a range of interchain hopping t ⊥ ) Ag or Au chains. To avoid competing antiferromagnetic 2 sublattice order, we stagger the chains,so that when t ⊥ = t we get isotropic triangular lattice. Using known studies we find doped Mott insulator physics and ambient Tc superconductivity, provided competing instabilities such as dimerization and valence bond order are taken care of. In the above system pair tunneling plays an important role in stabilizing 2D or 3D superconducting order. We have used Wheatley-Hsu-Anderson's mechanism Scale of Tc is given by k B Tc ≈ t 2 ⊥ /∆ s . Here ∆ s is a local spin gap scale. It can be approximated by superexchange J, in the present context. It is easily seen that for reasonable choice of t ⊥ , in our model system of Ag and Au we get 2D superconducting Tc at ambient temperature scales. Thus we conclude that nanoscale line segments in Ag-Au NS are are also important singlet reservoirs, with a high pairing temperature scale. 2D Plane Segments as Singlet Reservoirs: Two dimensions is equally interesting. We considered hypothetical 2D triangular lattices of Ag and Au. Firstly, U is not strong enough to result in Mott localization. However, a form of (self) doped Mott insulator physics (dynamical Mott localization, figure A schematic phase diagram of repulsive Hubbard model in 2D triangular lattice is shown in figure What is important is that the nanoscale 2D patches continue to support strong singlet pairing, which could eventually contribute to observed 3D ambient Tc granular superconductivity. An important question is survival of reservoir singlets, when there is hybridization to the 3D embedding metal-lic matrix. To gain some insights into this issue we introduce a simple model and discuss results qualitatively. Consider a tetrahedral cluster coupled to a 3D metallic matrix. It is a tJ model of tetrahedral cluster coupled to 3D jellium metal: Here c's and d's represent operators of metallic plane wave states and operators of four atomic sites of our tetrahedral cluster. Hybridization f(k,i), hopping t and kinetic exchange J have usual meaning. We also have appropriate local constraints on occupancies at sites i. In an isolated tetrahedral cluster, number of valence electrons is 4 and fixed. We have a doubly degenerate ground state with resonating singlets (for suitable linear combinations they become two degenerate and PT violating chiral singlets). Once we allow hybridization through the 3rd term in the above equation we have a possibility of charge fluctuation and hopping t within the tetrahedral cluster, in addition to the exchachange J. Depending on position of atomic level with respect to chemical potential of the metal, electrons or holes are allowed to enter the tetrahedral cluster and hop around. We control doping via local occupancy constrains on occupancies of 4 atoms and chemical potential which determines mean number of electrons in a cluster. We have some general conclusions for this model: i) Singlet correlations within the tetrahedron decreases with increase of hybridization and ii) singlet pairing correlations will spread to metallic matrix. We have also looked at model, a 1D Mott-Hubbard chain weakly hybridized to planewave states of 3D metal. As anticipated on physical grounds, stability of singlet reservoir and Mott localization survive till a critical hybridization strength. Interestingly, singlet correlations survives as dynamical Mott localization on the metallic side, close to metal insulator transition. We hope to study this model in detail in the future. Fortunately we can answer our question of stability of reservoir singlets using certain known experimental result as well. Clark and collaborators found They found surviving superconducting gap like structure till number of molecules became as small as four ! This experimental result demonstrates that a spin singlet electron pair reservoir, as small as 4 molecules, remains statble in the presence of coupling to a metallic substrate. Proximity Effect, Web of Reservoir Singlets & Ambient Tc Granular Superconductivity Two macroscopic superconductors connected by a weak link exhibit Josephson effects, via Cooper pair tunneling. Weak link is typically an insulating barrier. In our case we have nanoscale patches (which support pairing correlations and not real superconductivity) embedded in a 3D metal matrix. It is known that such type of system can have Josephson like coupling through proximity effect and produce macroscopic superconductivity. we present a physical picture for proximity effect in nanoscopic and phase fluctuating singlet paired system. Consider two electron wave packets with opposite momenta with random spin orientations from the jellium metal enter a nanoscale patch simultaneously. As these electrons are identical to interacting electrons inside the doped Mott insulator patch, they will experience strong singlet pairing and come out dominantly in spin singlet channel. Thus singlet reservoirs act like singlet filters and and also transfer and share their spin singlet correlations to the jellium metallic matrix in a dynamical fashion. Proximity effect in monovalent metals like Ag and Au is also known to have unusually long length scale It is also clear that relative volume occupied by clusters, 1D and 2D nanoscale patches in bulk Ag-Au NS is very important. A measure of this the density of singlet reservoirs. We formalize our problem using the following model. A free electron system representing the jellium metallic matrix is hybridized to a doped t-J model subsystem representing our low dimensional correlated electron subsystem. As in equation 3, hybridization f(k,i), hopping t ij and kinetic exchange J ij have usual meaning. In the presenct case they are spatially random. We also have appropriate local constraints on occupancies at sites i. A quantitative study of the model we have presented above can be performed using various approximations. In an earlier work Berg, Orgad and Kivelson In BOK model pairing within islands is replaced by an effective attractive U Hubbard model. An important result from BOK is that bulk granular Tc can be as high as the mean field Tc present within a given patch. As we mentioned earlier our mean field pairing Tc is above ambient temperatures, for given t and U for our nanoscale low dimensional susbsystems in Ag-Au NS. Using the bounds on Tc from the work of BOK we conclude ambient Tc granular superconductivity is a possibility, within our model and theory. In a very interesting work Chen et al. They found a remarkable result that under certain conditions a synergy from free electron system, via proximity effect can even increase the Tc of the t-J layer. We interpret their result as follows. If the free electron system has sufficiently high density of states it can take advantage of RVB pairing offered by the t-J layer and have a Tc larger than the t-J layer. From the work of Chen et al., we conclude in our Ag-Au NS the free electron or jellium 3D background could play important role in bringing Tc of the granular superconductor to large scales, comparable to the large pairing temperature scale we have found to be present in the nano scale low dimensional singlet reservoirs. A closer look at our theoretical study reveals that two important criteria to reach ambient temperatuture superconductivity are: i) monovalent character of Ag and Au and ii) low dimensional nanoscale electronic subsystems we can create, which are potential singlet reservoirs. Thus our theory predicts that all elemental monovalent (alkali, Cu, Ag and Au) metals, under suit-able structural perturbations, are likely exhibit ambient Tc superconductivity. Sharp structural perturbations seem to be necessary. Monovalent Alloys with sharp (atomic scale) compositional superstructures might help. We plan to discuss our provocative prediction in some detail in a future pubication. In this context a straightforward prediction of our theory is that a single atom thick monovalent metal layer (a flattened atom thick monovalent metal) is a potential ambient temperature superconductor, if competing orders such as valence bond order and gap opening lattice instabilities can be taken care of. We wish to refer to several diamagneitic anomalies known in alkali metals, Cu, Ag and Au Inspired by the recent discovery of strong signals for ambient temrtiperature granular superconductivity in Ag nanoparticles embedded in Au matrix, we have presented a theoretical analysis in support of their discovery. Our main thesis is that a robust Fermi liquid in 3D, in monovalent metal becomes a metal containing dynamical Mott localization in reduced dimensions such as quasi 2D and quasi 1D. We have suggested few possibilities for presence of certain unavoidable reduced 2D, 1D and 0D nanoscale segments and patches in Ag-Au NS. Electron correlation effects, known to be present in 2D and 1D close to half filling is used to suggest presence of strong local pairing correlations, via RVB or doped Mott insulator physics. That is, there are lower dimensional singlet reservoirs present randomly at nanoscale in the Ag-Au NS The 3D metallic matrix, under suitable conditions will allow strong correlation effects such as strong pairing, to survive inspite of hybridization to 3D metallic states. The intervening metal, via proximity effect couples two nanoscale patches via a Josephson type of coupling. In our theory, such coupled 3D network is responsible for the observed granular superconductivity at ambient temperatures. In the present article our focuss is on showing theoretically a remarkable possibility of strong correlation based ambient temperature superconductivity in structurally perturbed monovalent metals. There are other important issues such as order parameter symmetry, complex superconductivity phenomenology, vortex tangles etc. Our proposal also suggests that other nanostructures involving two or more monovalent metals could give rise to ambient Tc superconductivity. It also follows from our theory that all elemental (alkali, Cu, Ag and Au) monovalent metals, when structurally perturbed will exhibit ambient Tc granular superconductivity to varying degrees. To confirm our theory and predictions it will be very interesting to study isolated nanocrystals, quantum dots, rods, heterostructufes of monovalent metals, using STM and other probes, after creating controlled structural perturbations. Study of charge 2e noise will also be valuable. Does ambient temperature granular superconductivity exist already, in some form or other, in the rich world of minerology and metallurgy -natural ones and man made ? An exploration into minerology and metallurgy is likely to offer surprises. In a recent article Kopelevich, da Silva and Campargo the simplest unit, is very important as a source of electron pairing that we are after. Monovalent clusters appear inside the Ag nanoparticle, in the Au matrix and in the interface region. In the interface region monovalent clusters of Ag could be embedded in Au matrix and vice versa. In our estimate from the figure 1 in 2) Grain Boundaries in Ag rich Au rich regions: Inside Ag nanocrystals and Au matrix grain boundaries will be present. In a given Ag nanocrystal more than a dozen granin boundaries are visible (figure Foreign atoms tend to diffuse and aggregate at grain boundaries. Close to the interface between Ag nanocrystals and Au we expect copious diffusion of Au atoms into Ag and vice versa. It will result in quasi 2D and 1D Au patches in the Ag region and vice versa. In figure Low angle grain boundaries are known to support arrays of dislocation lines, Dislocation lines present in grain boundaries in Ag nanocrystals are also likely to attract lines of Au atoms, via diffusion. 3) Decoupled ribbons A dislocation pair is an extra plane, of finite width, inserted between two neighboring planes in an otherwise periodic lattice. When the distance between dislocation pairs is small what we have is a ribbon of inserted two dimensional plane. Since our systems are finite, it could have an incommensurate relation with bounding planes. This could arise from small twists for example. Such planes becomes a source of 2D correlated electrons under suitable conditions. Such decoupled planes are likely to occur close to the interface. 4) Stacking Faults and Decoupled Planes: Stacking faults can be formed in fcc crystals via production of dislocation pairs and separating them to the boundary. Because of low stacking fault energies for Ag and Au, a variety of stacking faults are possible. Two well known periodic stacking faults in the fcc (ABC) packing produce hcp (AB) and 9R (ABC.BCA.CAB) structures. Interestingly, a cylindrical Fermi surface emerges in tight binding model for hcp, 4H and 9r structures. In the next section we will see how effectiv two dimensionalitys arise when fcc stacking sequences change. II Effective 2 Dimensionality Arising from Stacking Faults, hcp, 4H and 9R Structures First we will consider a simple case where a stacking fault is introduced in fcc stacking (ABC repeat) by replacing one of the trilayers ABC by a quintuple layer AABCC. The quintuple layer is a locally stable (metastable) state. Local stability comes from a direct H 2 molecule type bonding between s-orbitals of atoms in registry in AA bilayer. Similarly for CC bilayer. In a simple tight binding analysis we find that AA layer in isolation has a depleted density of states at the Fermi level with small electron and hole pockets. It effectively becomes a semimetal. Thus to a first approximation AA and CC bilayers isolate the middle B layer and makes it quasi 2 dimensional. We expect presence of a small density of such and similar stacking faults in Ag-Au NS. Such electronically isolated 2D triangular lattices will become resorvoirs of singlet electron pairs, as we discussed before. We have looked at hcp (AB repeat), 4H (ABCB repeat) and 9R (ABC.BCA.CAB repeat) from the above perspecive. In the cerorresponding stacking sequences we find layer units such as ABA (and permuted ones). We find possibility of next nearest neighbor AA binding, via interstitial orbitals of McAdon and Goddard We find that the above type of decoupling can be done in different (energetically equivalent) ways. This allows possibility of dynamical decoupling or spontaneous symmetry breaking and suggests rich new physics in this apparently simple system 