Microbubble whispering-gallery resonators have shown great promise in fiber-optic communications because of their low confinement loss and hollow cores, which allow for facile stress-based tunability. Usually, the transmission spectrum of taper-coupled microbubbles contains closely spaced modes due to the relatively large radii and oblate geometry of microbubbles. In this letter, we develop an optical add-drop filter using a microbubble coupled to fiber taper and angle-polished fiber waveguides. Because of the extra degree of freedom in the angle of its polish surface, the angle-polished fiber can be used for the discriminatory excitation of certain radial-order modes in the optical microcavity, reducing the high modal density and enhancing add-drop selectivity. Our robust and tunable add-drop filter demonstrated a drop efficiency of 85.9% and quality factor of 2 x 10 7 , corresponding to a linewidth of 9.68 MHz. As a proof of concept, the drop frequency was tuned using internal aerostatic pressure at a rate of 7.3 ± 0.2 GHz/bar with no diminishing effects on the add-drop filter performance. ptical whispering gallery mode (WGM) microresonators Light is typically coupled into microbubbles with the fiber taper coupler Fig. The fiber taper acts as the bus waveguide and the APF acts as the add/drop waveguide in the ADF. The transmission coefficient T can then be expressed as roycedong@wustl.edu; liaojie@wustl.edu; abrahamqavi@wustl.edu; lyang25@wustl.edu). Z. F. and G. L. are with the State Key Laboratory of Low-Dimensional Quantum Physics and Department of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: zfphys@gmail.com; gllong@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn). where P ୧୬ is the input power at port 1, P ୲୦୰୭୳୦ is the collected power at port 2, ߢ is the total intrinsic loss for the resonator (combined material, scattering, and radiation losses), ߢ ଵ and ߢ ଶ are the coupling losses between the microbubble and the two couplers, and Δ is the detuning between the laser and resonance frequencies. Transmission at resonance, when Δ = 0, simplifies to and denotes the crosstalk of the ADF. Similarly, drop efficiency coefficient D ଵ→ଷ at resonance can be written as where P ୢ୰୭୮ is the power dropped at port 3 and P ୧୬ is the power inputted at port 1. From Eq. ( We fabricated microbubbles with fused silica capillary tubing (Polymicro Technologies, 150 μm OD, 75 μm ID) using the fuse-and-blow technique The fiber taper was positioned in the x-direction defined in Fig. Fig. Fig. As a proof of concept, we demonstrate the stress-based tunability of the ADF. Internal aerostatic pressure can expand the microbubble structure and alter the optical path of the WGMs, thus red-shifting their resonant wavelengths In conclusion, we have demonstrated a highly efficient and tunable ADF using a microbubble resonator with an APF coupler. The hollow core of the microbubble lends it facile stress-based tunability of the drop frequency without diminishing the ADF performance. The polish angle φ of the APF coupler can be chosen to differentially excite certain radial-order WGMs in the microcavity. The APF coupler greatly reduces the high modal density of the taper-coupled spectrum by ~73%, thereby enhancing the add-drop selectivity. We report a drop efficiency as high as >85% and Q as high as 2 x 10 7 . Future applications can use the capillary technology of hollow WGM resonators to support various fluids and gases for different material advantages, such as higher thermal stability, to improve the ADF. The highly efficient and robust APF can be used to couple to different resonator geometries, e.g. microtoroids and microspheres, for efficient and discriminatory excitation of WGMs. Copyright (c) 2019 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. However, permission to use this material for any other purposes must be obtained from the IEEE by sending a request to pubs-permissions@ieee.org.