Here we report a novel nitridation technique for transforming niobium into hexagonal Nb2N which appears to be superconducting below 1K. The nitridation is achieved by high temperature annealing of Nb films grown on Si3N4/Si (100) substrate under high vacuum. The structural characterization directs the formation of a majority Nb2N phase while the morphology shows granular nature of the films. The temperature dependent resistance measurements reveal a wide metal-to-superconductor transition featuring two distinct transition regions. The region close to the normal state varies strongly with the film thickness, whereas, the second region in the vicinity of the superconducting state remains almost unaltered but exhibiting resistive tailing. The current-voltage characteristics also display wide transition embedded with intermediate resistive states originated by phase slip lines. The transition width in current and the number of resistive steps depend on film thickness and they both increase with decrease in thickness. The broadening in transition width is explained by progressive establishment of superconductivity through proximity coupled superconducting nano-grains while finite size effects and quantum fluctuation may lead to the resistive tailing. Finally, by comparing with Nb control samples, we emphasize that Nb2N offers unconventional superconductivity with promises in the field of phase slip based device applications. Superconducting fluctuations (SFs) lead to several interesting quantum phenomena such as superconductor-insulator quantum transition (SIT) Inhomogeneities can be of structural imperfections like chemically impure samples, granularity and grain boundaries etc. and also it can be of geometrical nature such as constrictions and non-uniform edges. The geometrical inhomogeneities should be considered in great detail when a material possesses size dependent Tc variation which may cause broadening in R(T) In the context of SFs, more specifically superconducting phase fluctuations, NbN from the family of niobium-nitrogen based transition metal nitrides (TMNs) has shown its promises for the application in superconducting nanowire based single photon detectors (SNSPD) Further, R(T) measurements on Nb2N thin films varying in thickness from 8-16 nm exhibit NM-SC transition at ~ 1K with broad transition width consisting of two distinct regions. While comparing with equivalent Nb control samples grown on SiO2/Si substrate in the same run, the transport measurements for Nb2N films appear drastically different and unconventional in nature. The zero-field current-voltage characteristics (IVCs) are also wide and equipped with intermediate resistive steps which are originated from phase slip lines (PSLs). The transition widths in R(T) and in IVCs strongly depend on the film thickness and a wider transition is observed for thinner samples. The resistive transition can be understood from the granular nature of the samples that can be constructed as a collection of randomly distributed nanoscale granules separated by grain boundaries and the two-step R(T) transition characteristics can be explained in terms of local and global superconductivity We present the substrate mediated nitridation technique for Nb to form Nb2N schematically in Fig. For comparison, we have deposited Nb films on Si3N4/Si (nitride) and SiO2/Si (oxide) substrates simultaneously and the latter act as control samples. In Fig. The XRD pattern for the control sample reveals majorly the cubic Nb phase. However, some oxide phases for Nb appear too due to high temperature annealing on oxide substrate 21 . For the samples on nitride substrates, majority of the peaks relate to hexagonal Nb2N phase and consequently, a clear difference from the control sample is evident. All strong peaks related to hexagonal Nb2N phase are present and a couple of other relatively weak Nb4N5 peaks appear too. The appearance of elemental Nb peaks depends on the thickness of the films. For example, the two relatively thick samples G1 and G2 show the presence of Nb in addition to its nitride phases. With decreasing thickness the relative amplitudes of Nb peaks get reduced and the nitride phases start to become prominent and finally for G3, almost there is no trace of Nb and the same is true for the thinnest sample G4. Here the peak, at 2Ɵ = 38.5°, corresponds to Nb (110) plane as evident for the control sample and the same is present in the XRD spectra of G1 and G2. However, if we compare the amplitude of this peak in these three samples shown from the bottom to upwards in Fig. As the substrate induced nitridation for Nb is evident, we call the samples on Si3N4/Si and SiO2/Si substrates as nitride samples and Nb control samples, respectively. For low temperature transport measurements, the adapted device geometry is shown in the inset of Fig. The characteristic parameters are summarized in a tabular form in the Supporting Material (SM). Further, we have measured the current-voltage characteristics (IVCs) at different temperatures and the IVC isotherms are shown in Fig. Here for clarity we only present the increasing current direction, i.e. up sweep, and the IVCs in both up and down sweep direction is shown in the SM. The SC-to-NM transition for B1 is not occurring in a single step for the temperature range from 60 mK to 500 mK and an intermediate resistive step appears. The current-extent for the step decreases with increasing temperature and at about 600 mK, the transition takes place smoothly from SC to NM state without showing any intermediate step. Similarly, intermediate resistive steps emerge for the relatively thinner sample B2 as presented in Fig. As the switching from SC-to-NM does not occur in a single step, we have multiple characteristic critical currents among which two extreme cases are considered. The first one, defined as the critical current Ic0, relates to the onset of finite voltage from the SC state and the second one, named as Inm, associates with the transition to complete normal state. The retrapping current Ir is defined as the current when the sample starts to transit from its resistive state to the superconducting state in returning direction. The characteristic currents and the sweeping directions are shown by the dotted and the solid arrows, respectively in Fig. For the control samples, the span between Ic and Ir increases with lowering the measurement temperature. For particularly thinner nitride samples B2 and B3, Ic0 and Ir seem to be very close to each other and the variation remains almost unchanged when we reduce the temperature. However, Inm increases strongly and hence the extent in Ic0 or Ir and Inm gets widened while lowering the temperature. For better comparison, we have plotted in Fig. Therefore, the effect of magnetic field on the IVCs compliments the thinning effect at zero-field In contrast to Nb control samples, both R(T) and IVCs show wide transition for nitride samples. The R(T) data features two distinct regimes in the transition. The IVCs, being hysteretic in nature, showcase intermediate resistive steps which are the signatures of PSLs in wide superconducting films Here, the maximum relative variation in the grain size occurs for the thinnest sample B3 which undergoes the widest transition [Fig. In order to have an insight into the NM-SC phase transition as appeared in the measured R(T) characteristics, we present the normalized resistance in the reduced temperature scale for the nitride samples separately in Fig. Where, R0 and b are the material-specific parameters. The selected region of R(T) containing the fitted curves is presented separately in Fig. However as shown in Fig For clarity, a semi-logarithmic plot of selected region from the measured R(T) is shown in Fig. Generally, microscopic inhomogeneities 40 , disorder 41 ̧ vortex-antivortex movement in 2D 23 , quantum fluctuation Further, the zero-field R(T) measurements were performed with the excitation current (100 nA) much less than the critical current. Hence, the dissipation related to current-induced unbound vortex-antivorex movement can also be disregarded. In reduced dimension, phase fluctuation is one of the dominant mechanisms behind the resistive tailing & residual resistance 44 and above TBKT, the phase fluctuation leads to vortex proliferation which eventually brings the system to the normal state We have demonstrated a simple technique to transform Nb into Nb2N by employing Si3N4 based substrate which serves as the source of nitrogen when it gets decomposed by high temperature annealing. The transformed nitride samples show unconventional superconductivity below 1K by exhibiting wide two step NM-SC transition featuring resistive tailing in the superconducting state. We emphasize here that the granularity mediated inhomogeneity, quantum fluctuation and the FSE are the main reasons behind the observed wide transition, the resistive tailing and the residual resistance in the R(T) characteristics. Interestingly, the current driven metal-superconductor transition as appeared in the IVCs also exhibits wide transition featuring stair-case type resistive steps that are the signatures of PSLs in 2D superconducting strips. The PSLs indicate a significant role of phase fluctuations to the transition too. Finally, our results demonstrate that Nb2N can be a promising candidate to study SFs and PS related phenomena and applications. Nb thin films were grown on Si3N4/Si(100) [nitride] and SiO2/Si(100) [oxide] substrates by using an ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) DC magnetron sputtering system. For nitride substrate, low pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) grown 100 nm thick Si3N4 layer and for oxide substrate, thermally grown 300 nm thick SiO2 layer act as the dielectric spacers to isolate the films from the substrates. Prior to deposition, substrates were gone through a rigorous cleaning process by ultrasonic cleaning in acetone and iso-propanol for 15 minutes in each. Afterwards, the substrates were cleaned in oxygen plasma for 15 minutes and finally, they were preheated at ~820°C in high vacuum (~1 × 10 -7 Torr) inside the UHV chamber for 30 minutes to remove any chemical residues and surface contaminants. In the preheating stage, some parts of the substrate were covered with stainless steel shadow mask in order to have defined strips of Nb film. After the cleaning procedures we evacuated the chamber to less than 3.5 × 10 -9 Torr and meanwhile the substrates were heated up to (820±10)°C which was maintained during the sputtering and post-sputtering annealing process. The sputtering was done with a Nb (99.99%) target in the presence of high purity Ar (99.9999% purity) gas at about 5 × 10 -3 mBar. The heating was continued after the deposition and post sputtering annealing was done at (820±10)°C for 2 hours in high vacuum condition (0.5-1.5 × 10 -7 Torr). For low temperature transport study, electrical contact leads of Au(100 nm)/Ti(5 nm) were defined and aligned by a complimentary set of shadow mask on top of Nb strips. The length between the voltage probes for all the measured samples was ~1.1mm. The transport measurements were done in conventional 4-probe geometry with 100 nA excitation current by using ac lock-in technique in a dilution refrigerator (Triton from Oxford Instruments). For Structural characterization we have used grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) technique by Philips X'pert pro X-ray diffractometer using Cu-kα radiation operating at 40 kV and 20mA. AFM topography images, presented in Fig. The overall variation in the grain size for the region bounded by the voltage probes are about ± 10 nm for all the three samples. Therefore, grain size reduces for reduced thickness. Further, the surface looks less uniform for the thinner samples than that appeared for the thicker one. On the other hand, the estimated average grain sizes are 37 nm, 27 nm and 12 nm for the control samples B1 Ox , B2 Ox and B3 Ox , respectively with an overall variations of ± 7 nm for all of them. Grain sizes follow the same detrimental trend for the control samples also with reduction in thickness. For control samples, the reduction in Tc can be understood by the grain size reduction and for the thinnest sample B3 Ox the grain size is much lower if we compare the same for the thinnest nitride sample B1. However, we do not observe staircase like phase slip lines (PSLs) in the current voltage characteristics (IVCs) for B3 Ox and the R(T) was observed to be sharp with no such resistive tailing which was present for all the nitride samples. In Fig. As we have already seen in the main text that for the nitride samples thickness plays a vital role in monitoring the transition region for superconductor-metal transition in their R(T) and also in IVCs. However, for the oxide samples we observe a single step sharp transition from superconductor to normal metallic transition at the critical current IC. The same is observed in the reverse direction at the retrapping current Ir which is much less than IC. Hence, the IVCs are hysteretic with respect to the current sweeping direction. Except for the values of these two measurements follow a linear variation between the critical field and the critical temperatures. The slope of the fit is used to calculate the GL coherence length, ξ GL (0). Here, we used Tc Nande, A. et al. Quantum fluctuations in percolating superconductors: an evolution with effective dimensionality. Nanotechnology 28, 165704 (2017). Salasnich, L. & Bighin, G. Quantum Fluctuations and Vortex-Antivortex Unbinding in the 2D Bcs-Bec Crossover. J.Supercond. Nov. Magn. 29, 3103-3106 (2016). Scientific and Industrial Research, Dr. K. S Krishnan Road, New Delhi-110012, India. 3 Indian Reference Materials Division, National Physical Laboratory, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Dr. K. S Krishnan Road, New Delhi-110012, India. *The correspondence should be addressed to S.S.(Email: sahoos@nplindia.org) 