Although electrostatic microgenerators (ESMGs) have promised for nearly two decades extensive applications in wireless, self-powered microscale devices and sensors for security, personal health systems, communication, infrastructure and environmental monitoring 1, 2, 3, 4 , commercialized ESMGs are still scarce, mainly due to very low current densities and short product life for most applications 1, 5, 6, 7, 8 . Here we demonstrate that a combination of structural superlubricity, a state of nearly zero friction and wear between two contacted solid surfaces 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 , and nanotechnology can endow ESMGs with superlong life and high performances such as transferred charge, current, and power (at least three orders of magnitude higher than those of conventional ESMGs). Among a few significant advantages of superlubricity-based ESMGs, two are particularly noticeable. First, they can be driven by much lower external loads than conventional ESMGs; second, they can be massively fabricated by using micromachining processes. The quantitative relationships, experimental proof of concept, and optimization results reported in this Letter can guide future design and facilitate the commercialization of ESMGs. With the rapid development of nanotechnology and micro-machining processes, microscale sensors and devices are emerging in large numbers of applications in security, personal health systems, communication, infrastructure and environmental monitoring robots working in human blood vessels There are mainly three types of microgenerators, based on electromagnetic, electrostatic, and piezoelectric principles, respectively. In general, electromagnetic conversion is more suited for large systems because its efficiency scales somehow between L In fact, quite a few types of electrostatic generators, such as triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) In this Letter we demonstrate that structural superlubricity A fundamental working model of the above ESMG is to slide Electrode 0 at a constant speed v with respect to the STATOR. The changing serial capacity (Figure where gives two key dimensionless parameters that characterize the performance of the studied model ESMG. To validate the above elementary electrostatic generator based on two capacitors, we perform an experiment with an equivalent setup shown in Figure Practically, since permittivities of dielectrics are very small (typically several times ε 0 = 8.8542 × 10 -12 in a vacuum), in most cases α is much larger than 1 so that (3) holds. For example, if using SiO2 as Dielectric 2 ( ε 2 = 4.9ε 0 ) and taking which is a typical case in conventional ESMGs, then one has to apply an extremely high voltage V c = 100,000 V in order to achieve the maximum q c,max = σ 2cr A. This means that q c,max is impractical to achieve for most convenient ESMGs. We have to avoid electric breakdown of the dielectric media in not only the capacitor charging process (Step 2) but also the electricity generating process. Therefore, we need to study the electric field change during the generating process that corresponds to the sliding process for the entire period 0 ≤ t ≤ T. In this process, it is easy to find that the electric field strength E 2 in Dielectric 2 automatically satisfies E 2 < E 2cr as long as Dielectric 2 is not broken down in the charging process (see SI). However, the electric field E 1 in Dielectric 1 may reach the breakdown limit of Dielectric 1. To avoid this, the maximal allowed capacity charge has to satisfy (4) The maximal allowed transferred charge q max , maximal allowed instant current i max , and maximal allowed average power p max can be achieved as follows: where q c,max = ε 2 E 2cr A. Superlubricity-Based ESMGs offer quite a few significant advantages over the conventional ones. First, through shrinking the thicknesses d 1 and d 2 into nanoscales, we can achieve the theoretically maximal permissive capacity charge q c,max = ε 2 E 2cr A and the maximal possible values for all three major performance indices (q max , i max , and p max ) by using a very low voltage V c = E 2cr d 2 . This is critical in practice, in particular for healthcare applications where a high voltage is typically undesirable and needs to be avoided. Second, according to (5), all three performance indices decrease with β opt in the form ~βopt -1 for large β opt . In conventional ESMGs, a gas or even a vacuum layer has to be adopted as Dielectric 1 in order to avoid friction and wear. As a result, β opt is in the order of 10 2 or even larger Third, for sufficiently large α, the maximal external force required for the best possible performance shown in (5) can be solved as: Therefore, the required external force can become very low if we use the dielectric film with superlubricity-endowed nanoscale thickness d 2 . For instance, when L = 10 μm and both Dielectrics 1 and 2 are silicon oxide (E 1cr = E 2cr ≈ 10 9 V/m and ε 1 = ε 2 = 4.9ε 0 ), Figure Fifth, it is revealed by ( Sixth, the electric breakdown strengths, E cr , of a number of solid dielectric films exhibit an increasing tendency with shrinking film thickness as the film falls in the nanoscale Before concluding this Letter, we show two simple, and thus relatively easy, setups of superlubricity-based ESMGs. First, we suggest a rotatory ESMG as illustrated in Figures where R denotes the total resistance, and Q c,max = nq c,max is the maximal allowed total capacity charge. The second setup of the ESMG is illustrated in Figure ) for sufficiently large α. We further find (see SI) that the optimized β is β opt =