Metastable Fe78Ni22 thin films are excellent candidates for focused ion beam direct writing of magnonic structures due to their favorable magnetic properties. The focused ion beam transforms the originally nonmagnetic fcc phase into the ferromagnetic bcc phase with an additional control over the direction of uniaxial magnetic in-plane anisotropy and the saturation magnetization. The induced anisotropy allows to stabilize transverse direction of magnetization in narrow waveguides. Therefore, it is possible to propagate spin waves in these waveguides in the favorable Demon-Eshbach geometry without the presence of any external magnetic field. Nowadays, the vibrant field of magnonics stands on the edge between development of elementary building blocks of magnonic circuitry and envisioned all magnon on-chip devices Here we show, that magnonic waveguides allowing for fast spin-wave propagation at zero magnetic field can be directly written into metastable Fe78Ni22 thin films by focused ion beam (FIB). The local dose and scanning strategy controls both the saturation magnetization and the magnetocrystalline anisotropy (direction, type and strength) of irradiated areas. The unique possibilities of this material system allow to overcome the shape anisotropy of long magnonic waveguides and stabilize the magnetization along the waveguide's short side even in the absence of any external magnetic field. This is of great importance for using magnons as information carriers because the geometry where the magnetization is aligned perpendicularly to the propagation direction has the maximum group velocity. The Fe78Ni22 layers grow on Cu(001) substrate in the metastable nonmagnetic fcc phase and can be transformed by ion irradiation into the ferromagnetic bcc phase The FIB-written waveguides together with a microwave antenna for spin-wave excitation are shown in Fig. After the irradiation, the magnetic waveguides were investigated by Kerr magnetometry When the field B ext-90° is applied parallel to the long axis of the waveguide, hard-axis hysteresis loops [blue lines in Fig. Thermal spin-wave spectra obtained by micro-focused Brillouin light scattering microscopy All three waveguides show qualitatively the same behavior. The data also reveals the local change in spin-wave spectra towards the sides of the waveguide. Here localized low frequency modes appear at approx. 4 GHz in zero field and at approx. 8 GHz in the external field of 50 mT. This is a clear indication of the transverse orientation of the magnetization and its inherent demagnetizing field leading to lower effective fields at the waveguide edges and thus directly resulting in the localized spinwave edge modes In the following experiments, we extract the magnetic field-dependence of the spin-wave dispersion relation. By fitting the measured dispersion, we were able to obtain the full set of magneto-dynamic parameters of the material. The μBLS does not directly sense the phase of the detected spin waves and thus it does not allow to determine the wavelength λ (or equivalently the wave propagation vector k ⃗ ) of the spin waves. In order to extract the wave-vector information we employed the phaseresolved μBLS technique We recorded the interference signal along the 1.5 μm wide waveguide (x = 0 μm) with a step size of 120 nm from the edge of the exciting antenna up to 7 μm distance at the microwave frequency of 10.2 GHz. The phase-resolved measurements are shown in Fig. To extract the spin-wave wavelength, we fitted the measured data with the simple interference model: I(y) = I SW (y) + I EOM + 2√I SW (y)I EOM cos(θ(y)), From the dispersion, we can determine the magnetic parameters using the model of Kalinikos and Slavin where f is the spin-wave frequency and γ is the gyromagnetic ratio. M s is the saturation magnetization and A ex is an exchange stiffness. Since the thickness of the waveguide is small with respect to the other dimensions and the spin-wave wavelength, we We performed the fit using Eq. ( In conclusion we studied the spin-wave propagation in the waveguides prepared by FIB direct writing into metastable fcc Fe78Ni22 thin films. We have shown that in these high-aspect ratio waveguides we can propagate spin waves without the presence of an external magnetic field, and with high group velocities reaching almost 6 km/s. This unique feature comes from the possibility of the local uniaxial magnetic anisotropy control. The spin-wave dispersion relation has been determined by using phase-resolved BLS microscopy and the magnetic properties of the waveguides were extracted. The relatively large saturation magnetization together with high (controllable) magnetic anisotropy render the material suitable for high frequency spin-wave circuits operational even at zero external magnetic field. Moreover, the extracted material properties of the system will allow us to design more complex spin-wave devices by utilizing the possibility to spatially control both the saturation magnetization and the direction of the uniaxial magnetic anisotropy in a single magnetic structure. Our unique approach paves the way towards many other possibilities to develop and study spin-wave propagation in magnetization landscapes that are unattainable in any conventional magnetic system.