Magnetic impurities on the surface of Rashba spin-orbit coupled, but otherwise conventional, superconductors provide a promising way to engineer topological superconductors with Majorana bound states as boundary modes. In this work we show that the spin-polarization in the interior of both one-dimensional impurity chains and two-dimensional islands in these systems can be used to determine the superconducting topological phase, as it changes sign exactly at the topological phase transition. Thus, spin polarization offers an alternative method to detect the topological phase in magnetic impurity chains and islands deposited on conventional superconductors, beyond the zero energy Majorana bound states. Topological states of matter have been at the center of attention in condensed matter physics for the past decade According to the bulk-boundary correspondence In this work we consider both 1D impurity chains and 2D impurity islands deposited on spin-orbit coupled but otherwise conventional s-wave superconductors and show that the spin-polarization of the low-energy states, measured in the interior, or bulk, and along the direction of the magnetic impurity moments, can also be used to determine the topological state of the system. These low-energy states are formed from hybridizing Yu-Shiba-Russinov (YSR) states To avoid unnecessary complexities, we keep our model simple yet capturing all important features. For the substrate we consider a square lattice, lattice constant a = 1, with Rashba SOC and conventional s-wave superconductivity. The full mean-field Hamiltonian reads H = H sub + H imp where, Here c iα (c † iα ) is the creation (annihilation) operator at site i = (i x , i y ) with spin α ∈ {↑, ↓} and σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) with σ i the Pauli spin matrices. The chemical potential is t ii = 2μ [32] and we restrict the range of hopping to nearest neighbors: t i =j = t = 1. Rashba SOC is present due to inversion symmetry breaking at the surface and set by λ R , while superconductor order is given by ∆. Furthermore, magnetic impurities behaving as classical moments ) and measurable using STS with spin-polarized tips, calibrated along a specific spin direction To understand the behavior of the spin-polarization, we start by studying a pure 1D ferromagnetic system, which we obtain by shrinking the superconducting substrate along the y-axis to the width of one single unit cell. We also apply periodic boundary conditions in the x-direction and Fourier transform to arrive at the 1D BdG Hamiltonian and Nambu spinor Ψ T k = (c k↑ , c k↓ , c † -k↓ , -c † -k↑ ). Here σ i (τ i ) are Pauli matrices in spin (particle-hole) space, the SOC is L R = 2λ R sin k x , normal band dispersion ξ k = -2t cos k xμ, and V Z the impurity-induced uniform Zeeman field in the +ẑ-direction. Diagonalizing this Hamiltonian, we find four bands: E = it is easy to show that L R has to vanish at the closing points of the energy gap These gap closings are TPTs with a topological phase appearing between V c-Z and V c+ Z A physical explanation of the spin interchange between the lowest order energy bands at the TPT is conceived by recalling that each magnetic impurity in a con- ventional superconductor induces a pair of fully spinpolarized YSR states The chemical potential is, however, often not at the bottom of the band and we depict a more general situation in Fig. Tuning V Z further into the topological phase, ∆ 1 opens again and rapidly becomes larger than ∆ 2 . Therefore, in the topological phase, the sharp spin-up peak moves to higher positive energies, while only spin-down polarization remains at lower energies. Most notably, at negative energies the SP-LDOS is always spin-down polarized beyond the TPT, since the states associated with ∆ 1 are always hole-like for negative energies. Thus, the TPT is inherently connected with an interchange of the bulk spin-polarization for the lowest negative energy bands, as schematically indicated with colored arrows in Fig. Having understood the pure 1D limit, we next perform numerical calculations for one of the systems we set out to study: a finite ferromagnetic impurity chain (FMC) embedded in a 2D superconducting substrate, see Fig. Beyond the MBSs spin-polarization, we also find strong z-axis spin-polarization of the in-gap YSR states in the central regions of the chain. Focusing on the lowest energy YSR states, we see in Fig. As another indicator of the close relation between the bulk topology and spin-polarization of lowest negative energy YSR states, we plot a few of the lowest YSR subgap states in Fig. Next we discuss a spin-helical impurity chain (SHC), also likely experimentally realized With the helical spin structure, the spin-texture of the low-lying YSR states in the chain interior are alternating between up and down directions for x, y-axes SP-LDOS, following the pitch of the spin-helix of the implanted magnetic impurities. However, motivated by the fact that a SHC is topologically equivalent to a FMC plus an additional SOC As illustrated in Fig. In order to provide results for varying inter-impurity distances we also perform a T-matrix analysis based on an equivalent continuum model for FMCs where we can easily vary the inter-impurity distances. These results goes beyond the nearest neighbor distance used in the lattice calculations above, and provide results for more dilute FMCs. The T-matrix formalism is efficient when the number of impurities is small, or at least discrete, and embedded in a continuum. Generally, we write the Green's function of the system H = H 0 + V as Here, H 0 and G 0 are the Hamiltonian and Green's function of the system without impurities, respectively, and T = (V -1 -G 0 ) -1 is the T -matrix, which includes all the effects of the impurities encoded in V . In the above equations, all the elements are matrices for a multi-impurity system. In particular, we consider a superconducting substrate with SOC. The substrate Hamiltonian in the Nambu basis can be written as where ξ k is the normal-state dispersion relation for free electrons, ∆ the conventional superconducting order parameter, and the SOC is modelled by H SOC = λτ 0 (p y σ xp x σ y ). Here σ and τ are the Pauli matrices in the spin and Nambu basis, respectively, with the latter explicitly written in matrix form in the first term of Eq. ( Performing the same calculations for more dilute FMCs, we ultimately arrive at the picture in Fig. Inspired by recent work on 2D impurity islands In this work, we perform analytical and numerical calculations for 1D and 2D magnetic impurity structures adsorbed on the surface of a conventional superconductor with Rashba SOC. We find that for all dense impurity chains and islands the spin-polarization of the lowenergy YSR states undergoes a spin-interchange across the topological phase transition. For dilute FMCs, the spin-polarization continues to signal the TPT, although the weak hybridization causes the signal to slightly fade away with increasing inter-impurity distance. Remarkably, recent SP-STS measurements in the middle of ferromagnetic Fe impurity chains on a conventional Pb superconductor, with putative MBS at the chain end points, showed dominance of spin-down (-up) LDOS at the negative (positive) low-energy states by gap closings at high symmetry points. Here we consider the BdG Hamiltonian of a 1D ferromagnetic system Eq. 2. It is straightforward to show that by increasing V Z , the YSR band gap closes subsequently at Γ (k x = 0) and M (k x = ±π) points in the first Brillouin zone We continue our study by studying Eq. 2 at high symmetry points. At the Γ point the spin-orbit term, namely L R = 2λ R sin k x , vanishes and the 1D Hamiltonian takes a particularly simple form A1) where ξ 0 = -2μ is the kinetic energy at k x = 0. Diagonalizing the Hamiltonian Eq. (A1), we find two spin-up and two spin-down eigenstates where we define ε 0 ≡ ξ 2 0 + ∆ 2 and the eigenvalues are given by E ± ↑ = V Z ± ε 0 and E ± ↓ = -V Z ± ε 0 . We depict the eigenvalues in Fig. ↓ and E - ↑ cross each other at zero energy at V Z = ε 0 . The absolute values of other two eigenvalues increases with increasing V Z , and thus never enter the subgap region. In the same fashion, we find the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian Eq. 2 at k x = ±π where again two branches enter the subgap region, shown in dashed lines in Fig. We next concentrate on the electronic part of the wave function and evaluate the expectation value of the spin operator along the ẑ-direction given by ρ z = σ z (τ 0 +τ z )/2 for the two states we are interested in: Although the energy of these two eigenstates varies with V Z , their spin-polarization does not depend on V Z . We plot the spin-polarization given by Eq. A3 in Fig. As a consequence of the spin-polarization being only dependent on the chemical potential μ and superconducting order parameter ∆, we define a new variable η = |2 + μ|/∆ for which we identify two limits: 1. η 1: Both positive-and negative-energy YSR bands have finite spin-polarization, with opposite spin-orientations. Fig. 1: Only the spin-up state is dominantly electron-like and acquires a large spin-polarization, while the other state is dominantly hole-like, thus achieving only very minor spin-polarization. Fig. Since the denominator of η is ∆, which is generally the by far smallest energy scale in the problem, these are the only two relevant limits and values in-between would generally require extreme fine-tuning of the chemical potential. In this appendix we provide additional data on the spin-polarization for a dense FMC. In particular, we show in Fig. In the trivial phase, the negative low-energy subgap states possess a spin-up polarization along the z-axis and by increasing V Z these states approach the Fermi level, see Figs. If we continue increasing the Zeeman field V Z further, as plotted in Fig. 