The "metallic" temperature variation of the electrical resistivity of chemical nano goldsilver coatings with a silver content of 6.6% at. up to 13.1% at. determined in the temperature range 4.2-300 K. Features of low-temperature measurements of the resistance of nano-coatings were found and explained. The possibility of the appearance of superconductivity in them is discussed. In July 2018, a message appeared from Indian scientists about the development and properties of a new superconducting compound in the form of a chemical coating of nanoparticles (NPs) of gold with silver The combination of these experimental results is usually sufficient evidence of the existence of superconductivity. It was also reported that one of the samples had a transition temperature of 320 K (+47 °C), which meant that room temperature superconductivity (PCB) was achieved for the first time in the history of superconductivity with normal external atmospheric pressure. Attempts to test the possibility of the existence of such a compound The aim of our work was to experimentally test the transport and some magnetic properties of gold-silver (Au-Ag) nanocoatings prepared by the chemical method. To obtain the coatings based on "star"-shape bimetallic nanoparticles (NP) Au-Ag we used chloroauric acid HAuCl Aqueous NP colloidal solutions were obtained by a two-step method on Au nucleating seeds by reduction of chloroauric acid silver nitrate by ascorbic acid. In Morphology and structure of Au-Ag NP were studied by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) with the use of electron microscope TEM-125 (Selmi, Ukraine) with accelerating voltage of 100 kV. The statistical analysis of NP sizes obtained by the electron microscopy was processed, and the NP size distribution histograms were constructed. For every NP size obtained in the process the diameter of at least 300 particles was measured. Morphology and surface profile of NP coatings were studied by the high-resolution scanning electron microscope (HR-SEM) (Hitachi S-5500, Hitachi High-Technologies Corporation, Japan) and the atomic force microscope (AFM) (SPM-9600, Shimadzu Corp., Japan) in non-contact mode with frequency of 0.2 Hz using PPP-NCHR cantilever. Sample composition was analyzed by the scanning electron microscope JSM-6390LV with the X-ray chemical analysis system INCA Energy 350. Localness of energy dispersive X-ray analysis was ~1μm, concentration accuracy was 1-5 rel. %. Samples homogeneity was checked applying the assaying method point-to-point. Stable colloidal solutions of branched Au-Ag NP with the average particle size of 55-73 nm were obtained. Silver ions presence is an important condition for forming and growth of sharp branches of "star"-shaped NP along certain crystallographic faces of Au nucleating seeds. We suppose that silver absorbs onto the surfaces of seeds faces with the largest surface energy, forms monolayers Table Ag concentration, at.% Using self-assembly method, stable films with different Ag concentration were obtained (fig. The study of the electrical conductivity of samples with a coating of NP Au-Ag on glass consisted of measuring their temperature dependences of resistance using four probe methods in the temperature range 300-4.2 K. The connection of current and potential wires with the sample was carried out in one of two ways. In the first method, strips of indium-tin alloy or strips of indium melted in air were deposited in vacuum across the sample on the coating. Gold wires with a diameter of 0.05 mm were glued to the contact areas of the strips with silver paste. In the second method, the current leads were glued with silver paste directly on the edge of the sample. The typical length of the samples was 5 mm with a width of 1-2 mm. The distance between potential contacts ranged from 0.1 to 1 mm. Measurement of the resistance (R) of the sample as a function of temperature (T) was carried out automatically by recording the volt-ampere characteristics (I-V) of the sample at different temperatures and converting them depending on R(T). The maximum constant measuring current in various experiments was from 50 to 800 μA. I-V and and R(T) dependences were linear when using the first method of formation of current and potential leads in the whole range of measuring currents (in detail look more low). The magnetic properties of the samples were controlled in two ways. In the first of them, a permanent magnet was located above the surface of the sample, creating in the coating area a magnetic field of 0.05 T. The temperature dependence of the resistance of the sample in the temperature range of 4.2-300K was then recorded. Then the dependencies obtained with and without a magnet were compared. In the second method, the coated substrate could be placed on a flat coil with a diameter close to the size of the coating. After that, measurement and comparison of the inductance value of the coil without a coated substrate and when it was installed on the coil was made. The inductance was measured using a high-frequency digital inductance meter type E7-12 at a frequency of 1 MHz. The resolution of the meter was 100 nH. Typical temperature dependences of the resistance R(T) of samples with different silver contents in the temperature ranges from room temperature to 100 K are shown in Fig. Fig. For this sample, potential leads were located on the edge of the sample. A drop in resistance to zero does not occur and non-linearities are preserved during thermal cycling, if potential contacts are applied to the same sample that intersect the entire width of the sample (inset in Fig. Thus, the dependences obtained with the correct arrangement of potential contacts (Fig. Regarding the nature of the electrical conductivity of samples, the following can be noted. The change in the resistance R, linear with decreasing temperature, indicates their metallic conductivity. In this regard, it can be assumed that the total resistance (R) of the sample consists of the resistance (R 1 ) of the NP itself and the resistance (R 2 ) of the metal point contacts between them. The contribution to the conductivity of possible semiconductor interlayers between the granules is unlikely. The following model technique is used to estimate the value of R 1 . A model sample is made up of a complete set of substance granules. The mass of the model sample is equal to the total mass NP of the real sample. These NPs are laid so tightly that they are a solid coating without contact between the granules. Resistance R 1 can be calculated if the mass (m) of the sample coverage, the length (l) and width (w) of the sample, the specific gravity ( σ) and the specific resistance ( ρ ) NP of the material are known. Our coating is rectangular in shape from densely packed NPs with dimensions in the plan of w l × (0.5 × 5 mm) and with thickness t. In our case σ ≈ σ Au = 19.3 g/cm 3 , ρ ≈ ρ Au ≈ 10 -6 Ohm•cm, m ≈ 0.001 mg. The value of R 1 is calculated from two ratios: From ( . For the above numerical parameters from formula (3), we obtain R 1 ≈ 6 × 10 -2 Ohm•s. From a comparison of the resistance values (from 10 to 100 Ohm•s) experimentally measured at room temperature and the value of R 1 , it follows that the contact resistance between NPs makes the main contribution to the resistance of this sample. In this case, the average specific resistance of the coating of nanoparticles ranges from 3 × 10 -5 to 3 × 10 -4 Ohms•cm. The thickness (t) of the model sample, based on the ratio of ( The electrical conductivity of nanoparticle (NP) Au-Ag coatings in the form of "stars" in the temperature range 4.2-300K was first determined by measuring the temperature dependence of their electrical resistivity. The coating samples were obtained by chemical deposition of an Au-Ag colloid on glass substrates. The electrical resistance was determined by the four probe method. It is established that the temperature dependence of the coatings studied has a metallic character, i. e. the resistance decreases linearly with decreasing temperature up to the minimum temperature of the experiment (4.2 K). The complexity of the cryogenic measurements of the electrical resistance of these samples is due to the weak and non-uniform adhesion of the coating to the substrate, as well as the low and non-uniform density of the coating. The most repeated values of electrical conductivity of samples can only be obtained using the current and potential contacts developed with the sample in the form of either deposited in vacuum over a coating of film strips of In-Sn alloy with a length equal to the width of the sample or similar strips of melted indium. False and most often non-reproducible temperature dependences of the resistance of samples from NP, which coincide in shape with typical resistive transitions to the superconducting state, can arise in the case of using traditional electrical contacts located along the periphery of the coating. In particular, one can observe the occurrence of a false zero resistance at a temperature close to room temperature. Occurrence of false temperature dependences and them non repetition from one temperature cycle to another it is possible to explain irreversible thermomechanical movings of the nanopatricles of the coatings on the substrate surface, causing casual changes of electric contacts between them. This is confirmed by an estimate of the contributions to the total resistance of the sample to the resistance of the "stars" substance and the contacts between them. The last one is predominant. The same feature of coating resistance explains their very low density. The temperature dependences of the resistance of the "star" coatings of the selected composition, obtained using the optimal design of current and potential contacts with the sample, and the negative observation of the Meissner effect indicate the absence of superconductivity in the coatings studied. Further search for superconductivity in such a compound is advisable to carry out using additional measurement techniques and with increasing silver content in the coating, since the investigated coatings had a silver content of up to 13 %, and in 