Machine learning of the quantitative relationship between local environment descriptors and the potential energy surface of a system of atoms has emerged as a new frontier in the development of interatomic potentials (IAPs). Here, we present a comprehensive evaluation of ML-IAPs based on four local environment descriptors -Behler-Parrinello symmetry functions, smooth overlap of atomic positions (SOAP), the Spectral Neighbor Analysis Potential (SNAP) bispectrum components, and moment tensors -using a diverse data set generated using high-throughput density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The data set comprising bcc (Li, Mo) and fcc (Cu, Ni) metals and diamond group IV semiconductors (Si, Ge) is chosen to span a range of crystal structures and bonding. All descriptors studied show excellent performance in predicting energies and forces far surpassing that of classical IAPs, as well as predicting properties such as elastic constants and phonon dispersion curves. We observe a general trade-off between accuracy and the degrees of freedom of each model, and consequently computational cost. We will discuss these trade-offs in the context of model selection for molecular dynamics and other applications. A fundamental input for atomistic simulations of materials is a description of the potential energy surface (PES) as a function of atomic positions. While quantum mechanics-based descriptions, such as those based on Kohn-Sham density functional theory (DFT) In recent years, a modern alternative has emerged in the form of machine-learned IAPs (ML-IAPs), where the PES is described as a function of local environment descriptors that are invariant to translation, rotation and permutation of homonuclear atoms In this work, we present a comprehensive performance comparison of four major ML-IAPs -GAP, MTP, NNP and SNAP. The four IAPs were evaluated in terms of their accuracy in reproducing DFT energies and forces, as well as material properties such as the equations of state, lattice parameter and elastic constants. An attempt was also made to assess the training data requirements of each ML-IAP and the relative computational cost based on the best-available current implementations. To ensure a fair comparison, standardized DFT data sets of six elements (Li, Mo, Cu, Ni, Si and Ge) with the same training/test sampling and similar fitting approaches was used. The elements were chosen to span diverse chemistries and bonding, e.g., bcc and fcc metals, main group and transition metals, and group IV semiconductors. The four ML-IAPs investigated in this work have already been extensively discussed in previous works and reviews 1. High-dimensional neural network potential (NNP). The NNP uses atomcentered symmetry functions (ACSF) where R ij is the distance between atom i and neighbor atom j, η is the width of the Gaussian and R s is the position shift over all neighboring atoms within the cutoff radius R c , η is the width of the Gaussian basis and ζ controls the angular resolution. f c (R ij ) is a cutoff function, defined as follows: These hyperparameters were optimized to minimize the mean absolute errors of energies and forces for each chemistry. The NNP model has shown great performance for Si The GAP calculates the similarity between atomic configurations based on a smooth-overlap of atomic positions (SOAP) The spherical power spectrum vector, which is in turn the square of expansion coefficients, can be used to construct the SOAP kernel while raised to a positive integer power ζ (which is 4 in present case) to accentuate the sensitivity of the kernel In the above equations, σ atom is a smoothness controlling the Gaussian smearing, and n max and l max determine the maximum powers for radial components and angular components in spherical harmonics expansion, respectively 3. Spectral Neighbor Analysis Potential (SNAP). The SNAP uses the coefficients of the bispectrum of the atomic neighbor density functions in construction of the bispectrum components: where u j m,m are coefficients in 4-dimensional hyper-spherical harmonics expansion of neighbor density function: The SNAP model as well as qSNAP model has demonstrated great success in transition metals The MTP to describe the atomic local environments. Here f μ are the radial functions, and A comprehensive DFT data set was generated for six elements -Li, Mo, Ni, Cu, Si and Ge. These elements were chosen to span a variety of chemistries (main group metal, transition metal and semiconductor), crystal structures (bcc, fcc, and diamond) and bonding types (metallic and covalent). For each element, we generated a set of structures with diverse coverage of atomic local environment space, as follows: (1) The ground-state crystal for each element. (2) Strained structures constructed by applying strains of -10% to 10% at 2% intervals to the bulk supercell in six different modes, as described in the work by de Jong et al. (3) Slab structures up to a maximum Miller index of three, including (100), (110), (111), (210), ( (4) NVT ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations of the bulk supercells (similar to those in ( (5) NVT AIMD simulations of the bulk supercells (similar to those in (2)) with a single vacancy performed at 300 K and 2.0× of the melting point of each element. A total of 40 snapshots were obtained from each AIMD simulation at an interval of 0.1 ps, unless otherwise stated. All DFT calculations were carried out using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) The electronic energy and atomic force components were converged to within 10 -5 eV and 0.02 eV/ Å, respectively, in line with previous works To facilitate the reuse and reproduction of our results, the code, data and optimized ML models in this work are published open-source on Github (https://github.com/ materialsvirtuallab/mlearn). The code includes high-level Python interfaces for ML-IAPs development as well as LAMMPS material properties calculators. The optimized coefficients and hyperparameters for each ML-IAP are reported in Supplementary Information (see Table The cutoff radius determines the maximum range of interatomic interactions, and hence, has a critical effect on the prediction performance of ML-IAPs. Table These observations are consistent with those from previous traditional and ML IAP development efforts, where typically 2NN interactions are found to suffice for fcc metals, The number of degrees of freedom (DOF), e.g., the number of weights and biases for the NNP and number of representative points in GAP, has a strong effect on the accuracy and computational cost of each ML-IAP. Figure The MTP models generally lie close to the Pareto frontier, exhibiting an excellent balance between model accuracy and computational efficiency. For the SNAP and qSNAP models, the descriptor space (i.e., bispectrum components) is determined by the parameter J max . We find that the rate-limiting step is the calculation of bispectrum and the computation of quadratic terms in qSNAP has only a small effect on the computational cost. For the GAP model, the computational cost is linearly related to the number of kernels used in Gaussian process regression. The highest MAEs in energies are observed for the SNAP models and NNP models. It is well-known that neural network-based models often require larger data sets for best performance; previous NNP models have been trained on thousands or tens of thousands of structures In terms of chemistries, we find that the lowest MAEs in energies are observed for the fcc systems, followed by the bcc systems, and the highest MAEs are observed for the diamond systems. Very low MAEs in forces are observed across all ML IAPs for Cu, Ni and Li, while significantly higher MAEs in forces are observed for Mo, a metal with higher modulus and larger force distributions. Higher MAEs in forces are also observed for the diamond semiconductors. These trends are generally consistent across all ML-IAPs studied. We have also performed a study of the convergence of the ML-IAPs with training data size using Mo as the benchmark system given that it is a bcc metal (for which traditional IAPs tend to perform poorly) with large force distributions. Here, the length of the AIMD simulations were increased four-fold, and more training structures were sampled at the same time interval. The convergence results are shown in Figure The accuracy in predicting basic material properties is critical for evaluating the performance of ML-IAPs. Here, we perform the climbing-image nudged elastic band (CI-NEB) method In terms of diffusion properties, the GAP and MTP models perform well across different chemistries, with most of the prediction errors within 10% of DFT values, albeit with a moderate underestimate of the migration energy for diamond systems, in line with the previous study where E a and E b denote energies computed using methods a and b, respectively. IAPs. In all cases, the ∆ EOS for all ML-IAPs for all elements are within 2 meV/atom, which is the threshold for "indistinguishable EOS" previously used in evaluating different DFT codes In general, it is more challenging to give highly accurate predictions of EOS in diamond system than in fcc and bcc systems. In addition to the DFT-level accuracy in equations of state prediction, the predicted phonon dispersion curves by all ML-IAPs investigated in this work are in excellent agreement with the DFT reference (see Figure One of the principal applications of ML-IAPs is in molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. To assess the ability of the ML-IAPs to provide stable MD trajectories, we carried out N V T MD simulations at 1,300 K (0.5× melting point) on a 3 × 3 × 3 54-atoms supercell of bulk Mo for 0.25 ns using LAMMPS with the different ML-IAPs. A total of 40 snapshots at an interval of 2.5 ps were then sampled from each MD trajectory, and DFT static calculations were performed on these snapshots. Figure To evaluate the ability of the ML-IAPs to extrapolate to unseen data, we have computed the energy differences between the DFT ground state polymorph and a low-energy polymorph for each element, presented in Figure We have performed a comprehensive unbiased evaluation of the GAP, MTP, NNP, SNAP, and qSNAP ML-IAP models using consistently-generated DFT data on six elemental systems spanning different crystal structures (fcc, bcc, and diamond), chemistries (main group metals, transition metals and semiconductors) and bonding (metallic and covalent). This evaluation is carried out across three key metrics that are of critical importance for any potential user of these ML-IAPs: 1. Accuracy in predicted energies, forces and properties for both seen and unseen struc- tures; 2. Training data requirements, which influence the number of expensive DFT computations that have to performed to train a ML-IAP to a given accuracy; and 3. Computational cost, which influence the size of the systems on which computations can be performed for a given computing budget. These three metrics are inextricably linked -for all the four ML-IAPs, an increase in number of degrees of freedom (with increase in computational cost) and increase in training structures generally leads to higher accuracy. We demonstrate the application of the Pareto frontier as a means to identify the optimal trade-offs between these metrics. For all ML-IAPs, we find that there is an "optimal" configuration at which further expansion of the number of degrees of freedom yield little improvement in accuracy with increases in computational cost. We find that all ML-IAPs are able to achieve near-DFT accuracy in predicting energies, forces and material properties, substantially outperforming traditional IAPs. The GAP and MTP models exhibit the smallest MAEs in energies and forces. However, the GAP models are among the most computationally expensive for a given accuracy (based on current implementations) and show poor extrapolability to higher energy polymorphs in the diamond systems. Indeed, the simple linear SNAP model, which has among the highest MAEs in predicted energies and forces, show the best extrapolability to higher energy polymorphs as well as reproducing the equation of state for the diamond systems. The NNP and qS-NAP models show relatively high MAEs in energies with small data sizes, but these can be mitigated with increases in training data. Another somewhat surprising conclusion is also that even with relatively small training data sets of ∼100-200 structures, the GAP, MTP and SNAP models appear to be reasonably well-converged to meV atom -1 accuracy in energies and 0.01 eV Å-1 accuracy in forces. The NNP and qSNAP models can be further improved with larger training data sets, but the MAEs even at ∼ 100 structures are not excessively high. We attribute this performance to the training data generation procedure, which is aimed at sampling a diversity of structures from both ground state and multi-temperature AIMD simulations. In other words, diversity of training data is arguably a more important consideration than quantity. Finally, we note that one limitation of this study is that we have not attempted to combine the different local environment descriptors (symmetry functions, SOAP, bispectrum, moment tensors) with different ML frameworks (e.g., linear regression versus gaussian process regression versus neural network). The choice of descriptor affects how efficiently diverse local environments can be encoded, while the choice of ML framework determines the functional flexibility in mapping the relationship between descriptors and energies/forces. Different descriptor-model choices may yield better tradeoffs between accuracy and cost for a particular application. The Behler-Parrinello neural network potentials (NNPs) The ACSF converts the local atomic environment to numeric vectors that fulfill rotational and translational invariance. where η determines the width of the Gaussian basis, and R s is the position shift over all neighboring atoms within the cutoff radius R c . The cutoff function f c , which ensures a smooth decay in value and slope at cutoff radius R c , is given as follows: The angular ACSF takes the following form: where the summation loops over neighbors j and k, θ ijk is the angle, and ζ, η , and λ are three parameters that determine the shape of angular symmetry functions. Symmetry functions determined by an appropriate choice of hyperparameters (η, R s , etc.) should reflect the effective relationship between atomic representations and corresponding properties (e.g., energy and force components). A Kalman filter algorithm was used to optimize the neural network weights, and a grid search was conducted to optimize the hyperparameters so that the fitted model can reproduce not only the basic energy and force values but also the elastic constants. The optimized parameters for all elemental systems studied in this work are listed in Table The Gaussian Approximation Potentials (GAPs) where R represents the geometry of neighboring atoms within cutoff radius R c , and k indexes a set of reference data points R k that serve as a basis on which the atomic energy function is expanded. K is a kernel function that captures the variation of the energy function in terms of changing neighboring configurations. In this work, the kernel function used is the "Smooth Overlap of Atomic Positions" (SOAP) The atomic configuration of a central atom i is represented by its neighbor density as a sum of Gaussians centered over all neighboring atoms j within a cutoff distance R c , where f c is a cutoff function ensures smooth decay in value and slope at cutoff radius R c , and σ atom is a smearing parameter. This neighbor density is then expanded in terms of a basis of spherical harmonics Y lm ( R), and radial functions g n (R): and the rotationally invariant spherical power spectrum of atom i is then expressed in terms of expansion coefficients c nlm as follows: Finally, the SOAP kernel is written as a dot product of power spectrums and raised to a small integer power as follows: TABLE The choice of hyperparameters such as cutoff radius and regularization parameters in the linear system has a significant influence on the performance of GAP models The bispectrum of the neighbor density and spectral neighbor analysis potential (SNAP) formalism has been extensively studied in the previous works In SNAP, the atomic neighbor density around a central atom i at position R is defined as follows: where R ij is the position of neighbor atom j relative to central atom i, and ω j is the dimensionless weight to discriminate atom types. The cutoff function f c ensures that the neighbor atomic density decreases smoothly to zero at the cutoff radius R c . The angular distribution of neighbor density function can be projected onto spherical harmonic functions Y l m (θ, φ). In the bispectrum approach, the radial distribution is converted into an additional polar angle θ 0 defined by θ 0 = θ max 0 r Rc . Thus the density function can be represented in the 3-sphere (θ, φ, θ 0 ) coordinates instead of (θ, φ, r). The density function on 3-sphere can then be expanded with 4-dimensional hyperspherical harmonics U j m,m , as follows: where the coefficients u j m,m are obtained as the inner product of the neighbor density function with the basic function given by the following: The bispectrum components B j 1 ,j 2 ,j can then obtained via following: where constants H jmm j 1 m 1 m 1 j 2 m 2 m 2 are coupling coefficients satisfying the conditions j 1j 2 ≤ j ≤ In the SNAP formalism, the energy E SNAP , force F j SNAP , and stresses σ j SNAP are expressed as linear functions of the bispectrum components where β 0 and the vector β are the coefficients derived from fitting with the database of quantum electronic structure calculations. In our previous works where F (ρ i ) represents the energy of embedding atom i into the electron density contributed by its neighboring atoms. The "host" electron density of embedding atom i can be expressed as a linear function of the bispectrum components as follows: and the embedding energy can be expressed as a Taylor expansion based on a reference structure with density ρ 0 as follows: Thus, the modified SNAP energy is then given by the following expression: where α = F a ⊗ a is a symmetric K × K matrix. Essentially the quadratic extension carries all distinct pairwise products of bispectrum components, and expands the maximum complexity of energy functions to seven-body effects In this work, the same two-step fitting approach is used for both the SNAP and qSNAP models. The optimized qSNAP hyperparameters for all elemental systems are listed in The Moment Tensor Potential (MTP) model and its formalism have been studied in previous works As is denoted previously The basis functions B(R), in turn, depend on a series of moment tensor descriptors over all neighbor atoms j, where the functions f μ are the radial distribution of atomic configuration and the terms R ij ⊗ • • • ⊗ R ij are tensors of rank ν entailing angular information about the atomic configuration. These descriptors are rotationally invariant in a tensorial sense (or, to be more precise, rotationally covariant). The choice of μ and ν provides the balance between computational complexity and computational efficiency of MTP To investigate the scaling effect on the computational cost of different ML-IAPs, we perform npt MD simulations at a constant temperature of 300 K on structures with different size including 6 × 6 × 6, 10 × 10 × 10, 14 × 14 × 14, and 18 × 18 × 18 supercells, corresponding to 432, 2000, 5488, and 11664 atoms of bulk Mo, respectively. The computational costs are presented in Table No B VRH (GPa) 263 271 (3.8%) 260 (-1.1%) 266 (1.1%) 258 (-1.9%) 256 (-2.7%) E v (eV) 2.70 2.68 (-0.7%) 2.61 (-3.3%) 2.94 (8.9%) 2.72 (0.7%) 2.79 (3.3%) E m (eV) 1.22 1.60 (31.1%) 1.51 (23.8%) 1.59 (30.3%) 1.49 (22.1%) 1.50 (23.0%) v (eV) 2.19 2.10 (-4.1%) 1.98 (-9.6%) 1.98 (-9.6%) 1.77 (-19.2%) 1.67 (-23.7%) Continued on next page