Advanced microscopy and/or spectroscopy tools play indispensable role in nanoscience and nanotechnology research, as it provides rich information about the growth mechanism, chemical compositions, crystallography, and other important physical and chemical properties. However, the interpretation of imaging data heavily relies on the "intuition" of experienced researchers. As a result, many of the deep graphical features obtained through these tools are often unused because of difficulties in processing the data and finding the correlations. Such challenges can be well addressed by deep learning 1, 2, 3, 4 . In this work, we use the optical characterization of twodimensional (2D) materials as a case study, and demonstrate a neural-network-based algorithm for the material and thickness identification of exfoliated 2D materials with high prediction accuracy and real-time processing capability. Further analysis shows that the trained network can extract deep graphical features such as contrast, color, edges, shapes, segment sizes and their distributions, based on which we develop an ensemble approach topredict the most relevant physical properties of 2D materials. Finally, a transfer learning technique is applied to adapt the pretrained network to other applications such as identifying layer numbers of a new 2D material, or materials produced by a different synthetic approach. Our artificial-intelligence-based material characterization approach is a powerful tool that would speed up the preparation, initial characterization of 2D materials and other nanomaterials and potentially accelerate new material discoveries. Research on two-dimensional (2D) materials has grown exponentially over the past decade Hundreds of 2D materials have been isolated and studied In reality, optical microscopic (OM) images contain rich, often unused information other than optical contrast. These deep graphical features can be extracted through deep learning, especially semantic segmentation methods based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) Figure These materials are graphene/graphite, hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), the 2H-phase semiconducting transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) 2H-MoS2, 2H-WS2, 2H-WSe2 and 2H-MoTe2, the 2H-phase metallic TMDs 2H-TaS2 and 2H-NbSe2, the 1T-phase TMD 1T-HfSe2, black phosphorous (BP), the metal trihalides CrI3 and RuCl3, and the quasi-one-dimensional (quasi-1D) crystal ZrTe5. A total number of 817 OM images containing exfoliated flakes of these 13 materials and 100 background-only images were collected and labeled for training and testing. To make the training data representative of the typical variability of OM images, the training and test data were sampled from a collection of OM images generated by at least 30 users from 8 research groups with 6 different optical microscopes over a span of 10 years. The data were labeled with the material identifications and thicknesses in a pixel-by-pixel fashion with the help of a semiautomatic image segmentation program (Figure During training, a random rotation data augmentation method which produce random positioning and orientation of images were utilized. Detailed information is shown in Methods. A stochastic gradient descent with momentum (SGDM) method We first show that the trained 2DMOINet can be used to segment the OM images among 13 different exfoliated 2D materials and find the material identity and thickness of each flake. The performance can be visualized in Figure After a systematic optimization in terms of the network structure, the data augmentation approach, and the addition of background-only images (see Method for detailed information), we eventually obtained a trained 2DMOINet with high prediction accuracy, fast processing speed, as well as good generality that can be used for a fully automatic 2D material searching system. In the following, we discuss these three important aspects of our deep-learning-based optical identification approach in more details. (1) Accuracy Figure Additional performance metrics are summarized in Table Note that the calculated performance metrics of the 2DMOINet are likely an underestimate: after careful inspection of the label maps predicted by the 2DMOINet, we discovered a number of OM images in which the ground-truth was initially mislabeled, but predicted correctly by the 2DMOINet (Figure We believe that the proposed deep learning algorithm is well suited to real-time processing according to the metrics given in Table As a proof-of-concept demonstration, we have integrated our 2D material identification algorithm to an optical microscope with a motorized XYZ stage. The motorized stage is able to scan across one sample (1.5 cm by 1.5 cm) and capture over 1,000 high-resolution OM images (1,636 by 1,088 pixels) within 50 minutes. These images can then be pre-processed (color normalization, resize) and fed to the trained 2DMOINet for their corresponding label maps in less than 15 minutes with a GPU-equipped computer. Figures Re-location of the appropriate flakes can then be implemented automatically for following studies. Additional information about this automatic 2D-material-searching system can be found in Methods. Furthermore, through the transfer learning technique discussed later, it is possible to further improve the thickness identification accuracy for a single material. This thickness identification tool has high identification accuracy and high throughput, and has already been utilized in daily laboratory research. We would like to emphasize that our deep-learning-based optical identification approach is generic for identification of different 2D materials, and has good robustness against variations such as brightness, contrast, white balance, and non-uniformity of the light field (Figure Predicting physical properties of "unknown" materialsIn the following, we first discuss how our 2DMOINet was able to capture deep graphical features. Based on this, we then constructed an ensemble approach to provide predictions about physical properties of unknown 2D materials. To interpret how the 2DMOINet extracts features from 2D material OM images, we analyzed the output feature maps of all the layers in the trained network for the OM images in the test dataset as the inputs. As a demonstration, we used a typical image of graphite/graphene (shown in Figure By feeding the network with more test images as summarized in Figure After further analysis on the 512 channels of the Depth=5 encoder layer with more test images randomly chosen from our database, we concluded that the trained 2DMOINet is able to capture deep and subtle graphical features that were overlooked by previously reported optical contrast based approaches To confirm that the above analysis about the deep graphical feature maps are generic for our problem but not specific to any individual 2DMOINet, we repeated the training procedure for the 2DMOINet with different initialization, random permutation of the dataset, and different data augmentation strategies. 16 training runs were performed separately with the metrics and pixellevel confusion matrices shown in Table Another interesting observation regarding the generality of the graphical feature found by our algorithm is that the 2DMOINet is able to learn additional features in the Depth=5 channels in order to compensate the artifacts induced by the random rotation data augmentation strategy. In Figure Furthermore, it is clearly seen that this artifact has been mostly removed in the output of the graphene channels in the final ReLU layer of the network using random rotation augmentation method as shown in Figure The above feature map analysis has provided a better understanding about how deep graphical features can be extracted by the 2DMOINet for more accurate and generic optical identification of exfoliated 2D materials. However, the algorithm is not limited to this particular task, and we found that it can be used for more advanced optical characterization tasks such as the prediction of material properties. For this, the graphical features captured by the network are correlated to the optical and mechanical properties of the material. As shown schematically in Figure One simple approach to implement the material property predictor is to take the "similarity" vectors of each material from the confusion matrix (each row of the matrix) and decompose the vectors to a set of specifically designed base vectors. To improve the fidelity of this simple and relatively weak predictor, an ensemble approach is employed As a proof-of-concept demonstration, we fed the trained network with OM images of 17 2D materials that were unknown to the network during the training stage. The extended confusion matrices containing the 13 trained materials and the 17 untrained materials is shown in Figure For a more quantitative analysis, we selected two different predictors that are associated with the band gaps and the crystal structures of the material, and the projected mean values and their standard deviations of each material based on these two predictors and the 16 2DMOINets are plotted into a histogram with an error bar as summarized in Figure Finally, we show that the trained 2DMOINet can be adapted for different applications through transfer learning. The basic idea is to use the trained 2DMOINet as the initialization for the new training problem rather than a random initialization. With this approach, we are able to train the 2DMOINet for new optical identification/characterization problems with a good balance between prediction accuracy and computational/data cost. Here we use OM images of graphene synthesized by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and exfoliated Td-WTe2 as two examples. Figures Because this newly trained 2DMOINet is dedicated to the thickness prediction for only one material, it is able to differentiate different thicknesses with much better accuracy (91% mean class accuracy) and finer thickness divisions. In summary, we develop a deep learning algorithm for the optical characterization of 2D materials and the extraction of deep graphical features from optical microscopic images that can be used for anticipating material properties. After training, the neural network can achieve rapid characterization of material identities and their thicknesses with high accuracy. A fully automated system utilizing this algorithm is developed, which is able to free up tremendous amount of time for researchers. In addition, a systematic analysis was made to understand how the network captures deep graphical features such as color, contrast, edges, shapes and flakes sizes from the optical images. Based on this, an assemble approach derived from the trained neural network can be used for the prediction of physical properties of the materials. We also demonstrate that the trained network can be adapted for different optical characterization applications with minimal additional training through a transfer learning technique. The proposed methodology can potentially be extended for identification and understanding other morphological or spectroscopic data of diverse nanomaterials. (1) Network structure The 2DMOINet-based optical identification process is summarized in Figure ( There are 3 steps to generate the pixel-wise labeled dataset for the training of the 2DMOINet: labeling, color normalization, and data augmentation. To generate pixel-wise labeled OM images for the training and testing, we used a semi-automatic graph-cut method implemented by MATLAB. Graph-cut is a traditional semantic segmentation method based on graph theory We select thirteen 2D materials as experiment samples. They are graphene/graphite, hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), 2H-MoS2, 2H-WS2, 2H-WSe2, 2H-MoTe2, 2H-TaS2, 2H-NbSe2, 1T-HfSe2, black phosphorous (BP), CrI3, RuCl3 and ZrTe5. About 100 images for each of Graphene/Graphite, 2H-MoS2, 2H-WS2 and 2H-TaS2 were labeled with three classes ("monolayer", "fewlayer (2-6L)" and "multilayer (>6L)") to demonstrate the thickness identification capabilities, and about 50 images for each of the other 9 materials were labeled with only single classes. Moreover, to improve the robustness of our network, 100 background-only images are chosen which contain unbalanced light conditions or tape residuals. Therefore, the total number of classes (including background) is 22, and the total number of labeled OM images is 917. To partially reduce the color-related variations of the OM images because of different setups and user preferences, a color normalization was performed on all the images. We first converted the RGB images into the Lab color space, and the following transformation was applied to all the pixels: L←30L/Lref, a←a-aref, ( The training and testing of the 2DMOINet were implemented in MATLAB R2018b with the help of the Deep Learning Toolbox, the Parallel Computing Toolbox, the Computer Vision Toolbox and the Image Processing Toolbox. The training and testing were performed using a desktop computer equipped with a CPU (Intel(R) Core (TM) i7-8700K @ 3.70GHz, 32.0GB RAM) and a GPU (NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080 Ti, 11 GB GDDR5X). The stochastic gradient descent with momentum (SGDM) method The overall performance of these 14 networks are summarized in Table To optimize the performance of the 2DMOINet, we first investigated the network with different depths (number of pooling layers, as indicated in Figure Based on the above analysis, we finally chose the VGG16-based 2DMOINet, the random rotation augmentation strategy, and the addition of background-only OM images as the optimized model (network #5 in Table The confusion matrices (Figure To demonstrate the 2DMOINet's capability of predicting physical properties of unknown 2D materials, we also fed the trained 2DMOINet with additional OM images of new 2D materials that were not used in the training dataset, and calculated the "extended" confusion matrix as shown in Figure , where vk is the base vector of the k-th class in the material property predictor; vx is the base vector of the material An ensemble approach is used to improve the fidelity of these relatively simple predictors. We calculate the mean and the standard deviations of the outputs of these predictors for the 16 separately trained 2DMOINets (Table In the first transfer learning experiment, we only labeled 5 OM images of CVD grown graphene. 4 OM images were used to generate the training dataset, and 1 OM image were used to generate the test dataset. 360 and 90 images (224 by 224 pixels) were generated in the training and test dataset with the basic data augmentation. We divided the graphene region into five classes based on its layer number (from monolayer to 5-layers). We varied the size of the training dataset from 30 to 360, and sampled randomly from the 360 images. In the second transfer learning experiment, a total number of 297 OM images of exfoliated Td-WTe2 samples (including 48 background-only images) were used. Similar data augmentation and resizing strategy were applied before the training. For the training of the transfer learning, the initial weights in the network before the training are taken from the pretrained 2DMOINet (trained with the 13 exfoliated 2D materials, network #5 in Table We integrated our 2D material identification algorithm with an optical microscope (Nikon) with a motorized XYZ stage. We used an exfoliated graphene sample and an exfoliated MoS2 sample with the size of 1.5 cm by 1.5 cm to test the system. it took nearly 50 minutes to finish the automatic scanning and produce over 1000 1636-by-1088-pixel images (graphene: 1862 images, MoS2: 1406 images) per sample. Then color normalization and image chopping were applied to these images. To cover every part in one image, we first resized these images by 0.5, and then chopped into 12 squared images (224 by 224 pixels), which led to 22344 and 16872 images for the graphene and MoS2 samples, respectively. Network #5 in Table of the total images are selected for the graphene and MoS2 examples, respectively. These images can be inspected by human within 5 minutes. Supplementary video 1 and 2 summarized the automatic 2D material searching procedure for the graphene and the MoS2 samples, respectively. Figure 