We use Ru L3-edge (2838.5 eV) resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) to quantify the electronic structure of Ca2RuO4, a layered 4d-electron compound that exhibits a correlation-driven metal-insulator transition and unconventional antiferromagnetism. We observe a series of Ru intraionic transitions whose energies and intensities are well described by model calculations. In particular, we find a J = 0 → 2 spin-orbit excitation at 320 meV, as well as Hund's-rule driven S = 1 → 0 spin-state transitions at 750 and 1000 meV. The energy of these three features uniquely determines the spin-orbit coupling, tetragonal crystal-field energy, and Hund's rule interaction. The parameters inferred from the RIXS spectra are in excellent agreement with the picture of excitonic magnetism that has been devised to explain the collective modes of the antiferromagnetic state. L3-edge RIXS of Ru compounds and other 4d-electron materials thus enables direct measurements of interactions parameters that are essential for realistic model calculations. The influence of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) on the phase behavior of compounds with orbitally degenerate d-electrons has been a subject of intense recent interest We have built a spectrometer for resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) that allows direct measurements of the hierarchy of low-energy electronic interactions in 4d-metal compounds Using RIXS at the dipole-active Ru L 3 -edge (2838.5 eV), we have uncovered a series of sharp electronic excitations in Ca 2 RuO 4 from which we were able to accurately extract the parameters ξ, ∆, and J H , in analogy to recent Ir L 3 -edge RIXS experiments on iridates with 5d valence electrons The RIXS experiments were carried out at beamline P01 at the PETRA-III synchrotron at DESY, using the recently built IRIXS (Intermediate x-ray energy RIXS) spectrometer the Ru L 3 edge (E i > 2845 eV), the Lβ 2,15 emission line of Ca 2 RuO 4 is seen (dashed white arrows). The data in Fig. To extract the energies and intensities of the spectral features from the high-resolution RIXS data in Fig. We now address the photon polarization dependence of the RIXS intensity, which is also modulated by θ and provides additional clues to the origin of the different features. When increasing θ, the polarization of the incoming photon moves from the sample c-axis into the ab-plane. Fig. To gain insight into the origin of the multiple features seen in our RIXS spectra, we have carried out ionic model calculations that quantify the energy levels of Ru d 4 multiplets and corresponding RIXS intensities. The Hamiltonian we use is standard and includes intra-ionic Hund's coupling J H , spin-orbit coupling ξ, tetragonal ∆ and cubic 10Dq crystal field splittings; see Appendix B for its explicit form. The ionic model has a rich multiplet structure but is local in space, so it can be easily diagonalized numerically for arbitrary parameter values. In Fig. Based on the energy diagram in Fig. As a consistency check of the above assignment, we have also calculated the RIXS intensities of the transitions in Fig. To describe the dispersive magnons and amplitude (Higgs) mode that give rise to the low-energy A 1 feature, one has to go beyond the local model. We have adopted the effective S =1 model of Refs. 23,24 that is built on the low-energy singlet-doublet sector of the d 4ion, see Fig. neglecting small anisotropy terms Having fully quantified our RIXS data below 1 eV, we now discuss the higher-energy spectra which show a twopeak structure, B 1 and B 2 , evolving into a broader single peak at higher values of θ, see Fig. We now compare our results to previous experimental and theoretical work. The Hund's rule coupling constant 0.34 eV extracted from our RIXS results is comparable to the value J H ∼ 0.4 eV that was obtained by fitting angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy data to a model based on dynamical mean-field theory In recent O K-edge RIXS experiments With the values of ∆, ξ, and J H obtained in our experiment, and using the ionic model results in Fig. We observed that the transverse magnons and the Higgs mode contribute to peak A 1 at ∼ 50 meV, consistent with Ref. 23. However, these modes could not be individually resolved here due to insufficient energy resolution. We note also that in the [H, H, L] scattering plane used in our experiment, the Bragg peaks are not accessed and thus these modes do not show strong dispersion or intensity variations. We have presented an experimental investigation of Ca 2 RuO 4 using a newly built Ru L 3 -edge RIXS spectrometer, and we quantified its basic electronic parameters J H , ξ, ∆, and 10Dq. The parameters we obtained confirm the spin-orbit entangled nature of the low-energy states, lending strong support to the picture of excitonic magnetism in Ca 2 RuO 4 under the widely adopted approximation U = U -2J H . Here, U (U ) correspond to intra (inter)-orbital repulsion, and the J H terms describe the inter-orbital Hund's exchange and pair-hopping interactions. d † m↑ and n m↑ are electron creation and density operators, correspondingly. The spin-orbit coupling H so , and crystal fields of cubic H cub and tetragonal H tetra symmetries are parameterized as follows: We note that the coupling constants in the above Hamiltonians are effective model parameters whose values are generally smaller than those for free-ions, because they are affected by p-d covalency effects in a solid To calculate the RIXS intensity at the Ru L 3 -edge, we use the dipole moment operator P = (P x , P y , P z ) which brings core electrons from the 2p 3/2 level to the 4d states, and vice versa. Its x-component can be written as The numerically obtained multiplet wavefunctions |d n are substituted in Eq. C2 to calculate the RIXS intensities of the non-dispersive features A 2 , A 3 , and A 4 , as well as t 2g → e g transitions B 1 and B 2 . To describe the A 1 peak, which originates from the dispersive magnons and the amplitude mode, one has to go beyond the local model; we evaluated its dispersion and intensity using the effective S =1 model of Eq. 1 in the main text.