FeTe, a non-superconducting parent compound in the iron-chalcogenide family, becomes superconducting after annealing in oxygen. Under the presence of magnetism, spin-orbit coupling, inhomogeneity and lattice distortion, the nature of its superconductivity is not well understood. Here, we combined mutual inductance technique with magneto transport to study the magnetization and superconductivity of FeTe thin films. We found that the films with the highest Tc showed non-saturating superfluid density and a strong magnetic hysteresis distinct from that in a homogeneous superconductor. Such hysteresis can be well explained by a two-level critical state model and suggested the importance of granularity to superconductivity in this compound. Iron-chalcogenide is an important family of iron-based high TC superconductors (FeSC). It has the simplest crystal structure with one layer of Fe square lattice sandwiched between two layers of chalcogen atoms. Despite the simplicity of its crystal structure, a single layer of FeSe grown on SrTiO3 displays the highest TC among FeSC It has been reported that FeTe films may become superconducting after annealing in oxygen In this letter, we report the observation of two-level critical state in the superconducting FeTe thin films grown on Al2O3. We combined mutual inductance technique with magneto transport to uncover the surface resistance change over 8 decades when the superconductivity was tuned by temperature and magnetic field. Despite a Tc of around 13 K, superfluid density did not saturate down to 2 K. Furthermore, the films showed magnetic hysteresis in surface resistance distinctively different from what one might expect from a homogeneous superconductor with vortex pinning. The hysteresis decreased with increasing temperature and reducing maximum magnetic field in a way consistent with the two-level critical state model. These observations suggested the importance of granularity for the superconductivity in FeTe thin films induced by oxygen. We have grown FeTe thin films using molecular-beam-epitaxy on both Al2O3 and SrTiO3 substrates and annealed the sample in-situ in an oxygen pressure of about 10 -2 Torr (see supplementary materials). Films on the latter showed better morphology (see supplementary materials) but much lower or even zero Tc. The current study will focus on films grown on Al2O3 and use a film of 49 nm thick as a representative throughout this paper. Its resistance showed a superconducting transition around 13 K (Fig. In order to investigate the superconducting regime below 10 K where the resistance of the film was too small to be reliably measured using charge transport (Fig. As a function of the external magnetic field applied perpendicular to the film, our sample showed strong hysteresis both from transport and from mutual inductance measurement (Fig. The magnitude of the hysteresis as represented by the difference between up and down sweeps decreased as temperature increased (Fig. Nevertheless, it was still present in the resistance data up to 11 K (Fig. We found that the magnetic hysteresis in the superconducting state obtained from both transport and from mutual inductance signal could be unified if we transform the mutual inductance voltage V " = X + iY into surface impedance Z ) = R ) + iωL according to where R ) is the surface resistance, L is the inductance with A )n ) proportional to superfluid density n ) , I . and ω is the amplitude and frequency of the drive current, respectively, and M(x) is determined by the specific geometry of the mutual inductance coils Applying the same method on the mutual inductance data under sweeping external magnetic field H at various fixed temperatures (Fig. According to the two-level critical state model, the intergranular regions have a higher penetration field Hg and much stronger pinning than the grain boundaries. When the field is swept upward, flux penetrates grain-boundaries first forming Josephson vortices which causes large increase in R ) due to a lower viscosity. In the down sweep, intergranular fluxons disappear first, leaving the more strongly pinned intragrain fluxons that contribute less R ) per fluxon than their intergranular counterparts. The validity of the two-level critical state model can be further seen from the variation of hysteresis with the variation of temperature and maximum applied field Hmax. As we increased temperature, both the magnitude of hysteresis in R ) and Hm reduced and both disappeared at 12 K (Fig. We found that such two-level critical state invariably occurred in the superconducting FeTe films we studied. Films of same thickness with higher Tc tend to have stronger hysteresis at same temperature, which is not surprising given the temperature dependence of Hm (Fig. It is well known that granularity strongly affects the electromagnetic properties of superconductors. Even in high quality cuprate high Tc superconductors, granularity plays a crucial part in determining the critical density 