This paper presents the efficient Yagi-Uda nanoantenna with the chain of directors, reflector and a feed element, where these elements have been optimized to fulfil the requirement of high directivity and the gain of antenna. The proposed design consists of six core and cladding with silver core and silicon cladding is used to achieve high directivity. The design is analyzed by FIT based CST Software package by which Directivity and Gain of the antenna are computed. The enhancement of this directivity is mainly contributed by the increase in the number of directors from the four to five and the optimized length of the directors which is scaled by 0.9. The simulated results show that the proposed Yagi antenna provides good performance in terms of directivity. The suggested antenna design shows the improved directivity of 17.62 at 500 nm wavelength. The proposed design has wide range of applications including as solar cells. A device used for transmission and receiving electromagnetic waves is known as antenna Yagi-uda antenna design was given by a young engineer, Shintaro Uda, Assistant Professor of Hidetsugu Yagi from Tokyo imperial university 1909 under the supervision of German Professor Heinrichs Barkhauson. Recently the traditional Yagi-uda antenna has produced light emission & detection that is unidirectional at nano-scale The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 contains literature review of Yagi uda Nano antenna and its properties. Section 3 gives the structure of Yagi antenna. Section 4 shows the fabrication types of Yagi antenna design. Simulation and methodology is defined in section 5. Section 6 shows the maximum directivity of 17.64 achieved .Section 7 conclusion of paper and Section 8 gives reference to future work which could be done using CST Simulation software. Taminiau et al 2008, the Yagi-uda antenna was given the maximum directivity of 6.4 in contrast the dipole classical RF design antenna [9]. Liu et al 2012, Selective photonic sphere array has been used and the directivity of 15.7 at the wavelength of 603nm wavelength was achieved [13]. Krasnok et al 2012, due to the magnetic resonance in the visible range optical nanoantenna was made of silicon nanoparticles and the directivity of 12 at 500nm had been achieved It is the chain of active and passive elements. It consists of one active and some passive elements The passive element includes one reflector and one or more than one director as shown in Fig. The systematic process of fabrication of Yagi-uda nano antenna is performed using three different approaches. The fabrication of the suggested Au-Si nanoantenna can be performed by using the two-step electron-beam (EB) lithography evaporation technique The 3D Yagi-uda nanoantenna has been designed with silver (Palik) and silicon optical materials. It consists of 7 nanowires with silver (Palik) core and silicon cladding. Silver material has some best properties over other materials and its data can be taken from Palik data We consider geometric parameters of directivity from the Lorentz 4 parameters (01) Where, The efficiency of nanoantenna can be calculated by radiated power divided by radiated power and the total power loss as shown in the Eq. 02. (02) The proposed designed has been optimized by considering the Krasnok et al. Fig. The far field plot of antenna shows the radiation pattern of the antenna and it is defined in spatial coordinates that is defined by the azimuth angle (φ) and the elevation angle (θ). More precisely the plot of the power radiated from an antenna per unit solid angle as shown in Eq. 03. It has been plotted in 3D design as shown in Fig. (03 Where, is known as the power radiated per unit solid angle. We have noticed from Fig. The performance of proposed optical nanoantenna design has been improved significantly by using high permittivity materials and this feature shows low loss at optical frequency.In our study we concentrate on nanoparticles prepared of silicon and silver (Palik) material at the 500nm wavelength that lies in the blue band spectrum and it is best material used for quantum dot effects which is currently in used for the optical communication technology. Fig: Fig. From above discussion we concluded that Yagi-uda Nano antenna is widely used due to its forward gain capability, easy construction and low cost. The Proposed model of Yagi-Uda Nano antenna has been analysed and improved from 12 to 17.62. So, the enhancement of this directivity was mainly added by the increase in the number of directors from the earlier four to five while considering the length of these directors together with the length of the reflector element. In proposed design of 6 element Yagi antenna, the length of the directors is scaled by 0.9. Hence, the use of 6 element in the proposed yagi antenna with carefully design will improve the quality of coverage due to increased directivity and henceforth the gain in the reception side and for the digital photonics devices has been achieved. This will lead to enhanced the quality of suggested Yagi-Uda nanoantenna. Yagi antenna has been designed to convert photovoltaic energy from spectrum of EM waves into optical signals. Yagi antenna can be more improved by changing material and its parameters. In future its influence will be in numerous fields like broadband wireless links, mobile communication (5G), space communication, wireless optical communication and higher order frequency applications.