We report numerical simulations of the nonlinear dynamics of Josephson vortices driven by strong dc currents in layered superconductors. Dynamic equations for interlayer phase differences in a stack of coupled superconducting layers were solved to calculate a drag coefficient η(J) of the vortex as a function of the perpendicular dc current density J. It is shown that Cherenkov radiation produced by a moving vortex causes significant radiation drag increasing η(v) at high vortex velocities v and striking instabilities of driven Josephson vortices moving faster than a terminal velocity vc. The steady-state flux flow breaks down at v > vc as the vortex starts producing a cascade of expanding vortex-antivortex pairs evolving into either planar macrovortex structures or branching flux patterns propagating both along and across the layers. This vortex-antivortex pair production triggered by a rapidly moving vortex is most pronounced in a stack of underdamped planar junctions where it can occur at J > Js well below the interlayer Josephson critical current density. Both vc and Js were calculated as functions of the quasiparticle damping parameter, and the dc magnetic field applied parallel to the layers. The effects of vortex interaction on the Cherenkov instability of moving vortex chains and lattices in annular stacks of Josephson junctions were considered. It is shown that a vortex driven by a current density J > Js in a multilayer of finite length excites selfsustained large-amplitude standing waves of magnetic flux, resulting in temporal oscillations of the total magnetic moment. We evaluated a contribution of this effect to the power W radiated by the sample and showed that W increases strongly as the number of layers increases. These mechanisms can result in nonlinearity of the c-axis electromagnetic response and contribute to THz radiation from the layered cuprates at high dc current densities flowing perpendicular to the ab planes. The physics of current-driven Josephson (J) vortices It has been usually assumed that a driven vortex preserves its identity as a topological defect no matter how fast it moves, because instability of a vortex would violate the fundamental conservation of the winding number n = ±1 in the superconducting order parameter Ψ = ∆ exp(inχ). One of the outstanding questions is whether this topologically protected stability of a moving vortex remains preserved at any current below the depairing limit or there is a terminal velocity above which a uniformly moving vortex cannot exist. As far as the Josephson vortices are concerned, numerical simulations of long underdamped junctions A question whether a fast Josephson vortex can initiate the V-AV pair production in layered superconductors is of interest to the theory of nonlinear flux flow of vortices along the ab planes in high-T c cuprates and pnictides or artificial multilayer structures. For instance, revealing the materials parameters which control the values of v c and J s are essential for understanding the high-field electromagnetic response along the c-axis. Another issue pertains to dynamic dissipative structures which appear due to the V-AV chain reaction triggered by a single moving vortex. The nonlinear dynamics of these structures and their effect on the radiation and other electromagnetic properties of layered superconductors are of particular interest. The Cherenkov instability of vortices at high velocities is facilitated in underdamped interlayer junctions, as characteristic of highly anisotropic Bi-based cupraes, which can thus be testbeds for the experimental and theoretical investigations of these issues. The effects of Cherenkov radiation on a current-driven vortex in a few coupled junctions The paper is organized as follows. Sec. II specifies the geometry of the problem and the equations used in numerical simulations. In Sec. III we discuss Josephson plasmons and conditions of Cherenkov radiation in layered superconductors. Sec. IV contains the results of our calculations of a nonlinear drag coefficient, terminal velocity and critical current density of the Cherenkov instability J s for a single vortex. It is shown that the production of V-AV pairs at J > J s results in branching dynamic patterns and macrovortex structures. In Sec. V and VI we address the effects of vortex interaction on the Cherenkov instability of moving vortex chains and lattices in annular JJ stacks. In Sec VII we consider dynamics of bouncing macrovortices and self-sustained flux standing waves of large amplitude excited by a V-AV shuttle in a JJ stack of finite length. Contribution of this effect to the power W radiated by the JJ stack, and a strong increase of W with the number of layers are addressed. The conclusions and broader implications of our results are presented in Sec. VIII. Consider vortices in a stack of long JJs between superconducting layers shown in Fig. Here ∆ d f l ≡ f l+1 + f l-1 -2f l is the lattice Laplacian, the prime and overdot denote partial derivatives with respect to the dimensionless coordinate x/λ c and time ω J t, respectively, ω J = c/ √ ǫ c λ c is the Josephson plasma frequency, c is the speed of light, ǫ c is the dielectric constant along the z axis, λ c is the magnetic field penetration depth along the layers (B parallel to the ab planes in cuprates), and B is measured in units of φ 0 /2πsλ c where φ 0 is the flux quantum. The viscous drag coefficient η and the dimensionless current β are defined by: where J is the density of a uniform bias current flowing across the layers, J 0 is the critical current density of the junctions, σ c is the interlayer quasiparticle conductivity, and ǫ 0 is the vacuum permittivity. The dimensionless damping parameter η in BSCCO crystals is typically ≃ 0.005 -0.05 Here l T F is the Thomas-Fermi screening length along the layers, λ ab is the magnetic field penetration depth for B parallel to the c axis, and s is the spacing between the superconducting layers. For a BSCCO crystal with the anisotropy parameter Γ ≡ λ c /λ ab ∼ 500, λ ab ∼ 400 nm, λ c ∼ 200 μm and s = 1.5 nm, ζ ∼ 10 5 is much larger than the typical value of α ∼ 1. In this case the term α∆ d which describes deviations from charge neutrality in Eq. ( In this work we performed numerical simulations Eq. ( Josephson vortices described by Eq. ( where is the speed of light in the dielectric layers. At η → 0 and k x = q = 0 Eqs. ( For a stack of N junctions, Eqs. ( Cherenkov radiation occurs if the velocity v of a vortex exceeds the minimum phase velocity Ω(k x )/k x of the Josephson plasmons. As follows from Eq. ( In this section we present results of simulations of Eq. ( At β > β s in Eq. ( To investigate how the vortex dynamics changes by imposing the periodic boundary conditions, we consider an annular stack in which where n = n f -n a is the difference of the number of fluxons (n f ) and antifluxons (n a ) on the l-th layer, and L is the circumference of the stack along the x direction. In our simulations we choose L = λ c ≫ λ J in which case the structure of a static vortex in the annular stack at β = 0 is nearly identical to the vortex in the infinite stack shown in Fig. The transient solution then evolves into a chaotically oscillating distribution of θ l (x, t) resulting in unidirectional traveling waves of magnetic field with nearly constant amplitudes in each junction, as shown in Fig. Imposing the boundary condition θ 1 = θ N models a periodic chain of vortices spaced by N layers along the z direction in an infinite annular JJ stack. Our simulations for this case show that, because of the symmetry of this geometry, the solutions for θ l (x, t) and B l (x, t) are the same as in the above case of a finite annular stack. The above results show that the initial stage of the continuous V-AV pair production triggered by a single driven vortex is not very sensitive to the boundary con- ditions either across or along the stack. In this section we present the simulation results for a chain of M vortices placed equidistantly in the middle junction of the 21 JJ stack. If vortices are far apart from each other, so that the spacing between vortices d = L/M ≫ λ J , the initial stage of the V-AV pair production proceeds in the way similar to that of a single vortex. Namely, each vortex starts radiating Cherenkov wakes at β ≈ 0.075 which matches that of a single vortex for up to M = 9. The onset of the V-AV pair production at M = 9 occurs at β = 0.625 close to β s for a single vortex. In this case the intervortex spacing d ∼ 30λ J is large so that no significant overlap between the Cherenkov wakes from neighboring vortices happens, as shown in Fig. Our simulations have shown that the dynamics of 100 vortices with d ≃ 2.6λ J appears similar to that of 50 vortices. Yet because of stronger overlap of vortices and their Cherenkov radiation tails, the onset of the V-AV pair production β s = 0.455 is slightly higher than for 50 vortices. This trend becomes more apparent for 200 vortices for which β s ≃ 0.665 not only exceeds β s for 100 vortices but also β s for a single vortex. The increase of β s with M at large M may result from the fact that, if vortices and their radiation tails overlap strongly, the spatial modulations of θ(x, t) along the vortex chain get reduced, and the critical π phase nucleus which triggers the V-AV pair production can only appear at higher β. For a very dense vortex chain with d ≪ λ J , the V-AV pair production does not occur before the central junction switches to the resistive state at β = 1. In this section we present the results of our simulations for the driven Josephson vortex lattice in an annular stack of planar junctions. plitude and wavelengths increasing with β. As shown in Fig. As the density of vortices is increased the vortex configuration becomes closer to a triangular lattice, as shown in Fig. Proliferation of branching V-AV patterns or macrovortex (MV) structures caused by a single vortex is essentially a bulk effect which occurs in a sufficiently long sample or an annular JJ stack. However, in a JJ stack of finite length L x , the expanding MV chain eventually hits the edges of the JJs, where the boundary conditions of zero current θ ′ l = 0 are imposed. In this section we consider peculiarities of vortex dynamics resulting from the finite size effects. It turns out that interaction of a MV with the edges of the stack occurs in a way similar to that of a moving J vortex in a single long JJ (see, e.g., Ref. 14). This interaction proceeds as follows. As V approaches the edge of a JJ, it induces penetration of a counter-propagating AV which collides with the incoming vortex. The outcome of this collision depends on the damping parameter η. In an overdamped JJ (η 1), the colliding V and AV annihilate, fully extinguishing the fluxon of the initial vortex as it exits the junction. However in an underdamped JJ with η ≪ 1, the colliding V and AV do not annihilate but go through each other, as characteristic of non-dissipative solitons described by the sine-Gordon equation 1 . As a result, the incoming V exits while the AV moves into the JJ. This process can be regarded as a vortex analog of the Andreev reflection. A current-driven V in an underdamped JJ stack gets periodically reflected from the edge where it transforms into a counter-propagating AV which in turn gets reflected as a vortex from the opposite edge. Such V-AV shuttle causes oscillations of the magnetic moment M (t) with the flight frequency ν = v/2L x depending on the JJ length. Here M (t) = φ(t)L y and the instantaneous magnetic flux threading the stack φ(t) are calculated using where M 0 = B 0 sλ c L y /μ 0 = φ 0 L y /2πμ 0 , L y is the length of the stack along y, and the integral is expressed in terms of the dimensionless field B l and coordinates defined in Sec. II. Shown in Fig. Here u is the position of the vortex relative to the center of the film. Notice that φ(u) decreases as u increases and vanishes at the surface u = ±L z /2 where the vortex flux is extinguished by AV images Taking here N = 21, s = 1.5 nm and λ ab = 400 nm for BSCCO, we obtain φ ≃ 8 • 10 -4 φ 0 in agreement with the simulation results presented in Fig. Above the Cherenkov instability threshold β > β s a single V-AV shuttle excites counter-propagating MVs and anti-macrovortices (AMV) which then get reflected from the edges in the same way as single Vs and AVs. For instance, the collision of MVs with the edge of an underdamped stack with η = 0.1 is shown in Fig. A big transient spike in M (t) at the onset of the MV formation can be understood as follows. At β > β s the initial vortex placed near the right edge of the stack accelerates and starts producing V-AV pairs which form the MV structures spreading both along and across the JJ stack. Here MVs move to the left along with the initial vortex while AMVs move to the right and get reflected as MVs from the right edge before the leading MV reaches the left edge. As a result, the number of vortices in the stack keeps growing until the leading MV reaches the left edge, after which the process reverses as the number of AMVs increases and exceeds the number of MVs. After a few bouncing of MVs and AMVs back and forth, generation of new V-AV pairs stops and a standing wave, resulting in self-sustained oscillations of M (t) forms, as shown in Fig. The mean radiation power W = μ 0 M 2 /6πc 3 for JJ stacks smaller than the radiated wavelength 59 can be estimated using M (t) from Eq. ( where m(t) = M (t)/M 0 . The dimensionless factor G N takes into account the effect of the number of layers on the amplitudes and frequencies of different harmonics in M which contribute to W , where t 0 ≃ 800. We evaluated G N by averaging numerical derivatives in m2 for the calculated M (t) over the time interval T = 200. Calculations of G N for different N using the results shown in Such strong increase of G N with N is much faster than W ∝ N 4 resulting from only the quadratic increase of the magnetic flux of the vortex with N . Another part of this rapid growth of G N comes from the enhancement of higher-frequency harmonics at larger N evident from Figs. 25 and 26. All in all, the calculated G N roughly follows the N 6 dependence at N 10 2 . Taking λ c = 200 μm, L y = 1 mm, ǫ c = 10, and G 81 = 154 in Eq. ( In this paper we show that uniform motion of a Josephson vortex driven by a dc current in layered superconductors breaks down as the velocity of the vortex exceeds the terminal velocity v c at current densities J > J s . If v > v c the moving vortex starts emitting V-AV pairs, causing a dendritic flux branching in which vortices and antivortices become spatially separated and form dissipative structures which depend on the sample geometry. For instance, a single vortex in a long stack can produce a chain of dissipative macrovortices that extend across the entire stack as shown in Fig. In an underdamped JJ stack of finite length L x a vortex driven by a dc current at J < J s turns into a V-AV shuttle in which the vortex periodically changes its polarity and direction of motion after each reflection from the sample edge. This process results in oscillations of the magnetic moment M (t) with the flight frequency v/2L x depending on the length of the stack. At J > J s the V-AV shuttle produces propagating macrovortices consisting of bunched vortices aligned perpendicular to the layers. These macrovortices periodically change both the polarity and the direction of motion without fragmentation into single vortices after each reflection from the edges of the JJ stack. Such bouncing macrovortices eventually form large-amplitude flux standing waves, giving rise to oscillations of M (t). Here M (t) contains multiple harmonics the amplitudes and frequencies of which increase as the number of layers increases. Proliferation of V-AV pairs at J > J s can manifest itself in hysteretic jumps on the V-I curves. These jumps appear similar to those produced by heating effects 