The field of magnetic skyrmions has been actively investigated across a wide range of topics during the last decades. In this topical review, we mainly review and discuss key results and findings in skyrmion research since the first experimental observation of magnetic skyrmions in 2009. We particularly focus on the theoretical, computational and experimental findings and advances that are directly relevant to the spintronic applications based on magnetic skyrmions, i.e. their writing, deleting, reading and processing driven by magnetic field, electric current and thermal energy. We then review several potential applications including information storage, logic computing gates and non-conventional devices such as neuromorphic computing devices. Finally, we discuss possible future research directions on magnetic skyrmions, which also cover rich topics on other topological textures such as antiskyrmions and bimerons in antiferromagnets and frustrated magnets. Topology is an important discipline of pure and applied mathematics, which also plays a significant role in the understanding of many real-world physical phenomena. In the field of magnetism and spintronics, the concept of topology is particularly important to the physics of some exotic magnetic spin textures (i.e., the so-called magnetic solitons) The concept of skyrmion model was first proposed in the field of nuclear physics by T. H. R. Skyrme Due to the topological nature, spin textures including chiral magnetic skyrmions can be regarded as localized quasi-particles in magnetic materials and show topology-dependent static and dynamic properties where the topological charge density ρ(r) reads m(r) • (∂ x m(r) × ∂ y m(r)). (2) Thus, the topological charge can be calculated based on the exact spin texture configuration according to The topological charge basically counts how many times the reduced local magnetization (i.e., the spin) m(r) wraps the 2D surface of a 3D ball in 3D space (i.e., the 2-sphere) as the coordinate (x, y) spans the whole planar space. For example, as shown in Fig. In fact, chiral magnetic skyrmions are not limited to the case of topological charges |Q| = 1, and could be of any topological charge Obviously, these multifarious topological spin textures cannot be fully distinguished only using the topological charge Q, because there might be some degenerate states for a given value of the topological charge. Taking the skyrmion with Q = -1 as an example, there are additional degrees of freedom in the in-plane spin configuration. Therefore, one could calculate the vorticity number Qv and the helicity number Qh, which completely characterize the topological spin texture accompanying the topological charge Q. First, a point of the x-y space is parameterized as x = r cos φ, y = r sin φ. By applying the mapping r = 0 as z → -1 , r = 1 as z = 0 , r → ∞ as z → 1 , and lim r→∞ m(x, y) = lim z→1 m(z, φ) with z being defined as r = (1 + z) (1 -z) = ⁄ (1 + cos θ) (1 -cos θ) ⁄ . Therefore, we can re-write the local magnetization direction as m(r) = m(θ, φ) = (sin θ cos φ, sin θ sin φ, cos θ). By substituting Eq. ( From Eq. ( One also needs to introduce the helicity number, which is the phase appearing in Therefore, Eq. ( Figure As the topological spin textures are non-collinear spin textures, their existence in magnetic materials is usually a result of delicate interplay among different energy terms. From the viewpoint of micromagnetism at zero temperature, the energy terms for common magnetic materials include the Heisenberg exchange interaction, dipolar interaction energy terms as well as magnetic anisotropy and Zeeman energy terms. The dominated Heisenberg exchange interaction favors the parallel or antiparallel alignment of the adjacent magnetic spins in most cases, so that it does not stabilize any non-collinear spin texture. However, the strong emergence of various other energy terms that may naturally exist in or be introduced to the magnetic materials can lead to the stabilization of non-collinear topological spin textures. In particular, the most important energy term, which has been studied for many years, is the asymmetric exchange interaction, i.e. the above mentioned DM interaction The homogeneous DM interaction can exist in bulk materials lacking inversion symmetry and is expressed as where <i, j> denotes the nearest-neighbor sites, mi and mj are the reduced magnetic spin vectors at sites i and j, respectively. dbDM is the bulk DM interaction coupling energy, uij is the unit vector between mi and mj. In the micromagnetic model with DbDM being the continuous effective bulk DM interaction constant, and b being the magnetic film thickness. The bulk DM interaction could result in the stabilization of Blochtype skyrmions with (Q = +1, Qv = +1, Qh = π) and (Q = -1, Qv = +1, Qh = 0). On the other hand, the DM interaction can also be induced at the interface between an ultrathin magnetic film and a non-magnetic film with a large spin-orbit coupling (SOC), given as where diDM is the interface-induced DM interaction coupling energy, and ẑ is the normal to the interface determined by Moriya's rule with DiDM being the continuous effective interface-induced DM interaction constant. The interface-induced DM interaction could result in the stabilization of Néel-type skyrmions Note that the structures of skyrmions stabilized by DM interactions are not only limited to Bloch-and Néel-types, as recent reports have reported the presence of intermediate type of skyrmions Indeed, the topological spin textures can also be stabilized by other mechanisms such as the frustrated exchange interactions For the last decade, these topological spin textures have been significantly highlighted, mainly inspired by their potential to handle information in devices at low energy consumption and/or high processing speed. In particular, the study of magnetic skyrmions for the purpose of designing novel spintronic applications has led to an emerging research field called skyrmion-electronics At low temperatures, the hosting materials of skyrmions are not limited to conventional metallic ferromagnets, and other kinds of topological magnetic textures can also be stabilized. In 2012, Seki and colleagues In 2016, Matsumoto et al. directly observed skyrmion domain boundaries in FeGe1-xSix (x ~ 0.25) using the differential phase contrast scanning transmission electron microscopy (DPC STEM) equipped with a segmented annular all-field detector at a temperature of 95 K These early stage experimental observations of skyrmions at low temperatures mainly focused on the existence of skyrmion crystals, skyrmion chain, skyrmion cluster, and individual isolated skyrmions in diverse material platforms stabilized by either bulk or interfacial DM interactions. Although these findings have proved fascinating physical properties of skyrmions and provided in-depth physical understanding behind their topological characteristics, from the viewpoint of practical applications, most commercial electronic devices based on skyrmions would require their room-temperature stabilization (or room-temperature skyrmions in the industry-relevant sputter-grown non-crystalline ferromagnetic heterostructures. This approach was motivated by the theoretical suggestion The existence of room-temperature magnetic skyrmions were also demonstrated using non-centrosymmetric crystalline interfaces and bulk materials. As shown in Fig. As mentioned in Sec. Å). Reprinted with permission from The field of skyrmion-electronics mainly focuses on the design and development of information storage and processing devices In 2013, the magnetoelectric resonance effect of magnetic skyrmions was found by Mochizuki et al. In 2015, Zhang et al. [141] also proposed a transistor-like functional device based on skyrmions, where the current-induced motion of skyrmions is controlled by a gate voltage. Note that a similar idea on the control of skyrmion dynamics by a gate voltage was also proposed by Upadhyaya et al. Some bio-inspired applications based on skyrmions were also proposed in recent two years. Huang et al. For the successful demonstration of any skyrmion-based potential applications, the energy-efficient writing, deleting, reading and processing processes of skyrmions are prerequisites. In the following, we review the progresses that have been made over the last 10 years in the writing, deleting, and reading of magnetic skyrmions. We will also review several representative skyrmion-based applications in detail, including the skyrmion-based racetrack memory, logic computing gate, transistor-like device and bio-inspired applications. Magnetic skyrmion is a promising block for building future spintronic applications, as it can be employed as a non-volatile information carrier in magnetic media. The simplest method to encode binary information using magnetic skyrmions in magnetic materials is based on the writing and deleting of individual isolated skyrmions. Namely, the presence of a skyrmion can stand for the binary information digit "1" or "0". Hence, the controllable and reliable creation and annihilation of skyrmions are prerequisites for any skyrmion-based information storage applications. It is a vital task to find the best method to write and delete skyrmions. Magnetic field is one of the most important and controllable external stimuli that can be rather easily realized in most laboratories. In the early stage of skyrmion research, a number of theoretical and experimental studies were carried out on the magnetic phase diagram, where skyrmion crystals and isolated skyrmions usually form in chiral magnets within the range of certain out-of-plane magnetic fields and temperature On the other hand, once the skyrmion is created in a magnetic film, its size also depends on the strength of the external out-of-plane magnetic field Mochizuki Once the magnetic skyrmion is created, it can also be manipulated or even deleted by magnetic fields, similar to the magnetic vortices in magnetic disks Spin-polarized electric current could provide spin-transfer torques (STTs) or spinorbit torques (SOTs) on magnetic moments, which is an important driving force for magnetization dynamics in modern spintronic devices numerically demonstrated that skyrmions can be nucleated and created from the notch in a nanotrack In 2014, Zhou and Ezawa theoretically predicted that a magnetic skyrmion can be converted from a domain-wall pair in a junction geometry (j ~ 1.8×10 12 A m -2 ) [185], confirming its efficient mechanism and device compatibility suitable for future applications. The experimentally demonstrated the creation of skyrmions at room temperature and zero external magnetic field by applying bipolar spin current pulses (j ~ 1.6×10 11 A m -2 ) directly into a Pt/CoFeB/MgO multilayer For example, in 2017, De Lucia et al. theoretically studied the annihilation of skyrmions induced by spin current pulses (j ~ 5×10 12 A m -2 ) and suggested that skyrmions can be reliably deleted by designing the pulse shape In the last decade, a number of studies have been performed to explore skyrmion dynamics induced by electric current, however, the electric current often accompanies Joule heating that leads to energy losses or even permanent damages to metallic devices. Therefore, it may be necessary to find more reliable ways to drive skyrmion dynamics, and in this arXiv:1906.04718 [physics.app-ph] context, the pure electric field is one of the desired ways to drive skyrmion dynamics because of its ultralow power consumption with negligible Joule heating. A number of reports In ferromagnetic materials, the writing and deleting of magnetic skyrmions can also be induced by a pure electric field, usually based on the effect of voltage control of magnetic anisotropy (VCMA) In 2018, Srivastava et al. experimentally demonstrated the electric field turning of DM interactions in a Ta/FeCoB/TaOx trilayer In 2019, Ma et al. designed and fabricated a Pt/CoNi/Pt/CoNi/Pt multilayer, which is sandwiched between the indium tin oxide (ITO)/SiO2 bilayer and the glass substrate, in the form of racetracks where the thickness of the films had a slope Similar to the manipulations of skyrmions by magnetic field and electric current, the polarity of skyrmions can also be switched by a pure electric field, in principle. For example, Bhattacharya et al. numerically demonstrated the electric-field-induced switching of a magnetic skyrmion in a magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ) structure The magnetization dynamics can also be driven by (ultrafast) laser pulses, and laser pulse-induced magnetization excitation has been of great interest for many years. Such excitation enabled the observation of ultrafast demagnetization coercive field) of ferromagnets generally decreases with increasing temperature, therefore, the dipolar interactions that favor the formation of multi-domains overcome the switching field threshold, leading to the local magnetization switching. Nevertheless, in chiral magnetic materials, such laser-induced magnetization switching results in the local generation of a single or multiple chiral magnetic textures, including skyrmions. In 2009, Ogasawara et al. experimentally studied the magnetization reversal dynamics in a TbFeCo film induced by a femtosecond laser pulse in the presence of a small external magnetic field In 2017, Fujita and Sato theoretically studied the ultrafast creation of skyrmion and skyrmionium textures by applying a vortex laser beam In 2015, Fraerman et al. experimentally observed the creation of skyrmions in a perpendicularly magnetized Co/Pt multilayer film via the imprinting method In this section, we have reviewed a series of methods for writing and deleting skyrmions in magnetic materials. From the viewpoint of practical applications, it is desirable to use the spin-polarized electric current to control the generation/deletion of skyrmions, which can be integrated into transistor-based conventional complimentary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) scheme. Spin currents can be rather easily generated either by using a polarizer layer via spin-filtering effect or by using high spin-orbit coupling material with relatively large spin Hall effect (or interfaces with large Rashba effect), which have been extensively explored for the last few years. Such a heavy metal/ferromagnet heterostructure arXiv:1906.04718 [physics.app-ph] Page 29 of 80 are also known to generate certain DM interaction and PMA to stabilize skyrmions. However, the method utilizing electric excitation often suffers from inevitable currentinduced Joule heating and leads to a large power consumption, therefore the electric field and laser could also be alternative methods for writing and deleting skyrmions in a low-energy manner in the future. The manipulation of magnetic skyrmions as information carriers in device applications requires the precise tracking of their locations and dynamic behaviors. Hence, the efficient reading of skyrmions in real space is an important task that needs to be realized in a reliable manner with high enough on/off ratio. A lot of state-of-art microscopy magnetic imaging techniques have been used to observe the real-space profiles of skyrmions in laboratories for the purpose of studying their static and dynamic properties (see Table However, as a part of the information write-in/read-out system, electrical reading scheme is a prerequisite for any skyrmion-based information storage and computing device applications. Some methods were purposed to read and detect skyrmions in device applications, such as by using the magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ) or reading skyrmion-induced Hall voltages. In this section, we first review recent progress on the real-space imaging/reading of skyrmions in laboratories. The microscopy imaging of magnetic skyrmions in real space is very important for both theoretical and applied reasons. From the theoretical point of view, the imaging of the in-plane and out-of-plane spin textures in real space can directly identify the topological nature of a skyrmion. For example, one may calculate the topological charge based on the detailed in-plane spin texture of a skyrmion, including the vorticity number Qv and helicity number Qh. Moreover, some of techniques offer sub-ns temporal resolution along with realspace magnetization imaging, which plays an important role to understand the ultrafast dynamic properties of skyrmions, e.g. excitation modes. The real-space imaging of a 2D skyrmion lattice, which consists of many Bloch-type skyrmions, was first realized in a thin film of Fe0.5Co0.5Si by using the LTEM in 2010 Later, skyrmion lattices in thin films of FeGe MnSi Page 31 of 80 against beam direction or using off-focused images The SP-STM can also be used to measure nanometer-scale magnetic textures (see Table Recently years, various microscopy methods using X-ray radiation were used to as a powerful tool to image ultra-small spin textures and ultra-fast spin dynamics (see Table More recently, Woo et al. directly imaged ferrimagnetic skyrmions in GdFeCo films Indeed, skyrmion textures can also be directly observed by other methods. For example, by using the SPLEEM, Chen et al. imaged magnetic skyrmions in in-situ grown Fe/Ni bilayers in 2015 Page 32 of 80 imaged by using the MOKE microscopy The realization of reading skyrmions in an electrical manner is a crucial step toward the device applications based on skyrmions. A promising method to read skyrmions electrically is by harnessing the topological Hall effect (THE) of magnetic skyrmions The size of a skyrmion is ~ 1 nm for atomic Fe layer on Ir In electric current In On the other hand, it is noteworthy that, in 2016, Hamamoto et al. theoretically proposed a method to detect the skyrmion position in a pure electrical way by measuring the Hall conductance in a constricted geometry Recently, theoretical and experimental studies suggest the efficient large on/off ratio detection of skyrmions by measuring the magnetoresistance In 2017, Tomasello et al. theoretically proposed a protocol for the electrical reading of a magnetic skyrmion by measuring the change of the TMR signal via a point-contact MTJ in a three-terminal device As briefly mentioned in Sec. 1.2, Jonietz et al. Therefore, the spin-polarized current serves as an effective method for driving and processing skyrmions. However, it should be noted here that the skyrmion velocity is proportional to the driving current density, and practical skyrmion-based applications may require a skyrmion speed much larger than that induced by the very low depinning current density. At the same time, the energy consumption of skyrmion-based application will increase with increasing magnitude of the current. In 2011, Everschor et al. where G is the gyrocoupling vector and D is the dissipative tensor. v s is the velocity of the conduction electrons and v d is the drift velocity of skyrmions. In 2011, Zang et al. where with the reduced Planck constant ħ, the electron charge e, the applied current density j, the spin polarization rate P, and the saturation magnetization MS. is the electron velocity and β is the non-adiabaticity factor. The other is the case driven by a vertical spin current, which can be obtained either by using a MTJ or by utilizing the spin Hall effect. The skyrmion is driven by the induced in-plane and out-of-plane torques, where t is the film thickness and ξ is the amplitude of the out-of-plane torque relative to the in-plane one and m p is the current polarization vector. The numerical results obtained by Sampaio et al. In 2016, Woo et al. In 2016, theoretical studies In 2013, Fert et al. experimentally demonstrated a room-temperature skyrmion shift device In 2014, Zhou et al. numerically demonstrated a current-driven reversible conversion between a skyrmion and a domain-wall pair in a junction geometry Such a hybrid device has the potential to outperform domain-wall racetrack memory because that it combined advantages of domain walls and skyrmions for spintronic applications. In 2015, Zhang et al. As discussed in Sec. 4.1, when the skyrmion is driven into motion by a spin current, the trajectory of skyrmion bends away from the driving current direction due to the topological Magnus force Such a SkHE may create an obstacle for the transportation of skyrmions. Consequently, the skyrmions may be destroyed by touching the nanotrack edges. In 2016, Zhang et al. Page 41 of 80 promising platform where skyrmions can move in a perfectly straight trajectory even at an ultra-fast processing speed. In 2017, Tomasello et al. In 2016, Kang et al. In 2015, Zhang et al. Soon after the numerical demonstration of the first prototype of skyrmionic logic computing device, several works on skyrmion logic emerged. For example, in 2015, Zhang et al. Besides, in 2018, Prychynenko et al. The reservoir computing was realized via a two-terminal device with nonlinear voltage characteristics originating from magnetoresistive effects. Most recently in 2019, Zázvorka et al. experimentally demonstrated a thermal skyrmion diffusion-based signal reshuffling device In this section, we give an outlook on magnetic skyrmions in terms of potential novel materials and other possible topological spin textures. From the viewpoint of possible skyrmion-hosting materials, many previous works have focused on the ferromagnet, which is the most commonly known and important class of magnetic materials that has been employed in commercial products, such as modern hard disk drives. There are also two other technologically promising classes of magnetic materials, namely, the ferrimagnets and antiferromagnets, which can be used to host skyrmions. For example, several theoretical studies have demonstrated that skyrmion textures can be stabilized and manipulated in antiferromagnets For the last few years, antiferromagnetic spintronics has received much attention from the magnetism community as the antiferromagnetic materials have several intrinsic properties that may lead to a better performance of spin dynamics suitable for practical applications Similar to the skyrmions in antiferromagnets, the bilayer skyrmions in the synthetic antiferromagnets [see Fig. On the other hand, ferrimagnets are also composed of two sublattices which favor antiparallel alignment of spins between each other, where the magnetic moments of the two sublattices are not equal and lead to a net magnetic moment. Therefore, the ferrimagnetic skyrmions [see Fig. That is to say, the antiferromagnetic skyrmion can strictly move along the nanotrack without showing a transverse motion toward the edge. For the ferrimagnetic skyrmion, although it still shows a transverse motion (i.e., a shift) toward the edge, the skyrmion-edge interaction becomes very strong only when the skyrmion velocity is extremely large. Therefore, antiferromagnets, synthetic antiferromagnets, and ferrimagnets are considered as possible skyrmion-hosting materials, where the dynamic performance of skyrmions can be remarkably improved in compared with their counterparts in conventional ferromagnetic materials. Recently, another type of magnetic materials with exotic and particular properties, i.e. the frustrated magnet, has been reported to host magnetic skyrmions. The frustration Namely, the skyrmion energy in frustrated magnets can be irrespective to the skyrmion helicity [302] theoretically reported the current-induced helicity locking-unlocking transition phenomenon of a frustrated skyrmion, which suggests the dipolar interaction may also play an important role in the dynamics of skyrmions in the frustrated magnets, especially at low temperature. Owing to the multiple degrees of freedom of skyrmions in frustrated magnets, it is anticipated that frustrated skyrmions can be used as versatile information carriers to perform information storage and computing. As shown in Fig. Recently, several experimental studies indeed demonstrated the stabilization of Néel-type magnetic skyrmions in a van der Waals ferromagnet such as Fe3GeTe2 Nevertheless, continuous studies on potential novel skyrmion-hosting materials could reveal more unexpected but remarkable properties and features of skyrmions that can be utilized to perform more efficient information processing in the future. During extensive studies on magnetic skyrmions since a decade ago, a number of derivative concepts on skyrmion-like objects were created and envisioned for practical applications. As reviewed in Sec. 1, the skyrmion structure and its topological charge are determined by both in-plane and out-of-plane spin configurations. That is to say, there could be a variety of different skyrmion-like objects due to the modification of either the in-plane or out-of-plane spin configuration in principle. For example, most studies have focused on Néel-type and Bloch-type skyrmions with topological charge of |Q| = 1, however, several recent theoretical and experimental reports have revealed that antiskyrmions In compared to skyrmions with Qv = +1, the antiskyrmion has different in-plane spin textures, which leads to an opposite-sign vorticity of Qv = -1 as well as largely different current-induced motion as reported in several recent studies As mentioned in Sec. 1.1, the skyrmionium The skyrmion structure with a topological charge of |Q| = +2 is referred to as the biskyrmion. Theoretically, the skyrmion with Qv = +2 can be excited from a skyrmion with Qv = +1 by external stimuli, such as the STT The above mentioned antiskyrmion, skyrmionium, and biskyrmion are possible solutions in easy-axis magnets. In easy-plane magnets (i.e., magnets in which magnetization favor in-plane configuration), there is also a counterpart of skyrmions, i.e. the so-called bimeron As a counterpart of the skyrmions in easy-axis magnets (i.e., magnets where magnetization favor out-of-plane configuration), the bimeron is a localized and compact quasi-particle like spin textures in easy-plane magnets. Recently theoretical works have suggested that an isolated bimeron in either easy-plane ferromagnets or easy-plane antiferromagnets can be driven into motion by STTs Reprinted with permission from In this review, we have mainly focused on key device application-relevant findings and advances that have been made in the emerging field of skyrmion-electronics since the first experimental identification of skyrmions in 2009, which might indeed enable practical applications in the future. We have reviewed the writing and deleting of skyrmions by using different methods, including magnetic field, electric field, electric current, and laser. The We envision that skyrmion-electronics will continue to be an active and intriguing field of study, where more theoretical and experimental findings on the manipulation of skyrmions and their counterparts will emerge to support the development of practical applications and products for industry. Finally, we note that no review articles can cover this topic exhaustively, and therefore, here we refer to other published reviews where some of the aspects of chiral magnetic skyrmions are discussed in more detail ). Scale bar, 500 nm. Reprinted with permission from