Devices exploiting negative differential resistance (NDR) are of particular interest for analogue computing applications, including oscillator-based neural networks 1 . These devices typically exploit the continuous S-shaped current-voltage characteristic produced by materials with a strong temperature dependent electrical conductivity 2 but recent studies have also highlighted the existence of a second, discontinuous (snap-back) characteristic that has the potential to provide additional functionality. The development of devices based on this characteristic is currently limited by uncertainty over the underlying physical mechanism, which remains the subject of active debate Current-controlled negative differential resistance (NDR) is observed in a wide range of materials including amorphous chalcogenides alloys Several oxides (e.g. NbOx Devices exhibiting more complex combinations of S-type and snap-back characteristics have also been reported and have the potential to afford new functionality We have recently developed a model that explains a diverse range of observed negative differential resistance characteristics, including the snap-back response The effect of oxide conductivity on electroforming and NDR characteristics was assessed using 10 μm × 10 μm cross-point devices with low (x=2.6) and high (x=1.92) conductivity NbOx films. (The relationship between composition and conductivity is included in the Supplementary Information). Electroforming was conducted in current-control mode using bidirection current sweeps, with typical results for the low conductivity film shown in Figure After forming, the devices exhibited stable S-type characteristics as shown in Figure The forming characteristics of the high-conductivity films were also found to depend on the maximum current employed for forming, with devices subjected to lower currents exhibiting snap-back characteristics without the creation of a permanent filament. This is illustrated in Figure No significant change in device resistance was observed after the initial snap-back response and identical characteristics were measured during a second sweep, consistent with the current bifurcating into domains of high and low current-density. However, repeated cycling did eventually cause a reduction in resistance and a concomitant reduction in both thresholdvoltage and threshold-current, consistent with the creation of a permanent filament These results are consistent with the predictions of the core-shell model in that the lowconductivity film (x=2.6) (i.e. higher shell resistance), exhibits S-type NDR characteristics, while the high conductivity film (x=1.92) (i.e. low shell resistance), exhibits snap-back characteristics, as expected. Significantly, they also demonstrate that the snap-back response does not depend on the existence of a permanent conductive filament. To further understand the significance of current localisation and the role of the shell region as a current divider, in-situ thermo-reflectance measurements were performed on devices exhibiting S-type and snap-back NDR characteristics. These measurements were performed on NbOx films with a conductivity intermediate between those above (i.e. x=2.05), and included devices with and without permanent filaments. The results are summarised in Figure These results clearly demonstrate that the snap-back response is associated with current localisation, either due to a pre-existing permanent filament or current bifurcation, and the redistribution of current between low and high current-density domains. The current-voltage characteristics of Figure The effect of film thickness was investigated using devices with dimensions of 10 μm×10 μm and NbOx films with x=2.05. All devices underwent an initial electroforming step prior to measuring NDR characteristics and the forming current was found to decrease linearly with increasing film thickness, from 33.4±5.2 mA for a film of 35 nm thickness to 10±2.1 mA for a film of 93 nm thickness, consistent with the expected increase in film resistance i.e. RR DDooDDooDDoo ∝ tt (Figure Finally, we consider the effect of substrate temperature on NDR characteristics. The devices used for these studies had a NbOx composition of x=2.22. These devices exhibited a snap-back response at 293 K after electroforming but transitioned to an S-type response as the temperature was increased to 323 K, as shown in Figure The above results clearly demonstrate that the NDR response of NbOx-based cross-point devices can be controlled by the oxide conductivity, area and thickness and that the snap-back mode of NDR is associated with redistribution of current from low to high current-density domains in a manner consistent with the proposed core-shell model of current transport. Significantly, the results also explain several interesting results reported in the literature and resolve a long-standing controversy about the origin of the snap-back mode of NDR. Specifically, the area dependence of the NDR response observed in the finite element simulations by Goodwill et al In summary, we have demonstrated that the NDR characteristics of NbOx cross-point devices can be controlled by materials and device parameters and that these dependencies are consistent with the predictions of a model that can account for a non-uniform current distribution and the redistribution of current from regions of low to high current density. This was achieved by using in-situ thermoreflectance imaging to correlate NDR characteristics with changes in current distribution, and by systematically studying how the transition from S-type to snapback NDR depended on the conductivity, area, thickness and temperature of the NbOx film. These results conclusively demonstrated that the snap-back characteristic is a generic response of materials with a strong temperature dependent conductivity and that it has the same physical origin as the S-type characteristic. This is a particularly significant finding as it resolves a long standing controversy and provides a strong foundation for engineering devices with specific NDR characteristics for brain-inspired computing. The devices employed in this study were Nb/NbOx/Pt cross-point structures fabricated using standard photolithographic processes described elsewhere Electrical measurements were performed using an Agilent B1500A semiconductor parameter analyser attached to a Signatone probe station (S-1160). All measurements were executed under atmospheric conditions by applying voltage on the top electrode, while the bottom electrode was grounded. Note that switching characteristics were measured with negative bias applied to the top electrode unless otherwise stated. In-situ temperature measurements were performed with a TMX T°Imager® transient thermoreflectance (TR) imaging system using a 100x objective lens and a 490 nm illumination wavelength (see supplementary information). For these measurements DC and pulsed ) is much larger than that of Pt (CTR= -0.31x10 -4 K -1 ), we performed thermoreflectance measurements on devices with Au top electrode to improve the TR measurement sensitivity. Further details of the thermoreflectance method can be found in references During the reverse current sweep, the core begins to exhibit CC-NDR at the hold point, so that the snap-back response exhibits hysteresis as shown by the arrows on the RS load lines. Lumped element modelling was undertaken using a circuit representation of the memristor core and solved using LT-SPICE as shown in Figure S2 [1]. The active region (core) of the memristor is described by Poole-Frenkel conduction [2] as: where RR 0 is the pre-exponential factor and ββ = oo Eq. S4 where λλ ddh and CC ddh are the thermal conductivity and the thermal capacitance of the device, ∆T is the temperature difference between Tm and TT aammaa . The core-shell structure can be modelled with an archetype memristor as defined above, representing the high-conductivity filament, with resistance Rm defined by Eq.S3, and the parallel conduction through the surrounding film, with resistance RS, as shown in Figure The thermal imaging of the cross-point devices was performed using TMX T°Imager®, a camera-based thermoreflectance imaging system. The thermoreflectance method is based on the temperature dependent optical properties of reflective surface materials, and is non-contact For that reason, the CC ∂∂RR coefficient must obtained in-situ for each device through a calibration procedure where the temperature change is set using a controllable heating stage. During an activation experiment, the change of reflectance intensity due to Joule heating is acquired as the device is activated, and the temperature rise is inferred by combining the reflectance change and CC ∂∂RR fields. 