By tuning the angle between graphene layers to specific "magic angles" the lowest energy bands of twisted bilayer graphene (TBLG) can be made flat. The flat nature of the bands favors the formation of collective ground states and, in particular, TBLG has been shown to support superconductivity. When the energy bands participating in the superconductivity are well-isolated, the superfluid weight scales inversely with the effective mass of such bands. For flat-band systems one would therefore conclude that even if superconducting pairing is present most of the signatures of the superconducting state should be absent. This conclusion is at odds with the experimental observations for TBLG. We calculate the superfluid weight for TBLG taking into account both the conventional contribution and the contribution arising from the quantum geometry of the bands. We find that both contributions are larger than one would expect treating the bands as well-isolated, that at the magic angle the geometric contribution is larger than the conventional one, and that for small deviations away from the magic angle the conventional contribution is larger than the geometric one. Our results show that, despite the flatness of the bands the superfluid weight in TBLG is finite and consistent with experimental observations. We also show how the superfluid weight can be tuned by varying the chemical potential and the twist angle opening the possibility to tune the nature of the superconducting transition between the standard BCS transition and the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless transition. The ability to control accurately the twist angle θ between two-dimensional crystals forming a van der Waals systems In order to reconcile experimental observations and theory we notice that the above expression for D s xx assumes an isolated band and neglects the interband matrix elements of the current operator. Neither of these assumptions is valid in TBLG. In an isolated band the density of electrons within the band is constant, and therefore when the superconducting transition occurs the chemical potential is renormalized. The superfluid weight depends strongly on the chemical potential and this renormalization is responsible for the appearance 1/m * dependence of the intraband (conventional) con-tribution to the superfluid weight. In a semimetal where both electron-and hole-like bands are present, such as TBLG, the densities in each band are not conserved in the transition separately and the dependence on the chemical potential is weak so that the conventional contribution can be much larger than expected for isolated bands. Moreover, the bandwidth of the low-energy bands, even though very small, is still finite and larger than the superconducting gap. Therefore, the velocity can be large at some points of the Brillouin zone further enhancing the conventional contribution to the weight. On the other hand, the interband matrix elements give rise to the so called geometric part of D s xx , which can be large even for completely flat band well isolated from other bands In this work we calculate the superfluid weight of superconducting twisted bilayer graphene (TBLG) taking into account both the conventional and the geometric parts. We assume singlet pairing and use the experimentally measured value of T c to set the value of the coupling constant that enters the mean field gap equation. We obtain the dependence of the superconducting weight on the twist angle and separate the conventional and geometric parts. We find that at one of the "magic angles", θ = 1.05 • , the geometric contribution is approximately twice as large as the conventional one. However, just off the magic angle the conventional contribution is larger than the geometric one. We also obtain the dependence of the Berezinski-Kosterlitz-Thouless T KT temperature on θ and show that its scaling with the chemical potential is different at the magic angle and away from it. Because our calculations take into account the full band structure of TBLG and include both intra-and interband contributions, they can be used for quantitative predictions and they go beyond the models and approximations previously used in deriving bounds for the superfluid weight To model the TBLG we use the approach described in Ref. 8 and 17. The low-energy states of the isolated single layers of graphene are located at the K and K = -K valleys of the Brillouin zone (BZ). Close to K the Hamiltonian for each layer l = ±1 is where v F = 10 6 m/s is graphene's Fermi velocity, μ is the chemical potential, and τ i (i = 0, 1, 2, 3) are the 2 × 2 Pauli matrices in sublattice space. Because of the rotation of each layer by angle θ/2 the Dirac cone position in layer l is shifted to κ l . We choose moiré BZ in which κ l are located at the corners and refer to the center of this BZ as the γ point. This leads to a Hamiltonian for TBLG around the K point with periodically varying interlayer tunneling terms where We leave d-wave pairing and ∆s = ∆τ 0 b ∆ b e ib•r , where ∆ is the overall amplitude of the superconducting gap, and In the remainder we assume ∆ = 1.764k B T c , and determine T c and the coefficients ∆ b by solving the linearized gap equation Using standard linear response theory we can obtain the expression for the superconducting weight where L × L is the size of the two dimensional system, n(E) is the Fermi distribution function, E i , |ψ i (k) are the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of H BdG , and μ, ν = x, y represent the directions. In the remainder, we focus on the case ν = μ. We have the velocity operators vμ (k) = ∂H BdG /∂k μ , vcf,μ (k) = (1/2)γ z ∂H BdG /∂k μ , (γ z is the Pauli matrix acting in Nambu space). Let H + and H -be the particle and hole Hamiltonians, respectively, of H BdG , |ψ ±m the eigenstates of H ± , w ±im ≡ ψ ±m |ψ i , and In terms of these quantities we have where m, n and p, q index the particle and hole bands. The matrix elements with m = n and p = q in Eq. ( we can separate Eq. ( Below we show that both the conventional Figure An increase of ∆, keeping μ fixed, is expected to cause an increase of D s xx . This is confirmed by the results of Fig. In Figs. ) for different twist angles using the corresponding values of T c . The results are shown in Fig. Figure In summary, we have shown that in twisted bilayer graphene, despite the flatness of the low energy bands, the superconducting weight D s xx is finite and large enough to explain the experimental observation of superconducting be- havior in these systems. We find that the share of the geometric and conventional contributions to D s xx depends on the twist angle: at the magic angle the geometric contribution dominates, for angles slightly away from the magic angle the conventional contribution dominates. This qualitative difference is also reflected in the scaling of D s xx with μ: at the magic angle D s xx decreases with |μ|, a somewhat surprising result due to the conventional contribution to D s xx being almost independent of μ whereas the geometric, large, contribution decreases with |μ| at the magic angle. Away from the magic angle we find the more conventional behavior of D s xx growing with |μ| as the conventional contribution, that grows with |μ|, dominates. This has the important implication that at the magic angle, by simply increasing |μ| twisted bilayer graphene can be tuned into a regime for which the Berezinzki-Kosterlits-Thouless transition is significantly smaller than the BCS critical temperature. This result shows that twisted bilayer graphene is an exceptional system in which the nature, BKT or BCS, of the superconducting transition can be tuned and experimentally studied in unprecedented ways. We stress that the superfluid weight is one of the few observable signatures of the Berry phase in the Brillouin zone. Measurements of the superfluid weight with the known experimental techniques To obtain an estimate of pairing parameters we solve the linearized gap equation , where the pairing susceptibility is Here , U (q) bl = u n1 (q)|e ib•r |u n2 (q) l , g 0 is the pairing coupling constant due to electron-phonon interaction, A is the total area of the sample, n1,2 (q) and u n1,2 are eigenvalue and wavefunctions of the non-superconducting Hamiltonian H T BL,K (k) and l(l ) represents the layer index. We keep the reciprocal basis vectors whose lengths are no larger than twice of b ≡ |b 1 |. When the temperature approaches T c , the maximum eigenvalues of χ approach one. Correspondingly, the linearized gap equation becomes here v contains ∆ 0 , ∆ b and higher order Fourier components of ∆(r). Because the higher order terms are small, we can neglect them and keep only ∆ 0 and ∆ b . The results are listed in table Everywhere in the text we have asssumed ∆ = 1.764k B T c at zero temperature, where 1.764 is the prefactor for weakcoupling theory in metals. This assumption is made for simplicity because the actual prefactor in flat band systems depends on the details of the model. Our starting point is a BdG Hamiltonian for a singlet superconductor Here H 0 (p) is n × n normal state Hamiltonian and ∆(p) is the superconducting order parameter. We assume that the order parameter supports a gradient of phase φ = k • r where D s is the superfluid weight. We choose the units so that e = 1 and = 1 everywhere. The BKT transition temperature is given by We point out that in the literature several different conventions are used. In particular, one often uses e iφ(r)/2 ∆(-i∇)e iφ(r)/2 → e iφ(r) ∆(-i∇)e iφ(r) in Eq. (S4) and 2e → e in Eq. (S5). With this convention D s becomes 4 times larger and π/2 is replaced by π/8, but this of course does not affect the predictions for T KT . To diagonalize the Hamiltonian (S4) we use an ansatz This way we find that a(p), b(p) and corresponding eigenenergies E(p) can be solved using the effective Hamiltonian The operator for quasiparticle velocity in the basis described by the coefficients a(p), b(p) is given by The current density is given by where γ z is the Pauli matrix in the Nambu space, |n, p, k are the eigenstates and E n (p, k) the corresponding eigenenergies of Hamiltonian H eff (p, k). The Hamiltonian (in Nambu space C † p,k ) can be written as where The current density operator can be written as where and We assume that the current flows parallel to the gradient of phase k = ke μ , ĵ = je μ and by using linear response theory to obtain where E i (p) and ψ i (p) are the eigenenergies and eigenstates of H BdG (p). We have also used a shorthand notation v μ (p) = v μ (p, k = 0). Therefore, we can identify Additionally we can simplify the expression using where G(ω n , p) = (iω n -H BdG (p)) -1 and ω n are Matsubara frequencies. By assuming also that ∆(p) is independent of momentum p we obtain and arrive at the expression used in the main text. For single isolated parabolic band at zero temperature the expressions above give D s ∝ n/m * , where n is the density and m * is the effective mass of the electrons. In this calculation one needs to take into account that the density of electrons within the band is constant, and therefore when the superconducting transition occurs the chemical potential is renormalized. In particular, in the limit of small density and large m * the chemical potential is renormalized well below the band. This can be understood as a BCS to BEC crossover driven by decreasing n/(m * ∆). In a semimetal where both electron-and hole-like bands are present, such as TBLG, similar renormalization of the chemical potential below the conduction band (above the valence band) cannot occur because it would lead to appearance of large density of holes (electrons) in the valence band (conduction band). The densities in each band are not conserved in the transition separately (only the total density is conserved) and therefore the conventional contribution to the superfluid weight is necessarily much larger at small densities than expected for isolated bands. In this manuscript we always consider a system consisting of two valleys K and K and calculate D s only for a single valley. The valley degeneracy gives an additional factor of 2, so that π/2 in Eq. (S6) has to be replaced with π. To check our numerical codes we have calculated the superfluid weight for a single valley of TBLG numerically as a function of the effective interlayer tunneling amplitude w in the case of uniform s-wave pairing [see Fig. where the first term is the conventional superfluid weight and the second term is the geometric Following the approach described in Ref. where κ +1 = (0, 0) and κ -1 = (0, Q), and the basis is It is interesting to study how the superfluid weight depends on the number of bands that are included in the cal-culation. Figure 