Wave-based data processing by spin waves and their quanta, magnons, is a promising technique to overcome the challenges which CMOS-based logic networks are facing nowadays. The advantage of these quasi-particles lies in their potential for the realization of energy efficient devices on the micro-to nanometer scale due to their charge-less propagation in magnetic materials. In this paper, the frequency dependence of the propagation direction of caustic-like spin-wave beams in microstructured ferromagnets is studied by micromagnetic simulations. Based on the observed alteration of the propagation angle, an approach to spatially combine and separate spin-wave signals of different frequencies is demonstrated. The presented magnetic structure constitutes a prototype design of a passive circuit enabling frequencydivision multiplexing in magnonic logic networks. It is verified that spin-wave signals of different frequencies can be transmitted through the device simultaneously without any interaction or creation of spurious signals. Due to the wave-based approach of computing in magnonic networks, the technique of frequency-division multiplexing can be the basis for parallel data processing in single magnonic devices, enabling the multiplication of the data throughput. Multiplexing is a widely used technique of data transmission in telecommunication or computer networks. In contrast, frequency-division multiplexing (FDM) enables a simultaneous transport of data. In this letter, we present the design of a passive device which performs frequency-division multiplexing in a microscaled magnonic logic network based on caustic-like spin-wave beams. As groundwork, the frequency dependence of the propagation direction of these beams is studied by micromagnetic simulations using the open-source simulation program MuMax3. In magnonic networks, the interconnections between logic elements are realized via narrow stripes of magnetic material, so called spin-wave waveguides. Hence, it is very suitable to perform the creation of caustic-like spin-wave beams within these networks by attaching an input waveguide to a widened film area. Figure GHz and f = 18 GHz. The lower limit is determined by the bottom of the spin-wave spectrum, which can be calculated to fb = (8.92 ± 0.05) GHz. Aiming at an approach to realize frequency-division multiplexing in a magnonic logic circuit, the strong frequency dependence of the beam directions in the vicinity of the bottom of the spin-wave spectrum has to be highlighted. It becomes particularly obvious when comparing, e.g., the beam angles θB1(9.5 GHz) = 77.5° and θB2(12.5 GHz) = 66.2°. Hence, a frequency variation of ∆f = 3 GHz results in a pronounced change of the beam angle of ∆θB = 11.3°. The distinct angle variation demonstrates the applicability of the caustic effect to separate and combine spin-wave signals of different frequencies. Based on these insights, the design of a FDM prototype circuit has been developed, which is adjusted for the above mentioned frequencies f1 = 9.5 GHz and f2 = 12.5 GHz. The magnetic structure is indicated by the surrounding black, dashed lines in Figure After demonstrating the working principle of the FDM circuit, it will be verified that both spinwave signals with different frequencies can pass the device simultaneously without disturbing each other by, e.g., nonlinear scattering effects. In the following paragraph, it will be shown that such effects, which might lead to spurious signals at other frequencies followed by an intensity decrease of the actual signals, are negligible. Utilizing the data calculated by the temporal Fourier-transformation as described in the experimental section, Figure In the case of a single frequency excitation at f1 = 9.5 GHz in the upper input waveguide (red dashed lines), only one sharp peak at f1 is visible in the upper in-and output as well as in the multiplex area (Figure In the case of a simultaneous excitation of spin-waves at f1 and f2 in the respective inputs, the resulting spectra are the linear combination of the previously observed spectra of the single frequency excitations and no intensity decrease of the maxima occurs. Inside the in-and outputs, only one pronounced peak is visible and two distinctly detached peaks occur in the multiplex area. Hence, two important facts are revealed. First, the spin-wave signals are transmitted in two clearly separated frequency channels as can be seen in Figure In conclusion, the presented circuit is a passive network element which performs the operation of multiplexing and demultiplexing of spin-wave signals without any additional power consumption. The studied frequency dependence of the direction of caustic-like spin-wave beams is used to combine and separate spin-wave signals of different frequencies enabling frequency-division multiplexing for simultaneous signal transport. It is evidenced that no frequency-mixing or other nonlinear effects occur in the shared transmission line and, thus, no spurious signals disturb the functionality. In addition, the signal phase is not affected in case of a simultaneous transmission. By inserting proper logic elements in the multiplex area, simultaneous data processing in a single device can be realized resulting in a large efficiency boost of the logic circuits. Hence, the presented device can be a pivotal element for multifrequency magnonic logic networks. Micromagnetic Simulations: The micromagnetic simulations presented in this paper have been carried out by utilizing the open-source simulation program MuMax3. The multiplexing circuit has been designed to enable an efficient spatial separation of spin-wave signals of different frequencies. This separation can mainly be influenced by two dimensions of the multiplexing circuit: the width of the waveguides and the length of the widened film areas of the combiner and the demultiplexer. The width of the waveguides, which are connected to the combiner and to the demultiplexer, determines the wavevector spectrum of the spin waves in the widened areas. A change of the wavevector spectrum can influence the directions of the caustic-like spin-wave beams due to a changed distribution of its containing group velocity vectors. This could engender a change of the spatial separation of spin-wave beams of different frequencies. However, this effect is not very pronounced for moderate changes of the waveguide width since the condition for the creation of caustic-like spin-wave beams is precisely that the direction of the spin-wave group velocity vector is (nearly) unchanged for a broad range of spin-wave wavevectors. The second influence on the separation of different spin-wave signals is more pronounced and mainly due to geometric reasons: To reach a sufficiently large spatial separation of the signals, the length of the widened areas has to be adjusted to the width of the waveguides and the angle difference between the different caustic-like spin-wave beams. The (initial) width of the beams is given by the width of transition zones. Hence, a decrease of the waveguide width in combination with an unchanged length of the widened film areas would lead to an enhanced spatial separation of the different caustic-like spin-wave beams. This statement is valid as long as the direction of the beams is not significantly influenced by the decreased waveguide width. The ratio of the spin-wave intensities integrated along the waveguide width at x = -2 μm and x = 46 μm are calculated to 26.0 dB for the signal at 9.5 GHz (upper inand output) and 29.8 dB for the signal at 12.5 GHz (lower in-and output). These values can be mainly attributed to the intrinsic spin-wave damping of the magnetic material in combination with the respective propagation distances and group velocities of both signals, as it is the case for all spin-wave based devices. Apart from that, reflections of the spin-wave signals lead to additional transmission losses. It should be mentioned that the frequency-selective technique of (localized) parallel parametric amplification Calculation of the bottom of the spin-wave spectrum: The calculations are based on Ref. 