Droplet generation through spray breakup is an unsteady and non-linear process which produces a relatively dense, highly polydisperse aerosol containing non-spherical droplets with sizes spanning several orders of magnitude. Such variability in size and shape can lead to significant sources of error for conventional measurements based on laser scattering. Although direct imaging of droplets can potentially overcome these limitations, imaging suffers from a shallow depth of field as well as occlusions, which prevents the complete spray from being analyzed. In comparison, digital inline holography (DIH), a low cost coherent imaging technique, can enable high resolution imaging of the sample over an extended depth of field, typically several orders of magnitude larger than traditional imaging. In this study, we showcase an automated DIH imaging system for characterizing monodisperse and polydisperse aerosol droplet size and shape distributions in the 20 m -3 mm diameter range, over a large sample volume. The high accuracy of the technique is demonstrated by measurements of monodisperse droplets generated by a vibrating orifice droplet generator, achieving a resolution of ~14.2. Measurements of a polydisperse spray from a flat fan nozzle serve to establish the versatility of DIH in extracting a two-dimensional size-eccentricity distribution function, which indicates a strong semilogarithmic scaling between the two parameters that decays as the droplet migrates away from the nozzle. Due to its low cost and compact setup as well as high density of data obtained, DIH can serve as a promising approach for future aerosol characterization. Liquid droplet generation via sprays is an aerosol process which is applied to efficiently transport liquids in gases in a range of fields Measuring the droplet size distribution function in sprays is challenging when compared to most aerosols due to their high mass fractions There is thus a need for improved droplet size distribution function analysis techniques for sprays. Digital inline holography (DIH) has recently emerged as an alternative imaging technique that captures three-dimensional (3D) information of objects with both high spatial resolution and an extended depth of field (typically more than 3 orders higher than traditional imaging) using a single camera DIH has been recently demonstrated for the analysis of the motion and morphology of individual aerosol particles We apply DIH to examine the size distribution functions of droplets in the 20 m -3 mm diameter range. Though these are on the larger end of what are typically considered aerosol particles or droplets, droplets in this size range are specifically chosen both with the target application of agricultural sprays in mind and to demonstrate the ability to analyze non-spherical droplets (which are often larger in size). DIH can be easily extended to examine droplets down to 1 m in diameter, and to droplets which are submicrometer in dimension with appropriate increase in the imaging magnification and a decrease of the laser wavelength. The following sub-sections describe the DIH system, examination of monodisperse droplets, and DIH measurements in a recirculating wind tunnel housing an agricultural spray system. Figure The accuracy of our DIH approach is validated through measurements of monodisperse droplets, which demonstrates DIH's ability to resolve narrow size distributions, similar to mobility analyzer resolution measurements with monomobile standards The versatility of DIH measurements in characterizing the size and shape of droplets (specifically a size dependent shape) is showcased through measurements of a water spray (tap water at 19 oC) from an XR6515 flat fan nozzle at a pressure of 152 kPa (measured across the nozzle). Holograms were captured at two positions along the centerline of the spray at distances of 304.8 mm (74.3DN) and 457.2 mm (111.5DN) downstream of the nozzle exit, where DN corresponds to the width of the nozzle orifice. The experiments were performed with a mean tunnel flow speed of 4 m/s and the spray aligned parallel to the flow direction. A sampling rate of 500 frames/s ensured that no droplets were imaged more than once over the same field of view. Images were collected for a duration of 1.6 minutes, resulting in ~49000 holograms. During the experiment, we monitor the relative humidity and temperature in the wind tunnel test section to be ~80% and 30 o C, respectively. After image processing, DIH enables automatic determination of droplet dimensions, a large fraction of which are not spherical (see Figure Each measurement yields the diameter and eccentricity of N droplets. For VOAG generated droplets, we simply elect to construct a number based probability distribution function (PDF) to examine DIH performance on linearly spaced bins. For polydisperse flat fan spray droplets, number based size distributions are determined by selecting 20, 30, 40, or 50 logarithmically spaced bins in the 10-3000 m range, placing each droplet in the appropriate bin, and then normalizing the bin value by the logarithmic bin width. The cumulative size distribution function at diameter Dj is computed as: where is the total number of diameter bins, is the size distribution function value, δ log is the width of logarithmic bin and denotes the bin with upper limit diameter Dj. Volume based size distribution functions, , are calculated from the number based size distribution function via the equation: (2) where is the average diameter of the bin. Similar to the number based cumulative distribution function, the volume based cumulative distribution function is calculated as: Both number and volume based size distribution functions are examined here since they are the distribution functions most commonly reported via PDPA and LD, respectively. Hence, we demonstrate that DIH enables determination of both. Droplet asphericity typically correlates with droplet size, and an eccentricity PDF does not fully describe droplet dynamics in a spray process. Two-dimensional joint PDFs have been used with increasing frequency in aerosol analysis We have utilized digital inline holography (DIH) for automated droplet size distribution measurements of both vibrating orifice generated (VOAG) and flat fan nozzle sprayed droplets. To our knowledge, this is the first application of DIH for characterizing the two dimensional distribution function of spray droplets. Based on these measurements, we draw the following conclusions: 1. DIH size information is in excellent agreement with the expected size for VOAG generated droplets, both monomers and dimers. Importantly, DIH imaging system calibration can be carried out without the need for monodisperse standard particles. Even with the rather coarse pixel resolution utilized (18.2 m/pixel), DIH has a size resolution near 130 m of 14.2. This suggests that DIH may find application in standards characterization and in protocols where spray size distribution functions need to be measured. 2. Converged polydisperse distribution functions can be measured using DIH with size binning carried out as part of post-processing, instead of a priori with predefined bins. Because DIH is an imaging based technique, no prescribed functional forms are needed to fit size distributions, and multimodal distributions can be examined. 3. Flat fan generated droplets are highly aspherical at the point of generation, in contrast with the conventional assumptions made in LD and PDPA operation. DIH shows clearly that the droplet eccentricity scales with droplet size semilogarithmically, and that the eccentricity decreases farther from the spray nozzle. More refined data analysis with time-resolved DIH measurements capturing droplet deformation dynamics can aid in in situ measurement of liquid interfacial tension, an approach that is widely used in microfluidic platforms for small scale droplets In total, our current study introduces a fully automated digital inline holography imaging system for characterizing both monodisperse and polydisperse sprays. Apart from providing measurements on a single droplet basis, the complexity of the system in comparison to LD and PDPA is significantly reduced. Furthermore, the cost of a typical DIH system is an order of magnitude smaller than either of the two instruments. For instance, a DIH system can be constructed using a consumer camera, a diode laser module and some other simple optical components with total budget below or near $1000, while conventional LD and PDPA systems costs often well above $10,000. Recent work has also demonstrated the application of DIH in aquatic field settings A video resulting from DIH measurements of monodisperse VOAG droplets, a summary of lognormal distribution fitting, notes on calibration using a precision microruler, and additional images from image processing of polydisperse flat fan nozzle generated droplets are available online. This work was supported by Winfield United. The authors acknowledge the Minnesota Supercomputing Institute (MSI) at the University of Minnesota for providing resources that contributed to the research results reported within this paper. URL: http://www.msi.umn.edu. The