Tuning the macroscopic dielectric response on demand holds potential for actively tunable metaphotonics and optical devices. In recent years, graphene has been extensively investigated as a tunable element in nanophotonics. Significant theoretical work has been devoted on the tuning the hyperbolic properties of graphene/dielectric heterostructures, however, until now, such a motif has not been demonstrated experimentally. Here we focus on a graphene/polaritonic dielectric metamaterial, with strong optical resonances arising from the polar response of the dielectric, which are, in general, difficult to actively control. By controlling the doping level of graphene via external bias we experimentally demonstrate a wide range of tunability from a Fermi level of E F = 0 eV to E F = 0.5 eV, which yields an effective epsilon-near-zero crossing and tunable dielectric properties, verified through spectroscopic ellipsometry and transmission measurements. Spectral tunability is key for controlling light-matter interactions, critical for many applications including emission control, surface enhanced spectroscopy, sensing, and thermal control. Particularly in the subwavelength range, tuning plasmonic resonances has been essential in controlling color, typically achieved by controlling the size of plasmonic nanoparticles, antennas and metamaterials From a very wide range of recently investigated metamaterials and heterostructures for spectral control, particular emphasis has been given to hyperbolic media, due to enhanced light-matter interactions arising from a larger range of wavenumbers available for propagating modes where ε o and ε e refer to the ordinary (in-plane) and extraordinary (out-of-plane) dielectric permittivity, respectively. Due to the different sign in ε o and ε e , upon fixing the frequency ω, the isofrequency diagram of the relevant electromagnetic modes opens up into a hyperbola, giving rise to a very large density of optical states, promising for waveguiding a) Present address: Department of Electrical Engineering, Ginzton Laboratory, Stanford University, California 94305, USA; gpapadak@stanford.edu; Electronic mail: gpapadak@stanford.edu There has been significant effort in frequency-tuning of the optical response of hyperbolic metamaterials Gating graphene when integrated with dielectric layers is difficult due to graphene's two-dimensional nature with weak out-of-plane Van der Waals bonds that yield poor adhesion to most dielectric substrates. Furthermore, large-area graphene sheets on the order of mm 2 's with gate-induced tunability are needed to perform metamaterial optical measurements at infrared frequencies. Exfoliated flakes are generally limited to sizes of 10s of μm, so large-area graphene samples grown by chemical vapor deposition and subsequently transferred from their growth substrates, are necessary. Additionally, deposition of large-area thin dielectric layers on graphene is challenging. Films prepared by electron-beam evaporation exhibit thermal stress-induced delamination Here, we discuss how we overcome these challenges and are, thus, able to tune a graphene-based hyperbolic metama- terial unit cell for a wide range of doping levels in graphene translating to a Fermi level that ranges from E F = 0 eV to E F = 0.5 eV, without dielectric breakdown. Previous theoretical proposals have considered non-dispersive dielectric materials The metamaterial under consideration is depicted in Fig. Since the composite in Fig. In estimating the Fermi level to which we can actively tune the doping level in graphene, we use a capacitor model based on the materials between the gate and the applied voltage Experimentally, the location of the Dirac peak was determined via measuring change in sheet resistance. Furthermore, we use the Kubo formula We utilize the transfer matrix approach By taking spectroscopic ellipsometry measurements of the full metamaterial stack of Fig. In addition to spectroscopic ellipsometry, we perform Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) to measure the sample transmission, and compare with the results of spectroscopic ellipsometry shown above, derived based on initial parameter retrieval-based derivation of ε = diag(ε o , ε o , ε e ). Electrostatically gating the graphene induces changes in the transmission of the composite metamaterial, as shown in Fig. To further illustrate the epsilon-near-zero shifting and the resonant nature of the in-plane dielectric response of this metamaterial, i.e. ε o , in Fig. In summary, we have experimentally demonstrated a graphene/polaritonic dielectric metamaterial with tunable epsilon-near-zero permittivity response. By tuning the Fermi level of graphene by 0.5 eV, we observe a shift of 1 μm in the near-zero response. Although previous theoretical proposals have focused on non-dispersive dielectric materials between graphene monolayers, here we showed that utilizing the polar response of dielectrics at infrared frequencies benefits tunability, and additionally provides means of tuning constitutive material properties of polar dielectrics and semiconductors, by incorporating graphene. Ellipsometry was used to determine the optical properties (dielectric response and thickness) of the constituent materials, and, based on effective parameter retrievals that homogenize the metamaterial, we experimentally characterized the full metamaterial stack. FTIR transmission measurements agree with our ellipsometric results, where transmission reduction is directly attributed to electrostatically induced charges in graphene and to epsilon-nearzero tuning.