Many applications benefit from the ability of an RFID tag to operate both on and off a conducting ground plane. This paper presents an electrically small loop antenna at 433 MHz that passively maintains its free-space tune and match when located a certain distance away from a large conducting ground plane. The design achieves this using a single radiation mechanism (that of a loop) in both environments without the use of a ground plane or EBG/AMC structure. An equivalent circuit model is developed that explains the dual-environment behavior and shows that the geometry balances inductive and capacitive parasitics introduced by the ground plane such that the free-space loop reactance, and thus resonant frequency, does not change. A design equation for balancing the inductive and capacitive parasitic effects is derived. Finally, experimental data showing the design eliminates ground plane detuning in practice is presented. The design is suitable for active, "hard" RFID tag applications. any reported UHF RFID antenna designs are suitable for use on a conducting ground plane Most antenna designs surveyed Although loop antennas are common in inductively coupled, near-field RFID applications, they are relatively uncommon in the far-field UHF RFID literature for either on-metal only This paper presents a simple loop antenna that balances inductive and capacitive parasitics introduced by a ground plane such that the free-space tune and match change little when the antenna is located a fixed distance away from a ground plane. In practical hard tags (e.g., The design herein is about 0.03λλ 0 in height-similar to giving 1) a heuristic explanation of the observed platformtolerant phenomenon, 2) a quantitatively accurate equivalent circuit model and design equation for achieving platformtolerance and 3) experimental data showing that the platformtolerant antenna works in practice. The severity and nature of the detuning problem for small loop antennas used in both free-space and near ground planes is demonstrated via full-wave calculation of the Fig. The resulting full-wave reactance, XX fw , is shown in Fig. The Fig. . There is a modest change in the full-wave loop resistance, RR fw , between the environments (about 0.122 Ω in free-space and 0.230 Ω when zz=1.27 mm away from the ground plane). Despite this, the return loss remains acceptable-about 10 dB. The full-wave calculated radiation efficiency of the loop is 57% in free-space and 76% when zz=1.27 mm away from the ground plane; matching network losses may be considered separately. Because the loop circumference is only 16% of the wavelength, the current distribution is substantially uniform. Consequently, the radiation pattern approximates a torroid in free-space and a half-torroid when the loop is located close to a large ground plane; currents and patterns are shown in Fig. A simple circuit model explains the observed stable-tuning phenomenon and yields a design equation achieving this at an arbitrary frequency below the loop self-resonance. The freespace loop can be represented by the parallel-resonant equivalent circuit of Fig. Finally, CC ckt is determined according to: For the Fig. Because CC 1 is smaller than CC 2 and the two appear in series, the total series capacitance CC eq is close to CC 1 . approximately CC 1 when tt ≪ LL 1 . Without CC eq , there is no frequency below self-resonance where the reactance of the freespace equivalent circuit (shown in Fig. With tt=7.2 mm and zz=1.27 mm, a simple estimate of CC eq ~ CC 1 using the parallel plate capacitor formula is 0.325 pF. The mutual inductance MM is calculated from the full-wave twoport s-parameters of the mirrored Fig. The equivalent circuit of the loop near a ground plane without a matching circuit is shown in Fig. circuit operates in the "odd" (anti-symmetric) mode only This relation predicts that the equal-reactance frequency decreases as CC eq is increased (e.g., by increasing tt from 7.2 mm) and as the loop inductance is increased (e.g., by decreasing WW)-as is observed in both the full-wave model as well as experimentally. For ωω cc = 2ππ433 MHz, kk=0.118, and LL ckt =29.0 nH, (4) indicates CC eq must be 0.312 pF, in good agreement with the parallel-plate capacitance estimate. Circuit model results are shown in Fig. The Fig. Next, the VNA cable was disconnected from the antenna and a VNA-connected, sub-resonant magnetic field probe (Beehive Electronics model 100A) was held within a few centimeters of the loop antenna. Normally, such a probe reflects nearly all RF power incident from the VNA. However, at the loop antenna resonant frequency, a small amount of RF power is coupled from the probe; a small dip in the VNA-measured reflection coefficient is evident, indicating the antenna resonance. (This is a classic technique known as "grid dip" Next, the ground plane was removed, and the magnetic field probe measurement repeated. The indicated resonance shifted less than 1 MHz, demonstrating that the loop antenna maintains stable tune between the two environments as designed; this data is shown in Fig. Finally, a miniature, battery-powered swept-frequency RF source with approximately constant-available power in 50 Ω was set inside the loop. The RF signal transmitted by the loop was monitored with a polarization-matched, sub-resonant monopole probe connected to a spectrum analyzer located about 60 cm away from the loop antenna in the zẑ direction. This was done with the loop in three ground plane configurations: 1) zz=1.27 mm away from the ground plane, 2) zz=75 mm away from the ground plane, and 3) with no ground plane; results are presented in Fig. This paper presents a general design principle for preventing detuning when electrically small loop antennas are used both in free space and a fixed distance away from a ground plane. The approach balances the inductive and capacitive parasitics introduced by the ground plane such that the resonant frequency remains unchanged. The design may be easily adapted to commercial passive UHF RFID applications via the design equation ( 