Colloidal semiconductor quantum wells have emerged as a promising material platform for use in solution-processable light-generation including colloidal lasers. However, application relying on their optical gain suffer from a fundamental complication due to multi-excitonic nature of light amplification in common II-VI semiconductor nanocrystals. This undesirably increases the optical gain threshold and shortens the net gain lifetime because of fast nonradiative Auger decay. Here, we demonstrate sub-single exciton level of optical gain threshold in specially engineered CdSe/CdS@CdZnS core/crown@gradient-alloyed shell colloidal quantum wells. This sub-single exciton ensemble-averaged gain threshold of 〈N g 〉 ≈ 0.80 (per particle) resulting from impeded Auger recombination along with a large absorption cross-section of quantum wells enables us to observe the amplified spontaneous emission starting at a low pump fluence of ~ 800 nJ cm -2 , at least three-folds better than the previously best reported values among all colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals. Moreover, long optical gain lifetimes of ~ 800 ps accompanied with modal gain coefficients of ~2,000 cm -1 are achieved. Finally, using these gradient shelled quantum wells, we show a vertical cavity surface-emitting colloidal laser operating at an ultra-low lasing threshold of 7.5 μJ cm -2 . These results represent a significant step towards the realization of solutionprocessable electrically-driven colloidal lasers. Solution-processed semiconductor nanocrystals offer a versatile and promising gain medium for light amplification applications Previously, various efforts have been reported to tackle the issue of the fast Auger decay in nanocrystals including the smoothing of their confinement potential Here, we report optical gain in sub-single exciton regime ( 〈N〉 < 1 ) in quasi-type-II CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS core/crown@gradient-alloyed shell (C/C@GS) CQWs tailored as a promising and novel solution for suppression of the Auger process with their smooth confinement potential, presenting an important step towards the evolution of semiconductor CQW lasers. We demonstrated an exceptionally low stimulated emission threshold of ~820 nJ cm 01 , corresponding to an average number of e-h pairs of 0.84 per NPL, which is also fully supported by nonlinear absorption measurements through ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy. Sub-single exciton optical gain regime is also confirmed by linear dependence of the normalized absorption changes. The extremely large absorption cross-section (5.06 × 10 -13 cm 2 ) of our engineered NPLs, accompanied by an extremely large net modal gain coefficient of ~1,960 cm -1 , and a long net optical gain lifetime of ~830 ps result in such ultra-low optical gain thresholds and lead to record long stable ASE. Employing specifically engineered core/crown@gradient-alloyed shell heterostructures, we present a linearly polarized single-mode lasing from a vertical cavity surfaceemitting laser enabling a record low lasing threshold of ~7.46 μJ cm 01 . For this study, we synthesized CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS C/C@GS CQWs with a carefully controlled different number of Cd1-xZnxS alloyed gradient shell monolayers (MLs), tuned from 2 to 6 MLs, grown on the seed of 4-ML CdSe/CdS core/crown NPLs by using colloidal atomic layer deposition (c-ALD) method To analyze the optical gain performance of the CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS C/C@GS NPLs with different shell thicknesses, we performed femtosecond transient absorption (TA) measurements of NPLs in solution (hexane) with stirring (see Methods). TA measurements yield spectrally-and temporally-resolved pump-induced absorption changes (∆α), which were used to calculate the nonlinear absorption spectra (α = Δα + α 9 ) in the excited-state, where α 9 is the absorption of the unexcited sample. Figure The σ is calculated based on the method that we discussed in our previous study To determine the optical gain threshold (〈N D 〉), we depict the normalized absorption bleaching ( -∆α α 9 ? ) as a function of 〈N 9 〉 at the ASE peak position (λ ABC = 647 nm). Then level of 〈N D 〉 = 0.78 is quantified from the intersection of the measurement data (symbol) with horizontal dotted line at J ∆α α 9 ? J = 1 (Fig. To investigate the dynamics of the different e-h pair NPL states, we plotted the pump-dependent normalized average e-h pair populations 〈N(t)〉 per NPL at the peak position of stimulated emission ( λ ABC = 647 nm) (Fig. , where A N is the timeindependent coefficient and τ N is the lifetime of N-pair NPL state. Then, to analyze the multiexcitonic behavior of NPLs (N ≥ 2), we employed a simple subtractive process to derive the single exponential decay dynamics as previously used for CQDs In the case of bulk semiconductor, the rate of Auger recombination (τ N 0U ) follows C A (N/V 9 ) 1 for N ≥ 2 Moreover, by performing the method as described above, we calculated the biexciton Auger recombination rate for 2, 3, 5, 6 MLs shell thicknesses. As can be seen in Figure Next, we investigated the light amplification of CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS C/C@GS CQWs, These important observations indicate that net optical gain regime occurs at the sub-single exciton level per particle in our CQWs having smooth confinement potential. In addition, the appearance of similar sharp emission is observed with increasing length of the stripe in VSL measurement while keeping the pump intensity fixed (see Methods). Also, the ASE measurements are fully consistent with our TA analysis in the solution form of these NPLs, which indicates an optical gain threshold of 〈N D 〉 = 0.78. Here we reckon that the successful inactivation of Auger recombination allows to achieve the record lowest ASE threshold (I ABC ), which is several orders of magnitude lower than the CdS/ZnSe core/shell type-II CQDs The lowest excitonic energy state (heavy-hole excitonic transition (1hh-1e)) is shown in Figure where the stimulated emission is largely Stokes-shifted with respected to the 1hh-1e excitonic feature. This major Stokes shift (~17 nm) significantly reduces the re-absorption of the emitted photon, a critical loss mechanism in optical gain, avoiding which leads to a remarkably reduced ASE threshold and sub-single exciton optical gain regime. As seen in Figure The net modal gain coefficient (G) was also characterized via VSL measurement Finally, owing to highly efficient optical gain performance of our engineered CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS C/C@GS CQWs, we incorporated these NPLs (with 4-ML shell thickness) as a gain medium into a vertical-cavity surface-emitting laser (VCSEL).The optical resonator was fabricated by using a pair of distributed Bragg reflectors (DBRs), the reflectance of each of which reaches ~96% at the emission wavelength of the NPLs while keeping lower than ~10% at the excitation wavelength (400 nm). Then, a close-packed solid film of these NPLs was sandwiched between the DBRs (see Methods). The emission spectrum of the CQW-VCSEL is depicted in Figure In conclusion, the conducted study presents the first demonstration of light amplification in subsingle exciton gain regime of CQWs having smooth confinement potential, which avoids the complications associated with fast nonradiative multi-excitonic Auger process. This was confirmed by systematic nonlinear absorption analyses and linear dependence of normalized absorption changes below gain. This sub-single exciton (〈N D 〉 ≈ 0.8) optical gain, accompanied with extremely large absorption cross-section, in CdSe/CdS@CdZnS core/crown@gradientalloyed shell NPLs enables record low gain threshold among all colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals. The ultra-stable gain performance of these engineered NPLs addresses the stability problem of colloidal nanocrystals as a gain medium. Finally, the developed CQW-VCSEL exhibit a record low threshold of single-mode lasing. The realization of sub-single exciton regime optical amplification along with ultra-stable characteristics in these CQWs may enable lasing under continuous-wave excitation, possibly leading to electrically driven CQW-lasers. VSL measurements. Sample preparation was very similar to ASE samples. The optical setup was slightly modified, where an adjustable slit was used to vary the length of stripe on the sample and also to minimize the effect of light diffraction, the sample was placed as close as possible to the slit (~4-5 mm). To ensure 1D amplifier assumption and to maximize the ASE intensity from the edge of sample, the length of the excitation was adjusted to be ~120 μm. The PL signal was collected at the edge of the sample. Fabrication of the CQW-VCSEL. To fabricate highly reflective DBRs for CQW-VCSELs, eight pairs of SiO2/TiO2 (with the optical thickness of silica and titania chosen as quarter-wavelength emission of CQWs) were deposited on quartz substrate via sputtering. A narrow stripe of 120 μmthick Kapton tape was placed at the edge of one of the DBRs. On the other side, using an epoxy, two DBRs were stick to each other by applying slight pressure, and then the tape was removed. This creates a finite wedge-shaped structure between two DBRs, which provides a built-in thickness variation in the resulting vertical cavity. Finally, a highly concentrated (50-60 mg mL - 1 ) CQW/hexane was poured and dried between two DBRs, together with which formed a cavity length variable Fabry-Perot resonator. atmosphere under continuous stirring and alternating sonication until the formation of whitish color homogeneous gel. After the cadmium precursor was prepared, it was mixed with 3 mL of 0.1 M S-ODE stock solution and used for the CdS crown coating. Synthesis of CdSe/CdS core/crown NPLs: A typical core-seeded synthesis method reported previously was used with slight modifications. After obtaining the desired crown size by adjusting the injection amount, the resulting mixture was further annealed at 240 °C for 5 min. After that, the solution was cooled down to room temperature and the core/crown NPLs were precipitated using ethanol. The NPLs were cleaned three times with ethanol and methanol to remove any traces of unreacted precursors, which was crucial for the shell growth step using c-ALD. Lastly, they were then dispersed in hexane to be used for the shell deposition. Synthesis of CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS core/crown@shell NPLs: We used a modified procedure of our c-ALD recipe reported previously. For sulfur precursor we used 40-48 wt% solution of ammonium sulfide in water. Specifically, for the first sulfur shell growth, we added 40 μL of ammonium sulfide in 4 mL NMF and under vigorous stirring added 1 mL of CdSe/CdS core/crown seeds, which we had prepared separately. After 2 minutes of stirring when all the NPLs had entered the NMF phase from hexane, the reaction was stopped by quickly adding acetonitrile and excess toluene to precipitate the NPLs via centrifugation. This cleaning step was repeated once more by redispersing the NPLs in NMF and precipitating them using acetonitrile and excess toluene to remove any remaining sulfur precursor. for the potential profile given in Figure where mz is the effective mass of electron (hole), V(z) is the potential arising from conduction (valence) band offsets, and Ψ(z) is the wave function of electron (hole). We assumed the even parity for the symmetry of first excited states and solved the TISE for z > 0. Then, because of the symmetry, we reflected the obtained solution to z < 0. To solve the problem, we divided the right half of the potential well into five regions, as indicated in Figure Region I, by assuming even symmetry: where k = w As can be seen in Figure To characterize the polarization state of the laser emission, a linear polarizer was placed between the cavity output and spectrometer. By varying the angle of the polarizer, the signal was collected at the spectrometer. The luminescence intensity of the cavity is depicted as function of the detection angle in Figure 