We propose a novel macroscopic model for conjugate heat and mass transfer between a mobile region, where advective transport is significant, and a set of immobile regions where diffusive transport is dominant. Applying a spatial averaging operator to the microscopic equations, we obtain a multi-continuum model, where an equation for the average concentration in the mobile region is coupled with a set of equations for the average concentrations in the immobile regions. Subsequently, by mean of a spectral decomposition, we derive a set of equations that can be viewed as a generalisation of the multi-rate mass transfer (MRMT) model, originally introduced by Haggerty & Gorelick Conjugate transfer in heterogeneous media is of pivotal importance for a wide range of applications ranging from dispersion of contaminants in aquifers While transport in weakly heterogeneous media can be accurately described using stochastic perturbative approaches To predict transport in strongly heterogeneous systems, a large number of methods have been developed, the most common of which are: • Integro-differential formulations • The Multi-Rate mass transfer • The continuous time random walk Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that these methods are substantially equivalent However, accurate estimation for the closure parameters of the multi-rate mass transfer model is still a largely debated topic. Specifically, the multi-rate mass transfer model of Haggerty & Gorelick • α HG : the apparent exchange rate coefficient. • β HG : the capacity ratio. It was suggested In this work we propose a novel general derivation of the multi-rate mass transfer model that address the following modeling issues: i Providing a unique way of calculating the model parameters, like a set of equations that can be solved once for a whole class of problems. ii Including the effect of advective transport on the conjugate transfer in a way that is mathematically formal and physically sound. iii Derivation from first principles containing a limited and clear set of assumptions. This with the aim of facilitating any extension in future works. This work is structured as follows. In section 2 we describe the microscopic equations and the approximations we employ. In section 3 we present the upscaling methodology in details and in Section section 4 we show how the model of Haggerty & Gorelick can be obtained as a zero-order approximation of our model. In section 4, we also present higher order models and we summarise the model parameters in section 6. We conclude in section 7 with an outlook to future extensions of the current model. We consider the scenario presented in fig. In the following we will assume that transport within inclusions Ω i is dominated by diffusion, while on Ω m , advection might not be negligible. Thus, we can define a Peclet number: where U is a characteristic velocity of the fluid, L is a characteristic length and D is a diffusion coefficient. We will therefore assume that in the immobile regions: while no assumption is made on the Peclet number in the mobile region. We assume that the concentration field c m (x, t) in the mobile region is obeying the advection-diffusion equation at the microscopic scale: Furthermore, we have N i diffusion equations for the concentrations in the immobile regions: We assume here the immobile diffusion coefficients D i to be constant. This can be easily relaxed to smooth or piecewise smooth coefficients and will be subject of future studies (by decomposing into coupled sub-regions). At the interfaces ∂Ω i we enforce continuity of fields and fluxes: This choice of boundary conditions implies that immobile regions do not exchange mass with each other, but they are only connected through the mobile region. Standard multi-continuum models It is important to notice that in our model described by equations 3 and 4, the diffusive modes are mostly excited by the conjugate transfer with the immobile regions and not by source terms due, for example, to bulk reactions. Furthermore, we can consider a macroscopic domain Ω macro given by the union of a number of REVs Ω. Ω macro is taken sufficiently large to contain a large number of REVs, but sufficiently small to consider all those REVs as equivalent (i.e., disregarding any variation of the REVs geometry and material properties with x). Therefore, it is possible to interchange between Ω and Ω macro when computing averages without any loss of generality. Thus, we define the volume average of c m in the region Ω (x) (but it can be trivially extended to Ω macro ) as the top-hat filter of volume V = Ω dV centred on x: Where K Ω is a filtering Kernel and * is the convolution operator. A typical Kernel that is widely used in fluid dynamics and multiphase flows is the top-hat Where Ω (x) is a REV centred on x. In this formulation both c m and c m are both functions of the spatial coordinate x. However, the integral operator results in c m to be much smoother than c m and therefore we will consider as c m does not depend on space at scales smaller than Ω. Similarly, V is also a slowly varying function of x. We can therefore write an explicit expression for c m : As commonly done for multiphase and compressible flows, we also define the Favre top-hat Kernel And therefore, the Favre averaged concentration c m can be written as: The spatial filtering procedure is illustrated in fig. Generally, Ω is itself a function of the coordinate x but, since we assume symmetry of Ω under translation. the integral commutes with spatial derivatives and we will therefore omit its dependence of x for the sake of brevity. such that we obtain the relation: where we introduced the capacity of the mobile region β m defined as V m /V. Some authors (for example Thus, the main difference between volume averaging and Favre averaging is that the first is carried over all the space (mobile and immobile regions), while the second is restricted to a particular region. The main reason to introduce such difference, is that it formally leads to equation 11, and thus to the definition of capacity. Assuming that the the immobile regions Ω i are fully included into Ω (i.e., ∂Ω ∩ ∂Ω i = ∅ i = 1, . . . , N i ), applying the integral operator ( where we have defined the total average flux in the mobile region: and the average inter-region mass exchange rate for region i: Since in this work our focus is on the interface exchange, we do not perform an accurate upscaling of J m , and we will use a simplified expression without any loss of generality: where u eff and D m,eff are the effective velocity and the effective diffusivity in the mobile region. The capacity β m does not appear explicitly into (15) since it is generally accounted for within the effective parameters. We then define the Favre averaged concentration in the immobile regions as: where V i = Ω i dV is the volume occupied by region Ω i . Thus, we integrate (4) to obtain: where is the capacity of immobile region i. The time derivative in eq. ( In ( In order to express c i in a closed form that only depends on the geometrical and physical properties of the immobile region (as well as from the boundary value of c m ), we perform the following decomposition: Where the function ψ i satisfies the following equation and boundary conditions: While c i is given by: Summing eq. ( being n a field normal to ∂Ω i and S i the surface of ∂Ω i . Therefore, in our formulation the function ψ i is simply required to satisfy the non-homogeneous time dependent boundary conditions, while c i satisfies a non-homogeneous unsteady diffusion equation with homogeneous boundary conditions. The homogeneous form of eq. ( Where c i j (t) are series coefficients that depend on time and on x at the macro scale only, while the eigenfunctions φ i j (x) carry the dependence on the spatial coordinate at the micro scale and satisfy: Where λ i j is the eigenvalue corresponding to eigenfunction φ i j . While our decomposition of the spatial dependence in 23 may look arbitrary at first sight, in practice it simply mean that there co-exist two problems for the immmobile regions: (i) a local one and (ii) a global one. The local problem (i) refers to the solution within the single immobile regions and is described by eq. ( Both eq. ( Following this rescaling, eq. ( Substituting solution 23 back into eq. ( Where A i = Ω i φ ik φ ik dV is the normalisation factor of the eigenproblem, which depends on the geometry only. For reasons that will be clear in the next section, we introduce the following definitions: Substituting into eq. ( Where we introduced the projection of ψ into φ ik scaled over the norm of φ ik : Therefore, c i is now given by: Where: is the correction function for the immobile region, which accounts for the non-homogeneity of c m (x, t) at the interface. We now compute the Favre averaged concentration in the i-immobile region: Where the favre averaged correction function is given by: The terms β ik play the role of capacities (or a normalised weighting function) since: Equation 35 is the so-called partition of unity (notice that β ik is generally still functions of the spatial coordinates at the macroscale) and it arises directly from the eigenproblem. Recalling eq. ( It is important to notice that all the terms involved in the multi-rate transfer can be computed a priori by solving a cell problem, which consists in solving eq. ( So far, our formulation is exact, in the sense that we made no assumption regarding the regularity of the fields and we retained all the terms arising from the volume averaging. However, we still do not have an expression for the concentration field at the interface between mobile and immobile regions since that would require the complete knowledge of c m (x, t). In order to give a representation of the spatial variability of c m (x, t) without having to solve the microscopic unsteady governing equations, one can employ the classical two-scale expansion of homogenisation theory where χ n is the corrector function corresponding to the n-order of the series and : represents the contraction between the corrector and the n-order gradient ∇ n . c m and ∇ n c m varies much slower than χ n in x and can be considered as constant As a side note, we mention that homogenisation can be also employed to obtain an expression for J m,eff To introduce the information provided by the corrector equation into our problem, we can expand ψ i in a similar fashion: where the functions Ψ n are coupled with the correctors χ n at the interface and satisfy (owing the linearity of equation 20) : These are a set of partial differential equations for tensors of rank n. Notice that Ψ in satisfies a boundary integral relation similar to eq. ( where we introduced Θ in as the internal corrector tensor of rank n for immobile region i, which accounts for the internal effects of the spatial variability of c m (x, t) at the interface. This formulation shows that, when we assume c m (x, t) = c m at the interface, then θ i = 0, which means that no correction is necessary. Expansion 38 can now be substituted into the evolution equation for c ik , leading to: We can now write down a set of equations for the Generalised Multi-Rate Transfer (GMRT) model which can be closed using a set of parameters corresponding to different geometries. When a specific geometry is selected, such parameters are constants or are simple function of geometrical and material properties through a rescaling (as for the eigenvalue λ ik =λ ik D i /L 2 i ). The full system of equations is: In this system (GMRT-TS) mixed time-space derivatives are present. In the next section, these will be replaced to obtain a more convenient form. Nevertheless, GMRT-TS is exact as long as c m (x, t) can be expanded using the corrector eq. ( A key feature of the current formulation is that accounts for the non-uniform distribution of the concentration field at the interface from a microscopic perspective and shows how this can be upscaled to a macroscopic set of equations. Surprisingly, this does not lead to a new exchange rate (which is equivalent to the eigenvalue of the homogeneous problem λ ik ), but instead to an additional term in the equations for c ik and a new rate term. These terms lead to mixed and potentially high order derivatives in the governing equation for the mobile concentration. However, in practical applications one rarely goes beyond a second order corrector and therefore this does not alter the order of the differential equation. Clearly, practical applications require the multi-rate series to be truncated at some value k max corresponding to β ik max , λ ik max , c ik max , and Ψ ik max n . While previous works enforced k β ik = 1 by rescaling the capacities It is easy to see that the truncated modes k > k max will approach equilibrium faster, since they correspond to small perturbations inside the immobile region and to larger eigenvalues. They can be therefore assumed to be in equilibrium if k max is chosen sufficiently large, according to the physics of the problem. Therefore, one can write: Furthermore, the corresponding eigenfunctions φ ik will be highly oscillating for k > k max in contrast with the corrector Ψ in , which we choose to be a smooth function (recall equation 20). Therefore the projection of Ψ in over φ ik will be very small for k > k max since Ψ in will not have significantly high modes. The regularity of Ψ in is also connected to the change of c m (x, t) over ∂Ω i . In most of the applications (e.g., forced convection) c m (x, t) varies regularly over the interfaces, and thus the correctors χ n vary smoothly (and slowly) over ∂Ω i . Therefore, we can also assume that there exist a k max such that: and, consequently, which means that for sufficiently large k the modes are in equilibrium with the average field. Therefore, a more sensible approximation of the truncated terms would be a scaling of β i (and thus β m ) to account for the removed modes compared to simply rescaling β ik . In practice, one would then have new truncated immobile capacities β tc i and mobile capacities β tc m defined as: Thus, the system behaves as if the mobile region was larger and the immobile regions were smaller (in terms of volumetric occupation, not geometrical parameters). This is simply due to the fact that we assumed that the dynamics of modes k > k max in the immobile regions is completely determined by the mobile region. The original Multi-Rate Mass Transfer (MRMT) model proposed by Haggerty & Gorelick (MRMT) Therefore, the model of Haggerty & Gorelick is obtained under the approximation that the concentration at the interface between each immobile region and the mobile region is uniform and equal to c m . This is acceptable for systems where the mobile region is approximatively in local equilibrium at the microscale. This can be the case of a well-mixed concentration in the mobile region. Coefficients β ik and λ ik do not depend in any way on the interface concentration c m (x, t) and, following our approach, they bear no dependence on the transport processes happening in the mobile region. Therefore, they can be calculated exactly using only geometrical shape and material properties of the immobile regions as input. Table Geometry Table In this approximation. coefficients λ ik and β ik have the same meaning as in Haggerty & Gorelick, where λ ik plays the role of exchange rate between c ik and ψ ik . As demonstrated in table 1, λ ik is a function of geometrical dimensions and material properties through λ ik =λ ik D i /L 2 i , where the dimensionless eigenvalue depends on the shape of the immobile region only. On the contrary, β ik is a dimensionless weight that depends only on the class of geometrical shapes. While eq. ( To this end, it is useful to rewrite eq. ( Integrating the eigenvalue eq. ( Expanding the first term on the right hand side of eq. ( where we employed eq. ( The additional terms are consistent with the evolution equation for c ik , so that the mobile-to-immobile fluxes are identical to the corresponding immobile-to-mobile flux regardless the number of terms retained in the expansions. The complete set of equations 42 can be therefore rewritten without mixed time-space derivatives as: where we defined the equilibrium concentration for term k of region i as: This system of equations does not pose any significant issue for corrections up to the second order, since the order of the differential operators remains unchanged and no mixed derivatives arise. Physically, these additional terms change the equilibrium concentration at which ∂c ik /∂t = 0. Retaining first order corrections in eq. ( (GMRT-1) For the special case in which the material microstructure does not vary in space and the flow field is macroscopically homogeneous (i.e., u eff = const), Ψ ik1 does not depends on the spatial coordinates and we can define a drift velocity: and thus a new effective velocity: Therefore, the equation for the mobile region simply reduces to a standard advection diffusion equation, with an additional multi-rate reactive term: eq. ( In order to understand the meaning of these corrector terms, it is useful to consider the toy case depicted in fig. Now, we consider eq. ( Considering the local concentration in the mobile region, if all immobile regions have the same initial concentration, it follows that the local maxima will be locate at the interfaces as depicted in fig. Therefore, if all components of ∇ c m are positive, all the components of χ 1 are also positive. This positivity is transferred to Ψ i1 through eq. ( It is easy to demonstrate that this positivity property holds also when ∇ c m < 0. Therefore, as illustrated in fig. While such argument was based on the analysis of a simple system, it is often valid for a large range of situations as, for example, in aquifer remediation and in many applications it is possible to guess the sign of the correctors by looking at the gradients. However, when different immobile regions have different initial conditions or the transfer in the immobile regions is strongly asymmetric, this positivity condition may be violated. We now consider correction terms up to second order. Such term brings a second order differential operator into eq. ( Now, we can decompose tensor Ψ ik2 into hydrostatic and deviatoric components: Where tr (Ψ ik2 ) is the trace of Ψ ik2 and I is the identity tensor. We now introduce the diffusion coefficient arising from the conjugate transfer D ct : which correspond to the second order correction arising in the case of macroscopically isotropic material with istropic immobile regions. Again, we make the approximation of homogeneous, isotropic material with macroscopically homogeneous velocity field so that D ct does not depend on the spatial coordinate. Under these approximations, the second order correction term becomes a purely diffusive contribution and we can thus define a new total diffusion coefficient: Therefore, the equation for the mobile concentration simplifies to: Clearly, the the multi-rate series would be generally truncated at a desired accuracy. All the correction terms arising in the formulation of the present model can be evaluated based on analytical or numerical analysis of the immobile and mobile regions. All such parameters can be evaluate a priori and do not require additional computation when solving the macroscopic problem. Specifically, two parameters are independent on the flow and geometry in the mobile region: λ ik : these are simply the eigenvalues corresponding to the homogeneous eigenproblem in the immobile region. β ik : these weights can be calculated similarly to λ ik , from the solution of the eigenproblem. Once the eigenfunctions are known, β ik is given by: ik dV) These are the same parameters of standard multi-rate models. Furthermore, there ore other parameters that require the solution of a cell problem in the mobile region and therefore, that bring information regarding the interplay of conjugate transfer and transport in the mobile region. Such terms make use of the correctors χ in obtained from homogenisation theory. Ψ ikn : Projection of the function Ψ in on the eigenfunction φ ik scaled with the norm of φ ik . Clearly, the number of these parameters equals the number of terms in the multi-rate expansion but one can exploit some knowledge of the microstructure to simplify their expression. Other quantities we introduced, like D ct , c eq ik or u drift , can be obtained from the other parameters. It is worth to notice that, as it is often suggested for the standard MRMT, it is possible to consider each of the parameter as unknown and obtainable (for example) trough inverse analysis or data fitting. In this case, while the details of the derivation of λ ik , β ik and Ψ ikn become irrelevant, it is still crucial to remember that all the physics of non equilibrium is contained in Ψ ikn . In this paper we propose a novel approach to derive the multi-rate mass transfer model that is different from that of the memory function or that of Haggerty & Gorelick. Our model is derived starting from the microscopic equations and it is parameter free, i.e., it is possible to directly evaluate all the closure parameters in a unique manner. While our method agrees with previous results obtained by Our model predicts that additional arise in the governing equations of the multi-rate mass transfer when accounting for the effect of transport processes in the mobile region on the inter-region exchange. These terms are brought into the framework by the corrector equation resulting from homogenisation, which at the second order have the form of a drift and a diffusive contribution. Furthermore, under the assumptions of isotropy and homogeneity these terms can be absorbed into the effective diffusivity and effective velocity, thus leaving the form of the governing equations in the mobile region unchanged. However, the concentration in each immobile region will now depend on high order spatial derivatives of the concentration in the mobile region. Despite the self-consistency of this model (all the parameters can be evaluated from first principles without calibration) and its completeness with respect to the initial hypothesis (we never introduced additional hypothesis or simplifications in the development of our formulation) there are still some significant phenomena that should be accounted for when modelling real systems. Some examples are: • Exchange between immobile regions. • Multiple mobile regions with different mobility (e.g., fractures). • Chemical reactions at interfaces. • Multiphase flow, heat and mass transfer. • Internal flow currents in the immobile regions. Future works could focus on one or more of these topics to improve the range of applicability of this proposed model. This work has been funded by the European Unions Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme, grant agreement number 764531, "SECURe Subsurface Evaluation of Carbon capture and storage and Unconventional risks". Introducing the first order corrector χ 1 , which then satisfies: O(1) Matching the orders and applying Favre averaging over Ω m , this results in an upscaled equation for c m0 : Where Ṁi = ∂Ω i f i • n i dS is the same as equation 14. Furthermore, U = Ω m (u/V m )dV. This also allows us to obtain an expression for the effective diffusivity, and to connect volume averaging and homogenisation, as c m = c m0 . This formulation can be seen as an alternative to spatial filtering for the mobile region, although it is possible to obtain the same correctors equations using the volume averaging method (see for example They are, in fact, constant at the microscale, when a two-scale hypothesis is introduced.