The following study investigates the statistical nature of crack jumps during fatigue of Inconel 718. In-situ measurement in atmospheric air of the crack length at several loading and temperature conditions was conducted using a direct current potential drop (DCPD) method. Both annealed and heat-treated Inconel 718 samples were investigated. For a single sample, the normalized change of crack length was confirmed to not be a random process. This finding is significant in highlighting the time history features, which could be used in training machine learning models for the fundamental understanding of oxidation and the prediction of crack initiation and growth. With the recent move to reduce carbon emissions across many counties and the constant goal of reducing operation costs, gas turbine efficiency can achieve both goals and has been increasing steadily over the past 50 years More specifically, the focus of this work is to capture the statistical variation of the magnitude of crack length growth versus cycle number during initiation and growth stages. In this study, IN718 has been selected as the material of focus due to its polycrystalline nature and wide application in contemporary turbines The γ" phase is on the order of four times larger than the γ' phases The main focus being the experimental capture of the crack during initiation and growth. For this purpose, there are several experimental methods: The simplest method involves the use of a high-resolution optical microscope, which is typically limited to distinguishing up to submicron features The experimental method employed for this study is based on the combination of the DCPD method and fatigue loading of a statistically significant (n≥17) number of IN718 samples in a hydraulic MTS load frame. We employ the ASTM compact specimen standard testing procedure with a custom specimen geometry. The test specimens were not run to failure but were stopped prior to the ultimate fracture crack growth point. Samples were initiated with an electro-discharge machined initial crack in the absence of a crack initiation procedure to capture the crack initiation event and the later stages of crack propagation. Following the ASTM compact specimen The fatigue crack-growth testing is done on an MTS 810 hydraulic load frame. A custom fixture was machined to hold the specimen and allow both tension and compression of the sample, see Fig. To utilize the voltages taken from the DCPD measurement it is necessary to relate the voltage to a crack length. The relationship between the voltage and crack length is known as a crack length calibration curve. This relationship is a function of not only the geometry of the samples but also the placement of both the current and voltage probes on the specimen. In this study, two methods are employed and compared to derive the calibration curve. The first method is to follow the analytical calibration curve derived by H. Johnson shown in Equation In Equation 1 and 2, a0 is the initial crack length (10mm) created by the EDM cut, a is the total crack length, W is the specimen width, y is the plate thickness, V0 is the initial voltage before crack propagation, and V is the measured voltage throughout the experiment. The result of both of these calibration curves is plotted in Fig. Because the stress intensity factor is also a function of the geometry it is necessary to account for the sample geometry when predicting the stress intensity factor. There are several closed-formed expressions that use empirical geometry correction factors. In this study, an empirical expression for an edge crack under uniaxial stress where σ is the uniform stress state and the factor rightmost polynomial is a geometrical factor. Two heat treatment conditions of IN718 were analyzed during this study. Those include the as-received heat treatment condition also confirmed to be the annealed condition. The second condition was the fully heat-treated condition, which satisfies the ASTM The specimens were placed in the hydraulic testing machine using pin joints as shown in Fig. 1C . Because of the thin design of the specimen, small still spacers were used to align the sample and mitigate tearout. Because the study is interested in crack initiation, the specimens did not undergo a crack initiation procedure. In other studies, this is typically done to speed up the initiation of the crack by running at higher stress intensity without a hold cycle to initiate the crack. In this study after the sample was loaded in the machine, data acquisition began with a loading cycle that was used were made up of two parts, 10 fast oscillations for 30 seconds at a given peak load and that cycled with a ratio between the max and min of R=0.05. Following the oscillation, a 100-second hold with loading at the peak load was carried out. For this study, the peak loads were selected as 1600N, 1700N, and 1800N. More emphasis is given to the three highest loadings. The representative loading cycles as a function of time can be seen in Fig. Data acquisition was conducted at a high sampling rate of 512Hz (~2ms/sample) to capture the crack jumps that occur at small length scales and small durations. The data collected was post-processed using Python. To correlate the measured potentials to crack lengths the aforementioned calibration curves were employed along with the stress intensity factor relationship, see the previous section for details. For the 1800N peak load case n=17, for 1700N n=18 and for 1600N n= 22. The data was post-processed by examining the 100-second hold cycles and computing the difference between the crack length over subsequent hold cycles. The difference in crack length between subsequent hold cycles is considered a jump off the crack. For this study, the exact time of occurrence during the hold cycle was not of interest but rather just the quantity and statistics of jumps between subsequent steps. Information about the exact time to the nearest +/-1ms during the hold cycle is available due to the high sampling rate. Fig. An aspect inherent to this DCPC experimental measurement method is the incorporation of electrical noise in the measurement. This electrical noise is a product of the environment and was minimized by using condition DC power supplies. It is important to point out that the electrical noise in the experiment is random noise. By plotting a histogram of the noise and evaluating the p-value, see Fig. Theo. Osc. Theo. Osc. Theo Following the experimental procedure outlined above, the average crack length for each subsequent holding cycle was calculated. It should be clarified for the discussion that the terms crack and crack length refer to the crack originating at the end of a 10mm EDM cut. Fig. In addition, crack length was found to be commensurate with the operating temperature. From Fig. Region III SEM images were taken of the samples after the fatigue tests were completed. Fig. Further investigation of the band's width reveals that they are on the order of 0.5μm, is similar in magnitude to the beach marks found in Fig. A critical aspect of this study was to qualify and quantify the noise of the crack during fatigue. As mentioned previously, random electrical noise was present from the DCPD method and it is the non-random noise that is of interest. It was expected for a truly random event such as electrical fluctuations from the DCPD method that the distribution should follow a normal or Gaussian distribution that is centered about a zero mean provided the systematic bias has been removed through calibration. This was confirmed by running a zero-load test and creating Fig. To account for the increase in stress intensity as the crack length increases it was necessary to normalize the change in crack length by the stress intensity for each case. Fig. Fig. Capturing the statistical variation of the crack jumps for different loading cycles provides an argument for using DCPD data in a more complex simulation. More specifically the rightmost graphs of Fig. This study focused on conducting a DCPD measurement on IN718 samples at several peak loads at various operating temperatures for two heat treatments. This study confirms that there are unique features contained within individual time histories of DCPD measures. Often these features are lost when multiple DCPD measurements are taken and averaged. In this latter case, the DCPD measurement becomes a random process. Using the normality test it was found that the data for a single run experiment is not a random process. Hence, an event early on in the time history will influence an event later in the time history. With this finding, it can be concluded there the time history of individual DCPD measurements provided information such as how oxidation influences high-temperature fatigue. It is hypothesized that a machine learning model is a potential candidate for training on these DCPD features, relating them to the underlying physics.