In this paper, mid-wave infrared photodetection based on an InAs/GaSb type-II superlattice p-i-n photodetector grown directly on Si substrate is demonstrated and characterized. Excitation power dependence on integrated intensity from the photoluminescence measurements reveals a power coefficient of P~I 0.74 , indicating that defects related process is playing an important role in the predominant recombination channel for photogenerated carriers. At 70 K, the device exhibits a dark current density of 2.3 A/cm 2 under -0.1 V bias. Arrhenius analysis of dark current shows activation energies much less than half of the active layer bandgap, which suggests that the device is mainly limited by surface leakage and defect-assisted tunneling, consistent with the photoluminescence analysis. The detector shows 50% cutoff wavelength at ~5.5 μm at 70 K under bias of -0.1 V. The corresponding peak responsivity and specific detectivity are 1.2 A/W and 1.3×10 9 cm•Hz 1/2 /W, respectively. Based on these optoelectronics characterization results, reduction of defects by optimizing the III/V-Si interface, and suppression of surface leakage channels are argued to be the main factors for performance improvement in this Si-based T2SL detector towards low cost, large-format MWIR detection system on Si photonics platform. id-wave infrared (MWIR) photodetection based on InAs/GaSb type-II superlattice (T2SL) has recently generated extensive interests in both civil and military areas such as environmental monitoring, medical treatment and target imaging In this study, we report the comprehensive electrical and optical characterization of an InAs/GaSb type-II superlattice p-i-n photodetector directly grown on Si substrate by MBE. The device covers a MWIR detection range from 3 to 6 μm, with a quantum efficiency of 27.6% at 70 K and 5 μm under -0.1 V. The corresponding specific detectivity of the device is in the order of 10 9 cm•Hz 1/2 /W. Key device factors for future performance optimization are also addressed. Schematic structure of the InAs/GaSb T2SL p-i-n detector grown on Si is shown in Fig. The wafer used for the device fabrication in this work was equivalent to the samples grown in Ref. Optical properties of the T2SL device were probed by excitation power dependent photoluminescence (PL) at temperature of 10 K. The sample was mounted in a liquid helium closed-cycle cryostat and excited by a 532 nm laser with a beam diameter of ~1 mm. The pump power was varied from 10 to 600 mW (corresponding spectral density: 1.27 to 76.4 W/cm 2 ). PL signals were chopped and detected by a monochromator equipped with an InSb detector at liquid nitrogen temperature. The detected signals were then collected and analyzed by a lock-in amplifier. For electrical and photoresponse characterization, the sample was cleaved and a test device with 130 μm diameter was wire-bonded with a TO header. The chip was loaded into a variable-temperature cryostat with radiation shield installed and all surfaces of the cryostat were covered by aluminum foils. A semiconductor parameter analyzer was used to measure the dark current-voltage characteristics. The chip was remained in the cryostat for the spectral response measurement. A Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer in normal incidence setup and a low-noise current preamplifier were used to bias the chip and record the spectra. To obtain the responsivity, the chip was illuminated by a standard blackbody source operating at 700°C. The same current preamplifier was used to provide bias and measure the photocurrent simultaneously. The signal was then recorded by a Fast-Fourier-Transform network analyzer. Excitation power dependent PL spectra measured at 10 K from the T2SL as-grown wafer on Si are plotted in Fig. ./0 + B ** I -" + C 456%& I -" 7/0 (1) where P Laser is the laser pump power, I PL is the integrated PL intensity, and the leading coefficients A SRH , B RR and C Auger are associated with the Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH), radiative recombination and Auger recombination channel respectively. As a result, by fitting the data using Eq. 1 one could unveil the signature of dominant carrier recombination process in the active layer from the power value. The inset of Fig. Dark current density-voltage characteristic curves measured from the T2SL detector grown on Si at different temperatures are shown in Fig. where R is the responsivity, k B is Boltzmann's constant, T is the temperature of the device, R 0 A is the differential-resistance-area-product under zero bias, q is the electron charge and J d is the dark current density under bias. Fig. In conclusion, an InAs/GaSb T2SL p-i-n photodetector has been integrated directly on Si and the optoelectronics properties have been extensively characterized. Excitation dependent PL measured at low temperature suggests that the photogenerated carriers in the active regions are mainly limited by the SRH recombination channel related to dislocations, which is also evidenced by the high dark current density and small activation energy. At 70 K, the device shows 50% cutoff wavelength at ~5.5 μm under -0.1 V, and the corresponding peak responsivity and specific detectivity are 1.2 A/W and 1.3×10 9 cm•Hz 1/2 /W, respectively. Based on these results, further performance improvement of this Si-based type-II superlattice detector should be focused on reduction of dislocation density in the active layer as well as suppression of the large surface leakage to increase the device operating temperature.