Here we propose a waveguide-integrated germanium plasmonic photodetector that is based on a long-range dielectric-loaded surface plasmon polariton waveguide configuration. As this configuration ensures a long propagation distance, i.e., small absorption into metal, and a good mode field confinement, i.e., high interaction of the electric field with a germanium material, it is perfect for a realization of plasmonic germanium photodetectors. Such a photodetector even without optimization provides a responsivity exceeding 1 A/W for both wavelengths of 1310 nm and 1550 nm. To achieve such a responsivity, only a 5 μm-long waveguide is required for 1310 nm and 30 μm-long for 1550 nm. With optimization this value can be highly improved. In the proposed arrangement a metal stripe simultaneously supports a propagating mode and serves as one of the electrodes, while the second electrode is located a short distance from the waveguide. As a propagating mode is tightly confined to the germanium ridge, the external electrode can be placed very close to the waveguide without disturbing it. As such, the distance between electrodes can be smaller than 350 nm which allows one to achieve a bandwidth exceeding 100 GHz. However, as most of the carriers are generated inside a distance of 100 nm from a stripe, a bandwidth exceeding 150 GHz can be achieved for a bias voltage of -4 V. Compared to lasers and modulators that can be combined into one device element, thus avoiding in the optical link, photodetectors are crucial elements that cannot be replaced. They convert light into an electrical signal, making it essential for integrating small but slow electronic components with fast but large sized photonic elements. Furthermore, they are the last elements in the optical link, so they should operate effectively under low input power In the last few years, the surge of research in waveguide-integrated plasmonic photodetectors has produced results that show very promising performance improvements. In plasmonic photodetectors relying on a hot carrier photodetection schema, a bandwidth of 40 GHz and a responsivity of 0.12 A/W at 1550 nm was measured at a bias voltage of 3.5 V in a metalinsulator-metal (MIM) waveguide arrangement with a footprint below 1 μm 2 Additionally, interest has grown in graphene-based photodetectors that can operate based on photo-thermoelectric (PTE), photovoltaic (PC) or bolometric effects The ideal waveguide-integrated photodetector would need to have high responsivity (quantum efficiency), fast response time, and reduced power consumption, defined by the voltage required to achieve high responsivity. Furthermore, it should be easily implemented into the process flow of photonic foundries. State-of-the-art waveguide-integrated photodetectors need to be at least comparable with available Ge photodetectors that offer a responsivity of 1 A/W at an operating wavelength of 1550 nm. Finally, the bandwidth should exceed 50 GHz and a device should be CMOS compatible. For these reasons, Ge photodetectors are very attractive for potential integration with plasmonic structures. Germanium is very often used in a MSM configuration as it is compatible with the CMOS process and it is a good active material for photodetection in the telecom wavelength range To evaluate the performance of a plasmonic waveguide in terms of applications for a germanium photodetector, the propagation length and mode field confinement should be considered. The former provides information how long the mode can be transmitted, i.e., absorption losses into a metal, and the latter determines the electric field strength inside a waveguide, i.e., interaction between a mode and material. The operation principle of the proposed photoconductive germanium photodetector is based on the absorption of a long-range dielectric-loaded surface plasmon polariton (LR-DLSPP) mode propagating in a germanium waveguide (Fig. LR-DLSPP inherits the advantages of a very long propagation length from long-range SPP (LR-SPP) waveguides and good mode confinement from DLSPP waveguides The long propagation distance is achieved when effective mode refractive indices on both metal-semiconductor interfaces are close in value to each other so they can couple together to minimize the electric field in the metal. Thus, the LR-DLSPP configuration provides high propagation length and reasonable mode confinement. In comparison, a gap SPP (MIM) can support a very high confined SPP mode but absorption losses from the metal arise, limiting the propagation distance to tens of the corresponding mode's wavelengths. The LR-DLSPP waveguide is currently the only plasmonic waveguide configuration that allows to achieve a good mode field confinement and high propagation length where w0 is the lateral mode width, Lp is the mode propagation length, neff is the mode effective index, and λ0 is the excitation wavelength. The FoM for LR-DSLPP is at least two orders magnitude higher than other plasmonic waveguide configurations (Table The LR-DLSPP configuration therefore demonstrates great potential for creation of photoconductive photodetectors based on germanium and other absorbing materials where good mode confinement and low absorption losses in metal are essential. In a state-of-the-art PIN photodetector, the cross-sectional area of the waveguide has to be big enough to minimize absorption losses in a doped Si, so waveguide dimensions of w=1 μm and h=260 nm are required to achieve good mode field confinement in the Ge, low absorption into the doped Si, with high responsivity as a result Compared to the MIM strtucture, the proposed Ge photodetector based on the LR-DLSPP waveguide arrangement provides a cross-sectional area of 0.129 μm 2 even when far from optimization. Such a cross-section was chosen to allow efficient coupling of light from the Si waveguide to the photodetector through a butt-coupling arrangement (Fig. Neglecting the scattering losses, the responsivity and the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) a photodetector depends only on the absorption coefficient of Ge, αGe, and metal, αm The materials absorption of Ge and the confinement factor of the mode in the Ge waveguide determines αGe. Also, the overlap of the mode with the metal determines αm The light propagating in the Ge LR-DLSPP waveguide is absorbed mostly by the Ge and partially by a metal (Fig. As a result, an absorption as a function of space and frequency, depends only on the electric field intensity and the imaginary part of the material permittivity. Performed simulations showed that 97 % of the power is absorbed in the first 5 μm of the LR-DLSPP waveguide for a wavelength of 1310 nm and over 88 % of the power coupled to the photodetector is absorbed in the first 30 μm of the photodetector for a wavelength of 1550 nm (Fig. The frequency-dependent photon absorption rate is equivalent to the generation rate under the assumption that each absorbed photon excites an electron-hole pair. The generation rate for wavelengths of 1310 nm and 1550 nm with different photodetector lengths was calculated using Lumerical FDTD simulations and then exported to Lumerical DEVICES, where it was used to calculate a responsivity for each photodetector configuration (Fig. The dark current achieved in our devices was around 0.6 μA for a 3 μm long photodetector operating at wavelength of 1310 nm. As already shown (Fig. In telecommunication systems, photodetectors are required to detect optical signals modulated at high data rates. Thus, the important figure of merit is the opto-electrical 3 dB bandwidth, which is defined as the frequency range from DC to cut-off frequency f3dB i.e., the frequency at which the electrical output power drops by 3 dB below power value at very low frequency. The opto-electronic bandwidth of a photodetector depends both on the carrier transit time and RC response time. To reduce the carrier transit time, the distance between the collecting electrodes should be small. In comparison, RC time reduction can be obtained by lowering the contact resistance of the metal electrodes and by reducing the detector length which reduces the photodetector capacitance where Reff is the effective overall resistance and Cpd is the junction capacitance. The carrier transit time, that defines the time of photo-generated electrons or hole to travel through the active region prior to being collected by the contacts, can be estimated using: where dabs is the distance between the site where carriers are generated and the electrode collecting those carriers, and v is the average carrier velocity As previously shown, the bandwidth of the photodetector is not limited by the RC time constant but the transit time required for carriers to drift to the contact electrode collecting the carriers. By decreasing the distance between the two contacts, a very high electric field is obtained at low bias voltage what additionally improves carrier collection. Our proposed Ge plasmonic photodetector offers a unique combination of advantages and a huge flexibility in terms of design and integration with other materials. Due to the difference in velocity of the carriers, i.e., electrons and holes, the response of the photodetector is usually asymmetric as holes are delayed compared to electrons. However, in our proposed LR-DLSPP photodetector arrangement, carriers are photogenerated in the region surrounding the metal stripe that serves simultaneously as a collection electrode (Fig. Compared to previous waveguide arrangements where carriers were generated in the entire area limited only by metal contacts (Fig. In this study we have proposed the first plasmonic germanium photodetector operating at telecom wavelengths of 1310 nm and 1550 nm with a record high responsivity exceeding 1 A/W and bandwidth beyond 100 GHz for both wavelengths. An internal quantum efficiency exceeding 98 % was achieved for only a 5 μm long photodetector at a wavelength of 1310 nm, while for a wavelength of 1550 nm the quantum efficiency was calculated to be 84 % for 30 μm long photodetector. Both of these values are much higher than previously reported for both plasmonic and photonic germanium photodetectors. These results have been achieved owing to a long-range dielectric-loaded SPP waveguide configuration that ensures good mode field confinement and low absorption losses into a metal. Finally, the proposed photodetector arrangement can be easily integrated with silicon photonic platforms enabling on-chip integration with other components.