We study theoretically the onset of nonuniform superconductivity in a one-dimensional single wire in presence of Zeeman (or exchange field) and spin-orbit coupling. Using the Green's function formalism, we show that the spin-orbit coupling stabilizes modulated superconductivity in a broad range of temperatures and Zeeman fields. We investigate the anisotropy of the temperature-Zeeman field phase diagram, which is related to the orientation of the Zeeman field. In particular, the inhomogeneous superconducting state disappears if this latter field is aligned or perpendicular to the wire direction. We identify two regimes corresponding to weak and strong spin-orbit coupling respectively. The wave-vector of the modulated phase is evaluated in both regimes. The results also pertain for quasi-1D superconductors made of weakly coupled 1D chains. Superconducting systems in the presence of Zeeman field and spin-orbit coupling (SOC) exhibit striking spectral and transport properties including modifications in the pairing correlations The inhomogeneous FFLO state originates from the interaction of the superconducting condensate with a Zeeman field (see In a superconducting system, the interplay between Zeeman field h and spin-orbit coupling leads to the following additional term in the Ginzburg-Landau functional where n is a unit vector along the asymmetric potential gradient and the phenomelological constant ε is proportional to the microscopic spin-orbit coupling constant α. In the following, we will use the constant α, defined below in Eq. ( In this paper, we investigate the formation of inhomogeneous superconductivity in the presence of spin-orbit interaction and Zeeman (or exchange) field h for the particular situation of one-dimensional systems. We consider a superconducting wire deposited on a substrate (Fig. , the critical fluctuations of the superconducting order parameter are effectively suppressed, and the system can be treated as a strictly superconducting 1D wire. The paper is organized as follows. In section II, we derive the Gor'kov equations x h z α 3 . In section III, we consider the regime of large spin-orbit coupling α p F T c . In the strong spin-orbit coupling regime, the electronic spectrum is drastically modified, and it is necessary to work in the so-called helical basis to describe the normal state. We further derive the self-consistency relation in terms of the helical Green's functions. Analysis of the self-consistency relation reveals that increasing the ratio α p F /h leads to change the nature of superconducting correlations from interband to intraband. We also find an inhomogeneous superconducting phase in this regime, with a wave vector of the modulation scaling as h 2 x h z /α, for large values of α. We finally provide a complete (h x , h z , T )-phase diagram for different orientations of the Zeeman field and several values of the spin-orbit coupling constant α. We consider a single 1D superconducting wire deposited on top of a substrate (Fig. Let us consider a superconducting wire deposited on top of a substrate (Fig. Hamiltonian of the 1D wire is expressed as: where The annihilation electronic field operator at position x is written ψ ρ = ψ ρ (x), where ρ is the spin index. The summation is made over the spin ρ, and the Pauli matrices σ i (i = x, y, z) have the standard forms : The kinetic term H 0 corresponds to a purely quadratic dispersion with an effective mass m and a chemical potential μ. The Zeeman Hamiltonian H h incorporates the effect of a tilted field with respect to the wire direction x. The Rashba Hamiltonian H SO originates from the mirror symmetry breaking due to the substrate, and its strength is given by the spin-orbit velocity α. Finally, H BCS encodes the standard s-wave superconducting correlations within the BCS model. Because of the Zeeman splitting, the singlet superconducting order parameter can oscillate along the x-axis as: where ∆ 0 is independent of the position x, and q is the wave vector of the inhomogeneous order parameter. The Gor'kov Green's functions are defined as the following 2-point correlators between the field operators: where T τ is the time-ordering product for the imaginary time τ , and the brackets denote averaging over the thermal equilibrium distribution at temperature T and chemical potential μ. The electronic field operators obeys the fermionic anticommutation relations at equal (imaginary) times. We follow the standard procedure where G = G(x, x , ω n ) and F = F (x, x , ω n ) are two by two matrices defined in spin space, and ω n = 2 π k B T (n + 1/2), n being integer. The differential operator M (x) is defined by : where 1 corresponds to the identity matrix. To simplify the expressions, we will take = k B = 1 in the following. Here we solve the Gor'kov equations near the second order phase transition between the normal and superconducting states, namely assuming the limit ∆ 0 T c0 . To this purpose, it is useful to introduce the function G 0 which solves Eq. (7a) for ∆ 0 = 0, and also a closely related function g 0 which is the opposite of the kernel appearing in Eq. (7b). Those functions G 0 and g 0 are defined by the equations : which are easily solved in momentum space, yielding : where ξ = ξ p = p 2 2 m -μ, and the (p, ω n ) arguments have been omitted in G 0 (p) = G 0 (p, ω n ) and g 0 (p) = g 0 (p, ω n ). The denominators D ± are given by : x . (13) In the limit ∆ 0 → 0, the Gor'kov Green's function F † can be written as : Finally, using Eqs. This expression Eq. ( The self-consistency equation for the superconducting order parameter, ∆(x) = |γ|F † ↓↑ (x, x, τ = 0), reads in momentum and Matsubara frequency representation : where γ is the attractive electron-electron BCS effective coupling constant. Near the critical temperature, Eq. ( where v F is the Fermi velocity in the absence of SOC, T c is the critical temperature of the wire in presence of Zeeman and Rashba interactions, while T c0 is the critical temperature in the absence of these fields, i.e. for h x = h z = 0 and α = 0. A simple way of seeing the influence of spin-orbit coupling on the emergence of the modulated phase is to expand Eq. ( This expansion is justified by the fact that the wavevector q is small near the transition towards the nonuniform phase. We derived Eq. ( where the density of states at energy ξ reads : For a finite spin-orbit coupling, the Green's function F † ↓↑ contains terms proportional to p 2 = 2 m (ξ + μ) and p 4 in the numerator. Then, the presence of the small parameters ξ/μ and ξ 2 /μ 2 in G implies that we should expand N (ξ) at the second order in ξ/μ. This is a specificity of spin-coupled systems. In the absence of SOC, it is sufficient to keep the density of state N (ξ) at zero order in ξ/μ to compute the Green functions. Finally, the integral Eq. ( where v F = 2 m/μ. The ξ integration is then performed using the residue technique. The main result is the presence of a linear term in q which leads to the emergence of a modulated superconducting state at wave-vector q 0 given by : where the factor has been restored (previously = 1 in the derivation of the this result). The Euler-Riemann zeta function is denoted ζ(s). Hence the modulation requires spin-orbit coupling and a tilted Zeeman field, with h x and h z both finite, and q 0 ∝ h 3 α 3 , which is in contrast with the 2D case, where q 0 ∝ h α 3 where the factors disappears. The spin-orbit coupling has been expressed by the parameter α : which is commonly used in experimental works on spinorbit systems. The modulation is very sensitive to the value of this spin-orbit coupling. In the regime of weak SO coupling corresponding to the range α = 1 -10 meV. Å, the modulation wavevector q 0 reaches extremely small values (in comparison to k F 0.6 A -1 ) which justifies a posteriori the expansion in q. For the other parameters, we have fixed the values h x = h z = 0.5 meV for the Zeeman components, T c = 1 meV, and μ = 1 eV for the Fermi energy. In order to obtain q 0 which could be experimentally observable, it is necessary to "push" the SO parameter to values such as α = 100 meV. Å, which are now experimentally available but fall far beyond the domain of validity of the above result Eq. ( In the previous section, the self-consistency relation was derived in the case of weak spin-orbit interaction: α p F T c . This section is devoted to the opposite situation characterized by a strong spin-orbit coupling α p F T c . After rewriting the normal Hamiltonian of Eq. ( We still consider the same model Eq. (3) for the wire, but we are going to use a different basis to facilitate the study of the large spin-orbit coupling regime. In the absence of superconductivity, the Hamiltonian describing the wire reads : where σ x,y,z and τ x,y,z are the Pauli matrices acting in spin and Nambu space respectively. Using the unitary transformation with U given explicitly in Appendix A, the normal state Hamiltonian can be written in the helical basis as : where λ = ± labels the energy bands, and ε ± = Matrix τ 0 is the identity matrix acting in Nambu space. This allows to solve the equations for the normal state Green's functions for each helical band independently : which leads to the solutions in Nambu-helical space: where Let us now consider the system in the presence of superconductivity in the limit ∆ 0 T c . In order to take into account the possibility of a modulated superconducting order parameter ∆ 0 e iqx , the self-consistency equation reads where U (q) is the "momentum shifted" version (Appendix B) of the unitary matrix connecting the original spin basis and the helical basis. The matrix ĜS is the Green's function in the presence of superconductivity. At first order in ∆ 0 : The label S in ĜS denotes the presence of superconductivity, and the superscript q in Ĝ(q) 0 and U (q) refer to the "shifted versions" of Ĝ0 and U defined in the appendix B. The Green's function ĜS contains both in-traband and interband terms (see Appendix C). In the regime of strong spin-orbit interaction, α p F h x , h z , T c and E so = 1 2 m α 2 μ, the interband terms are negligible and it is sufficient to consider only intraband pairing. It is convenient to eliminate γ, and rewrite the selfconsistency relation Eq. ( which is reminiscent of Eq. ( For each helical band λ, the integral over momentum can be turned into an integral over ξ using quasi-classical approach: The integration over ξ is then straightforward and the expression of the self-consistency equation is provided in Appendix C. In the same way as Sec. II D, we first investigate the emergence of the modulated phase. We consider small values of the Zeeman field h x , h z T c and small values of q such that q p F : (35) The self-consistency relation Eq. ( x /α 2 p 2 F in Eq. ( where q 0 is estimated by maximizing Eq. ( Introducing the parameter α commonly used in the experimental literature, this expressions reads : For the values α = 300 meV.A of the SO coupling, h x = h z = 0.5 meV of the Zeeman components, and μ = 1 eV for the Fermi energy, this formula leads to a very small q 0 which justifies a posteriori the expansion in q. We now solve the self-consistency relation Eq. (C7) for arbitrary values of the wave-vector q, i.e. without doing any expansion in parameter q. We solve numerically the self-consistency equation Eq. (C7) in the following way. First, the temperature is extracted from Eq. (C7) as a function of both Zeeman field h and wave-vector q. The optimal wave-vector q is then determined such that it maximizes the temperature at a given h, which is equivalent to minimize the Ginzburg-Landau free energy. Following this procedure, the (h x , h z , T )-phase diagram is plotted (Fig. When the field is longitudinal (h x = 0), we get back to the FFLO case without SO, namely the modulated phase emerges at the tricritical point (T = 0.56 T c0 , h = 1.07 T c0 ). Indeed, when the spin-orbit and Zeeman fields are parallel, the SOC can be gauged out, and we obtain an effective Hamiltonian without SOC. In the opposite case, namely when the Zeeman field is transverse to the SOC (h z = 0), we obtain a rather different effect: The wave-vector q vanishes, and T c is not modified with respect to T c0 within leading order in h x /α p F 1. As we mentioned previously, this result comes from the fact that we neglect interband correlations in the self-consistency relation Eq. (C7). We can also compare the (h x , h z , T )-phase diagrams for different values of the spin-orbit coupling constant α for h x = h z , as illustrated in Fig. We have studied the onset of nonuniform superconductivity in a one-dimensional wire in presence of Rashba spin-orbit coupling and Zeeman effect. The spin-orbit coupling stabilizes a FFLO-like modulated order parameter at low field and for all temperature below T c0 . We have derived the self-consistency relation for the modulated superconducting order parameter in two extreme regimes of weak and strong spin-orbit strength respectively. The analytical expressions for the wavevectors of the modulated state scale as q ∝ h 2 x h z α in the weak spinorbit coupling regime (αp F T c ), and q ∝ h 2 x h z /α in the strong α regime (αp F T c ). When the ratio α p F /h increases, superconducting correlations change from interband to intraband, which was also demonstrated in two dimensions in The Zeeman field-temperature phase diagrams have been obtained numerically using the self-consistency relations for arbitrary strength of the spin-orbit coupling. These phase diagrams exhibit anisotropy effects related to the angle between the Zeeman field and the wire axis. We have plotted the phase diagram in the case of strong spin-orbit coupling for different orientations of the Zeeman field and several values of the spin-orbit constant, and highlighted the anisotropy caused by SOC. At last we have shown that increasing α and the ratio h x /h z allows superconductivity at larger temperature. Finally, the results above also pertain for the case of quasi-one dimensional organic superconductors consisting in weakly coupled one-dimensional chains, although the spin-orbit should be due to the bulk structure of the crystal instead of the surface Rashba coupling. Some perspectives result from this work. Because of its sensitivity to impurities Our model may be generalized to the two wire (or two plane) system, where superconductivity is generated in one wire (plane), while the spin-orbit and exchange interactions occur in the other one. Such model may be relevant for the description of S/F systems with spinorbit interaction. Using a method similar to Moreover, we outline that the system described in the present paper could be used as a link between two identical superconductors to create an anomalous Josephson junction where η = φ -p+q/2 -φ p+q/2 . The first term of Eq. (C2) describes intraband pairing correlations, whereas the second one corresponds to interband pairing. Using this expression, the self-consistency relation can be put in a more convenient form, thus eliminating γ: where F = -ĜS U S † τ x U S /∆ 0 . In the regime of strong spin-orbit interaction, α p F h x , h z , T c and E so = 1 2 m α 2 μ, the phase difference η → π at zeroth order in the Zeeman field, thus allowing to neglect interband pairing terms. Therefore, the selfconsistency relation Eq. (C3) becomes : The method used to perform the p integration in Eq. (C4) is quite different from the one used in Sec. II D for the small spin-orbit limit. Indeed in the regime of strong spin-orbit interaction, we consider only intraband pairing terms, which allows to treat each band separately. Therefore, it is possible to compute the integral in the customary way and we can approximate the momentum p by p λ F in the α p and q p terms, where is the Fermi momentum of the band λ, obtained by neglecting the Zeeman contribution with respect to the SOC: h x , h z α p F . In such a way the ξ integration can be performed straightforwardly.