Topological superconductivity holds promise for fault-tolerant quantum computing. While planar Josephson junctions are attractive candidates to realize this exotic state, direct phase-measurements as the fingerprint of the topological transition are missing. By embedding two gate-tunable Al/InAs Josephson junctions in a loop geometry, we measure a π-jump in the junction phase with increasing in-plane magnetic field, B . This jump is accompanied by a minimum of the critical current, indicating a closing and reopening of the superconducting gap, strongly anisotropic in B . Our theory confirms that these signatures of a topological transition are compatible with the emergence of Majorana states. Majorana bound states (MBS), which are their own antiparticles, are predicted to emerge as zero-energy modes localized at the boundary between a topological superconductor and a topologically-trivial region Early MBS proposals were focused on one-dimensional (1D) systems such as proximitized nanowires and atomic chains Since ZBCP could arise even without topological superconductivity, it is crucial to identify alternative signatures. A striking example is the closing and reopening of the superconducting gap with an increasing B that is simultaneously accompanied by a phase jump where is the Dirac's constant, v F the Fermi velocity, g the effective g-factor, μ B the Bohr magneton, and L is the distance between the superconducting contacts. In Fig. With B along the y-direction, tight-binding simulations presented in Figs. The JJs based on epitaxial Al/InAs V) and does not participate in the transport. At high gate (b), a minimum of the critical current is observed around 600 mT for JJ1. (c), Zero-bias differential resistance of JJ2 as a function of the applied in-plane field and the gate voltage. V 1 g is set to -7 V. We next consider the B y -dependence of the JJ1 critical current. In Fig. Minima in I c have been observed in Ref. 14 due to orbital effects, which can become energetically unfavorable in the presence of strong proximity effect Previous works where the Thouless energy is In our device, both JJs show a nontrivial evolution of the superconducting gap and topological transition. Figure Using SQUID interferometry, we can identify a topological transition by setting JJ1 at V 1 g = -2 V as the reference junction. At this V 1 g , JJ1 does not show a topological transition at any B y . The resulting SQUID oscillations in JJ2 reveal crucial differences between B y = 100 mT and 850 mT, shown respectively in Figs. Our tight-binding calculations, presented in Figs. By embedding Al/InAs Josephson junctions in a nearly-symmetric SQUID loop, we measured two distinct signatures of a topological phase transition, a minimum in I c and the coincidental π-jump of the superconducting phase, both indicative of a closing and reopening of the superconducting gap. Our findings demonstrate the emergence of a topological phase. In addition to B y , the top gate voltage is shown to be an efficient control knob for manipulating the topological phase transition. This offers a scalable platform for detection and manipulation of Majorana bounds states 