Most iron-based superconductors are characterized by the s± symmetry of their order parameter, and are expected to go through a transition to the s++ state if enough disorder is introduced. We previously reported the observation of this transition in Ba(Fe1-xRhx)2As2 through a study of the disorder dependence of the critical temperature and low-temperature London penetration depth. In this paper we report on the analysis of the electrodynamic response of the same sample across the transition and we identify peculiarities in the behaviour of the surface resistance and normal conductivity, that can be considered as traces of the transition itself. Most iron-based superconductors (IBS), and in particular those of the 122 family, such as doped BaFe 2 As 2 , are characterized by a fully gapped pairing state with sign changing over different Fermi sheets: the s ± state The sample under investigation is the same optimally doped single crystal of Ba(Fe 1-x Rh x ) 2 As 2 studied in our previous work We report on measurements of normal conductivity and surface impedance across the s ± to s ++ transition in proton irradiated Ba(Fe 1-x Rh x ) 2 As 2 that show three peculiar signs of the transition itself: the normal conductivity after the transition recovers the monotonous trend with temperature that characterized the pristine state. the low temperature value of the surface reactance drops at the transition, whereas that of the surface resistance increases monotonically with disorder. the surface impedance versus temperature curves develop a shoulder below T c after the transition. It is important to note that the normal conductivity (measured at a frequency of 8 GHz) is not the same quantity on which Schilling et al. This research activity was perfomed in the framework of the INFN-Politecnico di Torino M.E.S.H. Research Agreement, and also supported by the Coordinated Research Project F11020 of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The authors thank the INFN-LNL staff for the help with irradiation experiments.