Superconducting vortex loops have so far avoided experimental detection despite being the focus of much theoretical work. We here propose a method of creating controllable vortex loops in the superconducting condensate arising in a normal metal through the proximity effect. We demonstrate both analytically and numerically that superconducting vortex loops emerge when the junction is pierced by a current-carrying insulated wire and give an analytical expression for their radii. The vortex loops can readily be tuned big enough to hit the sample surface, making them directly observable through scanning tunneling microscopy. Many key properties of physical systems are determined by topological defects such as dislocations in solids, domain walls in ferroics, vortices in superfluids, magnetic skyrmions in condensed matter systems and cosmic strings in quantum field theories. In superconductors, the topological entities are vortex lines of quantized magnetic flux. The topological nature of these vortices makes them stable, which is important for potential applications such as superconducting qubits The formation of superconducting vortex loops is topologically allowed, and has theoretically been predicted to form around strong magnetic inclusions inside the superconductor Recently it has been shown that vortex loops can be formed in proximity systems by inserting physical barriers, around which the vortices can wrap In this manuscript, we present a way to create controllable vortices in mesoscopic proximity systems in a manner which makes them experimentally detectable through scanning tunneling microscopy. The system considered is a three-dimensional SNS junction pierced by a current-carrying wire which creates the inhomogeneous field responsible for the vortex loops. In planar SNS-junctions with uniform applied magnetic field, changing the superconducting phase difference between the two superconductors shifts the vortex lines in the vertical direction Vortex loops in superconducting systems has previously been predicted using the phenomenological Ginzburg-Landau theory In this section we discuss the quasiclassical Usadel theory and how it may be used to analyse the SNS-junction depicted in fig. In the Usadel theory, the system is described by a quasiclassical Green's function from which physical properties can be extracted. The SNS junction depicted in fig. Here, D is a diffusion constant, ρ3 = diag(1, 1, -1, -1) and ∆ = antidiag(+∆, -∆, +∆ * , -∆ * ) where ∆ is the superconducting gap parameter. The covariant derivative is where e = -|e| is the electron charge, A is the vector potential and is the quasiclassical impurity-averaged Green's function. Finally, in the normal metal. ǧ is normalized such that ǧ ǧ = 1. We use the convention that when two matrices of different dimensionality is multiplied, the smaller matrix is elevated to the dimensionality of the larger matrix by the tensor product of an identity matrix of the appropriate size. In equilibrium, the components of the 8 × 8 Green's function in eq. ( The quasiclassical formalism is not applicable across boundaries because the associated length scale is too short. The Usadel equation must therefore be solved in the normal metal and superconductors separately, and the solutions must be connected through boundary conditions. If we assume a lowtransparency interface, we may use the Kupriyanov-Lukichev boundary condition where e n is the outward-pointing normal vector for region i, ζ i is the ratio of the bulk and interface conductances of material i and L i is the length of material i in the direction of e n . For the boundaries interfacing vacuum, e n • ∇ ĝ = 0. The Usadel equation can be made dimensionless by introducing the Thouless energy, ε D/L 2 . The Usadel equation then becomes dimensionless by doing the substitutions (x, y, z) → (x/L, y/L, z/L), ε → ε/ε , ∆ → ∆/ε and ∇ → L ∇. The magnetic field should satisfy Biot-Savart's law, where μ is the permeability and J is the electric current density. In general, J includes the contribution the induced currents in the normal metal and superconductors in addition to that from the insulated current-carrying wire along the xaxis. However, we will make some assumptions in order to simplify the analytical and numerical calculations. Firstly, we will assume that the width W and height H is smaller than the Josepshon penetration depth. In this case we can ignore the screening of the magnetic field by currents inside the normal metal The last two assumptions are inaccurate very close to the wire. Close to the wire the details of screening currents will be important for the magnetic field, but far away we assume that the total contribution from the currents inside the superconductor is zero. A more precise model could be developed by taking into account screening currents inside the superconductors and solving the Usadel equation self-consistently with Maxwell's equation and the superconducting gap-equation inside the superconductors. However, we are here interested in the solution far away from the wire, and the details of the magnetic field near the wire should not significantly alter the results. For this reason we also model the wire as being infinitely thin. With the assumptions presented above we get a current density which is where θ is the Heaviside step function. Inserting eq. ( for x ∈ (-L/2, L/2), where ρ = y 2 + z 2 and e φ = (ye zze y )/ρ. B = 0 for x < -L/2 and x > L/2. A vector potential which satisfies as can be seen from insertion or calculated directly from Biot-Savarts law by using that ∇ × (J(r In the Ricatti parametrization where N (1 -γ γ) -1 and tilde conjugation is γ(ε) = γ * (-ε). Since the superconducting correlations in our system are spin-singlet, we may write γ = antidiag(a, -a) and γ = antidiag(b, -b), where γ and γ are the Ricatti parameters in the normal metal and superconductors, respectively. Substituting this into eqs. ( and where L is the length which is used to define the Thouless energy, ε . The corresponding equations for ã and e n • ∇ ã is found by tilde conjugating eqs. ( As mentioned initially, a vortex is accompanied by a nonsuperconducting core and a circulating supercurrent. Both the superconducting order parameter and the supercurrent can be extracted from the quasiclassical Green's function. In the following it will be useful to write There are only singlet correlations in the SNS system, so The local density of states for spin-band σ at energy ε and location r can be written where N 0 is the normal state density of state at the Fermi surface. In the normal metal we can write eq. ( In the cores of vortices we expect N = N 0 for all energies, which happens when a(ε) ≡ 0. The current density is Inserting eq. ( Written in terms of the quasiclassical Green's function, the superconducting order parameter is where ψ σ (r, t) is the field operator which destroys an electron with spin σ at position r and time t, N 0 is the normal state density of states and β = 1/k T. The Usadel equation was solved numerically using a finite element scheme. See for instance Here we present first an analytical solution of the Usadel equation in the weak proximity effect regime, then we show numerically that the findings are also present also in the full proximity effect regime. Dimensionless quantities are used in the analytics with distances being measured relative to the length of the half-metal, L, and energies being measures relative to the Thouless energy ε = D/L 2 , where D is the diffusion constant in the half-metal. Before solving the Usadel equation we must determine the solution in the superconducors. We will show that it suffices to use the bulk solution in the superconductors when a certain condition is fulfilled. Let λ (to be defined quantitatively below) be the length-scale over which the Green function recovers its bulk value in the superconductor. The criterion for neglecting the inverse proximity effect in the superconductors is then that the normal-state conductance of the superconductors for a sample of length λ is much larger than the interface conductance and that the length of each superconductor is not small compared to λ. We now proceed to prove this. The vector potential, in the superconductor at x < -1/2. To show that we can use the bulk solution in the limit L → ∞, let This gives an equation for δ ĝ, where we have used that ĝ solves the eq. ( ĝ +δ ĝ must also satisfy the normalization condition ( ĝ ) 2 = 1, so Hence, using that ε ρ3 Finally, from we get that δ ĝ is an eigenfunction of the Laplacian, where We can choose the sign of λ to be such that (λ) > 0. Let L be the length of the superconductor in multiples of the length of the normal metal. Using the boundary condition where Ω is the boundary not interfacing the normal metal, we get where C is some a function of y and ε to be determined by the final boundary condition. From the remaining boundary condition, eq. ( From eq. ( provided that the length of the superconductor L is not small compared to the maximal penetration depth, max[ (λ)]. ζ is proportional to the conductance of the whole superconductor and therefore also with 1/L . Therefore, ζ L / (λ) is the ratio of the normal-state conductance of a superconductor of length (λ) to the interface conductance. Taking the superconducting coherence length ξ as a measure of the inverse proximity effect penetration depth (λ), we see that the criterion eq. ( Solving for the Ricatti parameter in the superconductors we get that γ = antidiag(b, -b) The non-linear Usadel equation does not have a general analytical solution, but it can be solved analytically in an approximate manner far away from the wire. If we assume the proximity effect to be weak, we can keep only terms which are linear in a, ã and their gradients. In this case the Usadel equation ( where We keep only the first term in the Taylor expansion. Equation ( the solution can be written on the form where From eq. ( This means that f and hence also Ψ vanish at these points. By Taylor expanding a to first order around a root located at (0, ρ) we find where x ∼ cos θ and ρρ ∼ sin θ, and α 2 = tan -1 (|k |/2d). Hence, these roots have a phase winding of 2π, as is characteristic for vortices. Equation ( Note that the radius, ρ, of the largest vortex loop given eq. ( It is expected that a change in the superconducting phase difference will change the radii of vortex loops. This is because changing the phase difference is equivalent to changing the applied supercurrent through the junction. The applied current will be deflected by the circulating currents associated with the vortices and hence produce a reactionary force on the vortices. See for instance We now proceed to show numerical results in the full (nonlinear) proximity effect regime. We have set the parameters |∆| = 4ε , ζ = 3, W = H = 6L and φ l = 0 common for all the numerical calculations. We include the effect of inelastic scattering by doing the substitution ε → ε + iδ where δ = 0.001|∆| in order to avoid the divergence of ĝ at ε = |∆| Numerically we find that vortex loops do indeed form at the locations predicted by the analysis. There are circular paths around the origin where the superconducting order parameter vanish and the local density of states is equal to that of the normal state. This can be seen in figs. 2 and 3 which shows the local density of states and the amplitude of the Cooper pair correlation function Ψ, respectively. Around these loops there are a circulating supercurrent, as can be seen in fig. We find that the positions of the vortex loops match with eq. ( Normal SNS junctions are created by vertically growing first a superconducting material such as niobium, then a normal metal such as copper and finally the same superconducting material. The layers are grown for instance by a sputter deposition technique such as direct current sputtering Growing a wire is more complicated than growing a plane because one must localize the growth to happen at the tip at the wire, even though most of the surface area will be on the sides. Nevertheless, growing vertical nanowires has successfully been done by methods such as the vapor-liquid-solid method Schmidt et al. so the diffusion coefficient for copper is about D = 49.2 pm. In the numerics we have used which is on the same scale as what has been made with the vapor-liquid-solid method. Of course, other metals and superconductors could be used, giving different physical lengths corresponding to the values being used in the numerics here. Moreover, from the analysis it seems vortex loops would form also for other values of |∆|/ε . The calculation above is merely to show that the length scales used here is not unreasonable compared to what has already been experimentally achieved. We have used quasiclassical Usadel theory to demonstrate that controllable superconducting vortex loops can emerge in a Josephson junction pierced by an insulated current-carrying wire. The size and number of vortices depend on the phase difference between the superconducting order parameter in the superconductors, φ r -φ l , as well as the strength of the magnetic field. The radius of the vortices can be made arbitrarily large by tuning of the superconducting phase difference, which means that they can always be manipulated so that they intersect the surface. This makes them directly observable by scanning tunelling microscopy, which has already been used to detect normal vortices in proximized metals 