We study the structural origin of the Bauschinger effect by accessing numerically the local plastic thresholds in the steady state flow of a two-dimensional model glass under athermal quasistatic deformation. More specifically, we compute the local residual strength, ∆τ c , for arbitrary loading orientations and find that plastic deformation generically induces material polarization, i.e., a forward-backward asymmetry in the ∆τ c distribution. In steady plastic flow, local packings are on average closer to forward (rather than backward) instabilities, due to the stress-induced bias of barriers. However, presumably due to mechanical noise, a significant fraction of zones lie close to reverse (backward) yielding, as the distribution of ∆τ c for reverse shearing extends quasilinearly down to zero local residual strength. By constructing an elementary model of the early plastic response, we then show that unloading causes reverse plasticity of a growing amplitude, i.e., reverse softening, while it shifts away forward-yielding barriers. This result in an inversion of polarization in the low-∆τ c region and, consequently, in the Bauschinger effect. This scenario is quite generic, which explains the pervasiveness of the effect. The Bauschinger effect Our interest here is to understand the origin of the Bauschinger effect in amorphous solids. This is an especially challenging goal since there is no consensus today on how to describe the internal state of a glass Few numerical works exist on the Bauschinger effect in amorphous solids Here, we identify the origin of the Bauschinger effect in an amorphous solid under steady athermal quasistatic (AQS) flow Our analysis shows that the Bauschinger effect originates from an inverse polarization of the low-∆τ c tails during unloading. More precisely, we find that, in steady state, the distribution of ∆τ c extends down to ∆τ c = 0 for any strain orientation, a property expected to arise due to mechanical noise. Strikingly, this holds even for barriers responding to reverse shearing. It follows that, from its very onset, unloading causes reverse plasticity of a growing amplitude, i.e., reverse softening, while shifting forward-yielding barriers away. The Bauschinger ensues since after any finite amount of unloading, the reverse response (i.e. the continuation of unloading) is soft (plastic), while reloading is nearly elastic. This work uses the same numerical system as Ref. As is well known, the early shear response of a glass depends significantly on its preparation, and especially on its degree of relaxation: a poorly relaxed glass typically displays strain hardening; a very well relaxed glass typically develops a peak stress followed by softening and usually accompanied by localization. Yet, when steady shear can be maintained beyond the initial, transient, response, all glasses are eventually driven toward a unique ensemble. This steady flow state is usually inaccessible in experiments on hard glasses due to strain localization, but is commonly observed in soft glasses, and can be easily realized in numerical simulations using periodic boundary conditions. This is illustrated in the Supplemental Material Here, as detailed in Fig. To understand the origin of this phenomenon, we now analyze steady flow configurations using the method of Refs. For each test domain and each 2α ∈ [0, 2π], we measure the average (over inclusion atoms) shear stress conjugate to the imposed pure shear deformation. The residual strength of the inclusion in this orientation, ∆τ c (2α), is the corresponding stress increment at the first instability. The left panels of Fig. In the steady flow ensemble [Fig. In continuum theories of plasticity, although this was recently challenged The evolution of χ with strain is reported in the inset of Fig. The question remains to understand how the forwardbackward asymmetry of the barrier distribution may play a role in the Bauschinger effect. For this purpose, we recall that, in AQS plasticity, yielding occurs when atomic packings are mechanically brought beyond local yield thresholds To illustrate the key role of small barriers, we take an arbitrary zero-stress configuration and report in Fig. This idea is quantitatively tested by constructing an elementary model relating the early plastic response to the barrier distribution in the initial state. Three types of loading are considered: both Bauschinger tests, along with unloading from steady state. In all three cases, the macroscopic strain increment δγ xy is taken with reference to the initial state: it grows positive for reloading, and negative, for unloading and reverse loading. The straininduced change in macroscopic stress is written as δτ xy = μδγ xy -δτ pl xy with μ 15.7 the shear modulus, and δτ pl xy the stress released by plastic events. For all the three considered cases, we looked at plastic drops within the first few percents of strain [29], and found them to typically involve isolated rearrangements, which supports that avalanche dynamics are inactive, and hence mechanical noise can be neglected. Since we seek to capture the beginning of the stress response only, we also neglect rejuvenation. We thus assume that early plasticity results exclusively from instabilities of fixed thresholds τ (2) which defines δτ xy (δγ xy ). Here, p is the distribution, in the initial state, of the barriers responding to the considered forcing, a a the typical zone size, ∆ 0 the typical strain release, and ρ is the number density of yield barriers Equation (2) provides a quantitative test of the relation between barrier tails and the Bauschinger effect because it effectively depends only on the combination ρ a 2 ∆ 0 , i.e., of a single unknown parameter that can be obtained by fitting (solid black line on Fig. Once ρ a 2 ∆ 0 is thus determined, Eq. ( The remarkable ability of our model to jointly account for these three mechanical tests supports that its core assumption (barriers are mechanically shifted by macroscopic stress up to instabilities) is quite reasonable up to strains about a few percents. This legitimates using the model itself to understand how full unloading (down to zero stress) leads to the small barrier distribution asymmetry which we have just shown to be responsible for the Bauschinger effect. We thus plot in Figs. The model remarkably predicts an inversion of small barrier tails during unloading, as observed, yet with two discrepancies. It overestimates the growth of the backward barrier density near threshold, expectedly due to the neglect of mechanical noise, which facilitates the crossing of small barriers, hence requires P (u) to essentially vanish at ∆τ c xy = 0 To test this interpretation, we compute the model predictions for Bauschinger's tests, when replacing the initial (unloaded) density P (u) by P (m) . The predicted response curves are displayed in Fig. Additionally, according to the model: (a) for any finite unloading, a gap opens in the forward barrier distribution, hence reloading is pure elastic; (b) from its very onset, unloading initiates reverse plasticity and softening. The model therefore predicts that the Bauschinger effect exists at partial unloading levels, and that the associated contrast grows with the decreasing stress. This is unambiguously confirmed by simulations This work has shown that strain induces a historydependent polarization of local yield thresholds in an amorphous solid under AQS shear. The Bauschinger effect then appears to arise because the backward-yielding barrier distribution vanishes only (and quasilinearly) at threshold, so that unloading causes reverse plasticity of growing amplitude (i.e. softening), jointly with the emergence of a pseudogap in the forward barrier distribution, guaranteeing nearly elastic reloading. Although we used a 2D model, we expect these conclusions to carry over to 3D since our main qualitative results (forward-reverse symmetry breaking, and presence of near-threshold reverse barriers) are not dimension dependent. M.L. and S.P. acknowledge the support of French National Research Agency through the JCJC project PAM-PAS under Grant No. ANR-17-CE30-0019-01. On figure In continuum theories of plasticity, the Bauschinger effect is classically interpreted as arising from "microstresses", i.e. presumed local excesses of negative stress, that would cause certain regions to be closer to reverse yielding In Fig. Let us consider a configuration taken from steady state, at the end of a plastic stress drop. Previous studies On figure SM5, we report the forward and backward mechanical response, starting at a few levels of unloading from steady flow, ranging from δγ u xy = -0.02 (down from steady state) to fully unloaded (zero stress, δγ full xy ≈ -0.045) configurations. In unloaded states, the strain measured with respect to the zero stress state is γ u xy = δγ full xy -δγ u xy . To evidence the response contrast, the re-loading data is plotted after the inversion about the point (γ u xy , τ u xy ), which amounts to plotting in all cases |τ xy -τ u xy |+τ u xy vs |γ xy -γ u xy |+γ u xy . These curves unambiguously confirm our prediction that the Bauschinger effect exists at finite unloading, and that the associated contrast between forward and backward responses grows with the increasing unloading level. * anael.lemaitre@enpc.fr