The catalytic activity of nanotubular titanium dioxide films formed during the oxidation of acetone to carbon dioxide under the action of visible light with a wavelength of 450 nm was found to be approximately 2 times higher compared to standard titanium dioxide (Degussa P25). The nanotubular films were grown by the anodization of titanium foil using an original technique. Diffuse reflectance spectra of the films are attributed to enhanced activity in the visible spectrum by the nonstoichiometry of titanium dioxide near the interface between the nanotubular film and the titanium foil substrate. Nanostructural modifications of titanium dioxide are of great research interest, particularly in the development of promising functional media for renewable energy sources (i.e., solar cells and the photochemical decomposition of water) 1-4 , selective organic synthesis with atomic precision for direct C-H functionalization of a variety of organic molecules 5 , the manufacture of efficient photoelectric transducers and memristor memory cells 6 , the development of photocatalysts for the removal of organic impurities The most promising possibility for generating oxygen vacancies in titanium dioxide is the growth of nanofilms from titanium foil, as has been achieved previously Therefore, the aim of the present work is to consider the growth of the nanotubular titanium dioxide film with nonstoichiometry near the interface with titanium foil in detail, and to study the photocatalytic activity of such films under visible light by a reliable technique -the oxidation of acetone to CO 2 . Figures According to in L is the nanotube (NT) length, w is the thickness of the NT wall, D in is the inner diameter of the NT, and y denotes the voids between nanotubes. The solid fraction SF of the nanotubular film was calculated using equation (3), as given by 18 where D out is the outer diameter of a nanotube. According to an analysis of the morphology of the films grown at different anodization times, from 15 minutes to 6 hours, nanotube lengths range from 500 nm to 2 μm, the value of the inner diameter D in of nanotubes varies from 30 to 40 nm, and the outer diameter D out varies from 45 to 55 nm. It should be noted that at a certain time points, the growth of the oxide layer slows down considerably because the current density decreases; hence, dissolution of the oxide layer becomes more intense than oxidation. In the present study, this time point was 2 hours. After this time of anodization (t A = 120 min), an effective surface for the grown array of nanotubes reaches a maximum (S eff = 415 cm 2 ) at this anodization time, and a maximum length of the nanotubes of about L = 2 μm was also achieved. According to equitation (3), the solid fraction SF of nanotubes at an anodization time of 120 min reaches a maximum value approximately 0.41. Therefore, an optimal anodization time to grow ordered nanotubular TiO 2 layers with maximum values of the L and S eff parameters under the conditions indicated above is 120 min, which is necessary for enhancing catalytic activity. Figure Figure In addition, the analysis of DRS of the nanotubular TiO 2 layer that was anodized for 120 min allowed us to determine the optical gap width by the following technique. It was assumed that the relationship between the band gap width of a semiconductor E g and the optical absorption coefficient α has a Tauc function form where h is the Planck constant, ν is the frequency of electromagnetic waves, and A is a constant. In the case of nanotubular TiO 2 layers, the exponent n = 2 for indirect allowed transitions, and n = 1⁄2 for direct ones. To find the band gap width, the diffuse reflectance spectrum was converted into a Kubelka-Munk function 2 where R ∞ is the diffuse reflection of the oxide layer relative to a white body, and it is known that F(R ∞ ) is proportional to the coefficient λ shows the Kubelka-Munk function for indirect allowed transitions and the approximation of the dependence by linear functions for a nanotubular TiO 2 layer (top) and the Degussa P25 TiO 2 nanopowder (bottom). The extrapolation with a linear function to zero absorption in the region of high photon energies shows that the maximum band gap width for a nanotubular TiO 2 layer anodized for 120 min is E g = 3.3 eV, while E g = 3.0 eV for the Degussa P25 TiO 2 nanopowder. An analysis of the Kubelka-Munk function in the region of low photon energies using a procedure reported in The Table The weight (m) of nanotubes linearly depends on their length (L) according to the formula given by equation ( where ρ is the density of the material. According to XRD data, the material in the present case is amorphous titanium dioxide with a density estimated at 3.6 g/cm A numerical comparison of the catalytic activity of different substrates (see Table A scheme that considers the expected band diagram of photooxidation is shown on Fig. In the present work, the nanotubular films with a nonstoichiometric layer in the vicinity of titanium foil were grown by the anodization of titanium foil using an original technique. The highest activity of approximately 4.2 ± 0.8 μmol/(min•g), which is nearly twofold greater compared to standard titanium dioxide (Degussa P25), was observed for nanotubular films prepared by anodization for a period of 120 min. Such a pronounced enhancement of activity may be attributed to a more efficient absorption of visible light by the films due to narrowing of the optical gap because of difference in the nonstoichiometry of titanium dioxide near the interface between Nanotubular titanium dioxide films were synthesized on a Digma setup consisting of an electrochemical cell, thermostat and power supply XRD analysis of the films and substrate was performed using CuKα 1,2 radiation on a Shimadzu XRD-7000 (Japan) diffractometer with the Bragg-Brentano recording geometry. XRD patterns were measured using the step-scan mode at Δ(2θ) = 0.02° in the 2θ angular range from 10 to 100° with a long exposure time at each step. The surface and side views of the synthesized samples were examined on a SIGMA VP (Carl Zeiss) scanning electron microscope (SEM) under high vacuum using an InLens detector. The obtained SEM images were processed with Clinker C7 software (SIAMS). DRS measurements of the films and standard were recorded on a Lambda 35 (Perkin Elmer, USA) UV-VIS spectrophotometer with a RSA-PE-20 (Labsphere) diffuse reflectance attachment. The XPS measurements were performed on a photoelectron spectrometer (SPECS Surface Nano Analysis GmbH, Germany) equipped with a PHOIBOS-150 hemispherical electron energy analyzer, a FOCUS-500 X-ray monochromator, and a XR-50 M X-ray source with a double Al/Ag anode. The core-level spectra were obtained using monochromatic Al Kα radiation (hν = 1486.74 eV) and a fixed analyser pass energy of 20 eV under ultra-high-vacuum conditions. The charge correction was performed by setting the Ti2p 3/2 peak at 459.0 eV, corresponding to titanium in TiO 2 . For detailed analysis, the spectra were fitted into several peaks after background subtraction using the Shirley method. The fitting procedure was performed using CasaXPS software. The line shapes were approximated by the product of Gaussian and Lorentz functions. Photocatalytic activity of the films and the standard was measured in a flow reactor, and reactants were identified using an FTIR spectrometer. Standards -(titanium dioxide Degussa P25 and Kronos vlp7000) were uniformly deposited on a square glass slides (S = 9 cm 2 ) from aqueous suspensions, so that the surface density was 1 mg/cm 2 . The study was performed using a light-emitting diode with a maximum wavelength of 450 nm. The other reaction condition were as follows: T = 40 °C, relative humidity of 20%, an acetone concentration of 800 ppm, and a flow rate of 60 mL/min. Oxidation was performed using the oxygen in air. The concentration of acetone was found by integrating the area of the absorption band at 1160-1265 cm -1 , and the concentration of carbon dioxide was found by integrating the area of the absorption band at 2200-2450 cm -1 . The rate of photocatalytic oxidation was calculated from the accumulation of carbon dioxide, which was a sole product of the reaction: As CO 2 is the sole product of acetone photooxidation, the rate of acetone decomposition was one third of the rate of carbon dioxide formation rate. SCIENTIFIC RepoRts | (2018) 8:9607 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-28045-1