Scattering of a time harmonic anti-plane shear wave due to either a pair of crack tips or a pair of rigid constraint tips on square lattice is considered. The two problems correspond to the so called zero-offset case of scattering due to a pair of identical Sommerfeld screens. The peculiar structural symmetry allows the reduction of coupled equations to two scalar Wiener-Hopf equations and a total of four geometrically reduced problems on lattice half-plane. Exact solution of each problem for incidence from the bulk lattice, as well as from an associated lattice waveguide, is constructed. A suitable superposition of the four expressions is used to construct the solution of the main problem. The discrete paradigm involving the wave mode incident from the waveguide is relevant for modern applications where an investigation of mechanisms of electronic and thermal transport at nanoscale remains an interesting problem. A square lattice based analogue of a canonical problem in scattering theory Within the discrete framework, the two structures, that is, a pair of parallel cracks (Neumann condition) or a pair of rigid constraints (Dirichlet condition), can be construed as the two dimensional formulation of a three dimensional structure with a pair of parallel atomically thin cracks or rigid inclusions. The latter can be envisaged for a crystal lattice having a symmetry that allows square sub-lattice planes and at the same time admits an out-of-plane displacement relative to such sub-lattices. Both cracks or rigid inclusions can extend indefinitely in one direction and are spaced apart by certain multiples of the lattice parameter. In this paper, the incident lattice wave field as well as the scattered wave field is time harmonic with the the same frequency. Moreover, it is assumed that there is a very small amount of damping present in the medium which results into a complex valued frequency with vanishingly small but positive imaginary part. The angle of incidence of the incident wave and the (real part of) incident wave frequency can be arbitrary chosen according to the passband of the considered square lattice structure An infinite square lattice, denoted by S, as a mechanical structure undergoing anti-plane shear motion, is considered. The lattice consists of identical particles, with in-plane spacing b, each having unit mass and interacting with only its four nearest neighbours through bonds with a spring constant 1 b 2 (see Let Σ k (resp. Σ c ) denote the set of all lattice sites in S associated with the crack-faces (resp. rigid constraints), that is precisely those sites which miss one nearest neighbor bond (resp. those sites whose displacement is restricted to be zero). Suppose N is a positive integer (greater than 1). Let Z denote the set of all integers. Let Z 2 denote the set Z × Z. Corresponding to a separation of 2N (resp. 2N -1), i.e., for even (resp. odd) width N w of waveguide formed between both cracks, ( With separation 2N (resp. 2N -1), i.e., even (resp. odd) N w waveguide within rigid constraints, (2.1b) For convenience, the two different parities of the width N w are represented by a parity bit ג ( ג = 1 corresponding to the odd case and ג = 0 for even). The sets Σ k , Σ ′ k , Σ c , Σ ′ c , from (2.1a) and (2.1b), can be alternatively described as the broken bonds exist between y = N, N -1 and y = -N + ג , -N -1 + ג , while the rigid constraints are located at y = N and y = -N - Remark 1 The equation of motion on sites located on the upper and lower face of a crack, respectively, is The equation of motion on sites immediately above and below a rigid constraint, respectively, is The equation of motion for the single site facing a semi-infinite rigid constraint is Indeed, for the sites on each rigid constraint u x,y = 0. In this paper, the considered structure admits two distinct kinds of incident waves: one type of incident wave is the bulk lattice wave that corresponds to the passband of the square lattice outside the waveguide formed by the two semi-infinite defects, while the second type of incident wave is the lattice waveguide mode that corresponds to the passband of the waveguide formed by the two semi-infinite defects. The role of type of incidence is emphasized by writing 'incidence from the bulk lattice' vis-a-vis 'incidence from the waveguide'. Consider the former and let u i B describe the incident wave with frequency ω and a lattice wave vector (κ x , κ y ); specifically, where A ∈ C is constant (C denotes the set of complex numbers; z ∈ C, z = z 1 + iz 2 , z 1 ∈ R, z 2 ∈ R with R as the set of real numbers). Following a traditional choice in diffraction theory while the lattice wave (2.5) is diffracted by the pair of semi-infinite defects as illustrated by Fig. With ω = ω 1 + iω 2 , ω 2 > 0, it is easy to see that the wave number of the bulk incident lattice wave u i B (2.5) is also a complex number, i.e., κ = κ 1 + iκ 2 , κ 2 > 0, which is related to the complex κ x and κ y through (2.6) and the angle of incidence Θ ∈ (-π, π] of u i B so that κ x = κ cos Θ, κ y = κ sin Θ. Due to symmetry it is enough to consider Θ ∈ (0, π]. For the assumed model, when 2) the allowed values Θ lie in a subset of (0, π]. In general, it is assumed that where S e = {0, 2, 2 √ 2} Taking cue from the continuum model Remark 3 On the lines of §3 of However, from the viewpoint of explicit solution, going beyond the existence and uniqueness of the solution in Remark 3, in the special case of the absence of stagger, due to the alignment of the defect tips (see Fig. In order to utilize the geometric symmetry in the physical structure, it is natural to consider the even/odd symmetry relative the mid-plane (shown by thick dashed line in Fig. Consider the (bulk) incident wave (2.5). Recall Fig. = Ae iκxx cos κ y y + iAe iκxx sin κ y y. (3.2b) The first term in (3.1b) (resp. (3.2b)) is even-symmetric relative to y = -1 2 (resp. y = 0) while the second term is odd-symmetric. Due to the linearity of the scattering problem, using the uniqueness of the solution stated above in Remark 3, it is clear that the scattered wave field also respects the same symmetry and admits an identical decomposition where its even-symmetric (resp. odd-symmetric) component corresponds to even-symmetric (resp. odd-symmetric) component of incident wave. For the even symmetry of the wave field (incident as well as scattered) in case of even separation, the equivalent reduction to lattice half-plane S H with free boundary condition is, thus, possible since u x,y = u x,-y-1 , y ≥ 0 leads to effectively an absence of bond between the rows located at y = 0 and y = -1. Similarly, for the odd symmetry in case of odd separation, the equivalent reduction to lattice half-plane S H with fixed boundary condition holds since u x,y = -u x,-y , y ≥ 0 leads to a zero displacement condition for the row located at y = 0. In the other two cases the problem becomes equivalent to a lattice half-plane problem with a slightly different boundary condition; the details are omitted. See Fig. The diffraction problems on infinite lattice S involving a pair of semi-infinite defects have been solved in this paper by reduction to a problem on lattice half-plane S H with a single semi-infinite defect forming a waveguide with lattice half-plane boundary at y = 0. For this purpose, consider 3) The coordinates associated with S H , including a single semi-infinite defect, are illustrated in Fig. In a general case, that includes Case H1-H4, for lattice row at the half-plane boundary (y = 0), Naturally, the scattering occurs due to a single semi-infinite defect along with an equation of motion (3.4) (boundary condition) at the edge of the half-plane S H in the presence of the incident wave (2.5). In view of the reduction (Fig. where c B is given by Above expression results after simplification of -e -iκyc B e iκy + β(e iκy + c B e -iκy ) -γ(1 The general case of the scattering problem on a lattice half-plane S H with above boundary condition (3.4) involving β and γ can be solved using the complex analysis as developed in Above sets correspond to the crack and rigid constraint provided in the schematic illustration of Fig. except on the single rigid constraint Σ= Σ H c (the equation corresponding to (2.4) holds in the sites near the constraint) or the crack-faces of the single crack Σ= Σ H k (where the equation corresponding to (2.3) holds), while at (half-plane boundary) y = 0 (3.4) holds. Let the letter H stands for the Heaviside function: H(x) = 0, x < 0 and H(x) = 1, x ≥ 0. The discrete Fourier transform In this paper, z denotes the complex variable after the application of Fourier transform. By an application of (discrete) Fourier transform (4.3) (see also other details in Appendix A), in view of the form of incident wave (3.5) and splitting of the total wave field, the condition (3.4) at y = 0 becomes Let Z b a denote the set of integers {a, a + 1, . . . , b}. Using the definition of λ (A.1) for y ≥ N and y ∈ Z N -1 0 , respectively. Note that where By (4.4) and (4.6), u F 0 can be expressed in terms of u F N -1 , thereby reducing the set of unknown functions in (4.5) to u F N and u F N -1 . For the lattice row at y = N -1 and y = N, respectively, Following commonly used notation, It is supposed that z denotes the modulus and arg z denotes the argument (with branch cut along negative real axis) for z ∈ C. Let ) -1 , z > 1, and z P ∶=e iκx , (4.10) with v i 0,N ∶=A(e iκyN + c B e -iκyNe -iκy e iκyNc B e iκy e -iκyN ). (4.12) As special case of (4.3), using the definitions . and similar definitions for for u N +1;± and u N -1;± , taking the Fourier transform of (4.9), using (4.6) and (A.2) (i.e. H = Q -2), it is found that ) Let the vertical bondlengths in cracked row (i.e., between y = N and y = N -1) be defined by which, using (4.8), is an algebraic equation (yielding . (4.17) Finally, the WH equation obtained for v N is with the structure factor using the definition of C B given by (3.6) and L k given by Remark 4 Note that as N → ∞, the strip lemma holds According to (3.6) and (4.12), with the notation λ P ∶=λ(z P ), Above can be also re-written as v i 0,N = A(e iκyN -e i(N -1)κy )(1-c B e -iκy(2N -1) ). Using the multiplicative factorization L = L + L -, the WH equation (4.19) becomes on the annulus A . An additive factorization and a standard reasoning based on the Liouville's theorem leads to the exact solution The definitions of R ± and R L are provided in Appendix A. The complex function v F , for z ∈ A , is found to be Note that (using (4.19)) 1 -L -1 = λV k ((λ -1)(V k + 1)). As an example of a closed form solution in the context of near-tip field analysis (on the lines of In case of incidence from the waveguide, the scattering occurs due to the intact bonds ahead of the waveguide. In contrast to where A is a constant and a (κ i )y refers to the eigenmode representing a propagating wave in the lattice waveguide formed by the boundary of lattice half-plane S H and the lower side of crack. Notice that a (κ i )y automatically satisfies the free boundary condition at y = N -1. For the lattice row at y = N -1 and y = N, respectively, in place of (4.9), As before, follows, as an analogue of (4.19), and the multiplicative factorization L = L + L -leads to WH equation (4.22) with the exception that the right hand side is (for The annulus A involves R -= e +κ 2 with κ replaced by -κ x , while other details remain same as in the case of bulk incidence (see analogous arguments in Note that v i 0,N denotes the expression provided in (4.12). It is easy to see that . By a reasoning based on the Liouville's theorem in place of (4.25) 3 . By the inverse Fourier transform, where C z is a rectifiable, closed, counterclockwise contour in the annulus A (recall (A.3) and Remark 5), and upon substitution of (4.24), (4.23) and (4.28), the exact expression can be constructed. By (4.17) and (4.25), u F N -1 can be found while (4.15) yields u F N . Finally, (4.5) provides the exact solution everywhere in half-plane S H . In particular, by (4.15) and (4.17), )λ(z) y-N (with y ≥ N ) (4.31) and additionally by (4.5) 2 and (4.8) (as well as using (4.7) 1 and (4.7) 2 ) (with y ∈ Z N -1 ). (4.32) For the lattice row at y = N , the equation satisfied by the scattered field is -ω 2 u x,N = △u x,y , x < 0, y = N, and - Clearly, ∑ x∈Z H(-x -1)u x+1,N z -x = zu N ;-+ zu 0,N , and Applying the Fourier transform (4.3) to (4.33), with u -1,N as an unknown complex number, with u i 0,N = A(e iκyN + c B e -iκyN ). (4.36) Analogous to the case of crack (with minor change in (4.5) 2 , replacing N by N + 1), extending the expression (4.8), it is found that and , where (4.37) Using (4.34) and (4.37), a WH equation is found for as with the structure factor F c (z; β, γ, employing definition of C B (3.6) and L c (= r h Q) Using the multiplicative factorization L = L + L -, the WH equation (4.40) becomes An additive factorization ). An application of the Liouville's theorem (using elementary estimates on the kernel as well as the boundedness of the sequence corresponding to w N (4.39)) leads to the solution of (4.40), Using (4.34) and (4.49), the expression for u N ;+ can be found by incorporating minor changes in the expressions and manipulations detailed for the infinite lattice in By (4.34), Using , and (4.46), Observe that AC 0 happens to be same as -u t -1,N l -0 by a recall of (4.46). In the case of incidence from the waveguide, the scattering occurs due to the unconstrained sites ahead of the upper boundary of waveguide. In contrast to (3.5), the incident wave is given by (4.26), where a (κ i )y refers to the eigenmode representing a propagating wave in the lattice waveguide formed by half-plane boundary and the rigid constraint. Notice that a (κ i )y automatically satisfies the fixed boundary condition at y = N. (4.34) is replaced by while in place of C, the (same) equation (4.42) results; its additive factorization holds with where l -0 = lim z→0 L -1 -(z). Finally, the solution of (4.42) is written as (4.45). Also, as detailed in the supplementary 1, it is found that In the case of incidence from the waveguide, (4.48) follows with By using (4.38) and (4.25), as well as (4.37), u F N -1 and u F N +1 can be found. In fact, an analogue of (4.5) provides the exact solution everywhere. In particular, (4.5) 1 , (4.48) yields and additionally by (4.5) 2 and (4.37) 1 (as well as using (4.38) 2 and (4.38) 3 ) Above is not surprising, since the expression of u N -1;± + u N +1;± can be used to determine u N ;-by (4.34), so that the problem is solved completely by (4.37). 5 Far field approximation in the reduced half-plane problem (a) Far field approximation in the bulk lattice In either case, i.e. crack or rigid constraint, u x,y is eventually determined by inverse Fourier transform, where C z is a rectifiable, closed, counterclockwise contour (an appropriately dented contour, most of which coincides with the unit circle T ⊂ C in case the limit ω 2 → 0 + is considered) in the annulus A (recall (A.3) and Remark 5). Following the analysis of for the incidence from the bulk lattice, the expression (5.1) can be rewritten, in case of rigid constraint, using (4.48) and (4.5) 1 for y ≥ N , as while, for the crack, using (4.25) and (4.5) 1 , for y ≥ N , ) K(e -iξ )e iRφ(ξ) e i(ξ-ξ P ) -1 In (5.3), C ξ is a contour (oriented along increasing ξ 1 ) which lies in the strip Θ}, ξ P = -κ x , and φ(ξ) = η(ξ) sin θξ cos θ, η(ξ) = -i log λ(e -iξ ), ξ ∈ S . Eventually, by an application of the results provided by u x,y P = u r x,y H(θ r -θ), and (5.4b) u r x,y = AC 0 z P K(z P )λ(z P ) y-N z x-1 P (5.4c) while for the case of crack, there is a pre-factor (1 + V(z S ) -1 ) in (5.4a) and u r x,y = (1 + V(z P ) -1 )AC 0 z P K(z P )λ(z P ) y-N z x-1 P . (5.5) Equations (5.4c) and (5.5) can be simplified further to obtain u r x,y = -u i 0,N e iκxx+iκy(y-N ) and u r x,y = -v i 0,N (1 -e -iκy ) -1 e iκxx+iκy(y-N ) , where v i 0,N is given by (4.12). Similar expressions can be obtained for incidence from the waveguide; the details are omitted. (b) Far field approximation in the lattice waveguide Due to the vanishing of the diffracted wave field in the immediate vicinity farther behind the crack or rigid constraint tip, it is natural to seek an expansion of the expression of v x,N in case of crack and w x,N in case of rigid constraint, as x → ∞. Noting the absence of the contribution of u x,N and u x,N +1 in the respective cases, the function v N ;+ and w N ;+ play the pivotal role. For the case of crack, using plus (+) part of (4.24), with its counterpart in (4.23) for incidence from the bulk lattice (denoted by s = B) while that in (4.28) for incidence from the waveguide (denoted by s = W), i.e., it is found that (5.6) Using the inverse Fourier transform (4.30) and residue calculus (5.7) For the case of rigid constraint, using plus (+) part of (4.45), with its counterpart in (4.43) for incidence from the bulk lattice (s = B) while that in (4.50) for incidence from the waveguide (s = W), i.e., it is found that )δ s,W . (5.8) Using the inverse Fourier transform (4.3) and residue calculus, noting that w x,N ∼ u x,N -1 as x → ∞, (5.6) and Q ± (z) = z -1 2 q (1 -z q z ∓1 ) yields (5.9) Using the expression of total wave field corresponding to (5.7) and (5.9), the unknown coefficients in its eigenmode expansion, deep inside the waveguide, can be obtained in a straightforward manner based on orthogonality of modes ) is found to be, for the case of crack, and, for the case of rigid constraint, . (5.11) Indeed, (5.10) and (5.11) can also be obtained directly by using the expression (4.5) 2 . 6 Back to the problem involving a pair of parallel defects Reverting back to the main motivation for this paper, i.e., the analysis of diffraction of wave incident from the bulk lattice (2.5) by a pair of parallel cracks or rigid constraints, the wave field (diffracted) modulo the reflected wave from the geometrically reduced problem can be superposed in order to construct an exact solution. For the purpose of symbolic convenience, suppose that the scattered wave field for four choices of β, γ, i.e., cases H1-H4, are denoted by u s x,y (A, κ x , κ y ; β, γ; N, k), u s x,y (A, κ x , κ y ; β, γ; N, c), where the former corresponds to a crack located at y = N, N -1 and the latter corresponds to a rigid constraint located at y = N, while the boundary of half-plane (of type depending on β, γ) is located at y = 0 in both cases and the expression of incident wave remains the same (equal to constant A at (0, 0), without the reflected wave contribution). At this point, recall §3; in particular, Equations (3.1) and (3.2) which decompose the incident wave into even-symmetric and odd-symmetric components. (a) Even separation: 2N In this case only the cases H2 and H3 are possible. The parity bit is ג = 0. It is easy to see that the scattered wave field solution is given by u s x,y = u s x,y ( 1 2 A, κ x , κ y ; for case H2)+u s x,y ( 1 2 A, κ x , κ y ; for case H3). In particular, for the crack problem, and for the rigid constraint problem, u s x,y = u s x,y ( 1 2 A, κ x , κ y ; 0, -1; N, c) + u s x,y ( 1 2 A, κ x , κ y ; 0, 1; N, c). (6.3) (b) Odd separation: 2N -1 In this case only the cases H1 and H4 are possible. The parity bit is ג = 1. Due to the choice of boundary location in case of H1, the value of N needs to mapped properly. It is easy to see that the scattered wave field solution is given by u s x,y = u s x,y-1 ( 1 2 Ae iκy , κ x , κ y ; for case H1) + u s x,y ( 1 2 A, κ x , κ y ; for case H4). In particular, for the crack problem, and for the rigid constraint problem, The construction by superposition provided in this section can be used to obtain the far-field approximation in conjunction with the expressions derived in §5. The results based on numerical scheme (summarized in Appendix of In this paper, an analysis of a discrete analogue of diffraction by a pair of semi-infinite cracks or rigid constraints is presented following the analysis of As the separation N → ∞, naturally, the field near one of the tip of the two defects in two crack or two constraint problem reduces to that of a discrete Sommerfeld problem Further, within in the geometrically reduced diffraction problem on the lattice half-plane, a limiting case coincides with that studied recently In place of the infinite square lattice, if the pair of semi-infinite defects are placed symmetrically on a square lattice waveguide, then the same formulation can be extended to what are known as trifurcated waveguides Last but not the least, there remains an issue of the continuum limit. For the considered case of positive imaginary part of ω, it is left as an exercise (one possibility involves the tools that are used in 