Symmetry indicators have proven to be extremely helpful in identifying topologically non-trivial crystalline insulators using symmetry-group representations of their Bloch states. An extension of this approach to superconducting systems requires defining an appropriate atomic limit for Bogoliubov-de-Gennes Hamiltonians. Here, we introduce such a notion of atomic limit and derive a Z 2 d -valued symmetry indicator for inversionsymmetric superconductors of d dimensions. This indicator allows for a refined topological classification including higher-order phases for systems in the superconducting symmetry classes D and DIII. We further elucidate the bulk-boundary correspondence of these phases using Dirac surface theories. Requiring only the normal-state band structure and the superconducting order-parameter symmetry as an input, this indicator is well suited for a search of topological superconductors using first-principles calculations. Introduction -Unconventional, and in particular topological superconductors (TSC) are of fundamental research interest, due to the existence of gapless Majorana modes on their boundaries Conveniently, Majorana modes are the only anyons that admit a description in terms of free fermions. Thus, a description of TSCs in terms of quadratic Bogoliubov-de-Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonians suffices for most purposes. These Hamiltonians always posses particle-hole symmetry (PHS) by construction. In the following, we are interested in topological phases of generic spin-orbit coupled TSCs with or without additional time-reversal symmetry (TRS), which correspond to symmetry classes D and DIII in the Altland Zirnbauer (AZ) scheme Two recent developments motivate our study: First, the bulk-boundary correspondence for topological crystalline insulators and superconductors is very rich, including corner states in 2D and hinge as well as corner states in 3D, instead of edge and surface states, respectively. Systems with such a generalized bulk-boundary correspondence are termed higher-order topological insulators/superconductors The basic idea of symmetry indicators is to quantify the possible mismatch between the real space representation in terms of localized Wannier orbitals and the momentum representation of (Bloch) bands In order to adapt an analogous approach of symmetry indicators for TSCs that can be applied within a DFT approach, one faces several challenges. First, the band structure of a material in the superconducting phase is not available from DFT calculations. A useful symmetry indicator, thus, should be defined in terms of the symmetry representations of the normal-metal bands in addition to the order-parameter symmetry, rather than those of the BdG Hamiltonian. Further, on a practical level, the fact that the electronic spectrum is generically not bounded from above means that the particlehole-doubled BdG band structure is not bounded from below. These problems have indeed been addressed in previous work In this work, we show that the irreducible representations of the BdG band structure alone are insufficient to formulate a comprehensive symmetry indicator for inversion-protected topological superconductors. Instead, we introduce an atomic limit for superconductors in terms of the normal metal bands and with respect to that we define the symmetry indicators for higher-order inversion-symmetric TSC in classes D and DIII. Unlike the symmetry indicators for topological insula- tors, these indicators are Z 8 valued in 3D. We show that the symmetry indicators are consistent with the existing topological invariants for the strong TSC phases and agree with the previous results regarding the Fermi surface topology Main result -Our main finding is that for odd-parity order parameters, the symmetry indicator is a Z 2 d valued strong topological invariant for d-dimensional weak-coupling superconductors protected by inversion symmetry in symmetry class ξ ∈ {D, DIII}. Here, n ± k,N is the number of occupied states with inversion eigenvalue ±1 at the time-reversal-symmetric momentum (TRIM) k in the normal-state band structure where ν d,n,ξ ∈ {0, 1} are Z 2 indices for n-th order topology in d dimensions. For ν d,n,ξ = 1, the 'minimal' topology of the system is an n-th order topological phase, as illustrated in Tab. I Atomic limit and symmetry indicators -While a quadratic Hamiltonian describing a non-interacting insulator is written in terms of electronic wave functions and thus possesses a natural atomic limit, no such limit exists for BdG Hamiltonians. In the latter, Bogoliubov quasi-particles describe electronhole superpositions. Our strategy is thus to find a BdG Hamiltonian, where ∆ k → 0 does not close a gap and whose normal state possesses an AL in the sense of Ref. Since for a quadratic Hamiltonian (with the chemical potential μ equal to F , the Fermi energy), the normal-state band structure has to be bounded from below, we can move μ below the lowest band to find such an AL Hamiltonian (we write in the following μ = -∞). To quantify the mismatch between the two Hamiltonians, we introduce a symmetry indicator as the difference in the number of irreducible representations of the occupied BdG bands n α k,BdG | μ= F (analog to κ 1 where α refers to the inversion eigenvalue. The prefactors r D = 1 and r DIII = 1/2 guarantee that κ d,ξ ∈ Z. To calculate this difference, we first need to understand the irreducible BdG band representations. Given the normal-state Hamiltonian H k and the (mean-field) superconducting order parameter ∆ k , the superconducting state can be described using the BdG Hamiltonian Under any element of the generating point group, g ∈ G, this Hamiltonian transforms as a scalar with transformations given by U BdG Note that χ g ∈ U (1) is the eigenvalue of the order parame- in other words the character of the irreducible representation to which ∆ k belongs In this work, we focus on systems with inversion symmetry I. At TRIMs, each eigenstate of H BdG k then either belongs to an even or odd irreducible representation, corresponding to an inversion eigenvalue α k = ±1. Further, the order parameter is also either even or odd under inversion, meaning χ I = ±1. For the aforementioned construction, we then need n α k,BdG , the number of the occupied BdG bands transforming as the irreducible representation α at TRIM k. These transformation matrices can be deduced from the normal state transformation properties by assuming we are in the weak-coupling limit. In this limit, the transformation properties of the BdG bands at the TRIMs do not change for ∆ k → 0. Then, the transformation behavior of the BdG bands is entirely specified by the normal state properties and the irreducible representation of the order parameter. It follows from Eq. ( For the difference in the number of irreducible representations in the BdG bands between μ = F and μ = -∞ as defined in Eq. ( Let us inspect the stability of κ d,ξ against adding trivial AL bands below the Fermi level. Such additions should not change the topology of the system. Specifically, in 1D adding a fully filled trivial band below the chemical potential, in other words a band with r ξ k (n + kn - k ) = 2n (n ∈ Z), will change the index by 2n, making κ 1,ξ a Z 2 quantity. In general, One-dimensional case -To illustrate the importance of an AL for symmetry indicators of BdG bands, we consider the example of a 1D chain of spinless fermions. The normal-state Hamiltonian in momentum space is given by a tight-binding nearest-neighbor model with dispersion ε k = -2t cos(k)μ with hopping parameter t. For spinless fermions, the or- Possible inversion eigenvalues α k at TRIMs k = {0, π} for the single-band BdG Hamiltonian Eq. ( der parameter is necessarily odd, meaning Then, the BdG Hamiltonian reads Hamiltonian ( and belongs to class D. In 1D, class D is characterized by a Z 2 topological invariant. Note that this invariant does not depend on the symmetry properties of the underlying normalstate bands or the presence and nature of fully occupied bands. In particular, the system is topologically non-trivial if an odd number of Fermi surfaces exists While we have only discussed the case without TRS above, adding TRS in the presence of inversion simply doubles the number of bands. Since both cases in 1D have a Z 2 topological invariant, κ 1,ξ fully captures the topological nature of the phase for inversion symmetric systems. Two-dimensional case. -In 2D without TRS, class D, the strong topological phase hosts chiral Majorana edge states and according to the AZ classification is characterized by a Chern number C ∈ Z. Thus, the indicator only identifies directly first-order topological phases with odd C, Cmod2 = ν 2,1,D . In class DIII, helical Majorana edge states exist in the topological phase and the Z 2 invariant characterizing this first-order topological phase When ν 2,1,D = 0, the system may still be in a strong topological phase with even but nonzero Chern number. Assuming C = 0 instead, ν 2,2,D = 1 indicates a second order topological superconductor with two corner Majorana states in an inversion-symmetric geometry. This higher-order phase is thus the 'minimal' topology required by the index ν 2,2,D = 1. One can obtain such a superconductor from a strong topological superconductor with ν 2,1,DIII = 1 by introducing a TRS-breaking mass term, while preserving inversion symmetry A TRS second-order TSC is indicated by ν 2,2,DIII = 1 and features Kramers pairs of Majorana corner modes. It can be obtained by adding the fully occupied band of a Z 2 topological insulator in symmetry class AII to an otherwise trivial odd-parity superconductor. Three-dimensional case -The strong TSC in 3D with TRS and PHS belong to class DIII and are characterized by the winding number W ∈ Z When ν 3,1,DIII = 0, the system may still be in a strong topological phase with even but nonzero winding number W . Assuming W = 0 instead, ν 3,2,DIII = 1 indicates a second order topological superconductor with a Kramer's pair of helical hinge Majoranas in an inversion-symmetric geometry. Further, ν 3,2,DIII = 0 but ν 3,3,DIII = 1 indicates a thirdorder topological superconductor with a Kramer's pair of Majoranas corner modes. These higher-order phases are again the minimal topology compatible with the respective values of the symmetry indicators. The second and third-order phases can be obtained by adding the fully occupied band of, respectively, a 3D Z 2 topological insulator in symmetry class AII and a higher-order topological insulator with κ 1 mod 4 = 2 to an otherwise trivial odd-parity superconductor. We close by constructing examples of the bulk-boundary correspondence of all higher-order phases in class D and DIII using surface Dirac theories. For this purpose, we follow Ref. where τ are Pauli matrices in particle-hole space and n r is the normal vector to the surface. Furthermore, the surface theory possess PHS, TRS and inversion, which on the surface are given by T = τ y K, P r = ∓ n r • τ τ y K, and I = ∓τ 0 . Given a fixed bulk normal-state inversion eigenvalue of the occupied band at Γ, the sign of the winding number determines the sign of the induced inversion symmetry on the surface We can arrive at all possible higher-order phases by adding copies with opposite winding numbers (class DIII) and breaking TRS (class D). A second-order TSC in class D is obtained by adding to Eq. ( The class DIII second-order phase is built by taking two copies with the opposite winding numbers W , H = H + ⊕H -, which has W = 0. The surface theory of such a system can be written as where the Pauli matrices γ act on the +/grading. We can add a mass term M r γ x , which preserves all the symmetries of the Hamiltonian, namely PHS, TRS and inversion, iff M r = -M -r . For the surface theory, these symmetries are represented by T = τ y K, P r = -γ z n r •τ τ y K and I = -γ z , respectively. This form of I follows from the requirements W = 0 and ν 3,2,DIII = 1. The fact that M r is an odd function on the surface enforces again two domains with opposite mass sign. A gapless Kramer's pair of helical Majorana modes is bound to the domain wall, which is an inversion symmetric path on the surface. The third order TSC in D class can be obtained from this second order TSC in class DIII by adding a TRS breaking mass term Mr γ y with Mr = -M-r to the Hamiltonian, which would correspond to applying a magnetic field, for instance. This gaps the helical modes except for two inversionrelated points on the surface, where two corner Majorana modes remain. Finally to build third order TSC with TRS we need to combine four copies of H ± which total to W = 0, i.e., H + ⊕ H -⊕ H + ⊕ H -. The surface theory of this TSC is given by where we introduced the Pauli matrices σ which act on the additional grading introduced as compared to Eq. (9). This system has PHS, TRS and inversion given be T = τ y σ 0 K, P r = -γ z n r • τ τ y σ 0 K and I = -γ z σ 0 . This form of I follows from the requirements W = 0, ν 3,2,DIII = 0, and ν 3,3,DIII = 1. Since each of the four constituent strong TSC of the DIII class is characterized by a Majorana surface cone, we can combine these strong TSC in the pairs by adding a mass term of the form M r γ x τ 0 σ 0 , with M r = -M -r , which gaps out the surface states, but leaves two inversion-symmetric gapless lines carrying a helical Majorana mode each. Then, another mass term given by Mr γ y σ y with Mr = -M-r can be added, which anticommutes with the Hamiltonian and preserves all its symmetries, to gap out the Majorana edge modes but leave the Majorana corner modes at inversion-symmetric points. Conclusions -We presented a unified symmetry indicator to determine the topology of spin-orbit coupled TSCs with inversion symmetry and odd-parity order parameter. The indicator can be evaluated from the knowledge of the normal state band structure alone and describes in particular all higher order topological superconductors with hinge and corner Majorana modes. Our analysis is based on the definition of a physical atomic limit for superconductors and can be generalized to other spatial symmetries besides inversion. Note Added -In completing this work we became aware of Ref. 