We investigate to what extent one can use a thermodynamic description of turbulent flow as a source of stochastic kinetic energy for three-dimensional self-assembly of magnetically interacting macroscopic particles. We confirm that the speed of the objects in the flow field generated in our system obeys the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, and their random walk can be defined by a diffusion coefficient following from the Einstein relation. However, we discovered that the analogy with Brownian dynamics breaks down when considering the directional components of the velocity. For the vectorial components, neither the equipartition theorem, nor the Einstein relation is obeyed. Moreover, the kinetic energy estimated from the random walk of individual objects is one order of magnitude higher than the value estimated from Boltzmann statistics on the interaction between two spheres with embedded magnets. These results show that introducing stochastic kinetic energy into a selfassembly process by means of turbulent flow can to a great extent be described by standard thermodynamic theory, but anisotropies and the specific nature of the interactions need to be taken into account. Self-assembly is the autonomous organization of objects into a structure without human intervention In all varieties of and approaches to self-assembly, three elements are common and critical: the characteristics of the individual objects, such as their mutual binding forces and geometrical shapes, the environment which may promote assembly with templates or other forms of guidance, and the disturbing forces which oppose the binding forces and thus allow the objects to explore the associated energy landscape and find a global minimum of the energy In our earlier paper In self-assembly with very small objects, such as atoms or molecules, the thermal energy kT is adequate because according to the equipartition theorem it corresponds to signif-icant random (Brownian) motion (kT = 1 3 m v 2 ). However, for larger objects, roughly above 1 μm, thermal energy can no longer provide a sufficient disturbing force Even though shaking in the self-assembly of micro-meter sized objects has the same function as the thermal energy in the self-assembly of atoms or molecules, there are very distinct differences. In the first place, shaking is a dissipative process. When we stop shaking, the random motion of the objects comes to a halt. The energy we provide to the system is partially transferred to the objects, but at the cost of losing energy into heat along the way. Secondly, shaking introduces a directionality into the disturbing forces. It is impossible to shake in all directions simultaneously. One relies on random processes, such as collisions, to randomize the direction of the forces. Since shaking is a dissipative process, the effect of randomization has a limited lifetime. Therefore, a signature of the initial direction of shaking will always be present. Both deviations from thermal energy, i.e. dissipation and directional dependence, are present in all experiments where shaking is involved. Our macroscale setup provides an easy way to study the nature of the disturbing forces. The outcome is of general importance for the study and implementation of self-assembly. Shaking the support on which the objects are placed is a common method to provide disturbing forces in a selfassembly system. Friction is used to transmit the energy to the object, as first shown by Penrose In three dimensions, objects are shaken Instead of applying mechanical forces, one can apply disturbing energy by an external magnetic field to magnetic objects In the examples above, the focus of the research was on the products of the self-assembly process, not on the disturbing force itself. It is tempting to compare the energy provided to the system by some way of shaking to thermal energy. For example, one can analyse the distribution of the products generated by the self-assembly process by Boltzmann statistics. Attempts have been made to introduce an "effective temperature" We are interested in three-dimensional self-assembly as a manufacturing method for next generation electronics Scanning electron microscopy and other microscopy images often show the result of micro-or nanoscopic selfassembly, but they do not reveal the process and dynamics behind it. We cannot see how the structure formed or which pathways were taken. In situ transmission electron microscopy reveals self-assembly events rather than the entire self-assembly process itself and its underlying dynamics Self-assembly often includes rapid phenomena, such as protein folding or supramolecular or nanoparticle selfassembly, which can hardly be observed directly at the microscopic level. Via macroscopic experimentation we can overcome these obstacles by using representative particles and an analogous macroscopic self-assembly reactor, such as the one used in the research presented here. The dynamics of the selfassembly process appears much slower at the macroscopic level and can therefore be readily observed. One aspect common to many three-dimensional selfassembly systems is that the micro-or macroscopic particles stand or sediment onto the bottom of the vessel when there is no agitation. Self-assembly studies as a function of the strength of the disturbing forces are consequently complicated. We therefore designed a system where the function of levitating the objects is separated to a large extent from the function of disturbing the system Levitation is achieved by introducing a flow opposite to the force of gravity, counterbalancing the drop velocity of the objects in the fluid. Agitation is achieved by intentionally introducing a turbulent flow into the system by an asymmetric fluid inflow. As an example, Figure In this system, we thoroughly analysed the motion of the individual objects The speed of the objects obeys the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, and there is a well defined diffusion constant, so that the Einstein relation kT = f D is obeyed. Hence the concept of an effective temperature has merit. However, we also found that there are limitations to the validity of the thermodynamic description. For instance, the speed distribution and the diffusion coefficient were not dependent on the mass of the objects. Moreover, the kinetic energy determined from the random motion was considerably higher than the energy determined from the interaction between magnetic objects using Boltzmann statistics. We suspect that the dissipative nature of turbulence lies at the origin of this discrepancy. In this paper, we present a thermodynamic description of self-assembly processes that use turbulence as source of disturbing forces. We particularly investigate the effect of the strength of the turbulence and analyse the directional components of the random At maximum turbulence only single spheres appear, whereas at minimum turbulence the lowest energy structure (a 12-sphere ring) appears. The local magnetic forces of each individual sphere interact as the spheres explore the energy landscape in order to find the configuration of lowest energy. A video is available in the Supporting Information. (The image of the thermometer to the right of each image was adapted with permission from the version by ARTunchained) motion of the objects. The analysis of particle trajectories and two-particle interactions was introduced in where n(x, σ x ) is the normal distribution and N(x, σ x ) is the cumulative normal distribution. For x, we can substitute the y or z coordinate. the standard deviation of the displacement is denoted by σ x and the variance σ 2 x can be related to the diffusion coefficient along a coordinate in one direction by In where again x can be substituted with y or z. In thermodynamic theory, the disturbing forces are described in terms of the thermal energy kT . In the case of shaking, one can describe the disturbing forces in terms of an 'effective' temperature The self-assembly reactor was introduced in Schematic front-and top-views of the reactor are shown in Figure The movie demonstrates that there is always turbulence in the reactor. This is in agreement with the speed of the flow and the diameter of the tube. We estimate the Reynolds number of the flow to be in the order of 18 × 10 3 , which is indeed substantially above the laminar flow regime. When the flow is fully asymmetric, the turbulence increases and swirls are visible in the flow. At the experimental flow rate it takes only around 0.5 s for the water front to travel the 18 cm from the bottom to the top of the reactor. This observation accounts for that turbulence and the vortice size distribution seem not to vary with increasing reactor height. We expect the turbulence in the cylinder to be proportional to the asymmetry in the inflow. The inflow is determined by the angular position of the four valves. To analyze the relation between valve settting and flow, we measured the flow through the cylinder as a function of opening angle θ of one single valve, see Figure where f (θ ) is the speed of the flow of the water through the valves controlled during the experiments, i.e. at opening angle θ . This way, at minimum turbulence, when all valves are fully open, the flow asymmetry is defined to be 0, whereas at maximum turbulence, when three valves are closed, the flow asymmetry is defined to be 1. The particles were identical, as in The terminal drop velocity v t of the particles, measured in a column of water without flow, was 37 ± 1 cm/s, from which we estimate the drag coefficient C d to be 0.35 ± 0.06, which is in agreement with the theoretical value of 0.39 where ρ fluid is the density of water (998 ± 3 kg/m 3 ). At this flow velocity, the value of the effective drag coefficient is 35 ± 4 g/s. In the experiment, we set the flow velocity of the water to 18.6 ± 0.3 m/s. The flow velocity was lower than the terminal drop velocity of the sphere in order to avoid having the spheres touch the top net and get trapped there. Since during the measurement of the position, the sphere is levitating in front of the camera, we employ the terminal drop velocity, rather than the flow velocity, for the estimate of the effective drag coefficient. Two synchronized cameras were used for video recordings, as described in To determine the diffusion coefficient, the trajectory of the particle in the turbulent flow was observed, as described in To validate this process, we determined the diffusion coefficient for sets of data with varying numbers of trajectories. The result is shown in Figure From this measurement, we conclude that for a 1σ confidence limit of 5 % of the estimated value, we need at least 570 trajectories. We obtain approximately 80 trajectories of 0.5 s duration per minute. The total measurement time per experiment should therefore be at least 7 min. To be on the safe side, the duration of the experiments in this study was increased to 15 min. Even though the estimate of the overall diffusion coefficient is well behaved, we observe a large scatter on the estimates of the diffusion coefficient of the individual components, see figure 8. This scatter cannot be explained by the uncertainty on the estimates themselves. We conclude therefore that for the individual components, there must be other sources of uncertainty. For linear fits to the individual components (figures 8 and 12 bottom), we therefore ignore the error estimates in the linear fits. We observed the movement of a single sphere and the interaction between two spheres in the reactor, and determined the stochastic kinetic energy as a function of the flow asymmetry, applying the methods introduced in We observed the influence of turbulence on the kinetic behaviour of a single particle in terms of the most probable speed v p and its diffusion coefficient, as well as the interaction between two particles. From these observations, we determined The distributions in the speed of a single particle for different settings of the flow asymmetry in the reactor show a Maxwell-Boltzmann-like distribution. The distribution was obtained via a kernel density estimation using a Gaussian kernel with σ = 1 cm s -1 . Increased turbulence leads to a higher average speed. the relation between the flow asymmetry and the stochastic kinetic energy. Figure The measured distribution of the speed was fitted to a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, as described in The diffusion coefficient was estimated by fitting a confined random walk model to the measured average squared displacement As described in Figure The flow asymmetry is a parameter specific to our setup. To generalize the results, we analysed the ratio between the diffusion coefficient and the speed. Equating the stochastic kinetic energy obtained from the diffusion coefficient to that obtained using the velocity, we obtain D = 1 2 τ v v 2 p , where τ v = m * / f is the characteristic time separating the ballistic regime from the Brownian motion regime slope of the fit is 68 ± 1 ms, which is close to the value of 1 2 τ v =83 ± 11 ms and very similar to the value 0.1 s reported by Ilievski et al. for 1 cm blocks in a turbulent flow The water flow is directed from the bottom to the top in the reactor in order to counteract the action of gravity on the particles. It is therefore expected that the vertical (z) component of the motion of the particle deviates from the horizontal (x and y) components. Additionally, there might be an asymmetry in the xy-plane as well, since the flow is injected asymmetrically at high turbulence. These effects are present both in the velocity distribution as well as in the diffusion coefficient. This value is close to the theoretical prediction of 1 2 τ v =83 ± 11 ms. Figure Figure The kinetic energy can be derived from the velocity and diffusion coefficients for the individual x-, yand z-components as shown in Figure The z component of the velocity has a significantly lower distribution width than the horizontal components. (kT = f D, bottom). Of course these graphs show similar trends as Figures Using the velocity distribution, the stochastic kinetic energy is equal in the horizontal plane within the measurement error. However, for flow asymmetries below 0.5, the energy in the vertical direction is less than one-half of that in the horizontal directions. When using the diffusion coefficient to determine the directional dependence of the stochastic energy, the scatter in the estimates is higher even though the fits are still precise (error bars). The estimated values of the stochastic kinetic energy are in the same range as that of the estimates based on the velocity, especially at low flow asymmetry. The analysis suggests that an estimate based on the velocity distribution is to be preferred when considering the directional dependence, as it suffers less from scatter. FIG. Our experiments clearly show that the particle velocity, diffusion coefficient, and stochastic kinetic energy increase with the degree of turbulence. When three of the four inlet valves are gradually closed, the inflow becomes more asymmetric and the turbulence increases. This process adds to the turbulence created by the geometry of the reactor. Creating inflow asymmetry is a practical way to change turbulence and mimic temperature changes at the micro-and nano-scale. The analogy between turbulent motion and thermal fluctuation is quite intriguing. There are, however, at least two aspects where the analogy between turbulence and thermal fluctuation does not hold: isotropy and spatial frequency power density. The experiments show that one cannot ignore the directionality of the turbulent flow field. In analogy with temperature fluctuation, we would have to conclude that the temperature in the system is anisotropic. Judging from the observations on the directional dependence, an increase in turbulence has a more pronounced influence on the vertical direction. The differences in the velocity, diffusion coefficient, and stochastic kinetic energy between the xand y-directions are mild, especially compared to those of the z-component. The latter also has a higher range between its minimum and maximum values at the extremes of the flow asymmetry. The anisotropy of the stochastic kinetic energy is more pronounced when derived from the Einstein relation than it is when derived from the velocity. This might have to do with the nature of the velocity: the theory of diffusion assumes a purely random process. A bias might affect how this velocity contributes to the observed displacement over time, and in this way to the validity of Equation There is a region around the flow asymmetry minima of 0.5, in which the directional dependence is a minimum. We are confident that the directional differences between the variables can be minimized by proper technical reconstruction of the self-assembly reactor. Altering the number and location of the inlet tubes and valves might be one possible option to create a more homogeneous three-dimensional flow field in which multi-particle self-assembly can be realized. The value of the stochastic kinetic energy determined via the two-particle experiments is an order of magnitude lower than that obtained from the diffusion or velocity of a single particle. We believe that this is because a greater part of the provided energy contributes rather to the motion of the single particles than to their close interaction. There is a vortex hierarchy in turbulent flow (Richardson cascade Furthermore, we assume that the asymmetrical introduction of the turbulent flow causes a macroscopic swirl with a diameter similar to the diameter of the tank at the bottom of the cylinder. We think that the swirl moves upward in a screwlike manner and may actually represent the largest vortice in a Richardson cascade. We observed how a stream of air bubbles moved upwards in a screw-like manner with a screw-diameter approaching the diameter of the tank as they were introduced at the bottom of the self-assembly reactor. Due to the Richardson cascade, there is an energy transfer from larger vortices to smaller ones. The energy is not uniformly distributed over the length scales, and drops off at shorter length scales The observed deviations from standard thermodynamics may not specific to our experimental configuration, but may be present in all self-assembly experiments where some form of agitation other than thermal energy is used. The directionality in stochastic kinetic energy may lead to an anisotropic growth of the assemblies, which could even be desirable. On the other hand, if the assemblies are free to rotate in the fluid, the growth may be isotropic. However, the fact that the stochastic kinetic energy decreases with decreasing length scale can become an obstacle. If the assembly grows, the disturbing forces increase as well. This will limit the maximum size of the achievable assemblies. There are two measures one can take. In the first place, one can gradually reduce the power of the shaking over time, so that as the assembly increases in size, the disturbing force generated by the shaking action remains the same. Alternatively, one can ensure that when the assembly grows, the forces that are required to break it increase as well. In onedimensional assemblies, such as the lines and rings in Figure We have analysed the movement of centimeter-sized spheres in a vertically biased turbulent flow field, and compared this movement with the thermodynamic theory for Brownian motion. We found that the speed of a single sphere in the turbulent flow obeys the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution and its movement can be described by a confined random walk with a well defined diffusion coefficient, identical to that of the Brownian motion of a sub-micron particle in a fluid. We created an asymmetric inlet flow, which introduces an additional turbulence on top of the turbulence resulting from the high velocity of the flow and the geometry of the reactor. With increasing asymmetry, both the diffusion coefficient and the mode of the distribution of the speed increase. In analogy to the thermodynamic thermal energy term kT , we defined a stochastic kinetic energy, using either the effective mass of the sphere and the the mode of the speed distribution ( 1 2 m * v 2 p ) or the drag coefficient and diffusion coeffient ( f D). These values equal within the measurement error over the entire range of turbulence and increase from 25 to 200 μJ with increasing asymmetry in the inlet flow. The analogy with Brownian motion breaks down when considering the vectorial components of the velocity. The water flow is upwards, to compensate for the drop velocity of the spheres. As a result, at low turbulence, the vertical component of the velocity of the sphere is twice as large as that in the lateral direction. This difference disappears at higher turbulence. In contrast, the diffusion coefficient in the vertical direction is approximately equal to that of the lateral directions at low turbulence, but is higher by almost a factor of 3 at high turbulence. So neither the equipartion theorem nor the Einstein relation are obeyed when considering the individual components. The analogy with standard thermodynamics also breaks down when comparing the stochastic kinetic energies for different experiments. We estimated the stochastic kinetic energy from the interaction between two spheres with embedded magnets. This energy again increases with increasing turbulence, but is an order of magnitude lower than the value obtained from the single sphere experiment (2.1 up to 13.6 μJ). For self-assembly studies, this value of the stochastic kinetic energy is more relevant. These results show that the shaking due to a turbulent flow can, to a certain extent, be described by standard thermodynamic theory, but directional dependencies should be taken into account, and one cannot simply translate the value of the stochastic kinetic energy from one expermental configuration to another. This result is of importance for the self-assembly of objects with sizes above the micrometer range, where thermal motion is no longer effective and some form of shaking needs to be applied to drive the system into the minimum energy state.