Standard flavors of density-functional theory (DFT) calculations are known to fail in describing anions, due to large self-interaction errors. The problem may be circumvented by using localized basis sets of reduced size, leaving no variational flexibility for the extra electron to delocalize. Alternatively, a recent approach exploiting DFT evaluations of total energies on electronic densities optimized at the Hartree-Fock (HF) level has been reported, showing that the self-interaction-free HF densities are able to lead to an improved description of the additional electron, returning affinities in close agreement with the experiments. Nonetheless, such an approach can fail when the HF densities are too inaccurate. Here, an alternative approach is presented, in which an embedding environment is used to stabilize the anion in a bound configuration. Similarly to the HF case, when computing total energies at the DFT level on these corrected densities, electron affinities in very good agreement with experiments can be recovered. The effect of the environment can be evaluated and removed by an extrapolation of the results to the limit of vanishing embedding. Moreover, the approach can be easily applied to DFT calculations with delocalized basis sets, e.g. plane-waves, for which alternative approaches are either not viable or more computationally demanding. The proposed extrapolation strategy can be thus applied also to extended systems, as often studied in condensed-matter physics and materials science, and we illustrate how the embedding environment can be exploited to determine the energy of an adsorbing anion -here a chloride ion on a metal surface -whose charge configuration would be incorrectly predicted by standard density functionals. Charge-transfer processes are of paramount importance in many technological and biological processes The issue is linked to the approximate form of the unknown exchange-correlation functional in DFT, which contains a spurious fraction of the electron-electron self-repulsion, also known as self-interaction error (SIE). In this work, we propose an alternative scheme that allows stabilizing localized anion configurations within a DFT framework. By exploiting a continuum embedding environment that favors electron localization, we are able to self-consistently compute anion densities and total energies for properly bound systems. The artificial contribution that derives from the embedding can be removed through extrapolation to zero embedding intensity, allowing to estimate EAs in the absence of the environment. Specifically, we suggests two possible embedding schemes. In the first one, a dielectric embedding, analogous to the one employed in implicit solvation models to mimic the solvent response, provides an electrostatic stabilization of bound states. In the second scheme, an ad-hoc confining potential favors electron localization by providing instead a de-stabilizing contribution for the delocalized states. The two schemes provide very similar results, with the MAE computed for the G2-1 EA data set The article is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the embedding procedure and it presents the computational parameters employed in the calculations. Results on the EA extrapolation for the various embedding schemes investigated, and the comparison with previous approaches is then reported in Section 3.1. The application of the dielectric extrapolation method to extended systems is then illustrated in Section 3.2. Finally, the conclusions are presented in Section 4. We first consider a dielectric embedding, as typically employed in continuum solvation models to mimic the electrostatic response of the solvent on the embedded solvated system. Namely, an interface function s(r) is defined in terms of some of the system's degrees of freedom and chosen to smoothly vary between the value of 1 in the volume where the embedded system's degrees of freedom are present and the value of 0 in the embedding region. In particular, we have tested here two possible cavity definitions: the electron density-based function from the revised self-consistent continuum solvation (SCCS) model where t (x) is a smooth step function that goes from 0 to 1, with continuous first and second derivatives: The interface is defined in terms of two physically intuitive parameters, ρ max and ρ min , that control how close to the embedded system the interface lies: the smaller their values, the further away from the embedded system is the interface. The interface function s(r) is used to construct the embedding dielectric function ε(r), which in the SCCS model takes the following form: The second cavity definition exploits instead interlocking spheres centered on the system's nuclei with a smooth error-function profile: where the r a quantity defines the radius of the sphere and the ∆ parameter regulates the smoothness of the transition. Following the original SSCS model, we have set r a = αr vdW a , where r vdW a is the van der Waals radius of the element corresponding to the atom a as defined in the universal force field library, Similarly to Equation 3, also Equation 5 allows to recover the vacuum permittivity (ε = 1) inside the quantum-mechanical region, where s(r) is equal to one, and a constant permittivity ε 0 in the surrounding volume, where s(r) assumes a value of zero. The electrostatic energy of the embedded system will be expressed as where E sys and E pol can be seen as the electrostatic contributions that arise from the interactions within the embedded system and between the system and the embedding environment, respectively, ρ (r) = ρ el (r) + a ρ ion a (r -R a ) is the total (electron and nuclear) charge density of the embedded system and the electrostatic potential φ (r) = φ sys (r) + φ pol (r) is the solution of the generalized Poisson equation: The modified electrostatic potential tends to stabilize localized anions' electronic densities: indeed, it provides an electrostatic stabilization, which is greater for charged and dipolar systems. In the dielectric embedding we can play with the intensity of the embedding (in this case the dielectric permittivity of the environment ε 0 ) to fictitiously stabilize the electronic density of difficult (unbound) systems and extrapolate their energies for vanishing embedding (i.e. for ε 0 → 1). The second embedding environment is a confining potential contribution to be added to the Kohn-Sham potential. In particular, such contribution may be defined as proportional to the value of the complementary of the interface function. The corresponding energy contribution can be written as: where the confining constant κ is a positive tunable parameter, which acts as a destabilization factor for the electronic density that spills out of the interface. The corresponding addition to the Kohn-Sham potential is given by The last term naturally vanishes if the interface function is not an explicit function of the system electron density. This is the case, for instance, if the cavity from the SSCS model (Equation Electron affinities (EAs) have been computed as energy differences between the neutral species and the corresponding anions (∆SCF approach). Consistently with Ref., where ∆E = E 0 -E -1 is the total energy difference between the neutral and the anionic species and ∆ZPE = 1 2 ω -1,i is the corresponding difference between ZPE contributions. Note that the sums extend over the N = 3N A -6 vibrational degrees of freedom of each molecule (N = 3N A -5 for linear molecules), where N A is the number of atoms in the molecule. All calculations have been performed with the Quantum ESPRESSO (QE) distribution. Ry and 320 Ry have been used for the expansion of the wave-function and of the density, respectively. We have performed Γ-only spin-polarized calculations using a cubic box with a 13 Å-long side, if not mentioned otherwise. The Martyna-Tuckerman reciprocal-space correction, Vibrational calculations have been performed using the finite-difference approach as implemented in the relevant tool in the atomic simulation environment (ASE). where is the total energy difference between the charge-neutral and anionic species, respectively, both embedded in a dielectric medium with dielectric con- is the corresponding energy difference between the dielectric polarization contributions to the electrostatic energy of the systems (see Equation Figure where E 0 (κ) and E -1 (κ) are the total energy of the charge-neutral and anionic species, respectively, where we have explicitly indicated the dependence on the confining potential κ. For the confining potential case, we have found that sufficiently smooth curves can be obtained without the need of subtracting the confining energy contributions from the respective total energies, and we have thus used these for the vanishing-embedding extrapolation. Figure For what concerns the dielectric embedding (Figure Figure In contrast, the HOMO energy follows a milder dependence on κ, since the corresponding state is mostly localized in the region of space where the confining potential is zero. Therefore, the confining potential embedding fosters electron localization through a destabilizing contribution, which is larger for delocalized states than for the localized ones. Å, the delocalized levels are considerably affected by a volume change. This is consistent with a 'particle-in-a-box' model, where the minimum-energy level shifts down for increasing volumes. According to this picture, the minimal embedding conditions for which localized anion states can be effectively stabilized are a function of the cell size. We observe, in fact, that the threshold values of ε 0 and κ that allow for converging anion calculations shifts to larger values with increasing cell volumes. These thresholds can be identified with the points where the (localized) HOMO level becomes lower in energy than the corresponding delocalized state, i.e. the points where the blue and orange curves cross in Figure The results of the different extrapolation techniques considered are illustrated in Figure For these molecules, all techniques lead to extrapolated values that agree within less than 30 meVs with the reference vacuum results. Overall, the dielectric extrapolation technique, using either the SCCS or the SSCS cavity, and the confining-potential extrapolation approach based on either the zero-potential or the large-cavity limit, give rise to total energy differences between neutral and anion species that are in good agreement with each others. The largest deviations are observed for the confining potential extrapolation scheme based on the cavity size: the infinitely-large-cavity limit, in fact, is approached rather slowly (see Figure EA estimates are obtained by adding ZPE corrections to the extrapolated energy differences between the optimized neutral and anionic species (see Equation Predicted EA values for the G2-1 set are plotted against experimental data in Figure Overall, the MAE obtained for the various extrapolation methods is very similar to what obtained through the MBS. This is not surprising, as both the embedding extrapolation calculations and the MBS ones are based on the PBE density functional for both the density optimization and the energy evaluation. A lower MAE (0.079 meV) is obtained using the HF-PBE method, which is consistent with the use of higher quality densities; similar results could be expected here using simple self-interaction corrections. Most importantly, it can be employed in combination with any basis-set type, including plane waves, and it can be straightforwardly applied in combination with extended systems, as illustrated in the following section. Red symbols corresponds to results obtained from the extrapolation method (vanishing potential limit in the confining-potential embedding), while grey and yellow symbols are for the moderate basis set (MBS) method Plane-wave calculations on isolated anions that are predicted to have a positive HOMO by DFT present severe converge issues. This is because the system tends to delocalize the fraction of the additional electron that can not be bound by the nuclei. If the simulation box, however, includes a second subsystem that can accept the unbound charge, like e.g. a metal surface, a different and problematic aspect can emerge. Indeed, under these circumstances, the lowest-energy electron density configuration involves the extra electron to be split between the anion and the metal, regardless of the distance between the two subsystems. As a study system, we consider here a chloride ion sitting at 10 Å from a Pt(111) surface. The surface has been modeled as a bulk-like 4-layer slab, constructed using the computed equilibrium lattice constant a = 3.961 Å. A 3×3 multiple of the surface primitive cell has been considered, and the first Brillouin zone has been sampled with a 6×6×1 Γ-centered k-point grid. A large separation between periodic replicas of the slab (40 Å) has been introduced along the surface normal. Figure A fraction of the extra electron is thus expected to be transferred to the Fermi level of the metal, even if the subsystems lie at very large distance from each other. This is a well-known issue in the context of the so-called ion-unbalance model for electrochemical interfaces. Figure Figure Summarizing, we have presented a strategy that allows to stabilize localized anion configurations within a DFT framework. This is achieved by means of a continuum embedding, whose effect on the calculations can be removed through extrapolation to zero intensity. Two embedding schemes, based on a dielectric medium that favors electron localization and a confining potential that penalizes delocalization have been tested and shown to provide virtually identical EAs estimates through ∆SCF calculations. The proposed strategy allows one to estimate the accuracy of self-consistently-evaluated density functionals without relying on electron densities optimized using other electronicstructure methods. The MAE obtained with the PBE functional for the G2-1 dataset is in line with previous estimates based on the MBS approach, but, in contrast with the latter, our framework presents well-defined basis-set convergence limits and it is not specific to localized basis functions. In addition, the functional extrapolation procedure allows for straightforward force evaluations, which enables self-consistent geometry optimizations and frequency calculations. The extrapolation method described here can be similarly applied in the context of periodic calculations for extended systems. As a study case, we have shown how the dielectric embedding can be employed to stabilize the correct charge configuration for the Pt(111)+Cl - system, and how the corresponding energy for vacuum conditions can be obtained by a suitable extrapolation procedure. from the MARVEL National Centre of Competence in Research of the Swiss National Science Foundation. This work was supported by a grant from the Swiss National Supercomputing Centre (CSCS) under project ID s836. Figures S1-S4 illustrate how the vacuum total energy differences between the neutral and the anionic species of the G2-1 datasets have been extrapolated from the different types of embedding. In particular, Figure Figures S1-S4 also illustrate the role of the cavity size on the computed ∆E and ∆E values. They show that converged values (within less than 15 meV) can be obtained using a cubic cell with a side length of 13 Å. Figure Finally, the computed electron affinity (EA) values for the various extrapolation methods, together with the corresponding ZPE corrections, are presented in Table : ∆E extrapolation for the species of the G2-1 dataset, using the confining-potential extrapolation towards large cavity sizes. Lines represent constrained 12th-degree polynomial functions (ridge-regression regularization has been employed to allow stable extrapolations). 