We have studied the ambient air oxidation of chemical vapor deposition (CVD) grown monolayers of the semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenide (S-TMD) WS2 using optical microscopy, laser scanning confocal microscopy (LSCM), photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy, and atomic force microscopy (AFM). Monolayer WS2 exposed to ambient conditions in the presence of light (typical laboratory ambient light for weeks, or typical PL spectroscopy map), exhibits damage due to oxidation which can be detected with the LSCM and AFM; though may not be evident in conventional optical microscopy due to poorer contrast and resolution. Additionally, this oxidation was not random, and correlated with 'high-symmetry' and red-shifted areas in the PL spectroscopy map -areas thought to contain a higher concentration of sulfur vacancies. In contrast, samples kept in ambient and darkness showed no signs of oxidation for up to 10 months. Lowirradiance/fluence experiments showed that samples subjected to excitation energies at or above the trion excitation energy (532 nm/2.33 eV and 660 nm/1.88 eV) oxidized in as little as 7 days, even for irradiances and fluences eight and four orders of magnitude lower (respectively) than previously reported. No significant oxidation was observed for 760 nm/1.63 eV light exposure, which lies below the trion excitation energy in WS2. The strong wavelength dependence and apparent lack of irradiance dependence suggests that ambient oxidation of WS2 is initiated by photon-mediated electronic band transitions, that is, photo-oxidation. These findings have important implications for prior, present and future studies concerning S-TMDs measured, stored or manipulated in ambient conditions. Since the discovery of two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals materials such as graphene It was proposed that electric fields were necessary for WS2 oxidation, although the detailed mechanism was unclear. Recently, Atkin et al. In this work, we investigate ambient-exposed monolayers of the S-TMD WS2 using standard characterization tools -optical microscopy, photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy and atomic force microscopy (AFM). Moreover, we also employ laser scanning confocal microscopy (LSCM), which serves as an integral tool in this work. By correlating AFM images with LSCM images, we are able to rapidly identify oxidized regions of monolayer WS2, which may not be evident from optical microscopy or PL spectroscopy. Oxidation is evident in samples kept in ambient conditions and exposed to light characteristic of laboratory conditions (typical room light for weeks), or moderate laser powers in PL mapping spectroscopy, but is not seen in as-grown samples or those stored in ambient conditions and darkness for up to ten months. We further explore the role of light by irradiating monolayer WS2 samples with low-irradiance, visible light at 532, 660, and 760 nm. For WS2 samples exposed to 532 and 660 nm light (above the threshold necessary for electronic excitation), oxidation was observed, whereas, samples exposed to 760 nm light did not show appreciable oxidation (similar to those left in darkness). These results indicate that oxidation of WS2 in ambient conditions requires photo-excitation, i.e., oxidation is a wavelength dependent, photo-induced process -at odds with recent interpretations in literature. WS2 is grown on c-sapphire (single side polished) in an atmospheric-pressure chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process described previously, Figure To understand the optical properties of our CVD grown WS2 and investigate whether this could provide clues as to the causes of the observed oxidation in Figure Figures Figure Thin films of WOx have a much higher transmittance than WS2 at visible wavelengths (see Supporting Information Figures S4 and S5 for transmittance, reflectance and absorptance of monolayer WS2) explaining the dark (see-through to substrate) appearance of these regions under the LSCM. Figures We also exposed the WS2 monolayers to similar low-irradiance (≈ 3 W m -2 ) green (≈ 515 nm) light in a nitrogen filled glove box environment with ultra-low levels of O2 and H2O for 7 days. In contrast to the ultra-low irradiance experiments in ambient conditions, the results show that no damage or adverse effects were observed (using the LSCM) on glove box exposed WS2 (see section 10 in Supporting Information for details); indicating that light-induced oxidation does not proceed in the absence of O2 and H2O. We have identified for the first time that the previously observed The strong wavelength dependence of oxidation indicates a photo-excitation mechanism involving the WS2 itself. We can rule out direct excitation of oxygen to create singlet oxygen (excited, reactive form of oxygen -see Supporting Information), which would occur at 760 ± 10 nm wavelength excitation, There is now overwhelming evidence that the most common structural defects present in S-TMDs are in the form of sulfur vacancies, and this is true (with the exception of atomic layer deposition grown samples) In addition to the small (< 250 nm) triangular oxide islands formed (Figure The contents of these droplets are most likely aqueous H2SO4 (H2SO4 is hygroscopic) which forms one of the products in the oxidation of S-TMDs. However, the physical reasons behind the changes in PL intensity Our work shows that the physical mechanism that causes the oxidation of WS2 in ambient conditions is a photoinduced, i.e., a photo-oxidation mechanism. Oxidation is observed to not occur randomly, but in three-fold symmetric areas (as defined by μ-PL), edges and areas in which there is an observed red-shift in exciton emission. It is thought that all these areas contain more defects in the form of sulfur vacancies where oxygen can attach, and so provide a starting point from which oxidation can proceed. The fluence threshold that begins this photo-oxidation is at least four orders of magnitude lower than previously thought, 24 <2.3 x 10 6 J m -2 . Photo-oxidation does not occur when the samples are left in darkness, nor is significant oxidation visible when the WS2 is exposed to wavelengths that are not absorbed appreciably -as found in the low-irradiance 760 nm experiment. Taking into consideration that oxidation is only observed upon excitation of an electronic transition, it is likely that no fluence threshold exists, and that oxidation occurs on a probabilistic basis. That is, lower light levels progress the reaction at much slower rates that are difficult to observe using the LSCM or AFM. Still, our study already places severe constraints on the processing and analysis of S-TMD films in ambient conditions, since exposure to typical room light for extended periods (days), or exposure to a single typical scanning PL or Raman spectroscopy measurement (minutes) may cause significant oxidative damage. Furthermore, we expect that these findings will guide the development of new nanofabrication techniques that completely avoid significant oxidation of S-TMDs, as the storage of S-TMDs in darkness or exposure to light that cannot excite electronic transitions should completely prevent progression of the oxidation reaction. Deposition. An atmospheric-pressure CVD method was used to grow monolayer WS2 on polished (single side) c-sapphire(0001) substrates (Shinkosha) in a 1-inch quartz tube furnace. The samples were determined to be monolayer from PL and AFM measurements, as presented in the main text. Before beginning the CVD process, the c-sapphire substrates were ultra-sonicated in acetone and ethanol, and then loaded into a 1-inch tube furnace in preparation for oxygen annealing. The samples were oxygen annealed by flowing oxygen at 50 sccm for at least 5 minutes over the sample after which the furnace was then ramped from 30 °C to 1050 °C in 30 minutes, held for 1 hour and then allowed to naturally cool to room temperature. After oxygen annealing, approximately 1.1 ±0.1 g of sulfur powder (≥99.5%, Sigma-Aldrich) and 2 ±0.1 g of WO3 powder (≥99.9%, Sigma-Aldrich) were loaded in separate quartz boats. The sulfur was placed upstream and away from the central part of the furnace heating coils and under external heating coils (controlled by a separate temperature controller), while the WO3 was loaded in the central part of the furnace along with the oxygen annealed substrates. A quartz test tube (approximately 22 mm in diameter) was placed against the substrate quartz boat (with the openend facing outwards) so as to restrict the flow of reactants (see Supporting Figure Photoluminescence spectroscopy. Crystals were analyzed using a WITec 300R spectrometer equipped with a 532 nm laser and power set at approximately 140 μW (as judged by an optical power meter after the 100× objective). 2D confocal PL maps (μ-PL) were taken using the 100×/0.9 (Olympus MPLFLN) objective lens. A Gaussian beam profile was assumed, and the maximum irradiance estimated as I = 8P/(πD 2 ), where P is the laser power and D is the diameter of the beam, estimated as D = 1.22λ/NA ≈ 721 nm, where λ is the wavelength in nanometers and NA is the numerical aperture of the lens. The μ-PL map shown in Figs. Laser scanning confocal microscopy. Two different LSCM's were used. In Fig A Bruker Dimension Icon AFM in tapping mode (in ambient and at ≈ 20 °C) was used to obtain the atomic force micrographs. RTESPA-300 tips were used, and analysis was conducted using WSxM v4.0. Controlled low-light irradiance/fluence experiments. Light sources were a 532 nm laser diode, 650 nm laser diode (measured to be 660 nm, see Supporting Information) and halogen light source (XGY-II) with appropriate bandpass filter at 760 nm ± 10 nm (Thorlabs FB760-10, OD 6+ 200 nm to 719 nm). The optical spectra of the laser sources can be found in the Supporting Information. A custom-built enclosure was used to shroud the experiment in darkness. In the enclosure, the optics used were an iris (Thorlabs ID25), beam steering mirrors, a circular linear variable neutral density filter and a simple convex lens to expand the beam to an appropriate size. Samples were mounted onto a glass slide using double sided sticky tape. Standard samples (usually a sister sample from the same growth run), were kept in darkness for the entirety of the light exposure experiments. The irradiance and fluence for the sources were calculated similarly to the LSCM and PL sections above with the exception that the 760 nm light was assumed to be non-Gaussian (as in the white LED case with the LSCM), i.e I = 4P/(πD 2 ). The diameters were measured as ≈20 mm, ≈12 mm and ≈30 mm Values for the irradiance were calculated as 3.8 W m -2 14.2 W m -2 and 2.2 W m -2 for the 532 nm, 660 nm and 760 nm light respectively. Fluence values were then found by multiplying the irradiance by 604800 seconds (seconds in 7 days) to give 2.3×10 6 , 8.6×10 6 and 1.3×10 6 J m -2 for the 532, 660 and 760 nm light respectively. Reflectance / Transmission / Absorptance Measurements and Calculations. The reflectance and transmission spectra of the WS2 monolayer crystals were measured over 350 -800 nm using a Perkin Elmer Lambda 1050, equipped with an integrating sphere. Samples grown on c-sapphire (Shinkosha) were mounted on clear glass microscope slides (Sail). Blank sapphire substrates (Shinkosha) mounted on clear glass microscope slides (Sail) from the same batches were also measured. This allowed the absorptance from only the WS2 to be determined in the following way. The absorptance of the substrates, As = 1 -Ts -Rs, was subtracted from the absorptance of the WS2 and substrate, given as AWS2+S = 1 -TWS2+S -RWS2+S, to yield the absorptance from only the WS2 using the formula AWS2 = AWS2+S -AS = (TS -TWS2+S) + (RS -RWS2+S), where Ti and Ri are the measured transmittance and reflectance respectively of the substrate (i = S) and WS2 plus substrate (i = WS2+S). The transmittance, reflectance and absorptance of the WS2 on the substrate and the substrate itself are shown in the Supporting Information. Supporting Information is available. Furnace setup is elucidated. The effects of multiple LSCM scans are visualized. Oxidation height analysis with AFM of triangular islands is presented. Details of the edges of WS2 is analyzed further with LSCM and AFM. The spectra of the lasers used in the study are presented, and the transmittance reflectance and absorptance of the WS2 on sapphire on glass and sapphire on glass are presented. Details of FRET and photo-catalysis are given, and possible reaction products relating to the microscopic droplet feature seen in Figure *See Supporting Information Section 10 for details. **Some crystals had signs of small amounts of oxidation. See Results and Supporting Information.