A consistent stress-driven nonlocal integral model for nonisothermal structural analysis of elastic nano-and microbeams is proposed. Most nonlocal models of literature are strain-driven and it was shown that such approaches can lead toward a number of difficulties. Following recent contributions within the isothermal setting, the developed model abandons the classical strain-driven methodology in favour of the modern stress-driven elasticity theory by G. Romano and R. The example section provides several applications, thus enabling insight into performance of the formulation. Exact nonlocal solutions are established, Research breakthroughs in nanotechnology over recent years have caused an increased interest in the mechanical behaviour of structures at nanoscale as well. Most commonly, sensors that measure forces or displacements are analysed. However, the mechanics of such structures fails outside usual macroscale mechanical principles. Origins of such behaviour are manifold. The structures at the nanoscale have discrete nature manifested in the form of atoms and interactions between atoms so that continuum mechanics can have limited success in describing discrete nanostructures. Furthermore, forces that are completely irrelevant at the macroscale, van der Waals forces for example, can dominate the nanoscale behaviour. As a consequence, size effects start to appear. The research community has been very active lately trying to capture this behaviour by accounting for the nonlocal nature of the phenomenon. Although such a claim can be made for the problems involving isothermal deformation processes, when the nonisothermal problems are concerned the results are not so numerous. For a short review of the existing nonisothermal models, see The existing methods are almost exclusively based on gradient methods and are applied to a variety of different problems, see However, the literature survey in A gradient method, widely adopted to describe size-dependent phenomena in nanostructures, is based on Eringen differential model (EDM) associated with the strain-driven nonlocal integral theory conceived in Elastic responses associated with EDM are technically unacceptable, as discussed in The research at hand aims to provide a well-posed nonlocal integral formulation of nanobeam mechanics in nonisothermal regime. It is assumed that the nanobeam can be described by Bernoulli-Euler kinematics. This kind of model has not been previously addressed in literature. The method presents an extension of the contributions presented in This section will introduce the notation and provide well-known governing equations that will serve as a starting point for the nonlocal integral formulation introduced in §4. In the subsequent analysis, a straight nanobeam made The nanobeam's cross-section Ω is assumed to lay in the y -z plane while the longitudinal axis is denoted with x, Fig. The displacement u = {u x , u y , u z } of any point of the beam can be evaluated as: where φ(x) denotes the angle of rotation of the cross-section. As the above equation indicates, the longitudinal displacement u is composed of two parts. The first part u 0 represents the average displacement of the cross section, defined as: When introduced into the Eq.( Due to the Bernoulli-Euler assumption, the cross-section remains plane. This effectively enforces vanishing shear strains, thus providing a link between the derivatives of the longitudinal and the transversal displacement as: where Eq.(1) 1 was utilized. The apex (n) denotes the n-th derivative with respect to the longitudinal coordinate x. With the link between the transversal displacement and the rotation established, the strains in a point can be now conveniently obtained by differentiating the axial displacement field with respect to the longitudinal coordinate as: The above introduced kinematic framework can account for both isothermal and nonisothermal class of problems. Note that the normal strain can be additively separated into an axial and a bending part. The axial part of the normal strain can be naturally introduced as the centroidal normal strain by setting z = 0 in Eq. ( Likewise, a standard procedure shows that the curvature χ of the deformed axis of the beam is related to the transverse displacement w as: This allows definition of the bending part of the normal strain as z χ(x). Hence, the normal strain can be represented as: As this point, calculation of stresses in the local Bernoulli-Euler nonisothermal beam should be summarized. The case in which the beam is free from external mechanical loads, but subjected to the non-homogeneous temperature field variation ∆θ(x, z) is considered. In such type of problems stresses can arise as well. The first step involves separation of the normal strain into a part that describes thermal dilatation due to free expansion (or contraction) of a beam ε th (x, z) = α∆θ(x, z) and the one caused by the elastic effects ε el (x, z) = σ(x, z)/E: It should be emphasized that only elastic (mechanical) part of the strain is used to calculate stresses; free thermal elongation does not contribute to stress evolution. Having in mind kinematics of the Bernoulli-Euler beam as described in §2, the sum of thermal and elastic strain should equal axial and bending deformation, Eq. ( so the normal stress is obtained as σ(x, z) = -αE∆θ(x, z) + ε 0 (x)E -zE χ(x). In the absence of external mechanical loading and upon introduction of the normal stress, equilibrium equations provide the axial strain and the curvature: With known ε 0 and χ, the normal stress is rewritten as: see classical textbooks on the subject where N is the the axial force and M is the bending moment in the corresponding cross-section. The two integrals Ω α∆θEdA and Ω αE∆θzdA are usually named as the thermal axial force N th and the thermal bending moment M th . The deflection line can be obtained using Eq. ( accompanied by a suitable set of boundary conditions. The framework described so far should be now extended to account for nonlocality present at the nanoscale level. The first step again involves separation of the strain into a part that describes dilatation due to free expansion (or contraction) of a beam ε th (x, z) = α∆θ(x, z) and the one caused by the stresses ε el , Eq. ( Accordingly, the elastic strains originating from stresses are assumed to be of the nonlocal nature and defined as a convolution where the kernel function φ(x) is The characteristic length is defined as L λ = λL > 0, i.e. as the product of the nonlocal parameter λ > 0 and the beam's length L. Due to the exponential nature of the kernel function, the nonlocal effects in the vicinity of the corresponding point have significantly more influence on the strain than points situated at larger distance. Note that above assumption accounts only for nonlocality in the longitudinal direction. Variation of stresses in the transverse directions does not contribute to the nonlocal normal strain in the present formulation. Since the decomposition Eq. ( where the thermal strain and the nonlocal elastic strain definition were used. If the latter equation is integrated over the cross section, it follows: The proposition that the cross-section axes are central and principal axes imply that the second term on the right hand side vanishes. In the second term on the left hand side, the equilibrium equation Ω σdA = N can be employed. This yields: In the same manner, multiplication of Eq. ( Obviously, the equilibrium conditions are explicitly enforced in the formulation. In order to simplify notation, at this point we introduce the following functions: Now, accounting for Eq. (5, 6), a decoupled system of ordinary differential equations governing nonlocal mechanical behaviour of the nanobeam is obtained: The solutions of the above integrals are provided in This differential equation must be augmented with the constitutive boundary conditions: For the proof of the above integral to differential transformation, see Remark 1 below for a detailed explanation. Even in the isothermal problems, the boundary conditions are of the constitutive character since they include a material property -the nonlocal parameter L λ . In the nonisothermal problems, an additional material property is included in Φ N and Φ M , the coefficient of heat expansion α. The transverse displacements can be dealt with in the same manner: with the boundary conditions: If the problem is statically indeterminate, the set of differential equations Eqs. Remark 1. The equivalence of Eq. ( where L λ is a constant. In the first step, the above integral is additively separated into two parts: i.e., f (x) = f 1 (x) + f 2 (x). In that way, the modulus in the kernel function φ(x -y) is removed. This implies following values of these functions at the boundary: By virtue of the Leibniz integral rule, differentiation of Eq. ( Thus, the first derivative f (x) is then: In the same manner, second derivatives are: The necessary boundary conditions are obtained from values of functions at the boundary, Eqs. To prove the uniqueness of the solution, the solution of the homogeneous part of Eq. ( The general form of the solution to the above differential equation is: Enforcement of the boundary conditions Eq. ( Determination of constants C 1 and C 2 from the above system gives trivial solution. Now, if there are two solutions to the non-homogeneous problem Eq. ( what upon enforcement of trivial solution ensures: i.e. that the initial assumption about two different solutions was false and that only one solution exists. This proves uniqueness of the solution. Remark 2. After determination of the displacement fields, calculation of stresses is straightforward. Namely, Eq. ( The stress field now follow as σ(x, z) = E -L 2 λ ((-α∆θ(x, z)) (2) + u (3) 0 (x) -z w (4) ) -α∆θ(x, z) + u (1) 0 (x) -z w (2) , ( while the accompanying constitutive boundary conditions of type Eq. In the absence of external forces, the thermal stresses can be alternatively evaluated from the convolution Eq. ( Thermal stresses are now: It is easy to verify that if the product α∆θ is constant, thermal stresses do not arise. The similar result follows in some other situations. For instance, when the temperature field is independent of the transverse coordinate z and simultaneously linearly dependent on the longitudinal coordinate x (viceversa is also true). To Due to symmetricity of the cross section, first moment of the area S y vanishes. Thus, functions Φ N (x) and Φ M (x), Eqs. Since Φ M (x) = 0, the transverse displacement w equals zero for the whole domain. On the other side, the elastic (mechanical) axial force field is nonvanishing, homogeneous and equal to N = P . Equilibrium ensures that the internal force is not a function of axial coordinate, N = f (x), so the axial displacement Eq.( where Eq. ( where (α∆θ) (2) = 0 due to constant heat expansion coefficient and temperature. This can be augmented with the constitutive boundary conditions Eq. ( Integration of the above problem yields: The nonlocal strain is obtained by differentiation as: Straightforward application of the Remark 2 enables simple calculation of stress from the equilibrium equation as σ = P/A. So, although the obtained stress is equal to the local solution, the resulting strain and elongation are distinctly nonlocal. Finally, the resulting axial displacement field could be solved by resorting to analysis of two decoupled problems. In particular, one can solve for thermal displacements in the first step, while the second step involves solution due to action of mechanical loading. The total solution is obtained as a linear combination of these results. In this example, a doubly clamped beam of similar geometrical and material properties like in the previous example is considered. The beam is clamped at both ends so it cannot expand. The total axial deformation is where the second -elastic part reflects the nonlocality caused by the reactions P in supports. Also, the axial force does not change along the beam, so Introducing nonlocality for the elastic part in the same manner as in Example 5.1 and exploiting Eq. ( Considering Eq.( augmented with two boundary conditions: Additionally, since the beam is clamped it must be u 0 (0) = 0. The differential equation is of the third order, so only three boundary conditions can be accounted for at this point. The remaining one, u 0 (L) = 0, will be introduced at the later stage. Because this problem has the identical structure as the one in Example 5.1, resulting displacement distribution is identical, cf. Eq.( with the difference that this equation contains unknown constant -reaction P . The reaction can be determined by exploiting condition u 0 (L) = 0 in Eq. ( Introducing the reaction P into Eq. ( Contrary to the statically determine Example 5.1, this solution involves coupled thermal and elastic part that cannot be separated into two decoupled problems in the manner suggested in the former example. To present results graphically, the same parameters as in Example 5.1 were used. Obtained total axial displacements u 0 are given in Fig. Results presented in the previous example showed that increase in the nonlocal parameter will increase the nanobeam stiffness. However, in this example, the nonlocal elastic shortening at the nanobeam ends must match the thermal elongation that has the local character. This means the support reactions cannot remain constant but have to increase as well in order to compensate for increased stiffness due to λ. Fig. Note that curve P vs. λ is initially slightly curved and later almost linear, Fig. Hence, the third term is responsible for reduction/increase of stiffness. For the smaller values of λ, the third term has some influence, visible as the initial nonlinearity in Fig. A comparison of behaviour of the third term for a constant value of P (i.e. Example 5.1) and for a variable one from the present example is provided in Fig. The normal strain ε(x) distribution is given in Fig. In this example, the identical problem as in The cantilever beam's length is L, while the rectangular cross-section is defined by the height h and the width b. The temperature field is given as , where a 1 and a 2 are constants defining distribution of temperature. The beam is not loaded by a mechanical load in any way. Thus, due to its nonlinear temperature dependency on the transverse coordinate, the nanobeam will exhibit in-plane bending. It will be assumed that the initial temperature was homogeneous and equal to zero, θ 0 = 0. Functions Φ N and Φ M , Eq. ( Since the temperature field does not depend on the longitudinal coordinate, both functions are reduced to constants and their derivatives will vanish. Also, due to absence of external mechanical loads M = 0. The transverse displacement is the solution of differential equation Eq. ( augmented with the boundary conditions, Eq. ( The solution of the above problem is: what is identical to the solution based on the gradient formulation, cf. The same conclusion can be stated for the rotation: The average axial displacement follows from the differential equation, Eq. ( with the boundary conditions: The solution is: what again corresponds to the gradient solution. Obviously, the integral formulation does not show nonlocal behaviour as well, due to particular temperature distribution and absence of external mechanical loading. Stress can be conveniently determined by application of Eq. (42). Since the temperature field is independent of the longitudinal coordinate, the ex-pression is reduced to: This finally yields: As expected, the stresses are not affected by nonlocality and should be obtained from the local form, Eq. ( The above results introduced in Eq. ( In this example a doubly clamped beam L = 100 nm long is considered. The cross-section is situated in y -z plane and is assumed to be of a square shape with height h = 1 nm and width b = 1 nm. The Young's modulus is E = 1 nN/nm 2 . The coefficient of thermal expansion is α = 1 1/K. The temperature increase varies along the beam as: where a 0 = 1 K/nm 2 . Consequently, temperature is a function of both longitudinal coordinate x and the transverse coordinate z. Note that the plane z = -h/2 does not expand due to temperature variation. As a consequence, Φ N and Φ M are now functions of x: and their first and second derivative do not vanish. At the coordinate system's origin x = 0, both functions and their derivatives take null values. The bending moment and the axial force are distributed as follows: where M A , P Ax , P Az are unknown bending moment and reaction forces in the support A. Equilibrium constraints provide additional equations for determination of the reactions at the support B. Initially, distribution of the transverse displacements will be determined from the differential equation Eq. ( augmented with the boundary conditions: Since the differential equation is of the fourth order, only four boundary conditions can be specified at this point. This will provide a solution that involves unknown reactions in support A, M A and P Az . To determine unknown reactions, the remaining boundary conditions in the support B, As for the axial displacements, these can be determined from Eq. ( together with the boundary conditions: The solution includes unknown axial reaction P Ax at the support A. This reaction follows from u 0 (L) = 0. The main results are summarized in Figs. The minimal value for λ serves as the limit case that corresponds to the classical Bernoulli-Euler local solution. Similarly to Example 5.2, the nanobeam behaviour tends to be more flexible until a certain threshold is reached and subsequently converge to another, more rigid curve. The solution for the axial displacement u(x, z) is graphically presented in A new thermoelastic integral model for nanobeams has been developed by adopting the nonlocal elasticity theory by G. Romano and R. Barretta Effectiveness of the presented methodology has been tested by examining selected case-studies. Some closing remarks are collected below. 1. The new stress-driven integral thermoelastic law, equipped with the averaging kernel introduced by Helmholtz, is equivalent to a set of differential equations and to suitable higher-order constitutive boundary conditions. 2. The example section also demonstrates that thermoelastic nonlocal solutions do not necessarily lead toward gradually stiffer solution for increasing values of the nonlocal parameter. Such behaviour has been displayed in statically indeterminate structures. Otherwise, solutions show monotonically increasing stiffness like in isothermal cases. 