Nano-structures, namely, nano-rings and nano-particles, comprising two-dimensional, crystalline gold atomic discs were produced on a sapphire substrate. Nano-rings revealed several remarkable properties, namely, an apparent spatial/orientation memory register, an apparent programmed "homing instinct" and "action" based on that instinct, usually observed only in living, biological systems. Momentary application of 100nN force on a nanostructure ('mother') led every 'mother' within the entire scanner area to increase its volume and create several "daughter" replicas. Over time, without the influence of any applied external force or stimulus, each 'daughter', of its own volition, transported itself back to its 'mother' and re-created its original form. The results strongly implied temporal and spatial synchronization between the 'daughters' and their respective 'mothers'. The targeted movement of the 'daughters' towards their 'mothers' implied the existence of a special, yet unidentified new force. Momentary application of a weak force on a gold nanoparticle resulted in the spontaneous transformation of each nanoparticle into a complex and 'robot-like' (e.g. Dalek) 3-dimensional form. Without the application of any additional external force or stimulus, we observed a remarkable display of oscillatory transformation between the 'robot-like' forms and their 'mother' nano-particles lasting over 26 hours. The "robot-like" structures seem to replicate identical copies of themselves. Two dimensional materials (2DM) are one atom/molecule thick crystalline planar structures and Smart Materials (SM), are defined primarily as those whose one or more properties are tunable in a controllable and reversible fashion by an applied external stimulus. These are two of the most active fields of research, because of the remarkable properties of such materials and the promise they hold together in terms of applications across varied disciplines. The hypothesis behind our experimental procedure was based on the well-known phenomenon that the surface melting point of a thin film is significantly lower than its bulk melting point. In our experiments, a thin film of gold (e.g. X-ray Reflectivity (XRR) thickness ~ 66 nm (Figure Our experiments produced both nano-ring structures and nano-particles. Nano-rings were observed for the 66 nm (XRR) thick samples that were treated to 475 0 C, for 2 -60s, respectively. AFM images of nano-ring structures observed for the 2s, 5s, 30s and 60s heat-treated samples are shown in Figure As per our hypothesis, we observed circular, and "open top" dome like growth structures of gold film, rising from their edges that were pinned to the substrate, as shown in Figure High-resolution AFM phase image of a typical nano-ring (Figure At room temperature, we subjected one of the nano-rings to a momentary weak force (100 nN) using the Force/Displacement spectroscopy technique in the Atomic Force Microscope The force was applied at selected locations, shown by the red ink (+) marks in the image in Figure The effect of the force on the nano-ring shown in Figure We applied a momentary force of 200nN to the sapphire substrate in locations marked by the white ink (+) sign in Figure We were able to activate following phenomenon by exposing the nano-rings to acoustic waves and the results unequivocally confirmed strong coherence between the nano-rings. We subjected the nano-rings (Figure We report on the shape transformation phenomenon exhibited by nano-ring structures when subjected to a vibration frequency of 125 Hz for 10 seconds. Figure Our experiments with nano-particles were similar to those carried out with the nano-rings. In several instances, the nano-particles increased their volume significantly (Figure Subsequent scan shown in Figure In another experiment, momentary application of a 100 nN force on a gold nanoparticle resulted in a spontaneous transformation. Each nanoparticle transformed into a larger and a highly complex 3-dimensional "robot-like" (e.g. Dalek) form. We applied a force on the location marked by the white ink (+) mark (Figure In general, the nano-particles responded to an applied force by creating various highly complex and novel 3-dimensional structures/forms that exhibited this phenomenon (Figures S17, S18 and S19). For example, application of the force led each 'mother' (Figure Images in Figure We repeatedly observed that, after being subjected to a momentary weak force, nano-ring 'mother' structures undergo the process of creating 'daughter' structures that are replicas of their respective 'mothers'. Over time, the 'daughters', without fail, navigated back to their original 'mothers'. To illustrate this, we start with each gold 'daughter' replica separating from the 'mother' location (for example, X) and going to a different location (for example, Y). After sometime, and of its own volition, the 'daughter' returns back to the 'mother' location (for example, X). There were situations when two 'daughters' from different 'mothers' overlapped and were in significant physical contact with each other. It is important to note that they still remembered their 'mothers' and always returned back to them. First, the process of physically disconnecting from the 'mother' structure and moving from location 'X' to 'Y', and then returning to 'X' without being subjected to any additional applied external force/stimulus indicated an apparent spatial memory register in each 'daughter' that is correlated with its correspondent 'mother'. Secondly, it implies an apparent auto programmed "instinct" in these structures to act even in the absence of any internal force (i.e. non-living systems) or intentionally applied external force/stimulus. Thirdly, the local transport of these 'daughters' over space across the sapphire surface and precise (e.g. orientation) reassembly onto their original 'mothers' imply a strong correlation of their properties with respect to each other as well as to their 'mothers'. Finally, the observation that all the 'daughters' "act" in a coordinated manner with each other (i.e. in sync) to complete the process of navigation and re-assembly onto their 'mothers' implied a strong correlation between them as well. The apparent temporal and spatial synchronization demonstrated a dynamic communication and navigational feedback mechanism between each 'mother'/'daughter' pair. To re-iterate, the observed phenomenon requires the presence of a governing force field, is yet to be defined. Regarding the experimental results for the nano-particles, the observation of a significant increase in their volume as a first response to an applied weak force is counter-intuitive. It is highly unlikely that the synchronized, time dependent appearance and disappearance of several significant physical features on the 'mother' structures in a uniform manner is governed by thermodynamic equilibrium considerations. Nano-particles transforming themselves into uncanny 3-dimensional "robot-like" forms as a force response, followed by their remarkable phenomenological display of the "oscillatory dance" between them tends to challenge the imagination. The inanimate "robotlike" structures which are replica copies of their complex forms seem almost incredulous. Adhering to the disciplined scientific method and staying cognizant of the Occam's razor principle, these phenomena seem inscrutable from the framework of currently established physical and thermodynamic principles. We report the preparation of 2-dimensional gold atomic sheets based nano-structures for the first time. These inanimate gold nano-ring structures are the first inorganic systems to exhibit an apparent 'homing instinct' and an 'action' based on that 'instinct', under the influence of a special but undefined force. We also report a remarkable oscillatory shape transformation phenomenon between the 3-dimensional 'robot-like' forms and their 'mothers'. High resolution imaging confirmed that 3-dimensional 'robot-like' structures are identical replica copies of their highly complex forms. Besides the philosophical implications due to their, what appears to be, a higher level of intelligence exhibited by these structures, these findings lend validity to the new concept of "robots on chip". This would have the potential to fundamentally disrupt several technology fields. The sensitivity of these nano-structures to vibrations and acoustic waves, would enable remote dispatching of programmed "daughters' to target locations on the chip. The phenomenological observations reported in this manuscript are expected to stimulate significant fundamental research. Precursor material, namely, gold wires were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (99.99%, highest available purity grade). Polished sapphire substrates (0.33 mm thickness, Single crystal, DSP Prime C-plane <0001> off M-plane <1-100> 0.2 ± 0.1°), were purchased from University Wafer Inc. USA. Thermal evaporation process was used to deposited the gold thin films from a high purity gold wire onto the sapphire substrates. First, these substrates were ultrasonically cleaned with isopropyl alcohol (IPA) and dried with a nitrogen-spraying gun. The substrates were then loaded into a plasma cleaning system (PDC-002, Expanded Plasma Cleaner, Harrick Plasma, USA) for a duration of 5 minutes. Freshly cleaned substrates were transferred to the thermal evaporation chamber of Denton Vacuum LLC 502 B system. The base pressure of main chamber was ~ 3x 10 - 7 torr. Prior to the evaporation process, a lower current of ~50A was applied for 3 minutes for preconditioning the tungsten boat. Film deposition rate of 1Å/sec at 72 A was calibrated by an in-built quartz crystal monitor (QCM) and maintained constant throughout the process. Gold coatings with different (QCM, Quartz Crystal Monitor) thicknesses (e.g. 10 nm, 25 nm, 30 nm, 50 nm (66 nm by X-ray reflectivity), 100 nm, 200 nm) on single crystal sapphire substrate were deposited. Subsequently, the deposited films were diced into 0.5 mm x 0.5 mm square shaped samples and post-deposition heat treated in a preheated oven (Carbolite 1200, UK). Postdeposition heat-treatment temperature ranged from 350 0 C -600 0 C in air. The times of heat treatment were, 2s, 5s, 10s, 30s, 60s, 300s and 600s, respectively. Atomic force microscopy (Park NX10, Park Systems Korea) was used in true non-contact mode for morphological characterization. This unique scan mode prevents potentially invasive tipsample interaction during a scan. AFM scans were collected using Park SmartScan TM software (Park Systems Korea) using ultra-sensitive (Super Sharp Standard NCH cantilevers, High Density Carbon tip, Manufacturer: NanoWorld AG, Switzerland) with a typical tip height of 10-15 μm and 2 nm tip radius, under ambient conditions. The physical dimensions of these cantilevers were 125 μm (length), 30 μm (width) and 4 μm (thickness), respectively. The force constant value and resonant frequency were 42Nm -1 and 320 kHz, respectively. In addition to conventional AFM imaging, Park AFM has in built capabilities to precisely measure the nano-scale mechanical properties of materials, namely, nano-indentation technique (loaddisplacement (P-H) curve) and an additional capability referred to as the Force vs Distance (F/D) Spectroscopy. F/D spectroscopy measures the vertical force applied by the tip to the surface during contact-AFM imaging, through the deflection of the cantilever as a function of the extension of the piezoelectric scanner. Typically, this technique employs a significantly smaller force than that used in conventional AFM nano-indentation experiments. In F/D spectroscopy, the dependence of the cantilever deflection on the extension of the piezoelectric scanner is directly correlated to the tip-sample interaction forces reflecting a surface mechanical property. In principle, the technique could be used to measure local variations in the elastic properties of the surface. A facile route was implemented for the direct transfer of the gold nano-structures from sapphire substrate to the selected target for HRTEM imaging, the Quantifoil with 1.2μm holey carbon film coated Cu grids. This direct route of transferring the film ensured contamination free transfer. During the direct transfer, the support to the gold film is provided by TEM grid's carbon film. To bond the gold and carbon of the TEM grid, the grid is placed on top of gold and a drop of isopropanol (IPA) is gently placed on top of the grid ensuring that both the grid's carbon film and the underlying gold film is wet. The surface tension draws the gold and carbon together into close contact as IPA evaporated Characterization of transferred gold film on the TEM grids was performed using a Talos F200X FEG Transmission Electron Microscope with a lattice-fringe resolution of 0.14 nm at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV equipped with CETA 16M camera. High resolution images of periodic structures were analysed using TIA software. Figure It is evident that the structure in E has replicated a copy of itself. pairs as well. To re-iterate, the observed phenomenon requires the presence of a governing force field that is yet to be defined. Based on our experimental observations with nano-rings, we conclude the following: these inanimate gold structures are the first inorganic systems to exhibit an apparent "homing instinct" and an "action" based on that "instinct", under the influence of a special but undefined force. The ability of the 'daughter' replicas to "act in sync" with each other is an added level of sophistication to this "programmed instinct". Potential Impact: Besides the philosophical implications due to the higher level of intelligence exhibited by these inanimate gold structures, from a practical viewpoint, it would lend validity to the concept of "robots on chip", with potential to fundamentally disrupt several technology fields. For example, one could imagine having them embedded in the chip architecture and due to their sensitivity to vibrational and acoustic waves, communicate with them remotely and dispatch programmed "daughters' to target locations on the chip. They would accomplish specific tasks and then return back to their 'mother' location. The phenomenological observations reported in this manuscript should stimulate significant fundamental research in this new field. Momentary application of a weak force on a gold nanoparticle resulted in the spontaneous transformation of each nanoparticle into a highly complex and "robot-like" (e.g. Dalek) larger three-dimensional form. All the "robot-like" structures had an uncanny resemblance to each other. Without the application of any additional external force or stimuli, we observed a remarkable phenomenological display of, for the lack of a better word, an oscillatory dance between these "robot-like" forms and their original "mother' nano-particles, that lasted for several days. These "robot-like" structures were also capable of creating replica copies of themselves. In general, the nano-particles responded to an applied force by creating various complex and novel 3-dimensional structures/forms that exhibited this phenomenon. In many experiments, we found the first response of the nano-particles to applied pressure was to increase their volume significantly (e.g. 100X) which is counter-intuitive. In many cases, they would add additional features to their body with time and at some point, the whole process would reverse itself until the original form was recovered. It is highly unlikely that the synchronized, time dependent appearance and disappearance of several significant physical features on the 'mother' structures in a uniform manner is governed by thermodynamic equilibrium considerations. Nanoparticles forming the uncanny "robot-like" forms as a force response, followed by the remarkable phenomenological display of the "oscillatory dance" between them challenges one's imagination. The inanimate "robot-like" structure creating a temporal replica copy of itself seems almost incredulous. Adhering to the disciplined scientific method and following the Occam's razor principle, we find these phenomena to be inscrutable from the perspective of current understanding of physical and thermodynamic principles. Figure 