Thermally activated delayed fluorescence (TADF) emitters consisting of donor and acceptor molecules are potentially highly interesting for electroluminescence (EL) applications. Their strong fluorescence emission is considered to be due to reverse intersystem crossing (RISC), in which energetically close triplet and singlet charge transfer (CT) states, also called exciplex states, are involved. In order to distinguish between different mechanisms and excited states involved, temperature-dependent spin-sensitive measurements on organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) and thin films are essential. In our work we apply continuous wave (cw) and time-resolved (tr) photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy as well as spin-sensitive EL and PL detected magnetic resonance to films and OLED devices made of three different donor:acceptor combinations. Our results clearly show that triplet exciplex states are formed and contribute to delayed fluorescence (DF) via RISC in both electrically driven OLEDs and optically excited films. In the same sample set we also found molecular triplet excitons, which occurred only in PL experiments under optical excitation and for some material systems only at low temperatures. We conclude that in all investigated molecular systems exciplex states formed at the donor:acceptor interface are responsible for TADF in OLEDs with distinct activation energies. Molecular (local) triplet exciton states are also detectable, but only under optical excitation, while they are not found in OLEDs when excited states are generated electrically. We believe that the weakly bound emissive exciplex states and the strongly bound non-emissive molecular triplet excited states coexist in the TADF emitters, and it is imperative to distinguish between optical and electrical generation paths as they may involve different intermediate excited states. involved in the light generation mechanisms of TADF based OLEDs. In order to make sure that the conclusions we draw from EPR measurements on m-MTDATA:3TPYMB are not restricted to this particular system, we performed additional measurements on further donor:acceptor combinations. We used m-MTDATA as a donor and 4,7-Diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (BPhen) as an acceptor as well as Tri(9-hexylcarbazol-3-yl)amine (THCA) The major drawback of conventional fluorescent organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) is that due to spin statistics only 25% of injected electrons and holes form emissive singlet excitons, whereas 75% form long-lived triplets, which mostly decay non-radiatively. In order to further investigate the optical properties of the materials used in this work, we performed time-resolved PL (trPL) measurements on an m-MTDATA:3TPYMB blended solid film. Fig. Considering the negligibly small absorption of the exciplex state itself An overview of the involved processes is schematically shown in Fig. In the next step, we applied EPR to OLEDs. Here microwaves of a fixed frequency ν MW (in the GHz range) drive transitions between Zeeman sublevels of a triplet spin state which is energetically split due to an external magnetic field B, as schematically shown in Fig. Here h is the Planck constant, g is the g-factor of the spin system, μ & is the Bohr magneton, Δm s = 1 is the allowed change of the magnetic quantum number, D is the magnetic dipole-dipole interaction of two spins and θ is the angle between the direction of the external magnetic field and the vector connecting the two spins. For a statistical distribution of molecular orientations and electron-hole separations in heterogeneously mixed blends, a distribution of magnetic dipolar interaction energies D can be expected. This results in a superposition of several possible EPR transitions. If D is small, as in the case of distant electron-hole pairs, the EPR spectrum for an S=1 (triplet) state will consist of a single inhomogeneously broadened Gaussian bell-shaped curve. Alternatively, for strongly interacting close-by pairs of spins (large D), as for molecular (localized) triplet excitons, a broad spectrum ("powder pattern") with pronounced, separated side-peaks and shoulders is expected. non-Boltzmann, 0.15% at RT). There are several mechanisms for this, either considering transformation between singlet and triplet excitons, or between singlet and triplet exciplex states. In neutral excitations, such as triplet states, the polarization can be achieved via spin-selective population of a particular Zeeman sublevel, e.g. of mS=0 in an optical pumping cycle via ISC from initially photogenerated singlet excitons. To clarify the spin sensitive mechanisms in OLEDs, ELDMR is the most suitable method as it directly probes EL. Temperature-dependent ELDMR spectra measured on an m-MTDATA:3TPYMB OLED are shown in Fig. Each spectrum consists of a single, Gaussian shaped line centered at the magnetic field corresponding to g=2.002 in Eq.( To ensure that the observed ELDMR signals are directly related to the emitting layer, but not to the spin-dependent transport or injection in the adjacent transport layers or at the interfaces, comparative EDMR measurements on fully processed OLEDs without TADF emissive layers were performed. To remind, EDMR probes the microwaveinduced change of current through the OLED while a constant voltage is applied to the device. ELDMR and EDMR on an OLED (m-MTDATA:3TPYMB) yield identical signals, as shown in Fig. Moreover, we speculate that the EDMR signal can actually be induced by the ELDMR effect. A change of the recombination rate of exciplex states in magnetic resonance under constant voltage conditions can give rise to a change in the current. Consequently, the occurrence of an ELDMR signal can induce a smaller EDMR signal of identical shape. Similar correlations between a change in EL and current are observed in magnetic field effect studies on donor:acceptor based TADF OLEDs. Although, we clearly see a difference in activation energies of the underlying RISC process in these blends, the ELDMR spectra are almost identical for all studied OLEDs, with the same resonance position (i.e., in the vicinity of g=2.002), similar signal shape and only slightly different linewidth of about 3 mT FWHM (full width at half maximum). This similarity can be explained by the fact that the donor molecule in each case is either THCA or m-MTDATA, which have very similar molecular structures, as shown in Fig. Next, we measured PLDMR on m-MTDATA:3TPYMB blended solid films at temperatures between 50 and 290 K, as shown in Fig. In order to assign the detected signals in ELDMR and PLDMR to particular excited states, we assume that electrical injection predominantly populates the energetically lowest triplet state according to spin statistics. In the donor:acceptor blends studied in this work this is the triplet exciplex state ( 3 Exc) (Energies of all molecular singlet and triplet states as well as exciplex singlet states are shown in Fig. The second component in the PLDMR signal is a factor of two broader and therefore should have a different origin. We tentatively attribute it to molecular triplet excitons ( 3 LE), either on the donor or the acceptor molecule. The more localized character leads to a stronger dipolar-coupling D than in exciplex triplets, which are delocalized over at least two molecules. As schematically shown in Fig. An important consequence of the above assignment is that our experiments do not provide any evidence for the involvement of local triplets ( 3 LED or 3 LEA) in the emergence of delayed fluorescence in electrically driven devices although our detection scheme is sensitive enough to probe them. Therefore, we cannot justify a scenario, in which the exciplex state couples to energetically higher lying local triplets via spin-orbit coupling, We now discuss the relationship between the width of the ELDMR/PLDMR lines and the spatial separation of electron and hole, which form a bound state. From EPR spectra, the distance between electron and hole r )QT , can be estimated Here, r )QT is obtained in units of nm, if D is used in units of mT. We use FWHM as an upper limit for 2D, as we cannot fully exclude other mechanisms of the EPR line broadening, e.g. unresolved hyperfine interactions with surrounding nuclei. Consequently, a lower boundary for r )QT can be calculated by using Eq. (2). From the FWHM of our ELDMR spectra, one finds 2D ≤ 3 mT resulting in r )QT ≥ 1.2 nm (electrical generation), while for the narrow PLDMR component we estimate 2D ≤ 2 mT resulting in r )QT ≥ 1.4 nm (optical excitation). The broad We applied three different spin-sensitive techniques in order to reveal the role of spin-bearing excited states in the light generation mechanism of TADF-based films and OLEDs. In the case of electrical injection of charge carriers in the donor:acceptor emissive layer, which leads to EL, we found a characteristic signature of the triplet exciplex states ( 3 Exc), both in EL and in electrically detected magnetic resonance. By driving spin-flip transitions within triplet exciplex states the EL intensity changes by up to 1%. This is much higher than what is expected from the Boltzmann statistics at room temperature. From the temperature dependence, we deduced the activation energy of this process, which depends strongly on the donor:acceptor combination and is between 16 and 58 meV. We have assigned this characteristic energy to a singlet-triplet gap and the underlying mechanism of up-conversion to RISC. The underlying TADF mechanism includes a kinetic singlet-triplet exchange based on the g-factor difference, which ensures the conservation of angular momentum, while energy conservation is ensured by a thermal energy supply. As no molecular triplets are observed in the OLED experiments, we suppose they cannot be excited electrically. In the case of optical excitation of donor:acceptor films, the signature of triplet exciplex states ( 3 Exc) is observed in PL and it is similar to the one observed in EL from OLEDs. Additional spectral features from the triplet excitons localized on the donor molecules ( 3 LED) are also found, but their appearance strongly depends on the material system and on the temperature. Our experiments clearly show that the excited state which is majorly responsible for the occurrence of TADF in donor:acceptor systems is the triplet exciplex state ( 3 Exc). Molecular triplet excitons do not show up at all in efficient OLEDs, but only appear under optical excitation and in some systems mainly at low temperatures. We also emphasize the importance of comparative spin-sensitive, temperature-dependent PL and EL measurements, since the intermediate generation and recombination pathways may differ substantially. The materials m-MTDATA and BPhen were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. 3TPYMB was purchased from Lumtec (Luminescence Technology Corp.). THCA was supplied by A. Dabuliene and Prof. J. V. Grazulevicius from the Department of Polymer Chemistry and Technology at Kaunas University of Technology, Radvilenu pl. 19, LT-50254 Kaunas, Lithuania. All materials were used as received. An overview of all studied samples, their preparation and measurements is given in the SI in Table PL samples were prepared by evaporating the emitting layer onto glass substrates. Evaporation rates for all organic materials were 1 Å/s for PL and all other samples. PL and photoexcitation spectra were measured with a calibrated fluorescence spectrometer FLS980-s (Edinburgh Instruments) equipped with continuous broad-spectrum xenon lamp Xe1. Time-resolved PL images were taken with a Streak Camera C5680 (Hamamatsu Photonics) using the second harmonic (400 nm) of MaiTai laser (Spectra-Physics) as an excitation source. PLDMR was measured either on the same samples as for PL or samples were prepared from solutions of the materials in chlorobenzene. Both sample preparations yielded the same PLDMR results. For solution processing ~100 μl were poured into EPR quartz tubes and the solvent was then evaporated by vacuum pumping. The sample tubes were subsequently sealed under inert helium atmosphere. PLDMR measurements were done in a modified X-Band spectrometer (Bruker E300, see Fig. All OLED devices were fabricated on indium tin oxide (ITO) covered glass substrates (1 cm 2 ). First, poly( :polystyrolsulfonate (PEDOT:PSS, 4083Ai) from Heraeus was spin coated, resulting in a 40 nm thick film. All further device fabrication steps were done inside a nitrogen glovebox to avoid degradation, starting with annealing of the PEDOT:PSS layer for 10 minutes at 130°C. For m-MTDATA:3TPYMB devices, 30 nm donor and 30 nm acceptor were thermally evaporated in an evaporation chamber with an additional 70 nm mixed layer (1:1) in between the pristine material layers. For THCA:BPhen devices, THCA was spin-coated from chlorobenzene solution yielding a layer thickness of 50 nm followed by evaporation of a 40 nm BPhen layer (bilayer device). For m-MTDATA:BPhen both methods were used yielding identical results for the spin-dependent EDMR and ELDMR measurements. The top electrode for all devices was evaporated (5 nm Ca / 120 nm Al), completing OLEDs with 3 mm2 each. Evaporation rates for Ca were 0.3 Å/s and for Al 3 Å/s. For determination of layer thicknesses in spin coated and evaporated materials, a film of the material was scratched with a scalpel and the depth of this scratch was measured with a profilometer (Veeco Dektak 150) EL spectra were recorded by biasing the OLED with an Agilent 4155C parameter analyzer in constant current mode and coupling the emitted light via light guides to an Acton Spectra SP-2356 spectrometer (Princeton Instruments) or a SPM002 spectrometer (Photon Control). External quantum efficiencies and luminance were determined by placing an OLED at a distance of 20 mm from a 1 cm 2 area Hamamatsu S2281 Si photo detector. The OLED was forward biased via an Agilent 4155C parameter analyzer and the Si photodiode current was collected by the same. Knowledge about the spectral distribution of the OLED emission, the spectral response of the Si-photo detector, and the assumption of a lambertian emitter, allowed determination of the absolute EL photon flux from the OLED and the calculation of the external quantum efficiency and the luminance of the OLED. For temperature dependent measurements the OLED was placed on a peltier element. The construction is shielded by an aluminum housing which is continuously flooded with dry nitrogen in order to prevent degradation by air. ELDMR measurements were either done in the microwave cavity (bilayer devices of THCA:BPhen and m-MTDATA:BPhen) or devices were placed in contact to a microwave transmission line (co-evaporated devices of m-MTDATA:BPhen and m-MTDATA:3TPYMB) (see Fig. For measurements in the cavity a continuous helium flow cryostat and for the stripline measurements a continuous nitrogen flow cryostat provide temperature control and protection of OLEDs from degradation by air. The EL was detected by a silicon photodiode. For all OLEDs constant current (for ELDMR) or constant voltage (for EDMR) forward bias was provided by a source-measure unit (Keithley 237). For all ELDMR, PLDMR and EDMR measurements EL, PL and bias currents were fed to a current-voltage transimpedance amplifier (Femto). The signal change upon resonant microwave irradiation was then detected via a lock-in-amplifier (SR7230) with the on-off modulated microwave as reference. In order to determine the sign of PLDMR and ELDMR signals we used an oscilloscope to monitor the time dependent microwave induced change in PL/EL during microwave on-off modulation at a constant magnetic field. For PLDMR, transients at three different magnetic field positions are measured. For the first measurement the magnetic field is set to B-B0 = 0 mT where narrow and broad component are superimposed in the lock-in detected signal (Fig. For ELDMR, transients at two different magnetic field positions are measured. For the first measurement the magnetic field is set to B-B0 = 0 mT where the resonance condition is fulfilled (Fig. From this measurement we conclude that the microwave induce change of EL in resonance corresponds to a decrease of EL intensity. Therefore, we set the sign in lock-in detected ELDMR measurements to negative. The effect of static magnetic field on EL intensity (magneto-electroluminesence, MEL) (Fig. According to equation S2 the magnetic field splitting ∆B depends linearly on the microwave frequency ν MW if ∆g = |g f -g g | > 0. At low frequencies, ∆B is negligible and the resonance curves of the two spins overlap. In this case the linewidth of the overall EPR signal is dominated by broadening mechanisms such as dipolar interaction D and unresolved hyperfine interactions. For higher microwave frequencies the increase of ∆B causes an additional broadening of the EPR linewidth as shown in Figure The resonant transmission line approach we use to measure ELDMR spectra (see experimental section and Fig. An upper boundary value for ∆g can be extracted from a simulation of the ELDMR spectra within the whole frequency range. For this purpose we used the software package EasySpin, The fit is performed using EasySpin -a software toolbox based on Matlab, which simulates EPR spectra of spin systems. The starting parameters for the fit are defined as follows: Sys.S=[1/2 1/2]; %specifies the system as two spin 1⁄2 carrying particles. Sys.g = [2.00118 ; 2.00021]; %sets the initial values for the g-factors of the two spins. Sys.D= [27]; %sets the initial value for the dipolar interaction to 27 MHz. Sys.lw=4; %sets the initial value for the Gaussian broadening of the linewidth to 4 mT. First, the spin system is defined as two spin 1⁄2 particles with corresponding g-factors, which, in our case, represent electron and hole forming an exciplex state. Furthermore, a dipolar coupling D between the two spins is defined. D basically contains information about the distance of the two spins as described in the main part of this work. An initial linewidth for the EPR spectrum has to be set to account for broadening mechanisms such as unresolved hyperfine coupling. On the one hand, EasySpin allows to simulate a theoretical EPR spectrum of such a spin system if the user provides the values for the g-factors, the dipolar coupling and the initial linewidth as well as the frequency at which the EPR experiment is performed. On the other hand, EasySpin can be used to fit experimental data, where the parameters of the spin system are optimized to reproduce the measured signal. For a global fit this optimization is performed for several spectra simultaneously. General Information on EasySpin can be found in A total photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) of 0.45 was measured for an oxygen-free m-MTDATA:3TPYMB solid film, whereas the PLQY of the same film fully quenched by oxygen was 0.04. Then the quantum efficiency of the prompt component is φ pr = 0.04 and of the delayed component is φ TADF = 0.45 -0.04 = 0.41. Now, under the assumption that phosphorescence is not present at room temperature, the quantum efficiencies of ISC, RISC, and nonradiative triplet decay can be expressed via φ pr and φ TADF : φ ISC = 1 -φ pr = 1 -0.04 = 0.96, φ RISC = φ TADF = 0.41, and φ nr = φ ISC -φ TADF = 0.96 -0.41 = 0.55. With that, the maximum internal electroluminescence efficiency of the emitter in an OLED can be expressed as 5 : Φ EL,int = η S φ pr + η S φ ISC φ RISC + η T φ RISC ; Φ EL,int = 0.25 • 0.04 + 0.25 • 0.96 • 0.41 + 0.75 • 0.41 ≈ 0.416; Here η ... and η ] are the portions of singlets and triplets produced via electrical injection (0.25 and 0.75, respectively). We obtained Φ EL,int = 41.6%, which results in the estimation of EQE max = 8.3% in devices with an assumed 20% light outcoupling. C) FIG. S15. Scheme of ELDMR setup.