We demonstrate and characterize first superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPDs) made from atomic layer-deposited (ALD) NbN layers. To assess the suitability of these films as a detector material, transport properties of bare films and bridges of different dimensions and thicknesses are investigated. Similar ratios of the measured critical current to the depairing current are obtained for micro-bridges made from ALD and sputtered NbN films. Furthermore, we characterized the single-photon response for 5 and 10 nmthick nanowire detectors. A 100 nm-wide straight nanowire with a length of 5 μm exhibits saturated count-rate dependencies on bias current and a cut-off wavelength in the near-infrared range. The ALD technique could open up the possibility to fabricate NbN-based detectors on the wafer scale and to conformally cover also non-planar surfaces for novel device concepts. Being developed since their introduction in 2001 Key properties of SNSPDs include the spectral detection efficiency and the timing resolution limited by the timing jitter. By means of material research and optimization of the detector geometry and readout electronics, detection efficiencies of over 90 % at 1550 nm and a timing resolution as low as 3 ps have been shown recently For the use in SNSPDs, materials with a low superconducting energy gap, a small diffusion coefficient of the quasi-particles, and a critical current of nanowires close to the depairing current are advantageous Besides recently emerging materials such as WSi So far, NbN-based SNSPDs are predominantly fabricated by reactive-magnetron sputtering of niobium in a nitrogen atmosphere. However, this technology cannot ensure high uniformity and homogeneity of the NbN films and is hard to apply for larger wafer sizes. Atomic layer deposition (ALD), on the other hand, could alleviate these problems by its chemical nature, depositing superconducting thin films monolayer by monolayer while making lower demands on the vacuum system and the temperature homogeneity of the substrate. Furthermore, other features of this deposition technique like the conformal coverage of pre-patterned substrates could lead to new applications. Previously, ALD TiN films were reported for the application in SNSPDs We successfully deposited superconducting NbN in an Oxford Plasma Technology OpAL ALD system using (tert-butylimido)-tris(diethylamino)-niobium (TBTDEN) and hydrogen plasma as precursors. The substrates are alternately exposed to these precursors to deposit monolayers of TBTDEN on the surface and reduce the monolayers to form NbN, respectively. In order to prevent gaseous phase reactions and limit the process to surface reactions, purge steps with argon as an inert gas are introduced between the precursor steps. By using a nitrogen glove box for sample handling, oxygen contaminations in the reactor could be minimized Using electron-beam lithography, the resist was patterned in several steps. First, the nanowires were patterned in a negative-PMMA process similar to the process shown in The magnetron sputtering process, used to prepare NbN bridges for comparison (see section 3.2), is described in The bare films and test bridges were characterized by standard four-point measurements in a dipstick cooled down to 4.2 K using liquid helium (lHe). For magnetic field measurements, a pulse tube cryocooler equipped with a superconducting magnet was used. The coils create a magnetic field up to 5 T perpendicular to the substrate surface of the samples. The basic electrical characteristics of bare ALD-NbN films were investigated on samples with a thickness between 3 and 21 nm (±0.2 nm). In figure In figure 1(b), both the critical temperature T c (taken at 0.01 R s ) and the width of the transition ∆T (temperature difference of 0.9 and 0.1 R s ) between the superconducting and the normal state are plotted over thickness d. Similar to the trend of R s , the critical temperature T c reaches a plateau above d = 6 nm. A value of T c = 11.3 K for a 6 nm thick film has been obtained, while the critical temperature decreases rapidly for smaller film thicknesses, reaching 7.4 K at 3 nm. The magnetic penetration depth λ for 5 and 10 nm-thick films, estimated from μ 0 λ 2 = ρ 0 /πβ 0 k B T c (β 0 = 2.05 for NbN To define the electron diffusion coefficient D and the coherence length ξ GL , the upper critical magnetic field B c2 has been measured as a function of the temperature (see inset in figure with the Boltzmann constant k B and the elementary charge e (see equation with the magnetic flux quantum Φ 0 = h/2e (see equation Compared to reported values for sputtered films, the residual resistivity of ALD films is about two times higher, while the diffusion coefficient is 1.3-2.0 times lower for the same thickness The diffusion coefficient D is another important parameter when evaluating the influence of an absorbed photon on the superconducting order parameter. A small value for D results in short thermalization times τ th in a relatively small hot-spot volume, which improves the detection efficiency In figure NbN bridges have been patterned to investigate the critical current densities j c . The bridges have a width w between 0.1 and 10.0 μm and a length l = 10w (see geometry in the inset of figure In figure with the formal Ginzburg-Landau zero-temperature depairing current and the correction factor KL(T ) for the dirty limit (see curve 7, figure In figure The temperature dependencies of j c for different widths coincide near T c as expected from the Ginzburg-Landau theory (figure In addition to the theoretical j dep (T ) calculated by equation ( Although the absolute values of j c for the ALD-NbN bridges were significantly lower than the ones for sputtered NbN (9 compared to 23 MA/cm 2 for w = 0.1 μm), due to a higher ρ 0 and a lower T c , the calculated ratios of I c to I dep are comparable, reaching almost 0.6 at the minimal width of 0.1 μm (figure The obtained ratios are still below one, which is probably due to both material-inherent nonuniformities and fabrication imperfections of the nanowire geometry. Moreover, for the calculations we use the nominal width, determined by SEM, without taking the edge roughness into account. Also, damaged normal-conducting bands around the superconducting core were neglected. These are expected due to film oxidation, the formation of an intermediate layer between the substrate and the film and damaged edges during etching, as described in We fabricated straight nanowires with a width w = 100 nm and a length l = 5 μm for the investigation of detector properties. Detectors of both 5 nm and 10 nm film thickness have been characterized. To minimize current-crowding In order to characterize the detectors optically, the samples were mounted in a dipstick cryostat equipped with an optical fiber, RF, and DC lines. The dipstick was cooled down in lHe to 4.2 K. For the detector's operation, a low-noise voltage source with RC-filters connected to a room-temperature bias-tee was used. The samples were illuminated from the top by different light sources. For measurements dependent on the bias current and the optical power, the output of an LED at 385 nm and a laser diode at 658 nm was coupled on to the detector via a multimode fiber, which is specified from 400 to 2400 nm. For spectral measurements, a halogen lamp and a monochromator for the wavelength range between 400 and 2000 nm were used. In order to ensure a uniform illumination of the detectors, the samples were kept at a distance of 4-5 mm from the fiber tip resulting in an illuminated area with a radius of about 1 mm. All of the light sources were calibrated using a power meter equipped with Si-and InGaAs-based photodiodes for the wavelength range 350 to 1100 nm and 800 to 1700 nm (Thorlabs S150C and S154C), respectively. The calibration was done at the detector plane at the bottom of the dipstick in order to take into account any wavelength-dependent loss contribution by the vacuum fiber feedtrough, the fiber itself and the output of the stripped fiber. The count rate was measured by a pulse counter (up to 300 MHz count rate) with a two-stage roomtemperature preamplifier connected to the RF output of the bias-tee. The resulting pulse height was in the range of 200 to 900 mV, depending on the critical current of the sample. The pulse and jitter of the detector were monitored using a real-time oscilloscope of type Agilent Technologies DSA-X 93204A. The output optical power from the monochromator was strongly dependent on the wavelength. In or- der to keep the detector in the same detection regime during spectral measurements, the detection count rate was kept at values below 10 4 s -1 by manually adjusting the input slit width of the monochromator accordingly. The measured data was then stitched by means of overlapping data points. The bias-dependent count rates for different film thicknesses, wavelengths, and optical input powers are shown in figure For the same optical input power, the level of saturation is largely independent of the sample thickness, further emphasizing the near-unity internal efficiency. By blocking the feed-through of the fiber, the dark-count rate (DCR) was obtained. We measured an DCR exponentially growing with the bias current for d = 5 nm and I b > 0.8 I switch , whereas the 10 nm sample did not exhibit an increasing DCR above a noise level ≤ 3 s -1 up to I switch . As illustrated in figure In figure The data were fitted by with a cut-off wavelength λ c and an exponent p indicating the decay slope above λ c The estimated timing jitter of the ALD SNSPDs lies well below 28 ps, which is the limit of the used experimental setup due to intermodal dispersion in the multimode fiber. According to existing detection models for SNSPDs, events of both photon counts in the probabilistic regime and dark counts could be explained by fluctuations, e.g. vortex hopping In the framework of these models, the observed low DCR for thicker ALD-NbN films might be explained by the smaller Pearl length, which, in turn, increases the edge barrier for vortex penetration (see equation ( As a second mechanism, dark-counts due to the unbinding of VAPs should be suppressed in 10 nmthick nanowires, since the film thickness is more than twice the coherence length ξ GL (4.2 K) ≈ 4.45 nm and the probability of VAP excitations is therefore lower. It can be observed, that λ c increases with rising bias currents as it is at least qualitatively described by various detection models Besides that, the detector layout is beneficial for detecting lower-energy photons, since without bends, the single straight nanowires suffer less from currentcrowding and, due to its short length, have a reduced probability of material non-uniformities. As illustrated by the inset of figure Using the ALD technique, we deposited superconducting NbN thin films on sapphire substrates. With a small diffusion coefficient (D = 0.32 cm 2 s -1 for d = 10 nm) and similar values for the ratios C e /C ph and I c /I dep (≈ 0.56) compared to sputtered NbN, these highly disordered films exhibit well-suited properties for the use in nanowire detectors. SNSPDs based on this atomic layer-deposited NbN have been successfully demonstrated. These detectors show saturated CR(λ) characteristics and a cut-off wavelength of about 1.25 μm for a relatively large cross-section of 5 nm × 100 nm. Decreasing the nanowire width should lead to a further increase of the cut-off wavelength We expect, that the ALD technology will gain in importance in the future, since it offers greater flexibility regarding substrate materials and wafer size in comparison to existing deposition techniques. In this regard, the homogeneity with respect to both thickness and stoichiometry over large areas should be characterized. The high degree of film uniformity is important for reproducibility and yield of SNSPDs when scaling up to arrays.