In this article, we design a quantum device to duplicate the Robins procedure. The Robins use a unique method to determine the migratory direction. In the procedure utilized, the important issue is the effect of the geomagnetic field on the magnetic momentum of created radical pairs (triplet-singlet states) dancing with a special frequency. To duplicate the same operational procedure, the quantum sensor consisting of two coincident tripartite systems is designed. Each system is separately excited with the entangled photons (signal and idler) produced through nonlinearity. In a traditional tripartite system, the microwave cavity mode can be non-classically correlated with the optical cavity mode. In this study, however, there are two microwave cavities modes separately affected by the entangled photons, and these modes can be entangled. The entangled microwave photons play the same role that the triplet-singlet state of the electrons have in the Robins operating system. It is the key point that the quantum sensor is deigned to work with, in such a way that the entangled microwave photons can be strongly affected by the applied external magnetic field. In fact, it is the criterion employed by the quantum sensor to sense the magnetic field intensity and the direction. To analyze the system, the canonical conjugate method is introduced to determine the quantum sensor's Hamiltonian, and then the dynamics equations of motions are analytically derived using Heisenberg-Langevin equations. The accurate navigation ability of the European Robins has been an interesting subject for last decades Scheme 1 schematically illustrates the quantum sensor. It contains two coincident tripartite systems, including OC, MR and MC. Each tripartite system is separately excited by entangled photons, one of them is excited with the signal and the other is excited with the idler. The signal and idler are initially generated through interaction of a high intensity laser with OPDC The sensor illustrated in Scheme 1 is used only to sense the intensity of the applied magnetic field. In other words, it cannot determine the magnetic field direction. To detect the magnetic field direction, we design an array of the pairs illustrated in Scheme 2a. It works like a sensitive compass. The direction detection of the magnetic field can be possible using this arrangement. For instance, if the magnetic field is in the direction of the illustrated compass in the figure, then the red pair is activated, and the red pair microwave photons (MC1 and MC2) becomes entangled. Therefore, based on the design, when one of the Hall sensors senses an intensity above the threshold, the microwave photons of the activated pair's become entangled. Nonetheless, the MC modes of other pairs in the array cannot be entangled. The blue-colored pair, for example, can sense the attenuated magnetic field intensity based on the direction of the illustrated compass, which means that the MC modes of this pair is separable. Another interesting point about the system is that two different pairs cannot be coupled to each other. For instance, S_I from the red pair cannot be entangled with S_II from the blue pair. This is because the excitation source of the different pairs is different; the signal source to excite the red pair is not entangled with the signal source of the blue one. Additionally, this figure depicts two different angles αs and αe, which are the subjected area and the effective area of the external magnetic field, respectively. It is clearly seen from figure that the magnetic field can influence more than one pair with the angle of αs, while the results show that the MC1 and MC2 entanglement occurs for one pair just covered by αe. This is because the amplitude of the magnetic field is maximized only in the effective area αe, not in αs. Furthermore, Scheme 2b depicts the schematic of the detection of the magnetic field direction by the designed sensor. It is displayed that the intensity of the magnetic field is maximized at the direction of arrows. In other words, on each line, the maximum amount of the magnetic field intensity (S-pole) is absolutely sensed by one pair. An important question is that, is there a chance to sense a common magnetic field by two different pairs? One can consider very close pairs in the array to accurately determine the magnetic field direction. In this case, it is possible to approximately sense the same field intensity by too close adjacent pairs. It does not disturb the system performance, since the indicated pairs are very close to each other and indicate approximately one direction. More importantly, it is clear that the microwave cavity mode of different pairs is not able to nonclassicaly couple to each other. It is the main point causing this sensor to operate uniquely and safely to determine the direction of the magnetic field. Scheme 2. a) Schematic of quantum sensor to detect the magnetic field direction at which no pairs are affected by others. Based on the illustrated compass, the red pair is only one that is excited by the magnetic field; also a brief comparing is made between αs and αe; αs is the angle to cover the external magnetic field, while αe is the angle to indicate the effective area at which the sensor is designed to safely operate in; b) schematic of detection of the magnetic field direction by the designed quantum sensor. After a short discussion about the general operation of the system, in this section, the system is theoretically analyzed. The canonical conjugate method where LOC, LMR, LMC, and LOC-MR are optical cavity, microresonator, microwave cavity, and optical cavitymicroresonator interaction Lagrangian, respectively. Also, ε0, E, A, P, X, αc, ωm, L, Q, Φ, Vd and m are the free space dielectric constant, electric field operator, vector potential operator, MR oscillator momentum operator, MR oscillator position operator, OC and MR interaction coefficient factor, MR oscillation angular frequency, LC circuit inductance, the stored charge operator in the MC capacitor, magnetic flux operator, MC input driving field, and MR resonator mass, respectively. Moreover, CM = Cd+CVS and CN = CM+C1(x) where C1(x0) = εAcap/dcap. Also, Acap and dcap are the capacitor's plates surface area and the separation between, respectively. It should be noted that the third term in LMC denotes the interaction Lagrangian between MC and MR. Using Eq. 1, the Hamiltonians of the system are expressed as: Where ωos, and HMC-MR are the optical cavity resonance frequency, and interaction Hamiltonian between MC and MR, respectively. Moreover, CN0 = CM+C1(x0) where x0 indicates the equilibrium position of MR oscillator. After calculation of the cavities creation and annihilation operators and substituting in Eq. 2, the simplified system total Hamiltonian is given by: ( 2 where (aj + , aj), and (cj + , cj), with subscript j = s or i, are the creation and annihilation operators for the optical and microwave cavities, respectively. Also, ωωj, p0j, x0j, Ec, Ep0, n, χ (2) , and հ are the MC cavity resonance frequency, normalized quadrature momentum and position operators, OC cavity input driving rate, input laser amplitude to excite the OPDC, nonlinear material refractive index, nonlinear material susceptibility, Plank's constants, respectively. Notably, Hint-sph is the only part of the system Hamiltonian that connect the two tripartite systems, S_I and S_II, each other through the non-classical connection between the entangled photons (signal and idler). It is suggesting that if Hint-sph goes to be vanished, for example by decreasing of χ (2) , the tripartite systems modes either optical modes or microwave modes remained separable. This point will be discussed in the following section. Using the Hamiltonian defined in Eq. 3, and by applying Heisenberg-Langevin equations ) where κj, γj, and κcj, with j = s or i are the optical cavity, microresonator, microwave cavity damping rate, respectively. Also, Δocj, and Δoωj are the related detuning frequency, and G11 = √2(αc 2 ωms/2ε0mωos), G22 = √2(αc 2 ωmi/2ε0mωoi), G13 = (C1s'(x)/CN0)√(ћ/mωms), G23 = (C1i'(x)/CN0)√(ћ/mωmi), and Gint = -χ (2) Ep0√(ωosωoi)/2n 2 . In these relations, C1s'(x) and C1i'(x) denote the change of the MC circuit capacitance with respect to the signal and idler optical pressure, respectively. A simple way to achieve stationary and robust entanglement in continuous variable, is to determine an operating point at which the cavities are driven. Under the condition that the interaction field is so strong, one can focus on the linearization and calculate the quantum fluctuation around the semi-classical fixed point To solving Eq. 5, it is assumed that As and Ai is a real number, and Re{As}>>1, Re{Ai}>>1 and also |Cs|>>1 and |Ci|>> 1. It should be noted that the fluctuation is calculated around the fix point, and the selection of such those fix points don't affect the mode's fluctuation. Finally, the dynamics equations of the modes fluctuations are given by: To study the entanglement between cavities modes, Eq. 6 should be solved. For simplicity, the matrix form of the appropriate quadrature operators of the intra-cavity fields are introduced as: where M1 = 0.5√2*G13ΔoωsRe{Cs}, M2 = 0.5√2*G13ΔoωsIm{Cs}, M3 = 0.5√2*G23ΔoωiRe{Ci}, M4 = 0.5√2*G23ΔoωiIm{Ci}, M5 = -0.5*G13ΔoωsRe{qs}, M6 = -0.5*G13ΔoωsIm{qs}, M7 = -0.5*G23ΔoωiRe{qi}, M8 = -0.5*G23ΔoωiIm{qi}. Also, in Eq. 7 δx c , δy c , δx ω , and δy ω are the quadrature operator of the related noises. Eq. 7 can be simply solved and yield to a general form as u(t) = exp(Ai,jt)u(0) + ∫(exp(Ai,js).n(t-s))ds, where Ai,j u(0) n(t) n(s) is the noise column matrix. The related input noises obey the following correlation function where N(ω) = [exp(ћω/kBT)-1] -1 , kB and T are the Boltzmann's constant and operational temperature, respectively where J = [0, 1; -1, 0] and notation "tr" stands for the trace of the matrix. This criterion is a necessary and sufficient condition of bipartite Gaussian states system separability. So, if it is assumed that the states in the designed system are Gaussian, it can normally use this criterion, Eq. 9, to study the entanglement between modes. Also, A, B, and C are 2×2 correlation matrix elements [A, C; C T , B] that, can be represented for the case of MC1-MC2 as: Therefore, using Eq. 12, and substituting into Eq. 9, one can study the entanglement between cavities modes. In the following, the results of the simulations are presented, and it will be discussed that how the designed sensor can duplicate the Robins. This section presents the simulation results. Table Fig. Fig. To make some comparisons to the Robins procedure, an external RF source is employed with a modified voltage coefficient as VH1m = VH1+ VH1*cos(2πfextt)*cos(θext) where fext is the RF source frequency, and θext is the angle that the RF source is excited respecting the original magnetic field. Fig. In this article, a quantum sensor was designed to duplicate the Robins procedure. The quantum sensor had two distinct tripartite systems, which were separately excited by entangled photons. It was shown that the microwave cavities of the tripartite systems could couple nonclassicaly to each other. In fact, it was the main criterion in which the quantum sensor was employed to sense the small alteration of the applied magnetic field. It was a typical Hall sensor to sense the magnetic field intensity, and then the output signal was the voltage that drop across the Varactor diode. Then, the Varactor diode capacitance was changed based on the voltage drop. The change of the Varactor diode capacitance altered the LC circuit total capacitance. In other words, the LC circuit frequency was dependent on the alteration of the external magnetic field. The simulation results showed that the MC1 and MC2 modes could be entangled, and changing some parameters such as the magnetic field intensity, temperature and quantum property of the entangled photons strongly affected the quantum sensor operation. Consequently, the entanglement between MC1 and MC2 modes was the criterion utilized by the quantum sensor to duplicate the Robins procedure. It was shown that the entanglement between two microwave modes is severely influenced as same as the alteration of the singlet-triplet state dancing due to the geomagnetic field effect. Moreover, it was examined that the designed sensor was not affected by the external RF source at the range of MHz, which was in contrast to the Robins that was easily affected within the mentioned frequency range. It was notable to indicate that the quantum sensor was analyzed with the quantum electrodynamics theory in which the system dynamics equations of motions were derived using Heisenberg-Langevin equations. 