While regular flat bands are good for enhancing the density of states and hence the gap, they are detrimental to the superfluid weight. We show that the predicted nontrivial topology of the two lowest flat bands of twisted bilayer graphene plays an important role in the enhancement of the superfluid weight and hence of superconductivity. We derive the superfluid weight (phase stiffness) of the TBLG superconducting flat bands with a uniform pairing, and show that it can be expressed as an integral of the Fubini-Study metric of the flat bands. This mirrors results The recently discovered superconducting phase in twisted bilayer graphene has received extensive attention . The topology of the lowest two bands (per spin and valley) of twisted bilayer graphene (TBLG) is currently under debate This letter is organized as follows. First, we show that by assuming perfectly flat bands and s wave pairing, the superfluid weight can be written as the integral of Fubini-Study metric over the Brillouin zone (BZ), and show that it is lower-bounded by the Wilson loop winding. Secondly, by applying this result to TBLG, we estimate the topological contribution of superfluid weight and explain the relatively high transition temperature. The two characterizing features of superconductors are the zero DC resistance and Meissner effect. Both of these properties are captured by the celebrated London equation in which the coefficient [D s ] ij is called the superfluid weight and it is a tensor in general. Some spacial symmetry, such as C 3z , requires it to be isotropic in 2D. In some works, such as Ref. Two methods, using a static magnetic field or an alternating electric field, are used to measure the superfluid weight (phase stiffness) directly. In 3D, D s can be obtained by measuring the penetration depth λ L = 1/μ 0 D s of a static magnetic field into the superconductor. This method, however, fails in 2D, as the penetration depth is no longer a simple function of D s . Instead, one can measure the AC conductance under an alternating electric field of frequency ω. By taking time derivative on both sides of Eq. ( In Landau-Ginzburg (LG) theory of conventional superconductivity, the superfluid weight is given by D s ≈ e 2 n s /m * in which m * is the band effective mass and n s is the superfluid density To obtain the contribution of nontrivial band topology to the superfluid weight, we consider a mean-field Bogoliubov-de-Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian of a superconductor: We use Ω 0 to denote the ground state energy of H BdG , which is also the free energy at zero temperature. We substitute k → k-eA by Peierls substitution , where V is the area of the sample, and the second order coefficient [D s ] ij is the superfluid weight. The first order derivative ∂ A Ω(A) gives us the electric current, which agrees with the London equation shown in Eq. Before we start our discussion about TBLG, we briefly review the superconductivity in the spin Chern insulator with exactly flat bands studied in Ref. where ν is the filling ratio of the spinful flat bands, and g ij (k) is the Fubini-Study metric evaluated from the Bloch wave function of the spin ↑ flat band: where u(k) is the Bloch wave function at momentum k of the spin up flat band. This result is derived in the exact flat band limit, so the contribution from the band dispersion (Eq. (S18)) disappears. Thus we discover that LG theory prediction of superfluid weight is not enough even when the flat band is trivial, because we have models which has trivial bands and k dependent wave function u(k), such as the "topological" phase of SSH model A nonzero spin Chern number further gives a nonzero lower bound of the Fubini-Study metric, which will be discussed in the following paragraph. The Fubini-Study metric defines a distance on the BZ torus: two momentum points are close to each other if their wave functions have a large overlap The real part of G ij is the metric g ij and the imaginary part is the Berry curvature. One of the most important properties of G ij is its positive definiteness. It can be shown that for arbitrary complex vectors {c i }, the inequality ij c † i G ij c j ≥ 0 always holds We first generalize the result of Ref. in which ∆ 1,2 ∈ R because of time reversal symmetry. Here Ũk = (u is the projection of U (k) into these N F flat bands and u i (k) are the eigenvectors of matrix H(k). This ansatz implies that s wave pairing happens between Kramers pairs and the pairing strength in the flat bands and in all other bands are given by ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 , respectively. Therefore we have the following three important assumptions in total: 1) the free fermion Hamiltonian with time reversal symmetry has N F flat bands at the same energy near the Fermi level; 2) there is a large band gap between flat bands and other bands; 3) the pairing order parameter satisfies Eq. ( Because of this large band gap between flat bands and other bands, we can project the BdG Hamiltonian into the flat bands of the free fermion model and then derive the superfluid weight. The result is given by in which Tr(X) = N F n=1 (X nn ) stands for the trace over all the flat band indices. Eq. ( We also notice that if we assume ∆2 ∆1 ≤ -1, the superfluid weight will become zero, or even a negative number. A negative superfluid weight is unphysical, denoting that the BCS wave function of such a pairing is not a stable ground state. This also indicates that if there is no constraint on the order parameter ∆(k), the superfluid weight will not be bounded. However we expect a weaker pairing strength in the bands which are farther away from the Fermi level, or |∆ 2 | < |∆ 1 |. If the pairing in higher bands are much stronger than pairing in the flat bandsa physically impossible situation -, our projection of the BdG Hamiltonian into the flat bands may also become invalid. Hence we later set ∆ 2 = 0 in order to estimate the topological contribution of D s . Now we apply Eq. ( The wave function of the two flat bands in TBLG (per spin per valley -which are good quantum numbers for small twist angles) also can be used to define the positive-definite non-Abelian quantum geometric tensor G ij (which is a 2 × 2 complex matrix) and Fubini-Study metric . By choosing vectors c x and c y properly [64], we find that the metric is bounded by the "Abelian part" f xy of the non-Abelian Berry curvature F xy : tr g ≥ 2|f xy |. The derivation of band topology and metric of the TBLG can be found in SM Sec. V. In small angle TBLG, all bands are 4-fold degenerate with respect to spin ↑, ↓ and with respect to original graphene valley K, K . The order parameter ansatz in Eq. ( From this equation, we find that a nonzero superfluid weight is possible even when the bands are exactly flat, as long as Cooper pairing gap is developed (∆ 1 = 0). The parameter ∆ 1 can be estimated from the measured T c . The filling ratio ν is determined by the carrier density. Below we use experimental data to estimate the value of superfluid weight at zero temperature. For flat bands with attractive interaction between Kramers pairs, the mean field BCS wave function is a good approximation to the ground state (SM Sec. VIII). To see this, we can perform a partial particle-hole transformation c k,↑ → c k ↑ , c k↓ → c † -k↓ , under which the attractive interaction becomes repulsive, and the BCS wave function becomes a ferromagnetic state. Since repulsive interaction favors ferromagnetic state according to the Hund's rule, we conclude that BCS wave function describes the ground state well. As previously mentioned, in 2D superconductors, the transition temperature T c measured in experiment is the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless temperature (when phase coherence disappears) instead of the BCS mean field transition temperature T * c ≈ ∆ 1 /2k B (when Cooper pairing vanishes). The BKT transition temperature is given by the universal relation π , we can numerically calculate the temperature dependence of the superfluid weight. As an example, we have plotted D s in FIG. One notices that this is an order of magnitude smaller than the superfluid weight in conventional materials, such as BSCCO and MoGe Moving away from completely flat bands, we find that the conventional term in the superfluid weight mostly depends on the bandwidth W , while the topological term mostly depends on the pairing order parameter ∆ 1 (or the transition temperature T c ). In TBLG, the bandwidth W and the transition temperature T c have a similar magnitude, and we expect the topological term to have an important contribution. In the strong pairing limit where ∆ > W , the superfluid weight will be underestimated if by only the conventional contribution Recently, superconductivity has been observed in other Moiré systems, including twisted double bilayer graphene, and multilayer graphene/boron nitride heterostructure In summary, we proved that fragile topology can yield a nonzero superfluid weight (phase stiffness) of a superconductor even when the bands are exactly flat. In TBLG, by assuming exact flat bands and uniform s wave pairing, the superfluid weight can be written as the integral of Fubini-Study metric, which is bounded by the Wilson loop winding number of the two flat bands of TBLG. Based on the continuum model and the superconducting transition temperature measured in TBLG experiments, we estimated the magnitude of the superfluid weight in TBLG, and show that the topological contribution may play a significant role. The same argument can be applied to other Moiré superlattices with flat bands and non-trivial band topology. This shows that topological bands can have T c much higher than their band widths. We also note that our lower bound is consistent with the upper bound studied in Ref. The supplementary material sections are organized as follows: • In the case without specification, we set = e = k B = 1 in supplementary material for convenience. In this section, we review the BdG mean field Hamiltonian of a superconductor in the presence of an external gauge field. Before we consider the interaction between electrons, we write down the free fermion Hamiltonian: where ψ k is a spinor with N B components labeled by α. Here α can stand for the local orbitals in tight binding models, or reciprocal lattices in continuum models, such as the Q lattice in TBLG If a time dependent uniform gauge field q = eA -which corresponds to a uniform electric field -, is applied, we can obtain the Hamiltonian with Peierls substitution by shifting k to kq: The attractive interaction between the electrons leads to pairing terms such as ψ † ψ † appear in the Hamiltonian under mean-field approximation. We consider the case without FFLO order, hence only the pairing between electrons with momentum k and -k exists. In general, the pairing term takes the form: where ∆(k) = -∆ T (-k) because of particle hole redundancy. Since we have used Peierls substitution, the effect of gauge field has been included in kinetic term, and the pairing term will not depend on q. The Hamiltonian can be written as a bilinear form of a Nambu spinor If the free fermion Hamiltonian can be diagonalized by matrix U (k) as where ε k is a diagonal matrix, we will be able to use it to diagonalize the diagonal blocks of Eq. (S4): By diagonalizing the Bogoliubov-de-Gennes Hamiltonian H k (q), the quasiparticle spectrum of the superconductor can be obtained. Assume the matrix H k (q) is diagonalized by unitary matrix W k (q), we will have the following equation: where E k (q) is a diagonal matrix and its eigenvalues E kn (q) give us the quasiparticle spectrum. When q = 0, the matrix W (0) is the Bogoliubov quasiparticle coefficients: and because of the unitarity of matrix W k (0), the blocks satisfy . These matrices will be helpful for us to simplify the expression of superfluid weight later. At zero temperature, the free energy is given by the summation of all the negative eigenvalues of H k (q) at every momentum k in the BZ. More precisely, the free energy at zero temperature can be expressed as where Tr(• • • ) represents the trace over the energy bands. Because of the particle hole redundancy, the eigenvalues of matrix H k (0) are related with each other by is the number of free electron bands. For completeness, we reproduce the derivation of the superfluid weight. Our procedure is extremely similar to the derivation in Ref. where U (k) is the unitary matrix which diagonalize the original noninteracting Hamiltonian. D s is defined to be the second order expansion coefficients of free energy, so it can be expressed as the second order derivative of Ω(q): The first order derivative of the quasiparticle energy E kn (q) is given by: here we use Feynman-Hellman theorem to derive the second equality. Further we take the second order derivative of Eq. (S12), and it becomes: (S13) This expression can be further simplified. Suppose W k (q) α,n is the n-th eigenvector of matrix H k (q) α,β where q is a parameter, then by definition we have β H k (q) α,β W k (q) β,n = E kn (q)W k (q) α,n . Because H k (q) is a hermitian matrix, we will have the following equation when n = m: Now we take derivative ∂ qi on both sides of this equation, and we obtain (for n = m) The unitarity of W k (q) is used in the third equality. This result can also be written as This theorem (which is nothing else than the classic expression of the non-abelian Berry phase in terms of a sum over eigenstates) can be used to simplify the second and third terms in Eq. (S13): and now Eq. (S13) becomes: (S15) We have hence removed the derivatives of W k (q), which in principle are not immediately obtainable. Only the derivatives of H k (q) are left in the expressions, and these are immediately obtained. The first order derivative of H k (q) is given by: Similarly the second order derivative of matrix H k (q) will be: We substitute Eqs. (S16) and (S17) into Eq. (S15) to get the result of superfluid weight. Now only the Bogoliubov coefficients W k (0) are necessary. By using Eq. (S16) and the first term of Eq. (S15), we obtain the following two terms of superfluid weight: The contribution from ) . Similarly, by substituting Eq. (S14) into Eq. (S15), we get the third term of the superfluid weight: We use Eqs. (S7) and (S16) to express by the following block matrix: We use these blocks to express the third term of superfluid weight (Eq. ( First we study the contribution from these P i (k) matrices. The first term in Eq. (S25) is given by: and we notice it has two dummy indices n and n . If we simply switch them (n ↔ n ), it will become and it differs from the second term in Eq. (S25) only by a minus sign. Therefore the summation of the first and second terms will be zero, and all P i (k) matrices will not appear in the final expression. Similarly, we can prove R i (k) will also disappear. Only matrices Q i (k) will be left. By using the particle hole symmetry ij can be expressed as: By adding Eqs. (S18), (S19) and (S28) together, we finally get the general expression of superfluid weight. This result is accurate under mean-field approximation without FFLO order. In the following section we will see that the superfluid weight can be related to the quantum geometric tensor under the flat band approximation. Our result here is very similar to the result shown in Ref. In this section we study the superfluid weight in the flat band limit. The following discussion is based on these assumptions: 1) the free fermion Hamiltonian H(k) has N F flat bands, with energy ε 0 , and it can be diagonalized by unitary matrix U (k); 2) the band gap between flat bands and other bands is larger than the band width of flat bands (when the bands are exactly flat, this must be true) and the pairing order parameter. Because of the large band gap, the derivation of free energy and superfluid weight can be simplified dramatically by projecting into the flat bands. where Ũk = (u is projector of all the other bands, and Ũ † k Ũk = 1 N F ×N F . Cooper pairing happens between the Kramers pairs, and the pairing strength in flat bands is ∆ 1 , and in other bands it is ∆ 2 . If the BdG Hamiltonian is assumed to be time reversal invariant, then as we mentioned in last paragraph, equation U T ∆ † (k)U T = ∆(k) must be satisfied. This equation requires ∆ 1,2 to be real. To show this, we have the following equation thus when ∆ 1,2 ∈ R, the order parameter ∆(k) satisfies time reversal symmetry. As we mentioned earlier, because the band gap between flat bands and other bands is larger than other energy scales in flat bands, it is not necessary to use the tedious method in Sec. II to obtain the free energy and superfluid weight. Therefore, the derivation becomes much simpler if we project the Hamiltonian into these flat bands. The BdG Hamiltonian in Eq. (S6) includes all the energy bands. If we only keep the columns and rows which corresponds to the flat bands, it will become: where ε 0 is the flat band energy, and In order to evaluate the free energy, we have to know the eigenvalues of Hk (q). Thus we calculate the square of the projected BdG Hamiltonian: Note that it is block diagonal. We use λ kn (q) and φ kn (q) to denote the eigenvalues of matrices Dk (q) D † k (q) and D † k (q) Dk (q), respectively. Obviously, both Dk (q) D † k (q) and D † k (q) Dk (q) are Hermitian and semi-positive definite, we find that λ kn (q) ≥ 0 and φ kn (q) ≥ 0. Therefore, the eigenvalues of the projected BdG Hamiltonian satisfy E 2 kn (q) = (ε 0μ) 2 + λ kn (q) when 1 ≤ n ≤ N F and E 2 kn (q) = (ε 0μ) 2 + φ kn (q) when N F + 1 ≤ n ≤ 2N F . The free energy can be written can be written as the following form: Then we take the second order derivative of Ω(q) to get the superfluid weight: When q = 0, the matrices Dk (0), Dk (0) Dk (0) † and Dk (0) † Dk (0) will become Dk (0) Dk (0 Thus we must have λ kn (0) = φ kn (0) = ∆ 2 1 , and the denominator in Eq. (S44) will hence become a constant , and the superfluid weight can be written as . (S39) The first order derivative of matrices Dk (q) D † k (q) and D † k (q) Dk (q) are all equal to zero. In order to show this, we can calculate the first order derivative of D k (q) and D † k (q): The first order derivative of the product Dk (q) D † k (q) and D † k (q) Dk (q) will become Then by using Feynman-Hellman's theorem, we have ∂ qi λ kn (q)| q=0 = ∂ qi φ kn (q)| q=0 = 0. Hence the superfluid weight can be further simplified as shown: where the integrand of this result is the Fubini-Study metric mentioned in the main text, and it will be discussed in detail in Sec. IV. Because of the pairing term, the chemical potential is no longer at the flat band energy ε 0 . In fact, it can be determined by the filling ratio ν. Bogoliubov theory tells us that the filling ratio of momentum k is given by |v k | 2 : and in the flat band limit, ε k = ε 0 is momentum independent, which leads to a k independent v k . Therefore, the filling ratio of the flat bands is ν = v 2 k . By using this relation, the superfluid weight at T = 0 can be written as In fact the integrand in Eq. ( Fubini-Study metric mentioned in last section is closely related with Berry curvature through the "quantum geometric tensor". Suppose we have n orthonormal vectors u m (k), m = 1 . . . n, in a N dimensional Hilbert space, where k is some parameter. The quantum geometric tensor can be defined as: in which m, n are energy band indices and i, j are spatial direction indices. For convenience we denote ũk = (u n1 (k), u n2 (k), • • • , u nn (k)) where n 1 , n 2 , • • • , n n are the indices of the energy bands we are interested in. By using ũk , the quantum geometric tensor can be expressed in a more compact form: The Hermitian (real) and anti-Hermitian (imaginary) parts of G ij are: For convenience we use g ij to denote Re G ij , and g ij = Tr g ij is the "Fubini-Study metric" mentioned earlier. It is easy to notice that g ij is actually the integrand appeared in Eqs. (S46). If the Berry connection is defined by ). So in conclusion, the quantum geometric tensor can be written as By this quantity, the Fubini-Study metric and Berry curvature are related with each other. An important feature of G ij is its positive definiteness. Suppose we have several complex vectors c i ∈ C n , and we will get the following equation: Because {u m (k)} are orthonormal vectors, the matrix 1ũk ũ † k is a projector, and the eigenvalues can only be 0 or 1. Therefore a scalar product φ † 1ũk ũ † k φ must be non-negative. If we choose the complex vectors c i properly, Eq. (S52) can be used to prove important inequalities between the Fubini-Study metric and Berry curvature, as we will show in Sec. V. The geometric meaning of Fubini-Study metric can be understood as distance between quantum states. In fact the Bloch wave functions of N bands ũk define a map from the Brillouin zone torus to CP N -1 . If we define the distance between two points k and k + dk as shown: then by expanding this equation to the second order we will find d 2 (k, k + dk) = g ij (k 1 )dk i dk j . A pedagogical introduction to quantum distance and quantum geometric tensor can be found in Ref. A physical interpretation of the Fubini-Study metric is related with the Wannier function localization which is studied in Ref. The Wannier function localization functional can be defined as follows: where r is the position operator. However this functional is represented in the Wannier basis. We will show how to express it under Bloch basis. It is well known that the Bloch wave function can be expressed as the product of a periodic function u nk (the Bloch function) and a phase e ik•r : The overlap between two Bloch functions with different momentum will be: The right hand side of this equation is the Bloch states, and we can transform it into Wannier states as shown: Because the Wannier functions have a discrete translation symmetry along Bravias lattice, we obtain Eq. (S56) now becomes Up till now we were using the periodic Bloch wave functions |u kn instead of the eigenvectors u m (k) of matrix H(k). In fact it can be shown that for both continuum models and tight binding models with exactly localized atomic orbitals, we have The Bloch wave function is given by the following equation in both tight binding models and continuum models: In continuum models, the states |k, α are given by the plain waves: where Q α is a reciprocal vector in momentum space. By using the plain wave basis, we have In tight binding models, the states |k, α are given by where w α (r -Rτ α ) is the local wave function in the unit cell R and orbital α. The inner product of periodic Bloch wave function with different momenta will be If the wave functions of atomic orbitals are assumed to be exactly localized as , we will obtain the following equation Now we have proved that for both continuum models and tight binding models, the inner product of periodic Bloch wave functions |u nk is equal to the inner product of the eigenvectors u n (k) of H(k). Therefore, Eq. (S56) can be written as Then we take the first and second order derivatives of q on both sides of this equation, and evaluate the result at q = 0 to obtain: The Fourier transformation of these two equations will be where Ω c is the area of the unit cell. For future convenience we divide the localization functional F into the following two parts: and let us denote the first and second terms in Eq. (S68) by F I and F , respectively. Also F is always positive because of its definition. By using Eqs. (S66) and (S67), the first part F I can be written as the following form: The first term is always a real number because it is equal to 0n|r 2 |0n . So by taking the complex conjugation we obtain Also from the normalization condition we have We use this expression to replace the first term appeared in F I , and the result is Notice that the integrand is the trace of the Fubini-Study metric tr g defined by the eigenvectors u n (k). Since the metric is invariant under gauge transformation, F I is gauge invariant. Hence if the integral of tr g has a nonzero lower bound, the gauge invariant part of Wannier function localization functional will also be bounded. Because F is always positive by definition, the lower bound of the gauge invariant part F I is also the lower bound of the functional F itself. In the following section we will show some examples with bounded Fubini-Study metric. Several examples of metric lower bound are studied in this section. We start our discussion with SSH model. SSH model is a one dimensional model with chiral symmetry and it can be classified by a winding number. In this paragraph we show that the integral of Fubini-Study metric of SSH chain is bounded by the winding number. If the chiral symmetry is represented by σ z , then the (flat band) Hamiltonian of SSH model can be written as The topological index of this model is the winding number, defined by W = By diagonalizing H(k) and finding the wave function of valence band states, we can find the Fubini-Study metric of SSH model is: then it is easy to show that the integral of metric is bounded by the winding number: in which a is the lattice constant. Hence the integral of Fubini-Study metric in one dimension with chiral symmetry is bounded by the winding number. The next example will be a band with nonzero Chern number. The integral of Berry curvature of a Chern band must be 2πn, n ∈ Z. We consider the case with just one band with a Chern number C 1 . That means G ij = g ij -i 2 F xy is a complex number instead of a matrix and g ij = g ij . If we choose c x = 1, c y = i, Eq. (S52) will become: Similarly, if we choose c x = 1, c y = -i, we will get tr g ≥ F xy . In conclusion, the trace of the metric is bounded by the local Berry curvature tr g ≥ |F xy |. Obviously, lower bound for the integral of metric is given by the Chern number: The flat bands in TBLG are not Chern bands. In fact, their Chern number vanishes. The effective continuum model of TBLG per spin per valley is the Bistritzer-MacDonald model We will show how the Wilson loop winding number is related with f xy in the following subsection. It can be shown that the winding number of the Wilson loop of the two active bands can be expressed as the integral of f xy on the whole Brillouin zone. We can label the momentum as k = k1 2π b 1 + k2 2π b 2 in which b 1,2 are the primitive vectors of the Moiré reciprocal lattice. The large Wilson loop across the whole BZ along b 2 direction with fixed k 1 is defined as where P stands for the path ordering and c is the straight line path from (k 1 , 0) to (k 1 , 2π). The complex conjugation of this Wilson loop operator will become: Since we have proved that the sewing matrix is periodic, we find that W (k 1 ) and W * (k 1 ) only differ by a unitary transformation. There will be two kinds of possiblities: 1) the two eigenvalues are complex conjugation to each other; 2) the two eigenvalues are real, and because of unitarity of W (k 1 ), the two eigenvalues can only be {1, 1}, {1, -1} or {-1, -1}. However, the second case can only give us a trivial band because the Wilson loop is not winding, and hence we only consider the first case in the following discussion. Because the two eigenvalues are complex conjugation to each other, the determinant of this large Wilson loop must be 1. Therefore, we have When there is no Dirac point along this Wilson loop, from Eq. (S83) we know that Tr , where n 1,2 are the winding numbers of θ 1,2k along this large Wilson loop. Because of Eq. (S87), (n 1 + n 2 ) must be an even integer, and thus (n 1n 2 ) is also an even integer. As we mentioned in last subsection, the off-diagonal element of Berry connection ia(k)e The above discussion is about a large Wilson loop W (k 1 ) along BZ without going across any Dirac points. However the topology of bands is usually diagnosed by the winding of Wilson loop over the whole BZ, which means k 1 varies from 0 to 2π and it must encounter Dirac points during this process. It can be shown that W (k 1 ) is continuous when it goes across a Dirac point. Assume that W D is a non-Abelian Wilson loop surrounding a Dirac cone at position (k 01 , k 02 ). If we want to shrink this loop to a point with the Dirac point surrounded by it, then the shrinking point must be that Dirac point. The Wilson loop is made out of the projector into the two bands that have the Dirac point, hence it must be the identity. As shown in FIG. and these Wilson line operators W ± 1 , W ± 2 , W Dl and W Dr are also shown in FIG. < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " C B e r u g U D O n y 5 B T 9 S g a o 2 f 0 i t 6 s 3 H q x 3 q 2 P R e u a V c y c o D + w P n 8 A H j S S r Q = = < / l a t e x i t > W (k 01 + ) < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " U a u e W w Y w N J w 1 P 6 P e O P b m 6 t 4 A r e j C f j x X g 3 P q a t B W M 2 s w / + w P j 8 A R 8 U l W M = < / l a t e x i t > A r e j C f j x X g 3 P q a t B W M 2 s w / + w P j 8 A S V I l W c = < / l a t e x i t > W 1 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " a z u A N D J M m v w a 2 5 / u + q g 1 p c U P I j 8 = " Now we study how the winding number of Wilson loop is related with the off-diagonal Berry connection/curvature which defines the Euler class. To do this we need to know the eigenvalue of the Wilson loop operator. However, the form of its eigenvalue depends on the winding numbers of θ 1k and θ 2k , i.e., n 1 , n 2 , along the path of that Wilson loop. As we proved in previous paragraph, (n 1n 2 ) is an even integer and there will be two possibilities: 1) both of them are even integers, or 2) both of them are odd integers. If we calculate the Abelian Wilson loop of one band (either of the bands forming the Dirac node) around a Dirac point, the Berry phase must be ±π. This means the loop integral of both A 11 (k) or A 22 (k) around the Dirac point is either ±π. From Eq. (S83) we know A 11 (k) = 1 2 ∂ k θ 1k . Thus the winding number of θ 1k around the Dirac point will be ±2π. Because there is a nonzero winding of θ 1k around the Dirac point, there will be a branch cut, and the value of θ 1 on two sides of the branch cut differs by ±2π. Now we consider two paths c 1 and c 2 shown in FIG. The eigenvalue of the Wilson loops W (k 1 ) can be calculated as shown. To obtain an expression without θ 1,2k , we do the following transformation u k = ũk g k , in which the transformation g k is given by Then the Wilson loop W (k 1 ) can be expressed by u k as follows: When θ 1k and θ 2k wind even times, g(k 1 , 0) = g(k 1 , 2π), the eigenvalues of W (k 1 ) is the same as W (k 1 ). If the winding number is odd, then g(k 1 , 0) = -g(k 1 , 2π), the eigenvalue of W (k 1 ) is the same as -W (k 1 ). It is hence important to know the expression of W (k 1 ). From the expression of W (k 1 ), we find that it can be written as where P stands for path ordering. We use Eqs. (S83) and (S88) to derive A , and the result is Because σ 2 always commute with itself, W (k 1 ) can be expressed without the use of the path ordering: By this equation we can get the eigenvalue of Wilson loop W (k 1 ) as shown: At first glance the Wilson loop spectrum is not a continuous function of k 1 . However, as we will see in the following paragraph, the winding of a(k) around the Dirac point must be an odd integer, which means 2π 0 dk 2 a 2 (k 1 , k 2 ) is not continuous, and as a result we obtain a continuous eigenvalue ξ(k 1 ). This statement can be proved as follows. By using the transformation in Eq. (S89), the Wilson loop of the two bands around the Dirac point that they form can be written as In this equation the Wilson loop starts at point k i , and the it goes around the Dirac point and then ends at k f . Actually k i and k f are at the same position in the momentum space but the matrix g k are different because of the winding of θ 1,2 . As we proved in the text, the winding numbers of θ 1k and θ 2k around the Dirac point are ±2π, which means g ki = -g k f . Also the non-Abelian Wilson loop is identity when the radius of the loop goes to zero W D | D→0 = 1 , so the following equation holds: where D is the infinitesimal loop around a Dirac point. This means the winding of a(k) is an odd number times π: Now if a Dirac point is assumed to be located at (k 01 , k 02 ), we find that the integral 2π 0 dk 2 a 2 (k 1 , k 2 ) is not continuous and it satisfies: b) The increment of Wilson loop eigenvalue between k1 and k 1 is given by the integral of fxy in the rectangular region between k1 and k 1 with Dirac points removed. The C 2z T symmetry yields a constraint on the quantum geometric tensor. The quantum geometric tensor satisfies the following equation: where B(k) is the sewing matrix of the C 2z T symmetry. Similar to the Berry connection case, this equation gives a constraint on the matrix elements of the quantum geometric tensor. It can be shown that G ij can only take the following form: However, as we have mentioned, Fubini-Study metric defines a positive distance in the BZ, which means it must be a real tensor, hence g * ij (-k) = g ij (k). Therefore we have Then by using Eq. (S105) the lower bound of this integral will be tr That naturally leads to the lower bound of the trace of the superfluid weight: tr D s ≥ 8(∆1+∆2) π ν(1ν). Here we used the fact that the winding number of the flat bands in TBLG is one As mentioned in the main text, we will assume ∆ 2 = 0. Before we estimate the actual value of topological lower bound, we need to know the gap function ∆ 1 at zero temperature. As we discussed in the main text, the transition temperature measured in experiment is the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless temperature T c , and it is different from the mean field temperature T * c where Cooper pairing disappears. The condition of BKT transition is universal and it is given by where D s (T ) is the superfluid weight at temperature T . When this transition happens, the superfluid weight jumps from a finite value to zero, which is totally different from the situation in 3D. Hence the BKT transition temperature is always lower T c < T * c . Now we use the mean field Hamiltonian to determine the ratio of BKT temperature and mean field temperature. The free energy at finite temperature is given by the following equation: in which E kn (q) are the positive eigenvalues of Hk (q). Now we take the derivative of this free energy, and the superfluid weight will be 1 V ∂ 2 Ω(T, q) ∂q i ∂q j q=0 = -1 2 2T cosh 2 E kn (q) 2T q=0 + ∂ qi ∂ qj E kn (q) tanh E kn (q) 2T q=0   . (S114) In Sec. III we have shown that ∂ q λ kn (q)| q=0 = ∂ q φ kn (q)| q=0 = 0, so all the first order derivative terms in Eq. (S114) will disappear. Also in flat band limit, E nk (0) is independent with k and n under the pairing ansatz Eq. (S29), thus the superfluid weight at finite temperature will become and we find this result only differs by a hyperbolic tangent factor from the expression at zero temperature in Sec. III. By using Eq. (S44), we can write down the expression of D s at finite temperature. Since it is isotropic due to C 3z symmetry, the superfluid weight can be written as here ∆ 1 (T ) is the gap function at temperature T , and g(k) is the Fubini-Study metric derived from all the flat bands. For convenience we denote (ε 0μ) 2 + ∆ 1 (T ) by E B (T ). Notice that this expression depends on the chemical potential μ instead of the filling ratio ν. The particle number is no longer simply given by the Bogoliubov quasiparticle coefficient |v k | 2 here because of thermal excitations. Because both the free fermion band and Bogoliubov quasiparticle spectrum E B (T ) are momentum independent, the filling ratio of flat bands are given by are the coefficients of Bogoliubov transformation, c, c † are the electron operators and γ, γ † are the Bogoliubov quasiparticle operators. When T = 0, the expectation value of Bogoliubov quasiparticle number is given by Fermi-Dirac distribution, therefore we have γ † k,K↑ γ k,K↑ = n F (E B (T )) and γ -k,K ↓ γ † -k,K ↓ = 1 + n F (E B (T )). Hence the filling ratio will be If the temperature T , the order parameter ∆ 1 (T ) and the filling ratio ν are given, the chemical potential and further the Bogoliubov energy E B (T ) can be solved from Eq. (S118). Finally we are able to use Eq. (S116) to obtain the superfluid weight with given temperature T and filling ratio ν. To determine the relationship between BKT temperature and mean field temperature, we have to know the value of D s (T ). Here we use flat bands of TBLG as an example. For simplicity, we use the lower bound of the metric to estimate its integral: d 2 k (2π) 2 tr g ≈ 4 π . Hence the superfluid weight becomes in which the chemical potential is related with filling ratio ν by Eq. (S118). Since it is an order of magnitude estimation here, we can simply use the BCS mean field result ∆ 1 (T ) ≈ ∆ 1 (0) 1 -2T ∆1(0) to determine the temperature dependent superconducting gap. Then we can numerically evaluate the value of Eq. (S119), and the result is shown in FIG. By using Hund's rule we argue that the BCS mean field ground state is a good approximation of the real ground state. This argument was also applied in the spin Chern number case i 2 (θ2-θ1) is a real symmetric tensor.