A two-dimensional topological insulator (2DTI) has an insulating bulk and helical spin-polarised edge modes robust to backscattering by non-magnetic disorder. While ballistic transport has been demonstrated in 2DTIs over short distances, larger samples show significant backscattering and a nearly temperature-independent resistance whose origin is unclear. 2DTI edges have shown a spin polarisation, however the degree of helicity is difficult to quantify from spin measurements. Here, we study 2DTI few-layer Na3Bi on insulating Al2O3. A non-local conductance measurement geometry enables sensitive detection of the edge conductance in the topological regime, with an edge mean free path ~100 nm. Magnetic field suppresses spin-flip scattering in the helical edges, resulting in a giant negative magnetoresistance (GNMR), up to 80% at 0.9 T. Comparison to theory indicates >98% of scattering is helical spin scattering significantly exceeding the maximum (67%) expected for a nonhelical metal. GNMR, coupled with non-local measurements demonstrating edge conduction, thus provides an unambiguous experimental signature of helical edges that we expect to be generically useful in understanding 2DTIs. When time-reversal symmetry is preserved, the edges of a 2DTI are expected to be perfect ballistic conductors at zero temperature [1]. Indeed, 2DTIs were first identified experimentally through ballistic edge-state transport [2,3] over few-micron distances. However, in larger samples a finite, nearly temperature-independent resistance is observed [1,[4][5] however no experiments have probed this magnetic scattering directly. Recent efforts have focused on identifying larger bandgap 2DTIs with the hope of demonstrating topological electronic devices at room temperature. WTe2 [12], bismuthene [14] and Na3Bi [15] are thought to be large-bandgap 2DTIs, edge-state transport has been shown up to 100 K in WTe2 However, HgTe quantum wells have shown the persistence of edge state conduction into the conventional insulator regime, calling into question whether edge conduction alone is decisive evidence of topological transport. As the study of 2DTIs expands to new materials and new regimes, an unambiguous signature of helical edge state transport is necessary. Here we demonstrate such a signature, using a combination of non-local transport measurements to demonstrate edge conduction, and magnetoresistance to confirm unambiguously helical transport. We study ultra-thin Na3Bi, especially promising for topological devices due to its very large topological bandgap (>300 meV) and electric-field induced topological phase transition We grow large area epitaxial ultra-thin (~2nm) film Na3Bi on an atomically flat insulator (α-Al2O3[0001]). We use local and non-local After growth, annealing at 300-330 °C for 10 min in a Na flux was carried out to improve film quality. The as-grown film was then transferred in UHV to the low-temperature STM with 1 T perpendicular magnetic field and in-situ electrical contacts. The tetrafluorotetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ) deposition was carried out in the MBE chamber at room temperature using an effusion cell and the rate calibrated by quartz crystal microbalance to p-type dope thin-film Na3Bi without degrading the electronic properties We now turn to the bulk magneto-transport properties of as-grown ultra-thin Na3Bi. Fig. We fit the data to the full Hikami-Larkin-Nagaoka (HLN) formula (solid lines in Fig. The coherence length in a conductor is ultimately limited by electron-electron scattering . The electron band of few-layer Na3Bi is well approximated by a massive Dirac system with Fermi velocity vF = 1 x 10 6 m/s, gap parameter Δ = 92 meV, and effective mass m* = Δ /vF 2 = 0.016 me, where me is the electron mass We now investigate the transport properties when the Fermi level is within the bulk bandgap. We deplete the as-grown n-type doping by depositing high electron affinity (5.24 eV) F4-TCNQ to p-type dope thin-film Na3Bi. their ratio RNL/RL as a function of F4-TCNQ coverage at temperatures of 5.3-20 K. For a uniform conductor we expect More work is needed to clarify the detailed temperature dependence of ρedge. The temperature dependence of RNL/RL also prevents us from probing edge transport to temperatures above 20 K, apparently limited by bulk leakage. This temperature is much smaller than the bandgap in ultrathin Na3Bi, suggesting that bulk leakage could be significantly reduced in cleaner samples, realizing higher temperature edge transport. Fig. We now demonstrate that the observed edge transport is helical. Fig. We model the edge state magnetoresistance as follows. The edge states of Na3Bi in the presence of a perpendicular magnetic field // z are described by the Hamiltonian H = (ħv F k x + g e μ B B) σ z , where x is the transport direction parallel to the edge, g e is the edge spin g-factor and the Pauli matrix σ z represents the edge spin operator. The spins are polarised out of the plane and the magnetic field shifts the origin of k x without opening a gap. We consider scattering off magnetic impurities with spin coupled to the edge spins via a local exchange interactions Jδ(r ⃗) σ ⃗ • S ⃗ , whose matrix elements between momentum states are independent of wave vector. The magneto-resistance is calculated using Boltzmann theory in the spirit of Refs. where , g is the impurity gyromagnetic ratio, g-factor, and is given by the Brillouin function, which reflects the polarisation of the impurity spins by the Zeeman interaction. Spin-flip becomes inelastic and the energy cost associated with flipping the impurity spins leads to a negative magnetoresistance. We note that Kondo scattering terms logarithmic in T show up at orders J 3 and higher. The Kondo temperature TK is expected to be vary small for known TI parameters Fig. suggesting the impurities are quantum dot-like "puddles". In Fig. We have observed at higher F4-TCNQ doping that the fraction of spin-flip scattering is reduced (see Supplementary Materials). This is possibly due to the formation of larger puddles with increasing disorder, which scatter via non-spin-flip inelastic processes, or the F4-TCNQ ions themselves acting as a local moments with small g ~ 2. Our results demonstrate how electronic transport experiments can be used to observe the opening of a bandgap due to confinement in a topological Dirac semimetal, and to determine unambiguously whether the resulting insulator is topological or trivial. Our as-grown ultrathin Na3Bi films are lightly n-doped, and the conducting bulk shows a transition from weak anti-localisation to weak localization as the doping is decreased, as expected for a The variation in film quality between two nominally identically grown films is most likely due to small variations in the sapphire substrates influencing the growth quality. To achieve the highest quality ultra-thin Na3Bi that will enable edge transport at higher temperature will therefore rely on improving the preparation of sapphire substrates in order to reliably reproduce films of the quality shown in Fig. The momentum relaxation length (or the mean free path) can be extracted from our classical transport data, using where e is the elementary charge and ћ is the reduced Planck constant. This allowed us to fit the magnetoconductivity data to the Hikami-Larkin-Nagaoka formula (discussed below) with only two free parameters, instead of three. To understand the quantum interference correction to the conductivity, we need to study the phase coherence (lφ), spin-orbit (lso) and elastic (le) scattering lengths and their respective characteristic fields, One possible alternative to edge transport in ultra-thin Na3Bi, is that at the edge of the sample exists a pure Na or Bi nanowire (as a result of the Na3Bi film being grown through a shadow mask) which would display 1D metallic conduction. To rule out this possibility we grew two separate films; one consisting of only Bi and one consisting of only to determine whether either Bi or Na grow separately on the sapphire substrate. These growths were performed at the same substrate temperatures and conditions used for the Na3Bi growth. For both the Bi film and Na film the resistance (measured locally or non-locally) is above G (which is significantly larger than 100 M measured for edge transport in the Na3Bi ultra-thin films). This allows us to rule out that the non-local edge state transport is caused by pure Na or Bi metal nanowires.