The dream of physico-chemists to control molecular reactions with light beyond electronic excitations pushes the development of laser pulse shaping capabilities in the mid-infrared (MIR) spectral range. Here, we present a compact optical parametric amplifier platform for the generation and shaping of MIR laser pulses in the wavelength range between 8 μm and 15 μm. Opportunities for judiciously tailoring the electromagnetic waveform are investigated, demonstrating light field control with a spectral resolution of 60 GHz at a total spectral bandwidth of 5 THz. In experiments focusing on spectral amplitude manipulation these parameters result in a time window of 1.8 ps available for shaping the temporal pulse envelope and a phase modulation resolution of 100 mrad for several picosecond delays. Microscopic understanding of chemical dynamics on a molecular level is of fundamental importance in many science disciplines. Current objectives range from unravelling ultrafast transitions in processes relevant to life Broadband CEP-stable laser pulses are generated by a compact OPA system similar to the setup described by Sell et al. The first intermediate OPA conversion ('OPA 1') consists of a single-stage OPA based on β-barium-borate (BBO) and the second of a two-stage OPA ('OPA 2') based on potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP), cf. Fig. 3 Ultrafast MIR Pulse Shaping For MIR pulse shaping we used a germanium acousto-optic modulator (AOM) mask as the active element in a 4f -configuration, developed in the group of Martin Zanni at University of Wisconsin, Madison Fourier Plane Figure Real world optical pulse shaping setups impose certain constraints to pulse shaping capabilities. Spectral resolution is in the present case constrained by the diffraction limited beam waist in the Fourier plane. Yet, the accessible spectral resolution is by itself not enough to determine the maximum accessible time window, i. e., the maximum allowed temporal delay between shaped components. The principle of spatial separation of the spectral components of the incoming beam in the 4f -configuration implies a coupling between temporal delay of frequency components and lateral offset of the outgoing frequency components, cf. Monmayrant et al. and references therein. The consequence of this lateral shift may be a deteriorated focus of the beam and hence may affect the application of the beam in experiments The pulse shaper was used to create comb-like amplitude masks, sequentially reducing the spacing ∆ν c of an on-off amplitude pattern. The inset in Fig. The spectral intensity I(ν) was used to reconstruct the transform limited electric field time domain using: where the spectral phase φ(ν) is assumed to be zero over the whole spectral range. Details of the mathematical procedure are described for instance in ref. In contrast to a beam splitting delay unit, such as a Michelson interferometer, pulse sequences from a pulse shaper are in general not generated as replicas of the incoming pulse. Identical replicas are generated by modulation of the spectral amplitude and phase with a cosine function, while arbitrary shaping of the individual pulses is achieved by separate interleaving combs In a second measurement amplitude pulse shaping was used to demonstrate CEP modulation, which can be investigated by a simple spectrometer. Transform limited pulse trains are investigated as a test case for CEP modulation of pulse trains. The spectral intensity distribution does not contain information of the phase of the electric field. It can only be assumed that the spectral phase is of a certain shape. A constant spectral phase φ(ω) is assumed over the whole spectrum. It is then possible to perform amplitude pulse shaping, thereby modifying the relative CEP of the satellite pulses with respect to the central pulse in the pulse train. According to the Fourier shift theorem a shift in the spectrum by an amount ∆ω 0 leads to a phase shift in the electric field: The simulation of this approach is shown in Fig. In the present paper we demonstrate a compact OPA setup generating sub-microjoule pulses in the long wavelength MIR covering 8-15 μm. The spectral bandwidth supports few-cycle pulses, while the OPA architecture delivers passively CEP-stable pulses. The spectral bandwidth of the pulses perfectly fits the spectral bandwidth that can be accessed by the implemented 4f -configuration AOM pulse shaper. The pulse shaping capabilities of the setup are demonstrated for amplitude pulse shaping around 10.5 μm. The reconstruction of the transform limited electric fields is used to determine the available time window for pulse shaping of 1.8 ps. It is planned to extend the window in the near future by increasing the beam size of the MIR beam sent into the pulse shaper setup from 2.45 mm to more than 7 mm and thereby alleviate effects of lateral beam offsets due to spatio-temporal coupling discussed in the present contribution. Control of the relative CEP of subsequent pulses in a pulse train is found to be better than 100 mrad for delays in the range of several picoseconds. Table Cluster of Excellence 'The Hamburg Centre for Ultrafast Imaging' of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) -EXC 1074 -project ID 194651731. Table * (133 * )