We present techniques to model and design membrane phononic crystals with low-mass defects, optimized for force sensing. Further, we identify the importance of the phononic crystal mass contrast as it pertains to the size of acoustic bandgaps and to the dissipation properties of defect modes. In particular, we quantify the tradeoff between high mass contrast phononic crystals with their associated robust acoustic isolation, and a reduction of soft clamping of the defect mode. We fabricate a set of phononic crystals with a variety of defect geometries out of high stress stoichiometric silicon nitride membranes, and measured at both room temperature and 4 K in order to characterize the dissipative pathways across a variety of geometries. Analysis of these devices highlights a number of design principles integral to the implementation of low-mass, low-dissipation mechanical modes into optomechanical systems. Many nanoscale sensing and transduction protocols are based on detection of the minuscule forces between a sample and a highly sensitive probe. Examples include microscopy methods such as atomic force microscopy (AFM) and magnetic resonance force microscopy (MRFM) The factors that define mechanical damping to the environment have been a long-standing question. Generally, loss mechanisms can be divided into two categories: Acoustic radiation into the external structure In this work we explore PnCs with varying mass contrast and associated defect designs in two-dimensional periodic structures. We observe that increasing mass contrast of the PnC widens the bandgap in the frequency domain [Fig. When increasing mass contrast of PnCs mode localization is enhanced, but a consequence is a reduction in soft clamping, which increases susceptibility to internal (bending) loss. Here we consider this decrease in soft clamping quantitatively by examining the bending of multiple combinations of intertwined PnC and defect designs. We note that the choice of tradeoff between localization and soft-clamping will depend upon the application considered; when operating at room temperature soft-clamping is critical, but when at deeply cryogenic temperatures For designs in this work, we specifically have in mind applications where high force sensitivity is desired for MHz-scale membrane resonators simultaneously coupled to an optical mode and a spin or electrical degree of freedom We begin the article with an analytic and numerical analysis of design considerations for optimizing both bending and radiative loss. In particular, we correlate the PnC mass contrast to bandgap width, phononic isolation, and variation in mechanical quality (Q) due to corresponding changes in soft clamping. In this way, we link the geometrical design considerations needed to achieve soft clamping to a relatively narrow bandgap. We then present measurements of a set of five devices with varying bandgap and defects; we study Q at both room temperature and 4 K where internal loss is the dominant contributor, such that we can compare the experimental results to loss prediction from bending. As a primary metric, we examine the mechanical force sensitivity of all devices, developing design principles for combinations of both low mass and low loss mechanical defects. We also identify structures in which nuances of defect design has deleterious consequences, such as considerable defect bending, or large effective mass. In this study we utilize 100 nm thick SiN PnCs and demonstrate force sensitivities down to 12 aN/ √ Hz at temperatures of 4 K and a frequency of 1.6 MHz. We expect that thinner films and colder temperatures will further enable optomechanics that combines high frequency membranes with excellent force sensitivity Here we present the design and analysis of two dimensional PnC structures and their defects. The defect is designed such that it has one or more mechanical mode within the bandgap of the surrounding PnC. Such a design supports a spatially localized mechanical mode within the larger patterned membrane structure. The design of all devices in this work is guided by an optimization of the force sensitivity Here, x zp is the resonator's fluctuation at zero absolute temperature, ω m is the angular frequency of the mechanical mode, T is temperature, k B is the Boltzmann constant, and m is the effective mass of the mode. We emphasize that the appearance of x zp is not an indication of quantum effects, but rather a convenient parameterization as x zp is a fundamental parameter in both the force sensitivity and the optomechanical coupling where Q bend arises from the internal, or bending losses of the mechanical mode, while Q rad encapsulates acoustic radiation that is lost to the substrate and wider environment. A SiN PnC can enhance both Q rad and Q bend via acoustic isolation and soft clamping, respectively. 1D Model for Phononic Crystals In this work we are ultimately interested in the design and fabrication of 2D structures. However, the main design methodologies and concepts can be elucidated by considering a 1D analysis where we convert 2D unit cell (Fig. We present analysis of both finite and infinite PnC structures. A complete description of finite structures involves solving the 1D Euler-Bernoulli equation for the out of plane displacement u(x, t), which describes the bending of the PnC beam. Such an analysis captures the behavior of the mode shape near clamping points of the finite structure dt 2 = 0 (3) where I(x) is the geometric moment of inertia, E is the Young's Modulus, T is the tension, and ρ 1D is the linear mass density. It can be seen that for high aspect ratio devices, the 4th order term is negligible away from the clamps For infinite structures, we can assume periodic boundary conditions. Thus, any expected mode shape should have minimal contribution from the bending term in the Euler-Bernoulli equation. Under these conditions the Euler-Bernoulli equation reduces to the 1D wave equation, and thus the motion of the string is completely parameterized by its spatially dependent wave velocity: where ρ is the bulk density of the membrane, h is the membrane thickness, and wp ( wt ) is the converted pad (tether) width. Definitions of the converted pad and tether widths appear in Appendix A. We outline the solution for infinite structures in Appendix B. As is typical in these types of problems, the band structure is parameterized by a transcendental equation: where t p,t = l p,t /v p,t are the transit times of acoustic waves through the pad and tether respectively, a is the unit cell length, k is the Bloch wavenumber, and V ≡ v t /v p is what we define as the contrast. As can be seen in Eq. 4, the contrast V is geometrically defined by the mass contrast, or the relative converted width of the pads and tethers. Traveling wave solutions are prohibited when |S| > 1; such a condition defines the range of ω that determines all bandgaps. One goal of PnC design is to maximize the bandgap size in the frequency spectrum. For simplicity, we investigate the case where we wish to maximize the width of the first bandgap. Inspection of Eq. 6 reveals that this occurs when the second term is identically 0. In this case, t p = t t , and |S| reaches its maximal value S max when ω = ω π ≡ π/2t t : With this in mind, we can derive an expression for the normalized bandgap width: A strong agreement between the 1D model prediction of Eq. 8 (blue line) and FEM simulations of equivalent 2D unit cell (points) across a range of contrasts can be seen in Fig. The main advantages afforded by SiN PnCs include both soft clamping and phononic isolation of defect modes. We assert that V (and thus also ∆) is a geomet-rically defined indicator of the extent to which a PnC achieves these phenomena. To understand the effects of soft clamping on dissipation, we first examine the origin of bending loss for a given mechanical mode L s = κ(x, y)dxdy (10) where Q int (h) is the intrinsic Q of silicon nitride, E is the Youngs' mondulus, h is the nitride thickness, ν is the Poisson ratio, U is the kinetic energy of the mode and u(x, y) is the mode shape. E 2 (h) is the imaginary part of the Youngs' modulus, defined to be Here we call attention to the dependence of Q int , which has been shown to have a scaling Q int ∝ h at membrane thicknesses around 100 nm To directly illustrate how PnC design affects the soft clamping of defect modes, we perform a series of 1D simulations where a single defect is placed in a series of PnCs with ascending contrast. From the calculated defect mode shapes, one can predict a value for Q bend assuming that Q int has a value of 6600 The numerical analysis above showed that high contrast PnCs exhibit short defect mode decay lengths, and we also see numerically that this short decay length provides enhanced suppression of radiative loss. In this analysis, we investigate the concept of phononic isolation in a two dimensional structure by FEM simulation using Comsol. For details, see Appendix D. Here, we calculate the ratio of the tensile energy stored in the entire structure to the energy stored in a 10 μm overhang around the PnC perimeter. We define this ratio ∆U . As seen in Fig. Up to this point, we focused on PnC characteristics, and have shown that our 1D model reproduces the the basic behavior the equivalent 2D crystals. However, the same cannot be done for designing defects in two dimen-sions, where we generally find that the 1D results have at most a qualitative relationship to a 2D defect. This is mostly due to the complicated stress redistribution that occurs in intricate 2D structures around the defect (Fig. The stress redistribution of the 2D structure also strongly affects the position of the defect mode frequency within the bandgap, leading to discrepancies between the 1D and 2D simulations. While the 1D model allows positioning the defect modes directly in the bandgap center [Fig. To test examples of the above ideas, we fabricated and characterized multiple devices (Fig. The mechanical mode spectrum of the devices was characterized at both room temperature and 4 K by affixing the device to a mirror mounted on a piezoelectric transducer. The spectrum was imprinted on the amplitude fluctuations of light reflected from the etalon formed by the mirror and the membrane device. For all measurements, around 5 mW of 1064 nm laser power was incident on the sample. An absolute calibration of the mechanical displacement of our devices can be performed by assuming that the observed mechanical amplitude is entirely due to the expected thermal signal. However, many of our spectra were taken via white noise driving of the entire PnC chip via the piezo electric transducer. Therefore, all mechanical amplitudes are displayed relative to the shot noise limited noise floor the detection chain. The room temperature measurements were performed at a pressure less than 10 -6 mBar. 4 K measurements were performed in a closed cycle cryostat with free space optical access. To clearly understand the mode spectrum we characterize the motion in multiple regions of the PnC. Outlined in Fig. Quality factors were determined via ringdown measurements of the phononic structures driven by the piezoelectric transducer. Figure In Fig. To compare the effects of the PnC on the defect mode, we can compare devices A and C, which both have defects with trampoline geometries. Both devices also support a first asymmetric defect mode with frequencies between 1.5 and 2 MHz. We find overall that these devices exhibit a similar force sensitivity both experimentally [Fig. The remaining devices (D and E) provide examples of how nuances in device design can cause adverse effects. For instance, device D exhibits a relatively low x zp [Fig. To summarize, we studied SiN membrane designs composed of a defect surrounded by a PnC structure. We demonstrated the effects that high contrast PnCs can have on producing wide bandgaps. Additionally, we presented numerical analysis that connects high contrast PnCs to robust energy isolation of defect modes. Conversely, high contrast crystal, compress the mode spatial distribution, induce more bending and increase the internal loss. However, the increased internal loss is not severe for certain designs, and may for some applications be worth the trade-off for phononic isolation and requirements on the number of unit cells. We have shown that a 1D model with proper conversion, based on the Euler-Bernoulli equation or its reduction to the wave equation, is suitable for analyzing the behavior of a 2D PnC struc-ture. However, incorporating a defect to a 2D crystal requires a complex redistribution of the stress, which could be achieved only by a suitable FEM simulation. Utilizing these tools, we designed, fabricated and measured 5 devices differing in PnC contrast and defect designs. These devices exhibit force sensitivity on the order 10 aN/ √ Hz at 4K. We draw attention to both devices A and C, which we predict to have comparable force sensitivities when bending-loss limited. This similar performance is achieved despite the vast difference between the PnCs of the devices and we attribute this similarity in force sensitivity to the low-mass trampoline defect common to both devices. However, under conditions where both these devices are radiation-loss dominated, device A has the potential to outperform device C in force sensitivity due to its robust acoustic isolation, or equivalently achieve equal radiation isolation with a smaller number of unit cells. The low mass trampoline defect archetype also incorporates high stress tethers, which can be readily utilized to deposit metallic or magnetic materials for further device functionalization For force sensing functionalization, it is generally required to add additional components to the device to induce a force between the resonator and the sample in order to couple the mechanical resonator to the force in question. These additional elements add mass and alter the designed mechanical mode shapes and properties. One particularly challenging aspect is how to position the defect mode's frequency within the bandgap upon loading of additional mass. High contrast PnCs offer a larger design space in which to position the defect within the bandgap, while allowing a relatively large tolerance for mass deposition. However, the low mass defects studied here displayed a first symmetric mode at the lower end of the bandgap. This problem could be adverted by exploring more exotic defects beyond the trampoline archetype, such as delocalized double-pad defects, or by utilizing higher order modes. As mentioned earlier, the low frequency modes, or notably fundamental mode frequencies (ω 0 in Fig. All devices reported in this work were fabricated with a thickness of 100 nm. However, by using 20 nm SiN or thinner, force sensitivity could be significantly en-hanced thanks to the scaling of √ S F F ∝ h -3/2 . Reducing the thickness of device A to 20 nm, would optimally improve its sensitivity to 1 aN/ √ Hz force sensitivity at 4 K. Furthermore, employing SiN resonators below 100 mK, should significantly enhance force sensitivities as E 2 of silicon nitride decreases even more under these conditions We present here the method for converting a 2D unit cell geometry to an effective 1D geometry. This approach involves first considering a wave direction along which we will convert the 2D geometry. We wish to encode the geometry transverse to the wave direction into the resulting 1D geometry. It is known that 1D strings with variable width will have lower wave velocities in the wider regions. We imagine that with more transverse?, the plane wave in the 2D geometry will also have lower wave velocity. Our conversion will then be as follows: where x l and x t refer to the coordinates along the longitudinal and transverse wave directions respectively, and G refers to the domain of a single unit cell. Upon performing the conversion, g 1D (x) gives a continuous variable width of the beam from which a variable wave velocity can be derived. To derive the bandstructure, the 1D wave equation with Floquet boundary conditions can be numerically solved for an arbitrary g 1D (x). However, we find it fruitful to further simplify the geometry where possible. Namely, we wish to convert wave velocity to match that of the Kronig-Penney model which can be solved analytically. This involves defining regions of high mass and low velocity (pads) and low mass and high velocity (tethers) from an arbritrary g 1D (x). For unit cells like those in device A, the selection of the pad and tether regions follows naturally from the 2D geometry. Furthermore, the integration carried out in Eq. 12 can be carried out using geometric properties. This procedure will perform the transformation (w p , w t , l p , l t ) → ( wp , wt , lp , lt ) of the geometric parameters. Following this procedure, we derive the following: In this work we also study unit cells that do not fit the pad-tether model at the outset Therefore we have the following eigenvalue problem We note that M is a product of unitary matrices, which places a contraint on its components: Solving the eigenvalue problem gives us the implicit bandgap equation Devices were fabricated on a 375 μm thick 3 inch diameter silicon wafer with 100 nm of grown stoichiometric LPCVD silicon nitride on either side. Designs were patterned using a direct write photolithography system after spinning 1 μm of SPR-660 photoresist onto either side. The top of the wafer was patterned with the PnC designs, while the back was patterned with rectangular windows aligned to each PnC. The patterning was done on both sides with 300 mJ cm -2 of 405 nm light. During these steps, the wafer was affixed to a sapphire carrier wafer with Crystalbond 509 in order to protect the bottom side from unwanted processing. Patterning of the silicon nitirde was completed via a CF 4 reactive ion etch. The wafer was then cleaned with O 2 plasma followed by ultrasound cleaning in an acetone bath. Additional cleaning was performed with isopropyl alcohol and water. To suspend the PnC structures, the window side of the wafer was etched using a 80 C KOH bath. The PnC side was protected via a PEEK wafer holder. Following wet etching, the wafer was cleaned in a Nanostrip bath, acetone and isopropyl alcohol. FEM simulations in this work were performed using COMSOL Multiphysics. Simulations were performed in 2 steps; the stationary stress redistribution was calculated, followed by a eigenfrequency analysis to determine the mode spectrum of each PnC. The simulations were performed with increasingly fine meshes until both the mode frequencies and loss factors were found to converge to a change less than 5 percent. These simulations assumed that the density of silicon nitride was 3100 kg m -3 , the film stress was 1.13 GPa, the poisson ratio was .27, and the Youngs' modulus was 250 GPa.