The fabrication of a high-quality POLED (Polymeric Organic Light Emitting Diode) display requires the deposition of identical, uniform fluid films into a large number of shallow recessed regions that form a regular array of pixels on a display backplane. We determine the protocols required to achieve continuous liquid coverage of the entire pixel area for the case where equally-spaced fluid droplets are sequentially printed along a straight line within a stadium-shaped pixel, and explore how these protocols depend on the wetting properties of the pixel surface. Our investigation uses a combination of experiments and numerical modelling, based on the assumption of fluid redistribution via capillary spreading according to a Cox-Voinov law. We show that the model is able to predict quantitatively the evolution of the liquid deposited in a pixel and provides a computationally inexpensive design tool to determine efficient printing strategies that account for uncertainties arising from imperfect substrate preparation or printhead dysfunction. In recent years, inkjet printing-based manufacturing 1,2 has established itself as a simpler and more economical approach than conventional lithography processes for the production of a variety of microelectronics, 3-5 displays, The manufacture of high-resolution POLED displays via inkjet printing requires the controlled deposition of a dense pattern of identical liquid films of a functional material in solution. Solid deposits are formed upon evaporation of the solvent to yield the bottom-gated transistors that emit light, commonly referred to as pixels In this letter, we focus on determining the conditions required to fill such pixels as a function of the wetting properties of the substrate and the printing parameters, i.e. the total number of droplets deposited in a pixel (N ) and the inter-drop distance between them (∆x). We demonstrate that a simple model Experimental methods: A schematic diagram of the experimental setup is shown in Fig. Experiments were performed on sample display backplanes manufactured in the clean room facility of CDT, each having a pixel density of 200 pixels per inch -see Kant et al. the pixel boundary; here θ Ax and θ Rx refer to the advancing and receding contact angles, respectively; see ESI. We varied the inner advancing contact angle by letting the substrate age in the laboratory; this aging did not affect the contact angles on the walls and outer surfaces which remained approximately constant. The high values of the advancing and receding contact angles on the banks surrounding the pixels ensured that any droplet deposited partially outside the boundary retreated into the pixel so that the deposited volume was contained inside the pixel Numerical model : The details of the model development have also been presented previously The three sequences of images in Fig. The red contours overlaid on the experimental snapshots in Fig. For wetting pixels (θ Ai = 4.5 • ), 'safe' operating conditions are for N ≥ 4 (green line) because the low contact angle enables the line to spread to the end of the pixel regardless of droplet positioning. This means that the filling of a wetting pixel only depends on the total volume deposited; see Figs. For partially wetting substrates (20 • ≤ θ ≤ 38 • ), the filling of a pixel for small values of ∆x also requires the volume deposited to exceed a threshold value. However, the number of droplets required to fill the pixel decreases as the inter-drop distance increases (blue line: θ Ai = 20 • ; black line: θ Ai = 38 • ) because the filling of the pixel relies on the liquid line reaching the downstream end of the pixel and this can be achieved for a reduced total deposited volume by increasing ∆x. This result is consistent with Fig. Using the numerical model, we were able to reproduce the threshold operating conditions that separate filled and partially filled pixel states; see Fig. In a small subset of experimental pixels, anomalous equilibrium configurations were obtained, which the model used in Figs. 1 and 3 failed to capture. An example is shown in Fig. Finally, we used the numerical model to capture the effect of a printhead dysfunction commonly encountered during operations on an industrial scale, namely the misfiring of a droplet. As printing defects can lead to partially filled pixels 8 which reduce the overall resolution and performance of a display device, it is necessary to account for such dysfunctions at the design stage. In Fig. To summarize, we have discussed various aspects pertaining to the printing of short liquid lines to robustly fill pixels in the context of POLED display fabrication. We have shown that in order for sequentially deposited droplets that coalesce upon impact to form a thin film that covers the entire pixel surface, the wettability of the pixel surface must be considered in conjunction with the deposition parameters. Furthermore, we have demonstrated that a simple model that relies on capillary spreading according to a Cox-Voinov spreading law can be used as a computationally inexpensive design tool to determine efficient printing strategies in the fabrication of high performance POLED and also LCD (Liquid Crystal Display) P. Calvert, Chem. Mater.13, 3299 (2001). M. Singh, H. M. Haverinen, P. Dhagat, and G. E. Jabbour, Adv. Maters.22, 673 (2010). H. Sirringhaus, T. Kawase, R. Friend, T. Shimoda, M. Inbasekaran, W. Wu, and E. Woo, Science 290, 2123 (2000).