Grounding of kinesthetic feedback against a user's hand can increase the portability and wearability of a haptic device. However, the effects of different hand-grounding locations on haptic perception of a user are unknown. In this paper, we investigate the effects of three different hand-grounding locations -back of the hand, proximal phalanx of the index finger, and middle phalanx of the index finger -on haptic perception using a newly designed wearable haptic device. The novel device can provide kinesthetic feedback to the user's index finger in two directions: along the finger-axis and in the finger's flexion-extension movement direction. We measure users' haptic perception for each grounding location through a psychophysical experiment for each of the two feedback directions. Results show that among the studied locations, grounding at proximal phalanx has a smaller average Just Noticeable Difference for both feedback directions, indicating more sensitive haptic perception. The realism of the haptic feedback, based on user ratings, was highest with grounding at the middle phalanx for feedback along the finger axis, and at the proximal phalanx for feedback in the flexionextension direction. Users identified the haptic feedback as most comfortable with grounding at the back of the hand for feedback along the finger axis and at the proximal phalanx for feedback in the flexion-extension direction. These findings show that the choice of grounding location has significant impact on the user's haptic perception and qualitative experience. The results provide insights for designing next-generation wearable hand-grounded kinesthetic devices to achieve better haptic performance and user experience in virtual reality and teleoperated robotic applications. Preprints of the IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters (RAL) paper presented at the 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Palais des congres de Montreal, Montreal, Canada, The majority of the existing haptic devices providing kinesthetic feedback are world grounded On the other hand, wearable haptic devices must be portable and typically offer a large range of motion. But, majority of the existing wearable haptic devices are tactile in nature and provide feedback in the form of vibration or skin deformation. They are commonly grounded against the user's fingertip or the nearby region Kinesthetic haptic devices, that are not world grounded but instead impart feedback by grounding forces against the user's hand (hand-grounded haptic devices), provide a solution to challenges of portability, wearability and limited workspace in kinesthetic haptic devices. As noted by Pacchierotti et al. There exist numerous examples of hand-grounded kinesthetic haptic devices, including We aim to study the effects of different hand-grounding locations on a user's haptic perception by providing kinesthetic feedback on the user's index finger tip. For this purpose, a wearable 2-DoF haptic device is designed that can provide kinesthetic feedback grounded at three different regions of the user's hand (Fig. The results show that the choice of grounding location has profound impact on the user's haptic perception (measured through the metrics described above) and experience (based on user ratings). These findings provide important insights for the design of next-generation kinesthetic feedback devices, particularly in terms of grounding of forces, to achieve compelling and natural kinesthetic haptic interaction in realworld haptic and robotic applications. For example, using these findings we can now design hand-grounded wearable kinesthetic devices with appropriate grounding to offer superior haptic performance and user experience. As handgrounded devices offer comparatively larger operating range and smaller from factor than their world-grounded counter-parts, the knowledge related to the choice of hand-grounding location may help to increase the use of wearable kinesthetic devices in the fields of haptics and robot teleoperation. The contribution of this work is the design of a novel wearable kinesthetic device and study results for understanding of the role played by different hand-grounding locations on user stiffness perception. The device has a base (Fig. To provide hand-grounded kinesthetic feedback at the fingertip, a number of grounding locations can be used. Fig. To achieve different groundings, the device has three different modes. In mode A (Fig. Based on its kinematic design and actuator specifications, the device can apply, in different modes, a maximum force of 28.9 N along the finger axis and a torque in the range of 80 to 300 N-mm at the fingertip. It is driven by two Faulhaber 0615 4,5S DC-micromotors with 256:1 gearboxes, and 50counts-per-revolution optical encoders are used for position sensing. The device prototypes with different grounding modes (Fig. The device renders forces on the user's index finger by controlling the tendon lengths. To calculate the position and configuration of the finger, we use a robot-independent kinematic mapping between the actuator space and the task space. The obtained homogeneous transformation remains identical for all three grounding modes of our device. It is assumed ( The homogeneous transformation for tendons a and b, from O to p a (x, z) and p b (x, z) respectively, is The displacements of tendons a and b can be expressed in terms of arc radius and angles as where θ o is the initial angle angle of tendon a and θ t represents the tendon angle at time t. Using the tendon displacements ( where, K P represents the proportional gain and K D is the derivative gain. e(t) is the position error, y(t) represents the motor shaft position, and r(t) is the reference position calculated from the desired tendon displacements ( s d (a, b) in Fig. To evaluate the effects of the three different handgrounding locations on the user's haptic perception and experience, we conducted two separate user studies (Study A & Study B); one for each haptic feedback DoF provided by the hand-grounded device. In Study A, the kinesthetic feedback is provided along the axis of the user's index finger. In Study B, the feedback is provided along the flexion-extension movement of the finger. The purpose of evaluating each feedback DoF separately is to develop a clear understanding of the relation between the hand-grounding location and the corresponding feedback direction. A. Study A: Feedback Along the Finger Axis 1) Experimental Setup: 13 subjects (9 males and 4 females) participated in this study, which was approved by the Stanford University Institutional Review Board. The metrics were PSE and JND of stiffness perception while the handgrounded device was set up for each of the three grounding locations (back of the hand, proximal, and middle phalanx of the index finger). All subjects participated in the experiment after giving informed consent, under a protocol approved by the Stanford University Institutional Review Board. The participants used the hand-grounded haptic device on their right hand and performed tasks in a virtual environment, while holding the stylus of the Phantom Omni device in the same hand (Fig. 2) Experimental Procedure: Each participant used the haptic device configured for each of the three handgrounding locations in a predetermined order to minimize the effect of selection bias. As mentioned earlier, a Phantom Omni device was used to track the user hand position during the experiments as shown in Fig. 3) Method: We conducted a two-alternative forced-choice experiment following the method of constant stimuli Each of the eleven comparison values was presented ten times in random order for each of the three hand-grounded haptic devices over the course of one study. Each participant completed a total of 110 trials for each grounding mode (330 trials for the entire study). The participants used the kinesthetic feedback from the hand-grounded device to explore the virtual surfaces until a decision was made; they recorded their responses by pressing designated keyboard keys, corresponding to which virtual surface they thought felt stiffer. Subject responses and force/torque data were recorded after every trial. There was no time limit for each trial, and participants were asked to make their best guess if the decision seemed too difficult. Subjects were given an optional two-minute break after every fifty-five trials, and a ten-minute break after the completion of each grounding mode. In study B, the kinesthetic feedback was rendered along the flexion extension movement direction of the index finger. A total of 14 subjects (9 males and 5 females) participated, and the study was approved by the Stanford University Institutional Review Board. The procedure was the same as in Study A. However, in Study B the virtual surfaces were presented lying in the horizontal plane (Fig. For both user studies, we determined the number of times each participant responded that the comparison value of stiffness was greater than the reference stiffness value. A psychometric function was then fit for each participant's response data to plot a psychometric curve, using the pythonpsignifit 4 library (https://github.com/wichmann-lab/pythonpsignifit). Data from twenty-four out of the twenty-seven subjects fit sufficiently to psychometric functions and the mean JNDs and PSEs for both experiments were determined. Example plots for a representative subject are shown in Fig. In Study A, the best average PSE (closer to the reference value) for stiffness perception among all three grounding locations is found for the middle phalanx location of the index finger (104.75 N/m), shown in Fig. In Study B, the best average PSE (closer to the reference value) for stiffness perception among all three grounding locations is found in the grounding at the proximal phalanx of the index finger (103.88 N/m), shown in Fig. On the other hand, the comfort/ease-of-use ratings are higher for Study A than B, when the grounding locations are the back of the hand and the middle phalanx, respectively. The feedback in flexion-extension movement (Study B) has shown higher comfort ratings than for the fingeraxis direction (Study A) when grounding is set as the proximal phalanx region. The highest comfort rating among all grounding locations across both studies is given to the proximal phalanx, and that is for the feedback along the flexion-extension movement. Similarly, the highest comfort rating is given to the same grounding location, i.e., proximal phalanx, across both studies, and that too is for the feedback along flexion-extension direction. A novel hand-grounded kinesthetic feedback device was created for studying the effect of different grounding locations on the user's haptic experience. The device can provide kinesthetic feedback along the user's index finger, and in its flexion-extension movement direction. Two psychophysical experiments -one for each feedback DoF -were conducted to evaluate the user's haptic performance and experience. It is shown that the choice of grounding-location in wearable haptic devices has significant impact over the user haptic perception of stiffness. The realism of the haptic feedback increases, while the comfort level decrease, as the grounding location moves closer to the fingertip. The relationship between the grounding-location and user haptic perception is similar in both feedback directions. If the design objective is to achieve maximum comfort, feedback realism, and best haptic perception in both DoFs simultaneously, it is recommended to have grounding at the proximal phalanx region of the finger. These findings about the choice and impact of different hand-grounding locations give important insights for designing next-generation wearable kinesthetic devices, and to have better performance in a wide range of applications, such as virtual reality and robot teleoperation. In the future, we plan to conduct further experiments to explore the effects of these hand-grounding locations when the kinesthetic feedback is applied to both DoFs simultaneously.