The recently developed precession electron diffraction (PED) technique in scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) has been used to elucidate the local strain distribution and crystalline misorientation in CMOS fabricated strained Ge micro disk structure grown on Si substrate. Such structures are considered to be a compact optical source for the future photonics due to the specific undercut for direct bandgap behaviour under strain. In this study, the strain maps are interpreted and compared with a finite element model (FEM) of the strain in the investigated structure. Results demonstrate that the SiN used as a stressor on top of the Ge disk induces an in-plane strain εxx of a maximum value of almost 2 % which is also confirmed by FEM simulations. This tensile strain can reduce the difference between the direct and indirect bandgaps leading to direct bandgap radiative transitions, with the potential for applications in strained Ge lasers. It is only recently that Ge has made ground in standard Si technology for being compatible with CMOS processing Lasing has been demonstrated in Ge Fabry-Perot cavities with high degenerate n-type doping, and low tensile strain from growth on Si Applying biaxial tensile strain to Ge causes the Γ-valley to lower in energy at a greater rate than the L-valley, leading to a cross over to a direct band-structure at ~ 1.7 % Alloying Ge with Sn has also emerged as a viable means for creating a direct bandgap group IV material. Similarly to tensile strain, increasing Sn content causes a transformation to direct-bandgap It is therefore likely that a combination of external strain engineering and Sn alloying is required to achieve room temperature lasing, in order to improve the level of 'directness' i.e. ΔEL-Γ , while keeping thermal budgets sufficiently high for Si foundry processing, and potentially improving gain due to the strain induced splitting of the valence band To fully understand the potential modal gain available in SiN strain engineered Ge/GeSn devices, it is crucial to have an accurate measurement of the strain field in the devices cross section, with high spatial resolution. This is not achievable with measurements such as Raman spectroscopy, which only probes the top plane, averaged over the penetration depth of the excitation source. As an alternative, the use of the transmission electron microscope (TEM) provides an instrument in which spatial resolutions of a few nm are routinely achieved, and in which diffraction-based techniques could provide suitable tools for strain measurement and spatially-resolved mapping. Here, we demonstrate the use of a Precession Electron Diffraction (PED) technique to produce a cross-sectional strain map of a SiN strained Ge micro-disk, and compare results to FEM of the strain field. The results are in good agreement with the modeling, and the previously measured optical properties of the structure, but also reveal the strain field around threading dislocations, and the resulting deviations from the simplified model, which does not include defects and dislocations. Strain measurements are critical to understand and optimise the properties of the materials for improved device applications. It is therefore indispensable to have a method that can quantify the strain over nanoscale resolution and with high precision. A number of methods to investigate strain in semiconductors have been employed. Early studies used X-ray diffraction As an alternative, the use of the transmission electron microscope (TEM) provides an instrument in which spatial resolutions of a few nm are routinely achieved, and in which diffraction-based techniques could provide suitable tools for strain measurement and spatiallyresolved mapping. Béché et al. have recently compared some of the methods for strain mapping in TEM Geometrical phase analysis (GPA) of atomic-resolution TEM or scanning TEM (STEM) images Convergent beam electron diffraction (CBED) Dark-field electron holography (DFEH) was first employed by Hÿtch et al. In nanobeam electron diffraction (NBED), local diffraction patterns at each point are acquired by scanning an electron probe (~5-10 nm) across a specimen. These diffraction patterns are compared with a reference pattern in order to provide relative shifts in the diffraction spots to quantify the deformation in the specimen. Most importantly, precession also enables the collection of higher-order reflections, which are more sensitive than lower order reflections to small changes in lattice parameters. This technique is known as Scanning Precession Electron Diffraction (SPED). For an application like the present one, this is the ideal technique -it can be applied in relatively thick material (~ 100 nm), has a resolution of a few nm (mainly limited by beam spreading in a thicker sample), can be performed along a major zone axis, and has high precision with a sufficiently large precession angle to include higher index spots. Low-Energy Plasma-Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition (LEPECVD) was used to grow a 380 nm of Ge heterostructure on top of a Si (001) substrate at low temperatures of 500 ̊C. A cross section sample was prepared using a focussed ion beam (FIB, FEI Nova Nanolab 200) lift out procedure SPED was performed using a 200 kV CM200 (S)TEM equipped with a field emission gun (FEG) operated in the STEM mode and using a convergence half angle of 0.7 mrad. Precession of the electron beam was performed at an angle of 1.8 o and a frequency of 100 Hz using a NanoMEGAS DigiSTAR unit. The probe size was ~10 nm for the chosen condenser aperture of 20 μm. The reference diffraction pattern, obtained from an unstrained region, was modified numerically to make it comparable with each diffraction pattern taken from a strained region. This does not require identifying individual diffraction spots and thus make it easier to derive strain coefficients from processing these diffraction patterns. Thus, 2D maps for in-plane strain εxx, out-of-plane strain εyy, and shear strain εxy are obtained. In order to proceed with crystalline orientation identification, thousands of simulated electron diffraction spot patterns (so called templates) were utilized for each crystallographic phase in the sample. Local crystal orientations were obtained by comparing experimentally acquired patterns using crosscorrelation matching techniques with the template database. STEM imaging of the structure was undertaken on a probe corrected JEOL ARM 200F equipped with a cold field emission gun operated at 200 kV in STEM mode and using a convergence half angle of 29 mrad. High angle annular dark field (HAADF) imaging was performed with an inner detector angle of 107 mrad. At this angle the contrast is strongly dependent on atomic number and therefore the image brightness is strongly correlated to chemistry. A Gatan GIF Quantum ER energy filter/spectrometer with fast Dual EELS (electron energy loss spectroscopy) was used to record the spectrum images (SIs) with a collection half angle of 36 mrad and a dispersion of 1.0 eV per channel, to determine the final thickness of the lamella using the t/λ method. Dark field TEM imaging was performed on a FEI Tecnai T20 operated at 200 kV in order to view dislocations in the Ge micro-disk and in an equivalent specimen constructed from a Ge heterolayer grown in an identical way but not fabricated into a strained micro-disk. Finite element simulations Figure Moreover, the decrease in the strain observed along a vertical line from top to bottom of the micro-disk depends upon the diameter of the post and can vary accordingly. The best fit FEM of the in-plane strain εxx in the Ge micro-disk structure is shown in Figure FEM has certain limitations which restrict the exact agreement of the model with the experimental results. Firstly, PED measurements were performed on a thin lamella prepared from the bulk structure. In such a case, the thinning of the sample may release internal stresses in ways that alter the results from the stress distribution in the bulk. Specifically, it does not include factors such as any deviation from perfect epitaxy, and does not include dislocations and plastic deformation, so this could be the cause for any discrepancy between simulated and experimental strain maps. To further investigate these effects, dark field imaging and orientation mapping were performed. Dark-field images have been recorded for the specimen using two-beam conditions for various diffraction vectors to reveal dislocations. Some representative images are shown in Figure . The method strictly relies upon the accurate measurement of the thickness which in the present study was found by means of electron energy loss spectroscopy using a mean free path of 97 nm calculated by the Iakoubovskii method The crystal orientation should vary with position due to the bending resulting from the SiN stressor, and this can also be investigated from the SPED datasets used for the strain mapping, as previously performed by Estradé et al.. direction to the vertical. The tilt angle is plotted explicitly in Figure In this work, we have analyzed a tensile strained Ge micro-disk structure fabricated on Si, which has been tensile strain engineered with an external SiN stressor layer. Peak strain levels are found to be consistent with experimental measurements in ref The strain-field results presented here are in close agreement with expectations from FEM, as was previously seen in PED-FEM comparisons of (Al,Ga)N heterostructures by Reisinger It is clear from this work that the single stressor layer leads to a large in-homogeneity across the micro-disk, which is undesirable for gain in Ge/GeSn structures. Step grading has emerged as an approach for minimizing dislocations in the active layer (highest Sn content) layer, which is grown on top of multiple layers of lower Sn content, which serve as virtual substrates. Such photonic structures have been fabricated into micro-disks and Fabry-Perot cavities and have demonstrated lasing. In particular, higher order modes may overlap more significantly with the highest tensile strained regions of the micro-disk, however, a modal gain analysis is beyond the scope of this work. We have successfully characterised a Ge micro-disk structure, grown on Si by LEPECVD, using strain and misorientation mapping by scanning precession electron diffraction (SPED) with high accuracy and spatial resolution. Experimentally acquired strain maps for the εxx, εxy, and εyy components have been compared with FEM simulations. Whilst the principal spatial variation of the strain and the magnitudes of peak strains match well between experiment and simulation, it is clear that some discrepancies are present. Specifically, there are discontinuities in strain across diagonal bands emanating from close to the corner of the Si pillar and the Ge micro-disk above, which appear to correspond to dislocation walls along slip traces. This demonstrates that the peak strain observed here of 2.1% tensile strain at the top surface is close to the maximum that can be sustained in Ge before plastic deformation and possible cracking and failure of the structure. Nevertheless, it also demonstrates that a certain level of dislocations does not prevent the formation of sufficient tensile strains to produce the significant Raman shifts observed in our previous work.