Based on a two-orbital honeycomb lattice model and by use of a random phase approximation analysis, we investigate the pairing symmetry of Ni-based transition-metal trichalcogenides. We find that an I-wave (A2g) state and a chiral d-wave (Eg) state are dominant and nearly degenerate for typical electron and hole dopings. Both states exhibit nontrivial topological properties, which manifest themselves by the chiral edge states for the d + id-wave state and dispersionless Andreev bound state at zero energy for the I-wave state. We thus show that Ni-based transition-metal trichalcogenides provide a promising platform to study exotic topological phenomena emerging from electronic correlation effects. Two-dimensional (2D) materials, such as graphene and transition-metal dichalcogenides The crystal structure of the TMPT family APX 3 consists of edge shared AX 6 octahedral complexes and P2 dimers. Transition metal atoms are arranged in a hexagonal lattice, as shown in Figs. 1(a) and (b). In the octahedral crystal field, five 3d orbitals of transition-metal atoms split into high-energy e g orbitals and low-energy t 2g orbitals. For FePX 3 with Fe 2+ ions (d 6 ), it is an ideal system to study the high-to-low spin-state transition by pressure In this article, we investigate the pairing symmetry of Ni-based transition-metal trichalcogenide superconductors near half filling. Based on a two-orbital Hubbard model on the honeycomb lattice and through the use of a random phase approximation (RPA) analysis, we find that an I-wave and a chiral d-wave superconducting state are the dominant instabilities, and nearly degenerate in terms of pairing propensity for typical electron and hole doping. This is because both instabilities are promoted by the intra Fermi surface nesting (between α FS) and the inter Fermi surface nesting (between α and β FS). By further resolving their real-space pairing structure, we find that the I-wave (A 2g ) state is mainly attributed to NN and NNN pairing, while the chiral d-wave E g state is broadly extended in real space. Both superconducting orders involve strong inter orbital pairing and exhibit non-trivial topological properties. The chiral d-wave state is characterized by a nontrivial Chern number, and as such chiral edge modes. In turn, the nodal A 2g state features a non-trivial one dimensional topological invariant, and flat bands at zero energy can appear on the edges. Due to their distinctive physical properties, a variety of experimental measurements can be used to unambiguously distinguish these two pairing states. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we present the two-orbital tight-binding model based on e g orbitals (d xz and d yz orbitals) to represent the single-particle description of the Ni-based transitionmetal trichalcogenide. Furthermore, the crystal structure and electronic band structure is discussed. In Sec. III, we explain the formalism of the random phase approximation (RPA) approach we employ to predict the pairing symmetries within the scope of multi-orbital Coulomb interactions. In Sec. IV, we calculate the spin susceptibility and pairing symmetry as a function of electron and hole doping starting from half filling. We also analyze the real-space pairing of the obtained pairing states, and calculate the edge states originating from their nontrivial topological properties. Finally, in Sec. V we discuss about the experimental realization of superconductivity conclude that transition-metal trichalcogenide provide a promising platform for topological superconductivity. The compounds nickel phosphorous trichalcogenides NiPX 3 (X=S,Se) crystallizes in a layered hexagonal structure and each layer consists of edge shared MX 6 octahedral complexes and P 2 dimers. As shown in Fig. 6 is located at the center of honeycomb lattice. As they can be easily exfoliated to monolayers, we focus on NiPX 3 monolayers in the following. The electronic band structure and Density of states for monolayer NiPS 3 are displayed in Fig. Here α,β are the sublattice indices (A,B) and l i (l i = 1, 2) is the orbital index (d xz/yz ). c † αμσ creates a spin σ electron with momentum k in μ orbital on α sublattice. The matrix elements of h αβ μν (k) are provided in the Appendix. According to our calculations In this section, we explain the formalism of the multiorbital RPA approach where n i,α = n i,α,↑ + n i,α,↓ . U , U , J and J represent the intra-and inter-orbital repulsion, the Hund's rule and pair-hopping terms. In the following calculations, we use Kanamori relations U = U + 2J and J = J as requried by the lattice symmetry. The multi-orbital susceptibility is defined as, In momentum-frequency space, the multi-orbital bare susceptibility is given by where μ and ν are the band indices, n F is the usual Fermi distribution, l i (i = 1, 2, 3, 4) are the orbital indices, a li μ (k) is the l i orbital component of the eigenvector for band μ resulting from the diagonalization of the tightbinding Hamiltonian H 0 and E μ (k) is the corresponding eigenvalue. With interactions, the RPA spin and charge susceptibilities are given by where Ū s ( Ū c ) is the spin (charge) interaction matrix Within RPA approximation, the effective Cooper scattering interaction is, where the momenta k and k is restricted to different FSs with k ∈ C i and k ∈ C j . The orbital vertex function Γ l1l2l3l4 in spin singlet and triplet channels where χ RP A s and χ RP A c are the RPA spin and charge susceptibility, respectively. The pairing strength functional for a specific pairing state is given by, is the Fermi velocity on a given Fermi surface sheet C i . The pairing vertex function in spin singlet and triplet channels are symmetric and antisymmetric parts of the interaction, that is, Γ According to Ref. 18, superconductivity may emerge after the antiferromagnetic states is suppressed by electron or hole doping. Here, based on weak coupling appoach, we investigate the pairing symmetries for the doped system. In the following, we mainly focus on three typical doping levels δ = -0.2, 0.2, 0.4 relative to the half filled bands. δ > 0 (δ < 0) represents the electron (hole) doping. Fig. In order to study the pairing symmetries, we first show the bare susceptibility χ 0 along high-symmetry lines in Fig. The pairing states can be classified according to the irreducible representations of D 3d point group for NiPS 3 . First we discuss about the case with electron doping. We consider a fixed U = 0.4 and Fig. 3 k y lines and can be described by a function xy(x 2 -3y 2 )(3x 2 -y 2 ), which is an I-wave pairing state. The gap function on α FS is much large than that on β FS. For the twofold degenerate E g d xy and d x 2 -y 2 states are displayed in Fig. Now we discuss the hole doped case with δ = -0.2. Similar to the electron doped case, we find that A 2g and E g pairing states are dominant and their pairing strengths are close, as shown in Fig. To further understand the obtained pairing state, we analyze the real-space structure of the obtained pairing states. In multiorbital system, the pairing in orbital space can also transform nontrivially under point group operations. For this two-band honeycomb lattice model, the classification of pairing states in real space have been given in Ref. where Ψ † k = (ψ † k↑ , ψ † k↓ ) and i, j, k = 1, 2, 3, f η n (k) is the corresponding lattice harmonics in k space and s, σ, τ are Pauli matrices defined in the spin, sublattice and orbital space. For the A 2g state, the pairing matrix can be written as, Here f η nI/R represents the real/imaginary part of η form factor for n-th NN bond. Because there is no A 2g lattice harmonic, A 2g pairing state must involve twodimensional irreducible representations of lattice harmonics and orbital pairing. For the E g state, the matrices for two pairing states can be written as, The lattice harmonics are listed in the Appendix. We fit the obtained gap function from RPA calculations with the above form factors up to the third NN bonds. The I-wave state is dominantly contributed by pairing on the NN and NNN bonds. In contrast, E g state in real space is extended and pairing on these bonds as well as onsite pairing will contribute. Both of the obtained d-wave and I-wave pairing states can carry topological characters. The chiral d-wave state, breaking the time reversal symmetry, belongs to the class C and is characterized by the topological invariant 2Z. For the nodal superconducting state can be characterized by a nonzero one-dimensional topological invariant V. In order to achieve superconductivity in NiPX 3 (X=S,Se), charge doping is required to suppress the antiferromagnetic order. For 2D layered materials, electron or hole carriers can be introduced by gating technology, which has been used to realize superconductivity for semiconducting thin films Once superconductivity is realized in Ni-based transition-metal trichalcogenides, A 2g (I-wave) and E g (d + id) pairing states are dominant according to our calculations. I-wave state is characterized by its line nodes along Γ -K. While the chiral d-wave state, which has a full gap and breaks the time reversal symmetry, is characterized by a nontrivial topological invariant. For I-wave state, the nodal gap structure can be directly detected by the high resolution ARPES. Physical properties related to low energy excitations, such as low temperature specific heat, spin relaxation and penetration depth, should be very similar to the d-wave state in cuprates. The time reversal symmetry breaking for the fully gapped d + id state can be verified by muon-spin-rotation/relaxation measurements. Furthermore, at the edges there is a large peak at zero energy in DOS for I-wave state, which makes it distinct from the chiral d-wave state. Therefore, experimental measurements in the superconducting states can be used to distinguish these two pairing states. In summary, we have investigated the pairing symmetry for the Ni-based transition-metal trichalcogenide proposed recently. By performing RPA calculations, we find that I-wave (A 2g ) state and chiral d-wave (E g ) state are dominant and nearly degenerate for typical electron and hole doping. Both of them are promoted by the intra Fermi surface nesting (between α FS) and the inter Fermi surface nesting (between α and β FS). Their nontrivial topological properties are manifested by the presence of edge states. Ni-based transition-metal trichalcogenide provides us a new platform to study the exotic phenomena emerged from the electron-electron correlation. Appendix A: The tight-binding model of NiPS3 The four band tight-binding model is given by The form factor for onsite pairing is f A1 0 = 1. The form factors for nearest-neighbor (NN) bond is, 3 cosk y /2, (B1) TABLE II: Topological number ω(kx) for I-wave state with ∆ = 0.005 eV. Here, k i x (i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5) are defined in Fig. The form factors for next NN bond is, The form factors for third NN bond is, 