We have grown single-crystal BiSbTe 3 3D TI sample and studied structural, TE as well as pressure dependent magneto-transport properties. Large positive Seebeck coefficient confirmed the p-type nature of BiSbTe 3 , which is consistent with Hall measurement. We have also studied the electronic band structure using Laser-based ARPES, which revealed the existence of a Dirac-cone like metallic surface state in BiSbTe 3 with a Dirac Point situated exactly at the Fermi level. Additionally, superconductivity emerges under pressure of 8 GPa with a critical temperature of ~2.5 K. With further increase of pressure, the superconducting transition temperature (T c ) increases and at 14 GPa it shows the maximum T c (~3.3 K). Topological insulator (TI) is a new quantum state of matter in condensed matter physics which has attracted a huge attention because of their unique properties and potential technological applications such as quantum computation, spintronics and low power-dissipation electronic devices Moreover, BiSbTe 3 performs as a good thermoelectric material at room-temperature which attracts a great attention for the application as thermoelectric (TE) devices. Furthermore, usage of external pressure can be a very useful method to tune the materials properties and design new materials. Because, inter atomic distance inside the material can be reduced by imposing external pressure, which affects the material properties. Recently, pressureinduced superconductivity has been observed in Bi 2 Te 3 , Bi 2 Se 3 and Sb 2 Te 3 3D topological insulators In this report, we have characterized single crystal of BiSbTe 3 sample by ARPES technique to examine the surface states thoroughly and also measured transport properties with the variation of magnetic field and pressure. The single crystal BiSbTe 3 3D TI sample was grown by a modified Bridgman method as has been reported elsewhere However, no sharp transition in the resistance was observed up to the lowest measured temperature (~2 K) (inset: Fig. Magneto-resistance of BiSbTe 3 [defined as MR (%) = [{ρ xx (B)-ρ xx (0)}/ρ xx (0)]*100%], as a function of applied magnetic field at different temperatures is shown in Fig. The variation of Hall resistivity (ρ xy ) with the magnetic field (B) at different temperatures is shown in Fig. The decrease in carrier concentration might be due to the decrease of bulk contribution below 100 K. However, the mobility is decreasing with an increase in temperature; the decrease in mobility with an increase in temperature is mainly because of enhancement of thermal vibration. The p-type nature of BiSbTe 3 TI is also confirmed by thermoelectric measurement with positive seebeck coefficient (S), as shown in Fig. In order to investigate the electronic structure of this compound we have carried out the ARPES measurements as shown in Figs. in this compound which happens to be an ideal condition for the technological exploitation of the topological properties of the TSS. This is important because the parent compounds Bi 2 Te 3 and Sb 2 Te 3 are mainly of n-type and p-type In conclusion, we have investigated the external pressure effect on the resistance and the 