Self-ordered nanotubular titania TiO2-NT with outer tube diameter of 45 nm are synthesized using the anodic oxidation of titanium foil. Four sets of memristors with 100 m diameter based on Ti/TiO2-NT/Au sandwich structures with an oxide layer thickness of 80, 120, 160 and 200 nm are fabricated. Current-voltage (CV) characteristics for the obtained samples in the static and dynamic operation modes are studied. Resistance in high and low resistance states is estimated. Basing on the analysis of the CV characteristics in dynamic mode (> 14 000 switchings) a prospective of use for synthesized Ti/TiO2-NT/Au micromemristors with oxide layer thickness of 160 nm in nonvolatile memory is shown. At present much attention is paid to studying the processes of resistive switching in thin layers of semiconductors and dielectrics to create new computing devices for nanoelectronics and integrated neuromorphic networks Memristive behavior in the metal/oxide/metal structures is generally caused by the movement of anionic, cationic vacancies, etc. in the dielectric layer at an external electric field strength >10 6 V/m. It is known In the present work, the anodization method of Ti foil and sputter deposition of Au top contacts was used to obtain the memristive structure. The anodization of Ti substrate (VТ1-0 type, Russia) was carried out in the electrochemical cell while maintaining constant temperature of 20 °C. M1, M2, M3 and M4 semples of memristors were formed at constant voltage of 10 V and anodization time of 5, 10, 15 and 20 min, respectively. The solution of ethylene glycol 45 vol. %, glycerol 45 vol. % and water 5 vol. % with addition of ammonium fluoride 1 wt.% was used as an electrolyte. All chemicals were analytical grade purity. The samples morphology was studied using SIGMA VP Carl Zeiss scanning electron microscope (SEM) in high vacuum mode using the InLens detector. All synthesized samples of TiO2-NT were covered with golden top contacts by the masking method (see Fig. Current-voltage (CV) measurements were carried out using PXI-4143 National Instruments programmable power supply and MPS 150 Cascade Microtech microprobe station. In the static mode bias harmonic voltage with frequency of 0.01 Hz and amplitude 1-2 V was applied to top electrodes. Ti electrode was grounded. The switching procedure for each memristor was performed with a positive voltage of up to 3 V before the current-voltage measurements. The current through the sandwich structure was limited to 5 mA (M1 and M4) and 10 mA (M2 and M3). The measuring installation and the methods for recording the CV curves in static and dynamic modes are described in detail in As an example, Fig. CV characteristics, obtained for all samples, indicate the presence of the memristor behavior. Fig. Analysis of the CV characteristics for M1-M4 samples demonstrates that for thicker TiO2 layers higher value of the applied voltage is required to switch the structure from the HRS to the LRS and vice versa. The number of switching cycles for M2, M3 and for M1, M4 is N  20 and N  5, respectively. For all CV curves the average values of the resistance of the memristor sets in high (<RHRS>) and low-resistance (<RLRS>) states were estimated at the same voltage of U = ± 0.2 V (see Table The synthesis of TiO2-NT nanotubular structures was carried out by anodizing titanium foils with a process time varying from 5 to 20 min in a fluorine-containing solution of electrolyte at a voltage of 10 V. It is shown that the obtained oxide layer has a nanotubular structure with an outer tube diameter of 45 ± 10 nm and its thickness varies in range of 80-200 nm. The CV characteristics of the Ti/TiO2-NT/Au micromemristors structures in the full cycles of resistive switching (static mode) and simulating the processes of multiple switching (dynamic mode) are investigated. The influence of thickness on the resistances ratio in the high-(RHRS) and low-resistance (RLRS) states and on the number of switching cycles N is analyzed. The lowest value of RHRS/RLRS = 9 and a small number of N  5 are observed at an 80 nm oxide layer thickness. The ratio of RHRS/RLRS > 100 with N  20 and N  5 were obtained for samples with an 160 and 200 nm oxide layer thickness, respectively. The best value (from practical point of view) of RHRS/RLRS > 400 and N  20 were found for 120 nm thickness structure. The operability of micromemristors with 160 nm thickness of TiO2-NT functional layer for more than 14 000 switchings is shown. Basing on the analysis of the CV characteristics (symmetry, number of switching cycles, RHRS/RLRS ratio) in static and dynamic operation modes, it is discussed the Ti/TiO2-NT/Au sandwich structures are promising material for the fabrication of memristor memory elements.