An in-field interaction plot, δMR, has been recently introduced, presenting important advantages over the classical remanence plots. Here a general δMR is proposed, allowing to assess interactions even in systems with shifted and asymmetric major loops. To construct such a plot, a recoil loop (which incorporates a first-order reversal curve, FORC) and the position of the center of the major loop are only needed. Applying the method on exchange-biased Co/IrMn bilayer gives two types of δMR obtained for measuring field either parallel or antiparallel to the exchange-bias direction. This provides valuable information on the reversal mechanism and allows distinguishing between effects coming from coupling into the ferromagnet (Co) and those stemming from interactions in its interface with the antiferromagnet (IrMn). The essentially nonzero general δMR plot obtained from the major loop revealed to be a precise measure of the reversal asymmetry. The technique can readily be adjusted for use in other scientific fields where hysteresis is observed. We provide free software which generates such δMR plot(s). Wohlfarth pointed out a simple relation 1 between remanence curves of systems with symmetric major magnetization M , versus magnetic field H, hysteresis loops. These are the isothermal remanent magnetization curve M r (H), which represents the remanence obtained by the application and removal of a positive field on an initially demagnetized sample, and the DC demagnetization curve M d (H), i.e., the remanence resultant from the application of a negative field to a sample initially at saturation remanence. The Wohlfarth's relation should be valid for non-interacting uniaxial-anisotropy systems no matter whether the magnetization reversal occurs via domain nucleation followed by domain-wall motion or coherent rotation. Nonzero δM (H) = 2M r (H) -M d (H) -M r (∞) values of, e.g., initially thermally or AC demagnetized samples, are ascribed to magnetic interactions; positive values are normally attributed to exchange-like coupling favoring a ferromagnetic state and negative values are associated with dipolar-like interactions stabilizing the demagnetized state. Generalized and/or integral δM plots and functions, obtained with the help of first-order reversal curves (FORCs), Here M hys = 1 2 (M dsc + M asc ), being M dsc (H) and M asc (H) the descending and ascending branches of the major loop, and M sym (H) the curve symmetric, in respect to the origin of the coordinate system, to the extended recoil curve M R (H); 23 note that the latter also represents a FORC with reversal field H R . Based on Eq. 2, an in-field interaction plot has been introduced, It is acquired in an easier and faster manner than δM and does not demand demagnetization, significantly simplify- ing the measurement. Moreover, it allows estimating interactions in virtually impossible to demagnetize systems with rectangular major loops. Here a δM R plot more general than that The determination of H eb is correlated to that of the coercivity (H c ) which, normally, is considered as the halfwidth at half-height of a hysteresis loop. In EB systems, however, due to the characteristic loop's asymmetry, a more general definition Here, H sw1 and H sw2 are the po-sitions of the peaks of the first-order field derivatives of M - dsc and M + dsc , respectively. First, a relation interconnecting four parts of a recoil loop allowing the definition of the general δM R plot is derived. A M R (H) loop, measured after positive saturation for φ H = 0 • of the Co/IrMn film, is given in Fig. , the soft components reverse back their magnetizations and the respective variation equals M + dsc (H) -M + R (H). The two variations differ only in sign, so One can further extend the recoil curve by assuming that, in the - H), making Eq. 4 valid for all H. Let refer to M - dsc (-H) as the curve symmetric of M - dsc (H) through the center of the major loop, and to Note that the ascending part of the major loop does not take the part of the above equations. Evidently, the plot introduced for symmetric loops is a special case of the general δM R (H), where M R (H) ≡ M asc (H). Besides a recoil loop, the only parameter needed for the construction of a general δM R (H) is the position of the center of the major loop (H eb , M shift ). For the case of uniaxial anisotropy, nonzero deviations of δM R (H) are ascribed to magnetic interactions. The shape of δM R shown in Fig. The technique can also be applied to major loops by taking M asc (H) as recoil curve in Eq. 5. The asymmetry of an EB major loop, with one of its branches steeper than the other, results in an essentially nonzero δM major R (H) as seen in Fig. The information concerning interactions estimated from the δM R plot from Fig. This dissimilarity should be attributed to the distinct routines used by the remanence and in-field magnetization techniques. Here, the δM -plot is obtained from remanence curves measured for -H max ≤ H ext ≤ H eb , and δM + derives from curves traced for H eb ≤ H ext ≤ H max . Each plot reflects magnetization reversals that occur along either the descending or the ascending branches of the major hysteresis loop. In contrast, a δM R is generated from a recoil loop with H ext cycled following the According to its definition, δM R correlates processes taking place along the descending loop's branch with processes occurring along the ascending branch. Thus, δM R , differently from δM , evidences effects steaming from the asymmetry of the reversal, indicating that the negative part of the δM R from Fig. Major and recoil loops with H R ≈ H c , measured for On the other hand, the asymmetry of the magnetization reversal results in rather different δM R plots for φ H = 0 • and 180 • . While the former presents an initial increase followed by a negative dip, the latter is essentially positive. Its deviations from the zero line are almost negligible in the field region where the respective δM major R initiates its growth. Noteworthy, δM R in Fig. Major hysteresis loops with decreasing (due to the above treatment) H eb and the respective recoil loops with H R ≈ H c measured for φ H = 0 • and 180 • of the Co/IrMn film are given in Fig. The positive parts of all δM R plots in Fig. Until now, we constructed δM R plots from loops with H R ≈ H c mostly, aiming to compare the method with the remanence one which yields one δM (H) only. Obviously, more detailed information could be obtained from a family of δM R plots. The potentiality to measure a great number of FORCs and construct a family of δM R plots enables (in a manner similar to that FORC diagrams are created) to obtain 3D interaction plot diagrams, 2D diagrams with gradient sets, or interaction effects' distributions plotted inside the hysteresis loops. Although in the majority of the studies using remanence plots the estimation of magnetic interactions is purely qualitative, attempts to obtain quantitative information have also been made. Certainly, more systematic studies on the method should be conducted in a variety of systems to clarify its full potentiality for interaction effects estimations. The general δM R plot introduced here and applied to Co/IrMn gives a simple, yet efficient, way to assess interactions even in systems with shifted and asymmetric major hysteresis loops. The essentially nonzero δM major R plot revealed to be a precise measure of the reversal asymmetry. Also, the two distinct δM R plots, obtained for the same recoil field but for measuring field parallel or antiparallel to the exchange-bias direction, together with the two-dimensional δM R diagram, provide valuable information on the magnetization reversal mechanism and allow distinguishing effects coming from magnetic coupling into the ferromagnet from those stemming from interactions in its interface with the antiferromagnet. Also, the here-defined interaction parameter, i.e., the area enclosed by a δM R curve, could be used to quantitative measure the interaction effects and the major loop's asymmetry. This technique can readily be adjusted for assessing effects caused by deviations from theoretical behavior of other hysteretic quantities. Free software which generates the introduced here general δM R plots and also yields α is available for download at http://www.if.ufrgs.br/pes/lam/dMr.html. The research has been partly financed by the Brazilian agencies CNPq (grants 305796/2016-0 and 422740/2018-7) and CAPES (finance code 001). E. P. Wohlfarth, J. Appl. Phys. 29, 595 (1958).