We propose and analyze theoretically a class of energy-efficient magneto-elastic devices for analogue signal processing. The signals are carried by transverse acoustic waves while the bias magnetic field controls their scattering from a magneto-elastic slab. By tuning the bias field, one can alter the resonant frequency at which the propagating acoustic waves hybridize with the magnetic modes, and thereby control transmission and reflection coefficients of the acoustic waves. The scattering coefficients exhibit Breit-Wigner/Fano resonant behaviour akin to inelastic scattering in atomic and nuclear physics. Employing oblique incidence geometry, one can effectively enhance the strength of magnetoelastic coupling, and thus countermand the magnetic losses due to the Gilbert damping. We apply our theory to discuss potential benefits and issues in realistic systems and suggest routes to enhance performance of the proposed devices. Optical and, more generally, wave-based computing paradigms gain momentum on a promise to replace and complement the traditional semiconductor-based technology. acoustic devices in which the signal is carried by acoustic waves while the magnetic field controls its propagation via the magnetoelastic interaction in thin isolated magnetic inclusions as shown in Fig. To derive the equations of motion, we represent the magnetic energy density F of the magnetic material as a sum of the magneto-elastic F ME and purely magnetic F M contributions. , where N x(y) are the demagnetising coefficients, N x + N y = 1, M is the magnetization and μ 0 is the magnetic permeability. In a crystal of cubic symmetry, the magnetoelastic contribution takes the form 43 where B and B are the linear isotropic and anisotropic magneto-elastic coupling constants, respectively. , where U j are the displacement vector components. To maximize the effect of the coupling B, we consider a transverse acoustic plane wave incident on the slab from the left and polarized along the bias field, so that U x = U y = 0, U z = U(x, y,t). The non-vanishing components of the strain tensor are u xz = 1 2 ∂ x U and u yz = 1 2 ∂ y U, and F ME is linear in both M and U: The magnetization dynamics in the slab is due to the effective magnetic field, μ 0 H eff = -δ F/δ M . We define m as the small perturbation of the magnetic order, i.e. |m| M s . Linearizing the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation, where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio and α is the Gilbert damping constant. To describe the acoustic wave, we include the magneto-elastic contribution to the stress, σ where C = c 44 is the shear modulus and ρ is the mass density. The non-magnetic medium is described by Eq.( Since the values of C, B, and N x,y are constant within each individual material, we shall seek solutions of the equations in the form of plane waves U, m x(y From herein, we consider all variables in the Fourier domain. For the magnetization precession in the magnetic layer driven by the acoustic wave, we thus obtain where we have denoted ω x(y) = γ μ 0 (H B + N x(y) M s ) and ω x(y) = ω x(y)iωα. The complex-valued wave number k ω,x is given by the dispersion relation where k ω,y is equal to that of the incident wave, and the branch with Im k ω,x > 0 describes a forward wave decaying into the slab. Eq. ( Here and below, the subscript '0' is used to mark quantities pertaining to the non-magnetic matrix. To calculate the reflection and transmission coefficients, R ω and T ω , for a magnetic inclusion, we introduce the mechanical impedance as Z = iσ xz /ωU ω . Solution of the wave matching problem can then be expressed via the ratio of load (Z ME ) and source (Z 0 ) impedances. For impedances in the forward (F) and backward (B) directions in the magnetic slab, we find Here, the '-' and '+' signs correspond to (F) and (B), respectively. For the non-magnetic material, Eq. ( Reflection R ω and transmission T ω coefficients are then found via the well-known relations where δ is the thickness of the magnetic inclusion, ME /Z 0 . where R 0 represents a smooth non-resonant contribution due to elastic mismatch at the interfaces, while φ represents a resonant phase, which is non-zero for finite θ and approaches π rapidly. In a system with no magnetic damping, the hybridization yields a resonance of finite linewidth Γ R , The origin of this linewidth can be explained as follows. Due to the magneto-elastic coupling incident propagating acoustic modes can be converted into localised magnon modes. These modes in turn either decay due to the Gilbert damping or are re-emitted as phonons. The rates of these transitions are proportional to Γ FMR and Γ R , respectively, and the total decay rate is Γ = Γ R + Γ FMR . This is similar to resonant scattering in quantum theory Acoustic waves in the geometry of Fig. shown in Fig. To consider how the magneto-elastic resonance is affected by the damping, we also plot the response for α of 10 -3 and 10 -2 , red and blue curves in Fig. Another way to improve Υ is to employ the oblique incidence (θ = 0), in which the acoustic mode is also coupled to the magnetisation component m y . The latter is not suppressed by the demagnetisation effects if N y 1. The resulting enhancement in Υ is reflected in the full equation by the inclusion of ω x and ω y from Γ R , where ω x ω y and H B M s is assumed. For small θ , the approximation N x 1 and N y 0 still holds. As a result, nonzero θ increases peak reflectivity, as seen in Fig. (green). Although larger incidence angles may be hard to implement in a practical device, the resonant scattering is still enhanced at smaller angles. Above, we have focused on the simplest geometry that admits full analytic treatment. To implement our idea experimentally, particular care should be taken about the acoustic waves polarization and propagation direction relative to the direction of the magnetization. Indeed, our choice maximises magnetoelastic response. If however, the polarization is orthogonal to the bias field H B , i.e. U z = 0, the coupling would be second-order in magnetization components m x,y , and would not contribute to the linearized LLG equation. Furthermore, we have neglected the exchange and magnetodipolar fields that could arise due to the non-uniformity of the magnetization. To assess the accuracy of this approximation, we note that the length scale of this non-uniformity is set by the acoustic wavelength λ , of about 420nm for our parameters rather than by the magnetic slab thickness δ . The asso- 1.8x10 cidence but may become significant at oblique incidence, giving μ 0 M s k y δ 98mT at θ = 15 • . In principle, these could increase the resonant frequency of the slab by a few GHz but would complicate the theory significantly. The detailed analysis of the associated effects is beyond the scope of this report. In summary, we have demonstrated that the coupling between the magnetisation and strain fields can be used to control acoustic waves by magnetic inclusions. We show that the frequency dependence of the waves' reflection coefficient from the inclusions has a Fano-like lineshape, which is particularly sensitive to the magnetic damping. Figure of merit is introduced to compare magnetoelastic materials and to characterize device performance. In particular, the figure of merit is significantly enhanced for oblique incidence of acoustic waves, which enhances their coupling to the magnetic modes. We envision that further routes may be taken to transform our prototype designs into working devices, such as forming a magneto-acoustic metamaterial to take advantage of spatial resonance. The research leading to these results has received funding from the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council of the United Kingdom (Grant No. EP/L015331/1) and from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under Marie Skłodowska-Curie Grant Agreement No. 644348 (MagIC).