The dispersion process in particulate porous media at low saturation levels takes place over the surface elements of constituent particles and, as we have found previously by comparison with experiments, can be accurately described by super-fast non-linear diffusion partial differential equations. To enhance the predictive power of the mathematical model in practical applications, one requires the knowledge of the effective surface permeability of the particle-in-contact ensemble, which can be directly related with the macroscopic permeability of the particulate media. We have shown previously that permeability of a single particulate element can be accurately determined through the solution of the Laplace-Beltrami Dirichlet boundary-value problem. Here, we demonstrate how that methodology can be applied to study permeability of a randomly packed ensemble of interconnected particles. Using surface finite element techniques we examine numerical solutions to the Laplace-Beltrami problem set in the multiply-connected domains of interconnected particles. We are able to rigorously estimate tortuosity effects of the surface flows in a particle ensemble setting. Liquid transport in particulate porous media, such as sand, is customarily classified into fully saturated, funicular and pendular regimes of spreading Our prime concern here is the special case of liquid dispersion at low saturation levels. As the saturation level drops below the critical value, s ≤ s c , that is to the value relevant to the pendular regime of spreading, the liquid volumes in the porous matrix become isolated As a result, at low saturation levels, the liquid is only contained in the pendular rings formed at the locations of the particle contacts and on the particle rough surfaces, and the liquid transport can only occur over the matrix surface elements, as is illustrated in Fig. Our main concern here is the wetting cycle, when the liquid spreads over a dry porous matrix or over a matrix with a very low background saturation level up to s r ≈ 2%. These conditions are similar to those in the case studied previously experimentally and theoretically in The analysis of this regime of wetting, which is crucial for studies of biological processes and spreading of non-volatile liquids in arid natural environments and industrial installations, has shown that the liquid dispersion has many distinctive features and can be accurately described by the so-called superfast non-linear diffusion equation Theoretically, the superfast non-linear diffusion equation belongs to a special class of mathematical models. Unlike in the standard porous medium equation where The details of derivation of (1) can be found in where φ is porosity defined as φ = V E V , which is further assumed to be constant, and Q is the macroscopic flux density. The macroscopic flux density Q is defined in such a way that the total flux through the surface of a macroscopic sample volume element is given by the surface integral Q • n dS, where n is the normal vector to the surface of the sample volume element. To obtain (1) from ( (3) and the local Darcy's law 9,10 describing the surface flow in the rough layer of the particle elements Here, is the coordination number, that is the average number of bridges per a particle, p 0 = 2γ R cos φ c , γ is the coefficient of the surface tension of the liquid, φ c is the contact angle made by the free surface of the liquid bridge with the rough solid surface of the constituent particles, R is an average radius of the porous medium particles, q and u are the averaged local flux density and pressure in the rough surface layer, μ is liquid viscosity and k m is the local coefficient of permeability of the rough surface, which is proportional to the average amplitude of the surface roughness δ R , that is the width of the surface layer conducting the liquid flux One needs to emphasise here that two levels of averaging are involved in obtaining the final governing equation (1). While equations ( Therefore, to transit from (4) to the macroscopic description, the spatial averaging theorem formulated in 11 should be applied. That is, using intrinsic liquid averaging ... , where V l is liquid volume within the sample volume V , one has u l = p and q l Se S = Q. Here, S is the surface area of the sample volume V with the effective area of entrances and exits S e . Note, the ratio S e /S is not just a geometric property, but also takes into account the connectivity of the porous elements. For example, the effective area of entrances and exits S e is only defined by the pathways open to the flow. As a result of the two-level averaging Se S is the coefficient of permeability defined by The global surface permeability of the particles K as a function of saturation is one of the main elements of the model to accurately represent liquid dispersion at low saturation levels. It is fully defined by the particle geometry and the geometry of the liquid bridge contact areas, Fig. In particular, the disposition and the size of the liquid bridges on the particle surface, that is the size of the domains Ω 1,2 and the angle α, should play a leading role in defining the resistance to the surface flow. It is not difficult to discern that any variations of the contact area covered by the liquid bridges (pendular rings), that is areas Ω 1,2 shown in Fig. Previously, we have shown that permeability of a single particle element can be determined by means of a solution to the equivalent Laplace-Beltrami boundary value problem formulated in the flow domain Ω 0 with the boundaries ∂Γ 1,2 in Fig. We have studied several generalisations of the symmetric problem, such as arbitrary oriented domains, α = π, on the surface of the spherical particle, and particles of arbitrary shapes emulating the shape of a real sand grain. While variations of the particle shape was found to produce a relatively modest effect on the particle surface permeability, the orientation of the boundaries, emulating tortuosity effects, was found to produce a stronger impact due to the substantial variation of the distance, on average, between the boundary contours ∂Γ 1,2 . It became clear that while the previously obtained scaling was a good first step to estimate the surface permeability of particulate porous media, a more general case of an ensemble of interconnected particles should be analysed to enhance the model predictive power and at the same time to estimate rigorously the effects of tortuosity of the surface flow in the particle assembly. In this study, we will simulate a general case of an ensemble of many particles linked by liquid bridges. We will concentrate on the bunch of spherical particles, but of different radii and randomly arranged in configurations. We compare the random pack configuration results with some symmetric case to estimate the effects of tortuosity and formulate practical recipes to apply the super-fast diffusion model. Microscopically, the liquid creeping flow through the surface roughness of each particle can be described by a local Darcy-like relationship (4) between the surface flux density q and averaged (over some area containing many surface irregularities) pressure in the grooves u Equation ( Here, ∆ Γ designates the Laplace-Beltrami operator, which is defined on the surface element Γ through the surface gradient ∇ Γ tangential to the surface. Formally, let n Γ denote the unit normal to the surface Γ, Fig. The second assumption δ R = const implies that the surface layer is fully saturated, that is its content is not changing on the particle surface. The approximation of the fully saturated rough surface layer is well fulfilled, if the characteristic pressure amplitude |u| is less than the capillary pressure amplitude defined on the length scale of the surface roughness δ R , which is of the order of δ R ∼ 1 μm in typical sands Alternatively, if the surface layer somehow is not fully saturated, parameter δ R should be interpreted as the characteristic width of the liquid layer within the rough surface layer and one needs to presume that variations of the pressure |δu| are negligible |δu| u c . This is usually the case in slow, creeping flow conditions in porous media, and in fact, it is a criterion for the use of macroscopic approximation to such flows 1 . As is shown in that is the amplitude of the surface roughness (or the width of the liquid layer) is always much smaller than the particle size. Consider, as the simplest example, a spherical particle of radius R with a closed surface Γ, which is split into three sub-domains Ω 0 , Ω 1 and Ω 2 with the surface boundaries between them ∂Γ 1 and ∂Γ 2 , as is shown in Fig. The distribution of liquid pressure u, as it follows from (7), should satisfy the Laplace-Beltrami equation now defined on the surface of the sub-domain Ω 0 Note that, in fact, the condition of the fully saturated surface layer is not essential in calculation of the flows over one particle element of the porous media. It is sufficient to presume that the variation of the capillary pressure on the length scale of the particle |δu| is negligible, that is |δu| u c . In the case when the surface layer is not fully saturated, parameter δ R should be interpreted as the effective thickness of the layer filled by the liquid. At the same time, liquid pressure variation in the bridges is negligible in slow, creeping flows in comparison to that in Ω 0 . So that, one can assume that which are the boundary conditions to the Laplace-Beltrami Dirichlet boundary value problem. The Dirichlet boundary value problem ( where n s is the normal vector to the domain boundaries ∂Γ 1,2 on the surface, δ R is the average amplitude of the surface roughness, that is the width of the surface layer conducting the liquid flux and the line integral is taken along a closed curve in Ω 0 , for example the boundary ∂Γ 1 . If the total flux Q T is determined, one can define the global permeability coefficient of a single particle K 1 . This can be done, if we assume that the particle has a characteristic size D and so that it can be enclosed in a volume element V = D 3 with the characteristic side surface area D 2 . Then, the effective flux density Q can be represented in terms of K 1 (and if the flow is driven by the constant pressure difference U 2 -U 1 applied to the sides of the volume element. B. Surface permeability of a sphere in the case of azimuthally symmetric domain boundaries Consider now a spherical particle in an azimuthally symmetric case, when the domain boundaries ∂Γ 1 and ∂Γ 2 are oriented at the reflex angle α = π and have a circular shape. We use a spherical coordinate system with its origin at the particle centre and the polar angle θ counted from the axis of symmetry passing through the centre of the circular contour ∂Γ 1 . In this case, the Dirichlet boundary value problem ( with the boundary conditions The analytic solution to problem ( where One can now calculate the total flux and the permeability, using its definition (11), So that, taking D = 2R, Parametrically, the coefficient of permeability ( , so that evaluation of this parameter in applications is crucial for the accurate estimates of the liquid dispersion rates. One can see, if we take θ 1 = θ 0 , in fact assuming small variations of the bridge size and the pressure over one particle diameter, and θ 0 1, in fact considering small values of saturation, s 1, that the permeability coefficient K 1 tends to zero, that is How does the result affect the super-fast diffusion model (1), and basically how can it be incorporated into the main diffusion equation? If we approximate the permeability coefficient K by K 1 obtained in the azimuthally symmetric case at θ 1 = θ 0 , (17), and, using an approximate relationship between the radius of curvature R sin θ 0 of the boundary contour ∂Γ 1 and the pendular ring volume 2 , one can show that Therefore, finally As it follows from (18), the distinctive particle shape results in logarithmic correction to the main non-linear superfast-diffusion coefficient D(s) = D 0 (s) (s-s 0 ) 3/2 , such that Apparently, the correction will mitigate to some extent the divergent nature of the dispersion at the very small saturation levels s ≈ s 0 , smoothing out the characteristic dispersion curves. Consider now how the problem can be formulated in the case of several particles arranged in a single chain, as is illustrated in Fig. To create the flow in the system of two coupled particles, one can set pressure difference between ∂Γ 2 are 'internal', that is common to the bridge linking the flow between the two particles. Apparently, the pressure is supposed to be the same on the two contours and due to conservation of mass in steady state conditions in the absence of sinks and sources of the liquid one has where n s 1 and n s 2 are the outward tangential normal vectors to the boundary contours 1,2 , and u 1 and u 2 designate distribution of pressure on each particle respectively. As a result, the problem to define the flow and the permeability of the system corresponds to a system of two Laplace-Beltrami equations but with a slightly different set of the boundary conditions where θ 0 , as before, defines the size of the bridge footprint on the particle surface in the spherical coordinate system with the axis of symmetry passing through the centre of the bridge area, Fig. ∂Γ 1 (2) ∂Γ 1 ∂Γ 2 (1) Illustration of the solution domains in a system of two coupled spherical particles and their geometric arrangements. Apparently, equations ( where C 1,2 and B 1,2 are free constant parameters to be found from the boundary conditions. It is not difficult to see from (26), that one has C 0 = B 0 implying continuity of the contact flux. Applying the remaining boundary conditions ( where One can now calculate total flux and define permeability of the coupled spherical particles where D is the characteristic length scale of the cross-section in the problem, κ m is local permeability of the surface layer, δ R is the layer width and μ is liquid viscosity. So that, taking simply D = 2R, One can see that the permeability of a system of two coupled particles K 2 is identical to that of a single particle ( It is not difficult to discern by deduction that in a general case of N coupled particles in a chain where Note, experimentally, the setup of many beads coupled by liquid bridges is often used in microfluidics to create flexible water channels In real systems, the particles are interconnected randomly, so that the effects of tortuosity should substantially affect the permeability of the system 1,15-17 . To analyse those effects, we consider an ensemble of spherical particles randomly packed, as is shown in Fig. at ∆R/R 0 = 0.3. In this study, there were particles with three The resultant porosity in the configurations was about 48%. To obtain the configuration, the particle temperature controlled by the thermostat has been gradually reduced to bring the system to a minimum energy, frozen state. A representative sample volume element with dimensions L B x , L B y , L B z then was cut off the system, as is illustrated in Fig. The Laplace-Beltrami method then has been applied after establishing the position of the liquid bridges coupling the particles in the sample. Two particles (of radii R 1 and R 2 ) are assumed to be coupled by a liquid bridge if the distance between their centres r was only slightly larger than the sum of their radii The size of a single liquid bridge footprint H B on the particle surface can be characterised, as before, by the polar angle θ 0 in the polar coordinate system with the symmetry axis passing through the centre of the circular contour, the boundary of the area covered by the bridge, as is shown in the symmetric case in Fig. Indeed, when s 1, the pressure in the pendular ring p is defined by the smallest radius of curvature r 1 , Fig. so that when s 1, one has r 2 r 1 . Obviously, r 2 defines the size of the area covered by the bridge, 0 . If we have two particles of different radii, say R 1 and R 2 , in contact, the size of the bridge area will be approximately the same r at low saturation levels, s 1, with the difference being proportional to r 1 , that is Apparently, in a general case, no analytic solution is expected to the Laplace-Beltrami problem and a well established surface finite element technique The number of particles in the sample volume element was negotiated between computational efficiency of the surface finite element method (so that, practically, any mesh resolution can be used to deal with any details on the boundary contours ∂Γ number fluctuations) influence upon the results, that is the value of the total flux and the 'macroscopic' permeability. A posteriori, one can see that this seemed to be the case, Fig. There are two main questions, we would like to answer in this part of the study. First, how does permeability of the particle sample depend on the composition? Basically, how strong are there fluctuations? Secondly, what is the contribution of the tortuosity effects? To obtain statistically meaningful results, we consider several randomly generated configurations, as is summarised in Table As before, we are going to find a weak solution to a system of the Laplace-Beltrami equations ∆ Ω (k) 0 u k = 0 defined on each particle domain Ω (k) 0 , as in in Fig. While on a few external boundaries, Dirichlet boundary conditions are set. The numerical solution allows to calculate the total flux through the system by summing up the fluxes passing through the external contours, where the Dirichlet boundary conditions are set, either at the top of the pack or at the bottom using (10). The results are summarised in Fig. Remarkably, the reduced flux Q T /S 0 Q 0 as a function of where H B is the bridge size H B = 2R 0 sin θ 0 , behaves linearly in all configurations. This behaviour mirrors the flux dependence observed in azimuthally symmetric analytical solutions, see (15) or (31). The variations in the dependencies between different configurations are observed to be well within the statistical error expected in this case, error bar in Fig At the same time, a comparison with a similar, but a regular arrangement, as in Fig. Indeed, given identical porosity (φ ≈ 50%) and mean particle size (R/R 0 = 1) in the regular, symmetric and randomly generated configurations, the normalised flux values differ by a factor of two, which is consistent with the tortuosity values obtained in porous media in different conditions and configurations It is important that the result, that is the ratio of the total flux in the random and regular configurations does not practically depend on the size of the contour H B , basically the size of the liquid bridge, and hence the value of saturation in the porous media. This implies, that the observed effect is purely down to the distribution of contacts between the particles, but not the particular pathway on each single particle surface. That is, fundamentally, tortuosity in the surface diffusion processes is a geometric factor independent of the particular surface flow regime. At the same time, the pathways, on average, of course, does depend on the bridge size value H B leading to smaller permeability as the size of the contact area diminishes. This trend is expected, but essentially, the correction to the effective coefficient of diffusion is only down to a single universal factor of two representing the tortuosity effects in surface diffusion in particular porous media at low values of saturation. Note, this value is also in agreement with experimental observations and a comparison of the super-fast diffusion model with the data, where the tortuosity effects were estimated to reduce the effective permeability twofold Macroscopic permeability K(s) or the diffusion coefficient D(s) then should be corrected by the universal factor of two in the macroscopic diffusion model. We have demonstrated that the Laplace-Beltrami method can be used to obtain permeability of particulate porous media at low saturation levels and to estimate contribution from the effects of tortuosity. Essentially, analytical results obtained using azimuthally oriented coupled particles can be used with a universal correcting prefactor to estimate permeability of particle ensembles. That is, from the practical point of view, results obtained by analysing single representative element of particulate porous media can be translated into permeability of a particle composition. PS was supported through the Royal Thai Government scholarship. TP was partially supported through the EPSRC grant EP/P000835/1.