We have performed magnetic measurements like temperature (T), cooling field (H FC ) dependence of exchange bias (EB) and training effect to investigate the magnetic nature of the interface of the Fe/Ir 20 Mn 80 systems. Thin film bilayer samples of different thicknesses of Ir 20 Mn 80 have been prepared by dc magnetron sputtering at room temperature. The variation of exchange bias field (H EB ) with the increase in thickness of Ir 20 Mn 80 predicts the antiferromagnet (AFM) 'bulk' spins contribution to EB. Exponential decay of H EB and coercive field (H C ) with temperature reveals the presence of spin glass (SG) like interface. Also, the decrease of H EB with increasing H FC confirms the SG like frustration at the interface. Further, the fitting of training effect experimental data envisages the presence of frozen and rotatable spins at the magnetically frustrated interface of these EB systems. The exchange coupling at the interface of ferromagnet (FM)/AFM system The presence of interfacial spins and their behaviour play critical role for the origin of EB and the training effect where EB decreases with number of cycles of hysteresis loop measurement. It is reported in literature that the interface of the FM and AFM phase can be spin glass (SG) like disorder In the present study we report the magnetic nature of the interface from various magnetic measurements. In order to probe the role of 'bulk' spins we varied the thickness of Ir 20 Mn 80 layer for the fixed Fe layer thickness. The trend of H EB and H C with temperature and H FC indicates the presence of SG like interface in the FM/AFM system. From the fitting of the training effect experimental data, we found that both the frozen and rotatable interfacial frustrated spins contribute to the EB. The rotatable interfacial spins are found to be relax 8 times faster than the frozen interfacial spins. We have deposited Fe/Ir 20 Mn 80 bilayers on Si (100) substrate having native oxide layer by dc magnetron sputtering at room temperature. Sample nomenclature and structure of all the samples are given in table Figure Where, H EB (n) is the exchange bias field for the nth loop run, H EB is the exchange bias field after infinite number of loops run, K is the system dependent constant. We found that the power law given in eq. ( Where, A f , P f are the parameters for the interfacial frozen spins and A i , P i are the parameters for the interfacial rotatable spins of the FM and AFM interface. A f , A i have the dimension of mT and P f, P i are dimensionless. P f and P i are the relaxation rates of the frozen and rotatable interfacial spin components, respectively. From the R 2 value, we can estimate the excellent fit of the training effect experimental data. The parameters obtained after fitting the training effect data with eq. ( In conclusion, we investigated the temperature, H FC dependence of EB and training effect in sputter-deposited Fe/Ir 20 Mn 80 systems. We observed exponential decay behaviour in H EB , H C with temperature. We found decrease in H EB with increase in H FC contrary to the typical behaviour H EB with H FC in FM/AFM systems. It is found that the SG like interface might be a primary reason for this type of trend in H FC and temperature dependence of EB. However, the contribution of 'bulk' part of the AFM spins to EB from the variation of H EB with the thickness of AFM is also observed. Training effect has been analysed by fitting a model which consider both frozen and rotatable spins. We found that the interfacial rotatable spins relax 8 times faster than the interfacial frozen spins.