The ability of different materials to display self-limiting growth has recently attracted enormous attention due to the importance of nanoscale materials in applications for catalysis, energy conversion, (opto)electronics, etc. Here, we show that electrochemical deposition of palladium (Pd) between graphene oxide (GO) sheets result in a self-limiting growth of 5 nm thin Pd nanosheets. The self-limiting growth is found to be a consequence of strong interaction of Pd with the confining GO sheets which results in bulk growth of Pd being energetically unfavourable for larger thicknesses. Furthermore, we have successfully carried out liquid exfoliation of the resulting Pd-GO laminates to isolate Pd nanosheets and demonstrated their high efficiency in continuous flow catalysis and electrocatalysis. GO laminate with nanometer and sub-nanometer size interlayer channels is continuously receiving tremendous attention due to its unique molecular permeation properties 1-5 . In particular, tunable ion, molecular sieving and fast mass transport 4-8 make it a promising candidate for next-generation membrane for advanced separation technologies 1, hugely influence the chemical reactions at nanoscale Figure Figure Thickness profiles across the edge of the single and bilayer GO are shown in Figure The X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra show that the peak corresponding to the (001) reflection of the GO laminate nearly disappears after the ECD, while the new peaks corresponding to metallic Pd appear, confirming the successful growth of Pd inside the GO laminate. To characterize the deposited Pd inside the laminate, we have cleaved the Pd deposited GO laminate using scotch tape to expose the inner surfaces of the laminate, and performed AFM measurements. We have found two types of Pd nanosheets in the GO laminate. (i) scattered Pd nanosheet islands with a thickness of ~ 5 nm (Figure For the TEM, ECD was performed for a longer time (24 hours on a 2 μm thick sample) to make sure that Pd growth is complete accross the full interlayer spaces of the GO laminate. Figure The varying thickness of the GO spacers could be explained by the weak electric field screening of thin GO layers (≈ < 6 layers), which as a result bypasses the growth of Pd on these layers. The formation of a Pd between the GO layers offers the prospect of isolating the Pd layers in a water-based solution. To achieve this, we have followed a liquid exfoliation technique (Figure To explore the potential applications of the synthesized Pd nanosheets, we have performed two sets of experiments. First, we studied the catalytic properties of Pd nanosheets by re-assembling them into a membrane for continuous flow catalysis to convert 4-nitrophenol to 4-aminophenol using NaBH4 as reductant, which is a model reaction for examining the catalytic properties of metal catalysts The catalytic membrane conversion experiments were performed using a vacuum filtration setup Secondly, we studied the potential of Pd nanosheets to act as a catalyst for the methanol oxidation reaction and have demonstrated its superior performance over commercial Pd black (supplementary section 2 and Figure where r is the radius of the nucleus, z is the height/thickness of the nucleus, V and S are the volume and accessible surface area for the growing nucleus, u is the cohesive energy per unit volume of the nucleus between the GO sheets, S1 and S2 are the nucleus' contact areas with the top and bottom GO layers respectively, γ is the surface free energy, γ is the interaction between GO sheets and Pd (adhesion energy), and E z is the van der Waals adhesion energy between two GO sheets (supplementary section 3). Previously it has been found that Pd interacts with graphene via a strong chemisorption and γ was estimated as -0.084 J/m In conclusion, we have shown that electrochemical growth of Pd between the interlayer spaces of GO leads to a self-limiting growth of 5 nm thin Pd nanosheets. The self-limiting growth we observe is attributed to the interlayer confinement and strong interaction of Pd with the GO layers. Taking into account the highly favourable catalytic properties of Pd, we have demonstrated the potential application of Pd nanosheets for continuous flow catalysis, and electrocatalysis. Our work shows a novel route to the production of 2D nanosheets using 2D laminates as a host and invites for broad explorations. Preparation of graphene oxide: Graphite oxide was prepared by the modified Hummers' method as reported previously Electrochemical deposition: ECD experiments were performed using GO deposited ITO substrates (sheet resistance ~200 Ω/square), or 10 nm Al/30 nm Au coated free standing GO laminates as the cathode. Platinum electrode (99.9%, 25 m thick platinum foil with 5 mm width) was used as the anode. For the fabrication of scattered GO flakes on ITO, diluted GO suspension with a concentration ~ 1 μg/mL was drop casted on the ITO substrates. For thicker GO laminate electrodes, we deposited ~200 nm thick GO laminate on the ITO substrate by drop casting GO solution with a concentration of 0.1 mg/mL. Laminates with higher thickness were prepared by vacuum filtration and 10 nm Al/30 nm Au was thermally evaporated on one side of the laminate and used as an electrode. Electrolyte reservoir for the ECD was fabricated by attaching an open-end plastic tube onto the GO electrode using an epoxy resin. Before the ECD, the GO sheets or laminates were stabilized in the electrolyte for several minutes to allow the electrolytes to permeate into the GO laminates. The platinum anode was kept at a distance ~ 5 mm away from the GO electrode during the ECD. For the ECD, both the anode and cathode were connected to the Keithley 2400 SourceMeter, and the current density was controlled at 0.1-0.5 mA/cm 2 . The electrolyte concentration for all the ECD reported here was fixed at 1 M. We have also studied the influence of electrolyte concentration on the Pd deposition and found that 0.5 M and higher electrolyte concentration provides 5 nm Pd nanosheets whereas lower electrolyte concentration leads to Pd nanoparticle formation. The particle formation could be due to the lack of sufficient Pd ions between the GO sheets at lower electrolyte concentration which limits the growth of the Pd nucleation sites. The individual GO flakes on ITO, after the ECD, were rinsed with deionised water and directly used for AFM and SEM studies. In the case of Pd nanosheet incorporated GO laminates (Pd-GO laminate), after ECD, the samples were randomly peeled off by scotch tape to expose the fresh surface of Pd crystals grown inside the GO laminate. The thicknesses of Pd nanosheets were measured using a Veeco Dimension 3100 AFM in the tapping mode and SEM characterisations were conducted in a Zeiss ultra 55 microscope. The XRD measurements in the 2θ range of 3° to 75° (with a step size of 0.02° and recording rate of 0.2 s) were performed using a Bruker D8 diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). For the TEM cross-sectional sample preparation, the Pd-GO laminates were glued between two pieces of Si wafer and 500 μm thick section were extracted using a wire saw. The section was mechanically polished in to the shape of a wedge down to electron transparency using an Allied multiprep polisher system. Finally, the section was polished using low-energy (0.2-1 keV) Ar + ion to achieve thinner specimen thicknesses. TEM characterisation was carried out in a FEI Titan ChemiSTEM microscope operating at 200 kV. EELS experiments were performed using a Gatan Imaging Filter (GIF) Quantum. The C and Pd maps were obtained from the C-K edge and Pd-M edge, respectively. For both edges, the pre-edge background was subtracted using a power law model and the remaining edge intensity was integrated over a range of 50 eV after the edge. We used the Pd-GO laminate for the exfoliation of Pd nanosheets. The samples were obtained after a long-time ECD (for thin membranes on ITO, we deposited for 1 hour, and for thick free-standing membranes, a 24 hours deposition was used). The laminate after long-time ECD was peeled off from the ITO substrate by immersing it in water. For the thick GO laminates, the 10 nm Al/30 nm Au is etched and lifted off by 1 M hydrochloric acid. The Pd-GO laminates were then reduced in 50% hydrazine solution at 80 0 C for 30 min, repeatedly washed with water and dried in a vacuum oven at 100 0 C. The exfoliation was conducted by immersing the dry Pd/rGO in a mixture of isopropanol and water (volume ratio is 1:1). After 48 hours of ultra-sonication, the resultant colloid was directly used for TEM and AFM measurement by drop casting the colloid on a gold TEM grid and silicon wafer respectively. We have also exfoliated the GO-Pd laminates without the hydrazine reduction process, but the exfoliation yields were found to be smaller. For the continuous flow conversion of the 4-nitrophenol experiment, a 2.5 mL Pd/rGO colloid with a concentration of 1 mg/mL was mixed with 0.5 mL of 1 mg/mL GO suspension followed by filtration through a porous polysulfone polymer support (pore size: 0.22 m, Millipore). 100 mL of 4-nitrophenol (0.1 mM) solution mixed with 4 mL of 56 mM NaBH4 solution was used as feed solution. The permeance was monitored at different time intervals to make sure that the experiment is under a steady state. UV-visible-near-infrared grating spectrometer with a xenon lamp source (250-2500 nm) was used for monitoring the conversion of 4-nitrophenol. In this measurement, relative transmission spectra were measured as the ratio of sample (feed and permeate) transmission to that of the pure cuvette and then converted into absorbance. We first determined the electrochemical surface area (ESA) of Pd sheets and Pd black by using cyclic voltammetry (CV). This was carried out in N2 saturated 0.5 M HClO4 solution at a scan rate of 50 mV/s in the potential range 0.054 V to 1.414 V. ESA of Pd was calculated using Eq. 1 where Qo is the charge required for the PdO reduction which was derived from the PdO reduction peak in 0.5 M HClO4 solution, and QPdO is the charge required for the reduction of a monolayer of PdO (405 μC/cm 2 ) 2,3,4 . The catalytic methanol oxidation on Pd black and Pd sheets were compared by CV measurements in 0.1 M methanol + 0.5 M KOH solution. The current was normalized by ESA. The electrocatalytic methanol oxidation on Pd black and Pd nanosheets were compared by CV measurements in 0.1 M methanol + 0.5 M KOH solution. As shown in Figure The nucleation and growth of Pd between GO sheets can be understood thermodynamically by calculating the total free energy of the Pd, which is the driving force for both nucleation and growth. The free energy of a particle can be defined as the sum of the surface free energy and the bulk free energy. For Pd growth between two GO sheets, the interaction between Pd and GO sheets, as well as the van der Waals adhesion between two GO layers need to be considered. Hence the free energy can be expressed as, where V is the volume of the Pd nucleus, u is the is the cohesive energy per volume of the nucleus between GO sheets, S is the surface area of the nucleus, γ is the surface free energy (surface tension), S1 and S2 are the nucleus' contact areas with the top and bottom GO layers respectively, γ is the interaction parameter (adhesion energy) between GO sheets and Pd, and E is the van der Waals adhesion energy between two GO sheets. Due to the observed directional growth of Pd between GO sheets, the growth is modelled by assuming that the Pd nucleus is a spherical segment with a radius r and height z as shown in the inset of Figure Here we assume d = 1-2 nm since the molecular scale interactions become weaker above these limits. The bulk crystal free energy u0 is negative, and depends on the temperature T, Boltzmann's constant kB, the supersaturation of the solution S′, which is the ratio between the supersaturation concentration C and the electrolyte concentration C0, and the electrolyte molar volume Ω. The u0 is written as: The coefficient α can be determined as α by assuming u(0) ~ 0 because the nucleation starts at the bottom GO sheets. Bringing the above definitions together, Eq. ( where, π r cos θ 1 is the sum of the contacting areas of Pd with the top and bottom graphene sheets,θ sin , V π r z and S 2πrz are the volume and surface area of the spherical segment as shown in Figure Figure Here, we used the previously predicted graphene-Pd interaction parameter for our calculation since for GO, an area of 40-60% remains free from functionalization, and hence we assume that γ does not significantly vary from pristine graphene. However, to further understand the importance of the γ on the self-limiting growth of Pd we have calculated the ΔG for different values of γ by adding a pre-factor to γ and found that to alter the self-limiting growth thickness significantly from 5 nm, the value of γ needs to either increase or decrease by several times. For example, a four time decrease in γ leads to a self-limiting growth thickness of less than 3 nm. To accurately determine the value of γ for different oxygen functional group coverage, further dedicated density functional theory calculations are required. ECD of copper (Cu) inside the GO laminates was performed using the same experimental conditions as used for the ECD of Pd. 1M CuSO4 aqueous solution was used as the electrolyte. Both thin layers of GO on ITO glass and freestanding GO laminates were used for the ECD of Cu. Figure 