We show the physical realization and experimental demonstration of an exceptional point of 6 th order degeneracy in a triple ladder (or three-way) microwave waveguide realized using three coupled microstrips on a grounded dielectric substrate. This threeway waveguide supports six Bloch eigenmodes and all coalesce onto a degenerate single eigenmode at a given frequency. The three-way waveguide is gainless, and this exceptional point is associated to a vanishing group velocity and its multiple derivatives. Indeed the k dispersion diagram, that we call 6 th order degenerate band edge (6DBE) has six coalescing branches. We provide the experimental verification of a 6 th order exceptional point by evaluating the degenerate wavenumber-frequency dispersion diagram from the measurement of scattering parameters of a six-port unit cell. We also show the resonant behavior of a cavity made of the three-way waveguide with finite length. The unique properties of 6DBE can be exploited in designing innovative high-Q resonators, oscillators, filters, and pulse shaping devices. Degeneracy of order six in electromagnetic waveguides means that six eigenmodes coalesce and form a single degenerate mode. Here, we imply that the degeneracy is in both wavenumbers and polarization states of the six Bloch eigenmodes in a waveguide, forming a 6 th order degenerate band edge (6DBE). A particular class of exceptional points of degeneracy (EPD) in periodic structures is known as a degenerate band edge (DBE) where four eigenmodes in a periodic passive, lossless, waveguide coincide at the band-edge Here, we demonstrate theoretically and experimentally the existence of a sixth-order degeneracy (6DBE) in the Bloch wavenumber-frequency dispersion relation for a periodic waveguide implemented by three coupled microstrip lines. This condition happens when six Floquet-Bloch modes (eigenstates) coincide at the center of the Brillouin zone, here intended with the wavenumber interval of (0, We provide a simple implementation of the 6DBE in a threeway waveguide made of three coupled microstrips over a grounded dielectric susbstrate (Fig. To obtain a 6DBE in reciprocal waveguide structures, a coupling between at least three modes, for example in the three microstrip waveguides shown in Fig. To analyze and calculate the eigenmodes of the periodic waveguide, we use a transfer matrix formalism, which is discussed in detail in Refs. to describe the evolution of the eigenmodes, where T denotes the transpose operation, are the vectors that represent the voltage (referred to the ground) and current in each of the three microstrips , in which T is the 66  transfer matrix where 1 is the 66  identity matrix, and we have implicitly assumed the time convention exp( ) jt  . The dispersion diagram, which is the relation between frequency and the complex-valued Bloch wavenumbers, in a lossless and infinitely long periodic waveguide is depicted in Fig. , where h is a parameter that defines the flatness of the dispersion near the degeneracy frequency fd = ωd /(2π) = 2.95 GHz. Based on the real and imaginary branches of the dispersion diagram shown in Fig. The 6DBE condition is manifested when the transfer matrix is "defective," and a complete basis of eigenvectors cannot be found We observe the resonance of a passive waveguide made of a finite number of cascaded unit cells shown in Fig. We study the resonance behavior by constructing a finite structure made of 8 unit-cells as shown in Fig. As explained earlier, the scattering matrix is then transformed into a 6×6 transfer matrix of a unit cell. The voltage distributions at the various circuit nodes are calculated by cascading the transfer matrices of the unit cells. In Fig. the frequency response of the voltage at the middle of the finite structure with 8 unit cells is plotted where a peak is observed for each of the three microstrip lines at a resonance frequency close to the 6DBE frequency, i.e., at f r,6DBE =2.988 GHz. Fig. The experimental verification of the existence of the sixth order EPD in the microstrip three-way waveguide shown in Fig. where J Λ is the Jordan matrix and ζ e = e -jk e d . The similarity transformation matrix V is composed of one degenerate eigenvector and five generalized eigenvectors, associated with the eigenvalue e  . In practice, due to the fabrication tolerances and losses of the structure, the system can not operate exactly at the 6DBE but rather very close to it. When the system is close to the EPD, the system matrix is very close to be in a Jordan block form. At this case one can measure how close the system matrix is to Jordan block through measuring how the eigenvector of the system are close to each other using the prementioned concept of the coalasance parameter as done in Fig. A physical realization of a three-way periodic waveguide exhibiting a sixth-order degeneracy (6DBE) is demonstrated using microstrip technology. The 6DBE is an exceptional point of order six where six eigenstates coalesce onto a single degenerate one. Both theoretical and experimental verifications are provided. Remarkable physical properties may arise due to this strong sixth-order exceptional point of degeneracy including increased quality factor, high density of states, and sensitivity which can lead to novel designs for microwave and optical pulse generation 