InP based dilute Bismide InGaAsBi material is emerging as a promising candidate for extending short wavelength infrared detection. One critical factor to limit the performance of these InGaAsBi photodiodes is dark current caused by defects within the material. In this work, low frequency noise spectroscopy (LFNS) and temperature varied photoluminescence was used to characterize the defect levels in the devices. Three deep levels located at E c -0.33 eV, E v +0.14 eV, and E c -0.51 eV were identified from the LFNS spectra, which are consistent with emission peak energy found by photoluminescence spectra of InGaAsBi. InP based InGaAs material system has been widely used in high performance photodetectors (PDs) over past several decades. In particular, the lattice-matched In 0.53 Ga 0.47 As PDs on InP has been demonstrated with low dark current, high efficiency and high speed in 1.1μm-1.7μm wavelength range Recently, Bismuth (Bi) containing III-V semiconductor alloys have attracted much attention due to the strong band gap dependence on Bi In this paper, we studied the defect property of the InGaAsBi materials on InP substrate based on temperature varied dark current, optical response, photoluminescence (PL) and low frequency noise spectroscopy (LFNS) measurement. The devices show anomalous red-shift behavior as temperature changes from 77K to 300K, which is discussed in detailed along with the photoluminescence (PL) and low frequency noise spectroscopy analysis. Moreover, three different deep levels found from LFNS with activation energy of 0.33 eV, 0.14 eV and 0.51 eV, respectively, are also consistent to the temperature-independent peak behaviors observed in PL spectra. The sample was grown on InP substrate with a p-i-n structure by using molecular beam system (MBE). Fig. The Bi composition in InGaAsBi was measured by high resolution X-ray diffractometer (HRXRD) (004) ω/2θ curves as shown in Fig. After the material growth, the sample was fabricated into different sizes diameter mesa-shaped PDs. Standard photolithography and wet chemical etching were used to define the mesa. Ohmic contact electrodes were deposited by using electron evaporation and lift-off techniques, Si 3 N 4 was used to passivate the etched surface. The dark current-voltage relation of a 300μm diameter PD was measured from 77K-300K in a variable temperature probe station, as shown in Fig. After the electrical characterization, the device was wire-bonded and loaded into a low temperature cryostat for the optical response measurement. The photo-response of the device was carried out with frontside illumination and without anti-reflection (AR) coating. The photocurrent was amplified and analyzed by a low noise current preamplifier and a fast Fourier transform (FFT) network spectrum analyzer. A ThermoFisher Scientific Nicolet Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (FTIR) was used to measure the relative responsivity of the device, a standard black body source at 700 °C was used to calibrate the relative response. Fig. As the temperature increases, the defects become to be more effective recombination centers, and the carrier collection efficiency drops which results in a decreased responsivity. When the temperature is above 220K, valence band is uplifted above Bi-related edge state, as the temperature increases, the shrink of InGaAsBi bandgap causes an extension of the cutoff wavelength and a larger absorption coefficient, which enhances the responsivity of the device. In order to probe the optical property of the InGaAsBi materials and verify the explanation in the last section, the temperature varied photoluminescence measurement on the wafer with p-type cap layer removed was carried out. Here, 532nm laser was used as an excitation source, and emission spectra were detected by In-rich InGaAs detector equipped in Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (FTIR). Fig. Here, we used two different photodetectors for photoluminescence measurement in order to have the best signal to noise ratio in the whole spectrum. In Fig. Noise in a photodetector is an import figure of merit, which often limit the performance of photodetectors. White noise and low frequency noise (LFS) are the main noise in photodetectors. The current power spectral density (PSD) is often observed frequency dependent in low frequency region (below several MHz), which is called low frequency noise. In high frequency region, the PSD becomes frequency-independent white noise, generally limited by thermal and shot noise. LFN includes 1/f noise and generation -recombination (G-R) noise, where the PSD of 1/f noise is inversely proportional to frequency and the G-R noise is induced by the random capture and emission carrier from deep levels in the bandgap. The G-R noise arising from deep levels appeared as Lorentzian peaks superimposed on the noise spectra. The detail of LFN measurement can refer to the reference The current noise spectral density is mathematically expressed as Where A i and B are the amplitudes of the G-R and 1/f process, τ i is the time constant of the G-R center, C is the white noise related constant. By plotting the f*S I versus f, the Lorentzian peaks would be more visible, and the time constant τ i under different temperatures can be extracted by Lorentzian fitting. In addition, time constant τ i can be written as τ i =1/(2πf c ), f c is corner frequency where Lorentzian appear as symmetric peak . In a n-type material, we have time constant Where v th is electron's thermal velocity, σis capture cross section, E T is deep level position, E c and N c are the conduction band edge and effective density of states, v th and N c are T 1/2 , T 3/2 dependent, respectively. From the Arrhenius plot of ln(τT 2 ) versus 1000/T, the energy level and capture cross section of the deep levels can be obtained based on the slope and intercept. To further investigate the defect information in InGaAsBi, low frequency noise spectroscopy was applied to the InGaAsBi photodiodes, Device with diameter of 300 μm was measured under the temperature from 77K to 300K with an increasing step of 6K, at the bias voltage of 100 mV. Fig. As mentioned earlier, A i in Eq. ( Therefore, it can be inferred that the energy different between deep level and conduction band should also change monotonically. Thus, the three deep levels found above should be at E c -0.33 eV, E v +0.14 eV, and E c -0.51 eV. Recalling the emission energy (0.55 eV, 0.48 eV, 0.35 eV) found in PL spectra, two deep levels (0.35 eV, 0.48 eV) derived from the PL spectra are close to the energy levels found by LFNS which are located at E c -0.33 eV and E c -0.51 eV In summary, a comprehensive study was carried out to investigate the deep levels in the InP based InGaAsBi photodiodes. Three deep levels located at E c -0.33 eV, E v +0.14 eV, and E c -0.51 eV were found by LFNS. Two of them correlate well with the PL spectra of InGaAsBi, where three temperature-insensitive peaks at energy of 0.35 eV, 0.48 eV, 0.55 eV was observed. The additional peak around 0.55eV in PL spectra is consistent to the abnormal redshift behavior of optical response. These defects information found in this work is significant and provides a method for the characterization of deep levels in InGaAsBi, which may help further optimize and improve the InGaAsBi material quality. 