Voltage-induced ferromagnetic resonance (V-FMR) in magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs) with a W buffer is investigated. Perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) energy is controlled by both thickness of a CoFeB free layer deposited directly on the W buffer and a post-annealing process at different temperatures. The PMA energy as well as the magnetization damping are determined by analysing field-dependent FMR signals in different field geometries. An optimized MTJ structure enabled excitation of V-FMR at frequencies exceeding 30 GHz. The macrospin modelling is used to analyse the field-and angular-dependence of the V-FMR signal and to support experimental magnetization damping extraction. Magnetic multilayer structures are commonly utilized as key elements of magnetic field sensors 1 and magnetic random access memories 2 . A stack structure similar to the one used in existing applications and related physical mechanisms, such as magnetoresistance effect and spin-transfer-torque (STT), can be used for future microwave solutions, for example spin torque oscillators Recently, a few different mechanisms have been proposed to maximize the effect of an electric field on magnetic properties of materials, including diluted magnetic semiconductors In this work we present studies on CoFeB/MgO/ CoFeB-based MTJs deposited on a W buffer First, we focus on the wafer-level investigation using VNA-FMR. Resonance frequency (f ) vs. perpendicular magnetic field curves of samples with different thicknesses of the free layer (t CoFeB = 0.9 and 1.2 nm) are presented in Fig. From the same type of measurements, the free layer magnetization damping (α) was calculated from the linewidth (∆H) vs. f slope according to the following Eq.; where γ = 1.76×10 11 Hz/T is the gyromagnetic ratio and ∆H 0 is the inhomogeneous broadening The values obtained for the sample with t CoFeB = 1.2 nm agree well with the W/CoFeB sample of similar thickness reported in Ref. Next, we move on to the transport measurement on indicates a non-linear behaviour for small f (and thus small H). (c) presents summarized α for all samples obtained using both VNA-FMR and V-FMR. The origin of a non-linear ∆H vs. f is explained in (d), where β is the angle between the applied magnetic field vector and the magnetization vectora strong non-collinearity is found in simulations for small f and high KPMA. the fabricated sample. The crystallization process of Co-FeB (initiated from the MgO tunnel barrier) starts after annealing at 250 • C 22 . Therefore, we begin the analysis of the V-FMR signal for the samples annealed at this temperatures. The tunnelling magnetoresistance ratio of the fabricated MTJ reaches 40% (measured between an orthogonal and parallel CoFeB magnetization orientations) and the resistance-area product is around RA = 40 kOhm*μm 2 . Figure where H r1 (H r2 ) is the resonance field of the free (reference) layer at a given f , V S1 and V A1 (V S2 and V A2 ) are the amplitudes of the symmetric and antisymmetric Lorentz functions of the free (reference) layer and ∆H 1 (∆H 2 ) is the linewidth of the free (reference) layer. Fitting the ∆H 1 and ∆H 2 vs. f dependence enabled us to calculate the damping of the free and the reference layers independently -Fig. Within the limit of the available magnetic field of up to 1 T, for the MTJ annealed at 250 • C the maximum resonance signal was measured for around f = 20 GHz, depending on the magnetic field configuration To understand the angular dependence of the V-FMR and to confirm the magnetization damping analysis, the macrospin simulations were performed. We used Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation, where voltage excitation was modelled as sinusoidal changes of K PMA . This, in turn, contributes an alternating term to the effective field, which determines magnetization dynamics. Afterwards, MTJ resistance is calculated and multiplied by the assumed leakage current associated with the applied voltage, resulting in V mix , in the same way as in the experimental procedure. We used a similar approach previously in V-FMR spin diode effect modelled using micromagnetic simulations The simulated dependence of the linewidth vs. f for different K PMA is depicted in Fig. In conclusion, ferromagnetic resonance in W/CoFeB/MgO/CoFeB was investigated by means of wafer-level vector network analyser FMR and voltageinduced FMR in patterned devices. Both the CoFeB thickness and the thermal treatment influence magnetic anisotropy, which reaches a value of 1.5 MJ/m 3 , which is well above demagnetizing energy. Resonance signals from both the reference and the free layer are analysed, allowing for magnetization damping determination. For thin CoFeB free layers the damping between 0.01 and 0.02 was measured, independent on annealing conditions, which is approximately double of the thicker reference layer damping. V-FMR in the MTJ annealed at 300 • C is measured up to a high value of f = 31 GHz.