Diamond photonics is an ever-growing field of research driven by the prospects of harnessing diamond and its colour centres as suitable hardware for solid-state quantum applications. The last two decades have seen the field been shaped by the nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centre both with breakthrough fundamental physics demonstrations and practical realizations. Recently however, an entire suite of other diamond defects has emerged. They are M-V colour centres, where M indicates one of the elements in the IV column of the periodic table-Si, Ge, Sn and Pb, and V indicates lattice vacancies, i.e. missing next-neighbour carbon atoms. These centres exhibit a much stronger emission into the zero-phonon line then the NV centre, they display inversion symmetry, and can be engineered using ion implantation-all attractive features for scalable quantum photonic architectures based on solid-state, single-photon sources. In this perspective, we highlight the leading techniques for engineering and characterizing these diamond defects, discuss the current state-of-the-art of group IV-based devices and provide an outlook of the future directions the field is taking towards the realisation of solid-state quantum photonics with diamond. The field of diamond photonics is marching into its third decade-its birth arguably marked by the 1997 discovery of room-temperature optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) from a single diamond nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centre. In the recent past, other colour centres in diamond have thus been explored. Initial experiments revealed a diverse spread of narrow-band emitters, spanning over the visible and near infrared spectral range. In 2011, the centre was revisited after a study from Neu et al. We then discuss the spin coherence properties of the SiV -and the GeV -centres, and show the current state of the art for a few representative quantum photonic experiments realised with these emitters. We conclude by giving a broad outlook over the outstanding obstacles, which might focus future directions and advancements in the field. . Levels in grey, red, green, blue refer to values calculated in Refs. Incorporation. The formation of SiV -centres in diamond is rather simple. Due to the residual silicon, often present in chemical vapor deposition (CVD) chambers from quartz bell jars or substrates, most of CVD-grown nanodiamond does contain SiV -centres. Likewise, many high pressure high temperature (HPHT) nanodiamonds and bulk single crystals can include SiV - centres that are present due to addition of silicon-containing precursors. Arguably the main outstanding challenge to deterministic nanoscale positioning of colour centres in diamond is thus the availability of specific beam optics for accurate spatial delivery of individual ions. To this end, two main approaches are being pursued-both currently achieving resolutions well-below 100 nm-nanoscale focusing and scanning of a rarefied ion beam via electromagnetic lenses, and use of collimators in combination with nano-apertures. For the first approach, the main obstacle is the limited focusing capability of conventional MeV energy accelerators. This has however been overcome by the development-still ongoingof custom focused ion beam (FIB) apparatuses with commercially available alternatives to ordinary gallium liquid metal ion sources. Symmetry and structure. Group-IV diamond defects display the split-vacancy configuration in which the element M (Si, Ge, Sn, Pb) lies in between two adjacent diamond vacancies, i.e. two missing nearest-neighbours carbon atoms. The resulting M-V -defects have ground ( 2 Eg) and excited ( 2 Eu) states that both have E symmetry and double orbital degeneracy. The orbital degeneracy is lifted by spin-orbit coupling and dynamic Jahn-Teller interaction, leading to a pair of split ground and excited states, each with double spin-degeneracy (S = 1/2, Figure Spin Control. For many quantum-based applications, the spin coherence of the colour centres is a crucial figure of merit, for it dictates the feasibility as well as the maximum number of fundamental operations executable on the candidate qubit. Ideally, the ratio between the time of a single gate operation and decoherence time of the (spin) state should be ~10 -3 -10 - , as imposed by error correction limits. Here we focus on the well-studied SiV -as a representative case; similar considerations though can be drawn for the other diamond M-V centres and are briefly discussed at the end of this section. For the SiV -the coherence time is relatively short and is thus one of the main challenges towards its use as a robust qubit. The SiV -possesses two possible paths to encode information as a qubit-either via the two orbital branches of the ground state (ΔGS ~47 GHz) Charge-state control. An indirect alternative is to consider the neutrally-charged state of the M-V defects. For instance, the SiV 0 displays strong (~90%), nearly transform-limited (~450 MHz) emission in the ZPL at 946 nm. It is a S = 1 spin system which is less subject than its negatively-charged counterpart to decoherence caused by phonon interaction and electric field fluctuations. Coherent light-matter interfaces are one of the key components of many proposed quantum technologies. They are for instance essential for advanced quantum networks and modular quantum computing architectures Optical properties. One essential property of a coherent light-matter interface is a transformlimited optical transition. This is because in the opposite case, i.e. when spectral broadening is present, the emitted photons are distinguishable and the fidelity of key linear-optical quantum operations (e.g. projective Bell-state measurements) is limited. A second desirable property is high quantum efficiency: emission of spectrally-coherent, spin-correlated photons into a specific mode with high probability after optical excitation. Finally, the inhomogeneous (emitter-to-emitter) variation in optical transition frequency should be small such that spectrally-identical emitters can be produced scalably. Group-IV defects in diamond have advantages over other solid-state emitters for these crucial aspects. Unlike NV -centres, which have poor optical linewidths when produced through ion implantation, Colour centres in diamond have always been one of the most prominent systems for quantum plasmonic experiments owing to their robustness and small size. New designs and calculations are also being brought forward for realising indistinguishable photon sources at room temperature based on group-IV colour centres in diamond. Group-IV diamond emitters have already been successfully employed in a suite of fundamental demonstrations and practical applications. Yet the field is still at its infancy, especially in certain research areas. An in-depth discussion of these is beyond the scope of this perspective, but we deem important highlighting a few notable ones where M-V emitters are showing great promise (Figure 