This work presents a mechanism by which non-reciprocal wave transmission is achieved in a class of gyric metamaterial lattices with embedded rotating elements. A modulation of the device's angular momentum is obtained via prescribed rotations of a set of locally housed spinning motors and are then used to induce space-periodic, time-periodic, as well as space-time-periodic variations which influence wave propagations in distinct ways. Owing to their dependence on gyroscopic effects, such systems are able to break reciprocal wave symmetry without stiffness perturbations rendering them consistently stable as well as energy self-reliant. Dispersion patterns, band gap emergence, as well as non-reciprocal wave transmission in the space-time-periodic gyric metamaterials are predicted both analytically from the gyroscopic system dynamics as well as numerically via time-transient simulations. In addition to breaking reciprocity, we show that the energy content of a frictionless gyric metamaterial is conserved over one temporal modulation cycle enabling it to exhibit a stable response irrespective of the pumping frequency. Inertial and elastic components represent the building blocks of metamaterials and phononic crystals which have been predominantly utilized to manipulate incident waves over the past few decades In this effort, we examine dispersion characteristics, as well as non-reciprocal wave phenomena, in a class of gyric metamaterials (GMMs) which comprise a set of embedded spinning rotors. Unlike conventional rotating periodic structures Nonetheless, most if not all of these investigations target a modulation of the system's stiffness properties, which risks influencing structural aspects. Stiffness modulations also often require hard-wiring as well as electrical shunt circuits rendering them experimentally tedious unit cell bearings Inspired by previous efforts on gyro-elastic continua where J x and J y are the moments of inertia about the shown principal axes, and M x is the external moment applied to the outer mass in the x-direction. Also, θx,y and θx,y represent the angular velocities and accelerations in the respective directions. The coupling term appears solely as a result of including the rotor's angular momentum h in the system dynamics. The steady-state response amplitude of Eq. ( Using Eq. ( which mimics the frequency-dependent behavior of the gyric body B. In Eq. ( Although asymmetric elastic and inertial properties about the x-and y-axes might provide an additional degree of design flexibility, it is rather challenging to control these properties in real-time. Therefore, we limit our analysis to k x = k y = k and J x = J y = J in order to isolate the angular momentum role in tuning the dispersion profile from other parameters. In the following subsections, we discuss the dispersion of elastic waves in GMMs with uniform, space-periodic, time-periodic and space-time-periodic angular momentum distributions, and follow that with a numerical time-transient verification of the fully simulated system in the last section. Consider an infinite lattice made of gyric unit cells, as shown in Fig. where i = √ -1. Owing to the periodicity of lattice, a solution of the form θ (n) x,y = θx,y e -inκ can be adopted, where κ is the non-dimensional wave number. Substituting the solution back in Eq. ( with the corresponding Bloch modes (eigenvectors): where Ω = ω ω0 is the dimensionless frequency, Ω h = ω h ω0 is the dimensionless angular momentum of the spinning rotors, and ω 0 = k/J is the natural frequency. The group velocity at the long wavelength limit (c g = dΩ/dκ) is zero, indicating that the introduction of angular momentum results in a vanishing speed of sound in GMMs with a uniform h distribution. We also note that the ± appears in both Eqs. ( A frequency band gap forms in the range where κ is complex-valued. As such, given Eq. ( Each of these cases corresponds to a partial band gap where one mode attenuates and the other freely propagates. A complete band gap, where both modes are suppressed, occurs in the shared frequency range ). These ranges as well as the corresponding attenuation degree, i.e. Im(κ), are graphically illustrated in Fig. In practice, such localized flat bands, with near-zero group velocities, behave similar to standing waves associated with natural frequencies of a finite structure. As a result, the GMM manages to selectively admit both frequencies from a wide-band excitation. Such behavior has been also recently reported in time-periodic systems where wavenumber as opposed to frequency band gaps emerge as a result of an external temporal modulation To shed light on the band gap generation mechanism in GMMs, consider a lattice made of the equivalent non-gyric unit cells as shown in Fig. FIG. Next, we examine a phononic GMM with a spatially periodic pattern by setting the rotor speed of every other cell equal to zero. In which case, we are able to model the steady-state dynamics of the n th and (n -1) th successive cells via the system of equations given by where and Eqs. ( x,y e iκ and θ x,y e -iκ is employed. Upon substituting in Eq. ( Inspired by efforts in utilizing time modulated material properties for frequency conversion and amplification 9,34,41 , we next examine a time-harmonic GMM obtained by imposing an oscillating h with a pumping frequency ω p across the entire gyric lattice. The time variation is given by h(t) = h 0 +h 1 cos ω p t, where h 0 and h 1 are the average (bias) and oscillation amplitudes, respectively. Consider a time-periodic GMM realized by means of a mechanical torque imparted to each spinning rotor and given by T (t) = dh/dt = -h 1 ω p sin ω p t. The torque can, for example, be supplied by an internally embedded motor with an instantaneous power where J r is the rotational inertia of the rotor about its principle z-axis. As such, the required power to overcome the rotational inertia of the rotor is approximately upper-bounded by Ṗe ∼ = ω p h 1 (2h 0 + h 1 )/2J r (an exact upper bound exists, but is omitted here for brevity). For a frictionless setup, the net amount of energy injected into the system per one temporal cycle is independent of ω p , which can be attributed to the π 2 phase shift between the angular momentum and the electromotor torque. This behavior is reminiscent of forced harmonic oscillations of an undamped spring-mass system, where zero energy input is required to maintain oscillations at a desired frequency. It should be noted, however, that in the presence of friction or damping, a net positive amount of energy is needed to sustain the time-periodic angular momentum profile. The time-periodic GMM's motion equations are given by In deriving Eq. ( x,y (t), and θ x,y (t), and dropping n, Eq. ( x,y e ilωpt (18) where φ (l) x and φ (l) y are the Fourier coefficients and λ is a generally complex constant known as the characteristic exponent where I and O are identity and null matrices of a proper size. The entries of the dimensionless matrices Ψ (j) for j = 1, . . . , 4 are given by l,q = 2iqΩ p δ l,q (20a) where Ω p = ω p /ω 0 is the dimensionless temporal modulation frequency, l and q ∈ Z, and δ l,q is the Kronecker delta which is equal to one for l = q and zero otherwise. In addition, the rotation vectors (Φ x and Φ y ) are x,y , . . . , φ x,y , φ x,y T The vector in Eq. ( As previously stated, unlike stiffness and density in non-gyric metastructures, the angular momentum h is not limited to positive values. Consequently, time-periodic GMMs can be generally classified into three groups based on the modulation amplitudes h 0 and h 1 . The first group comprises GMMs with zero bias angular momentum (h 0 = 0) and h 1 > 0. The second group is systems with a nonzero bias (h 0 > 0) and h 1 < h 0 . The third group has h 0 > 0 and h 1 > h 0 . The previous classification is in addition to the traditional division of time-periodic systems into slow (Ω p < 1) and fast (Ω p ≥ 1) modulation regimes As outlined so far, a distinct advantage of GMM systems is the ability of an angular momentum (induced via a set of embedded spinning rotors) to influence elastic waves, onset band gaps and, more importantly, tune them in real-time by solely adjusting the rotation speed. In this section, we exploit such features to introduce a traveling-wave-like modulation of angular momentum with the intention of breaking the reciprocal symmetry of elastic waves in the GMM lattice. Consider the following space-time-periodic waveform for h: for a GMM consisting of an infinite number of "super cells", each of which containing N unit cells with the prescribed time-varying angular momentum. Also, n is the unit cell index and κ p = 2π/N is the spatial modulation frequency. It is worth noting that, unlike the time-periodic lattice, the angular momentum of adjacent unit cells here carries a 2π/N phase difference. For convenience, we rewrite the governing motion equations for every N gyric unit cells in the following LTP form where x , ..., θ y ] T is the rotation vector, J = JI is the inertia matrix, and I is an identity matrix of size 2N . In the absence of non-conservative G(t) takes the form from which it can be inferred that G(t) is a time-periodic skew-symmetric block matrix, i.e. G(t + τ p ) = G(t) = -G † (t) with (•) † denoting the complex-conjugate-transpose operation. In Eq. ( where the Hermitian matrix Γ(κ) is found to have the following general form for N ≥ 3: In order to study propagation of linear elastic waves in the space-time-periodic GMM described by Eq. ( where Φl and Ĝq are the associated Fourier vector and matrix coefficients. By substituting in Eq. ( FIG. where A, B and C are block matrices with entries that are explicit functions of N , Ω p , h 0 /Jω 0 and h 1 /Jω 0 (see supplementary material for details 49 ). In addition, the vector V is obtained by stacking all the Φq from q = -∞ to ∞ as follows Solving the eigenvalue problem in Eq. ( Fig. To verify the dispersion predictions detailed in Section III, the transient response of a finite 1D GMM lattice with 300 cells is numerically computed via full wave simulation and is used to evaluate the GMM's actual dispersion contours. The GMMs in the simulations are subjected to a broadband force imparted at the center of the lattice such that both forward and backward traveling waves can be captured simultaneously. The excitation is a Gaussian wave packet whose frequency content spans the frequency range of interest. We solve for the time-dependent displacement field of the lattice using MATLAB's "ode45" function with 1e-6 relative tolerance and an output time step of 5 ms. A Hamming window is also incorporated to compensate for the truncation of signal to the first 15 secondsbefore it reaches spatial boundaries. A two-dimensional Fourier transformation (2DFT) is then applied in both space and time to numerically reconstruct the dispersion diagrams of each individual case. The 2DFT is given by where t end is the total simulation time. In here, a grid of 200 × 200 is used to represent the transformed displacement amplitude in the κ -Ω space. Figs. The second set of simulations, shown in Figs. This work has showcased gyric metamaterials (GMMs) as an alternative class of metamaterials which can effectively exhibit wave manipulation capabilities culminating in band gaps as well as non-reciprocal transmission without necessarily requiring a mass or stiffness modulation. By tuning the rotational speed or direction of a set of embedded spinning rotors, a wide range of spatiotemporal distributions of the angular momentum of the lattice's unit cells can be achieved. Such variations have been shown to onset band gaps in the frequency spectrum and/or induce one-way directivity as needed. A combination of theoretical dispersion analyses as well as numerical time-domain simulations have been utilized to show the ability of the angular momentum modulation to achieve some of the fundamental and most recent developments in non-reciprocal systems and metamaterial-based wave guides. Unlike inertia and stiffness, angular momentum is not an inherent property of the material and can, therefore, be handily tuned by solely controlling the speed of rotors. As such, a gyric lattice can near-instantaneously switch between a set of different desirable functionalities by design. Such tunability becomes even more significant in the context of non-reciprocal wave phenomena and space-time-periodic systems, where a certain degree of online control over the system's mechanical properties is critical. Further, given their dependence on gyroscopic effects, in a frictionless setup, GMMs can be classified as conservative systems which do not dissipate mechanical energy into heat or other disorganized energy forms. Finally, the analysis undertaken here illustrated that non-reciprocal GMMs remain reliably stable at high pumping frequencies. Future directions of this work include an experimental realization of this class of time-periodic gyric lattices as well as a rigorous Lyapunov-based investigation of the different stability metrics of such GMMs. 