This study reports on the plasmon-mediated remote Raman sensing promoted by specially designed coaxial nanowires. This unusual geometry for Raman study is based on the separation, by several micrometres, of the excitation laser spot, on one tip of the nanowire, and the Raman detection at the other tip. The very weak efficiency of Raman emission makes it challenging in a remote configuration. For the proof-of-concept, we designed coaxial nanowires consisting in a gold core to propagate the surface plasmon polaritons and a Raman-emitting shell of poly(3,4-ethylene-dioxythiophene). The success of the fabrication was demonstrated by correlating, for the same single nanowire, a morphological analysis by electron microscopy and Raman spectroscopy analysis. Importantly for probing remote-Raman effect, the original hard templatebased process allows to control the location of the polymer shell all along the nanowire, or only close to one or the two nanowire tips. Such all-in-one single nanowires could have applications in the remote detection of photo-degradable substances and for exploring 1D nanosources for integrated photonic and plasmonic systems. The coupling of plasmonic nanostructures with other materials has been much investigated over the last decade. For the fabrication of the Au@PEDOT nanowires, we carried out a templated electrochemical synthesis, The morphology and the chemical analysis of the nanowires were investigated by optical microscopy, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM). Both arrays and isolated Au(core)@PEDOT(shell) nanowires were studied (Figure Figure The previously described hybrid coaxial nanowires have been exploited for a proof-of-concept of remote-Raman sensing. Different conditions have to be met to get such an effect. First, the excitation of the surface plasmon polariton with a laser can only be achieved, in a non-evanescent configuration, by focusing the laser at one tip of the nanowire to meet the criterion of momentum conservation. SPP along the nanowire cannot be excited if the laser focus does not overlap one tip. Second, the losses of the SPP propagation are strongly wavelength dependent. For gold, it has been shown that SPP can propagate along micrometres for an excitation in the red or near-IR range but it is shortened for smaller wavelengths. Plasmon-mediated remote Raman effect has been evidenced on specially designed coaxial Au@PEDOT nanowires. This coaxial morphology promotes an optimal effect due to the immediate proximity of the Raman scattering material with the gold core, thus benefiting for the excitation of a maximum of the evanescent field coming from the SPP. The opportunity to control the position of PEDOT only at one tip of the nanowire, rather than all along the nanowire or at its two extremities, was exploited to demonstrate unambiguously the remote origin of the Raman signal. The quite strong remote intensity in comparison to the one measured in the direct geometry also confirms the pertinence of our design. In addition, it has been shown that the extremely confined nanoreactors, a 5 to 15 nm thick cylindrical shell where the conjugated polymer is electropolymerized, endorse a strong preferential ordering of the polymer shell. This ordering is another factor contributing to a stronger remote Raman effect. This original coaxial design including a plasmonic core is particularly attractive for efficient remote Raman sensing of photodegradable organic materials. It could also be exploited to fabricate remote nanosources for nanophotonics, by replacing the Raman emitter with a photoluminescent material.