Various promising qubit concepts have been put forward recently based on engineered superconductor (SC) subgap states like Andreev bound states, Majorana zero modes or the Yu-Shiba-Rusinov Superconductor nanostructures are the most advanced platforms for quantum computational architectures thanks to the macroscopic coherent wavefunction and the robust protection by the superconducting gap. Recently, various novel qubit concepts like the Andreev (spin) qubits The coupling of these sub-gap states via a superconductor is an essential next step towards 2-qubit operations or state engineering, e.g. an Andreev molecule So far, the spatial extent and structure of the Shiba states was investigated by STM measurements on magnetic adatoms deposited on the surface of a superconductor In this work, we investigate the spatial extension of the Shiba state formed when an artificial atom is strongly coupled to a superconductor. The Shiba state is observed at a remarkably large distance of more than 50 nm. Furthermore, for the first time we explore the effect of an external magnetic field on the extension of the Shiba state, as it is relevant to access topological superconducting states. Remarkably, with increasing magnetic field, the spatial extension increases significantly further. Shiba states were widely studied in two different types of systems: a) in STM measurements, when magnetic particles are deposited on the surface of a superconductor Implementation of the Shiba device. In this paper, we implement a combined approach of systems a) and b), where a tunnel probe is attached to a superconductor-quantum dot hybrid. The schematics of the used device are shown on Fig. The device is implemented in an InAs semiconducting nanowire (gray), contacted by a 250 nm wide Pb superconducting electrode in the middle (SC in red), and one normal contact (N in yellow) on the left side (see Fig. Observation of the Shiba state in the tunnel current. First we present the results of transport measurements for the strongly coupled superconductorquantum dot setup isolated from the rest of the device on the right by g B . The differential conductance of the tunnel probe, G T is shown in Fig. Remarkably, applying a magnetic field smaller than the critical field, the conductance enhancement significantly increases (see Fig. In a 250 mT magnetic field, above the critical field of the superconductor, B c = 230 mT, the resonances vanish (see Fig. In the following, let us understand what condition of the quantum dot is linked to the tunnel current enhancement. As discussed in the Methods, our device is equipped with an extra normal electrode N QD on the -1.5 -1 -0.5 right of the quantum dot, which previously was isolated from the rest of the device by the large negative V B voltage. Increasing V B to more positive values opens up the barrier to N QD , which allows for a direct transport characterization of the quantum dot. In this way, we were able to measure in parallel both the differential conductance through the quantum dot itself, G QD , and the conductance through the tunnel probe, G T . Figs. For V B -1.1 V the tunnel barrier becomes sufficiently small, and transport through the quantum dot also sets in (see panel b of Fig. To gain further insight to the level structure of the quantum dot, a finite bias measurement was performed along the white dashed line on Fig. A detailed analysis of the finite magnetic field behavior is presented on Fig. The detailed evolution of the tunnel current enhancement with the magnetic field -measured along the dashed line in Fig. To explain the magnetic field dependence of the conductance enhancement and to probe the spatial extension of the Shiba state, we have set up a theoretical framework that allows us to compute the tunneling current though the normal lead N in a N-SC-QD geometry in a nonperturbative fashion. We assume that the quantum dot is coupled to the superconductor at x = 0, while the normal lead is contacted to the superconductor further away at a coordinate x T . Moreover, we consider that the tunnel probe acts as an STM tip and measures the local density of states by injecting electrons at x T . Electrons entering the superconductor propagate to the quantum dot, scatter on it, and propagate back to be extracted at a later time but at the same position (The model is detailed in the Methods). For a practical calculation, we need to determine the T -matrix that describes the scattering of the conduction electrons on the artificial atom. In our model, this is related to the Green's function of the creation operators on the quantum dot, as first discussed by Langreth Fig. In order to understand this field dependence, it is instructive to display the results obtained for a classical spin on the dot (see Methods). This minimal model captures most of the experimentally observed features and it is in good agreement with the NRG results (see Methods). In the classical case, the current carried by the Shiba state at the transition reads Here g NS stands for the dimensionless conductance of the N-SC contact in the normal state (in units of 2e with A(x T ) a geometry, position, and spatial dimension dependent dimensionless amplitude, and ξ = v F /π∆ the superconducting coherence length with v F the Fermi velocity. Apparently, the magnetic field dependence of the gap and thus that of the correlation length, ξ 0 → ξ(B), is mostly responsible for the unusual magnetic field dependence observed in our experiment. In the framework of Ginzburg-Landau theory, the order parameter in an external magnetic field is given by ∆ , where ∆ 0 ≈ 0.25 meV is the zero-field gap, B the magnetic field, and B c stands for the critical magnetic field at which superconductivity vanishes. Experimentally, however, we find a slightly different functional form for the suppression, qualitatively similar to that observed in thin films with ∆ 0 = 250 μeV and B c = 230 mT. For x T > ξ 0 , Eq. ( Let us turn to differences compared to typical STM measurements of Shiba states: In STM characterization of the Shiba wavefunction, I Shiba is significantly weaker. Moreover, it oscillates upon varying the tip-adatom distance, x T , and becomes unobservable at distances larger than 10 nm for 3D superconductors. These characteristic differences originate in the quite different geometries used in our setup and in STM experiments. In STM measurements, the amplitude |A(x T )| 2 is responsible for the spatial oscillations. It has a modulation of | sin(k F x T )| 2 , which originates in the point-like nature of the tunnel probe In an STM geometry I Shiba is a small signal (∼pA) Finally let us contrast our findings with the results of Cooper pair splitter measurements, where two quantum dots are attached to both sides of the superconductor, and contrary to our setup, current flows from the superconductor through both quantum dots towards the normal leads. Current correlations between the two arms are induced by splitting up Cooper pairs In conclusion we have studied the Shiba state in a SC-QD hybrid device by measuring the differential conductance in a tunnel probe attached to the superconductor at distance of 50 -250 nm away from the quantum dot. A large current enhancement has been observed when the Shiba resonance is tuned to zero energy. In an external magnetic field, the signal is further enhanced, implying an exponential growth for the extension of the Shiba state. The observed behavior is consistent with our microscopic theoretical model and field theoretical calculations. In our device, we can access the Shiba state from a remarkably large distance compared to previous experiments on magnetic impurities on superconducting substrates. These results establish an important milestone towards the realization of Shiba-chains implemented by a series of quantum dots attached to superconductors. An SEM micrograph of the measured device is shown in Fig. Prior to the deposition of the superconducting contact the nanowire was cut by FIB to prevent direct tunneling between the NW segment, which can lead to spurious effects The measurements were done in a Leiden Cryogenics CF-400 top loading cryo-free dilution refrigerator equipped with a 9+3 T 2D vector-magnet. The measurements were done at a bath temperature of 35 mK. Prior to the cool down, the sample was pumped overnight to remove the adsorbed water contamination from the surface of the nanowire. The currents were measured by standard lock-in technique at 237 Hz. The AC signal of V AC = 10 μV was applied to the superconducting electrode. The currents in the left and right arm were measured simultaneously via the two normal leads by home-built I/V converters. The DC bias was applied symmetrically to the normal leads. An in-plane magnetic field was applied parallel to the superconducting electrode, perpendicular to the nanowire. The circuit diagram is shown in Fig. Shiba bound state and the parity crossing transition. We model the superconductor using the s-wave BCS theory where c † kσ is the creation operator of a spin σ and momentum k and ∆ is the superconducting order parameter, which can be considered real. The QD can be described by means of the Anderson model, with ε d is the single particle energy and U is the onsite Coulomb energy. The operator d † σ here creates an electron with spin σ on the dot, and n σ = d † σ d σ . In our geometry the dot is located at the position x = 0 and is tunnel-coupled to the superconductor (See Fig. The factor α k , normalized to one at the Fermi surface, |α k | 2 F.S. = 1, accounts for the directional dependence of the tunneling, and prefers tunneling directions perpendicular to the SC-QD interface in our geometry. In the local moment regime, we can neglect charge fluctuations of the dot, and describe it in terms of a simple Kondo model, with J kk = α k α k J 0 , and J 0 ∝ t 2 S /U the exchange coupling to the spin of the quantum dot, S. This latter Hamiltonian can be solved exactly in the classical limit where j = πj/2, and j = J 0 S stands for the standard dimensionless Kondo coupling. With increasing coupling strength the bound state energy E 0 eventually crosses zero, and the impurity binds to itself a quasiparticle of opposite spin direction. Although this classical calculation captures the parity changing transition, determines its location incorrectly. In reality, the phase transition originates from the competition between the superconducting correlations and the Kondo screening of the spin, and the transition takes place when ∆ T * , with T * a characteristic Fermi liquid temperature scale. Deep in the local moment regime, T * can be identified as the Kondo temperature, T * T K , but it becomes of the order of the tunneling rate Γ S between the dot and the superconductor close to the mixed valence regime. For T * < ∆, the spin of the dot remains unscreened down to zero temperature, resulting in a doublet ground state |D ={| ⇑ , | ⇓ } and a first excited singlet state, |S , the so-called Shiba state inside the gap. By increasing the tunneling rate Γ S , the spin in the QD binds a quasiparticle from the superconductor, and |S becomes the ground state. The corresponding qualitative phase diagram is displayed in Fig. In the experiments, changing the voltage V P corresponds to moving along the red horizontal line in the phase diagram. At the intersections with the "dome" (denoted by the circle and the triangle), the Shiba state is at zero energy, and is in resonance with the Fermi energy, E F of the tunneling electrode N, leading to the observed sudden increase in the zero voltage differential conductance. Tunnel conductance and current. In our setup, the normal lead acts as an STM tip measuring the differential conductance across the device at a point x T away from the dot. the small SC-N tunneling limit Andreev processes can be neglected, and tunneling from the normal electrode to the superconductor yields at T = 0 temperature a current at a finite voltage bias V bias = V . Here N denotes the density of states in the normal lead, t N is the tunneling amplitude between the superconductor and the normal contact, and (x, ω) = -Im G σ (x, ω)/π is the energy dependent density of states in the superconductor at position x T . This latter can be expressed in terms of the Fourier transform of the retarded Green's function, G σ (x T , ω) = -i {ψ σ (x T , t), ψ † σ (x T , 0)} Θ(t). The Green's function G σ (x T , ω) can be obtained by means of standard many-body theory, invoking Nambu spinors, {φ στ } ≡ (ψ ↑ , ψ ↓ , ψ † ↓ , -ψ † ↑ ), and corresponding propagators, G → Ĝ. In this language, the quantum dot induced part of the propagator Ĝ can be expressed as δ Ĝ(x T , ω) = -ĝ(x T , 0, ω) T (ω) ĝ(0, x T , ω). , In the classical limit, we can determine T analytically, and extract the strength of its poles within the gap. At the transition points, j = 2/π, and expressing furthermore propagator ĝ(x T , 0, ω = 0) we arrive at the equation (2) displayed in the main text. In the framework of the Anderson model, we first introduce the spinors {D στ } ≡ (d ↑ , d ↓ , -d † ↓ , d † ↑ ). Similar to The matrix elements α and β can be directly extracted from NRG computations. A comparison between the two approaches is presented in Fig. The data that support the plots within this paper and other findings of this study are available at https:// doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3604194. 