We analyze the paradigmatic competition between intra-band and cross-band Cooper-pair formation in two-band superconductors, neglected in most works to date. We derive the phase-sensitive gap equations and describe the crossover between the intraband-dominated and the crossbanddominated regimes, delimited by a "gapless" state. Experimental signatures of crosspairing comprise notable gap-splitting in the excitation spectrum, non-BCS behavior of gaps versus temperature, as well as changes in the pairing symmetry as a function of temperature. The consequences of these findings are illustrated on the examples of MgB2 and Ba0.6K0.4Fe2As2. Multiband superconductivity is known to promote novel quantum phenomena of great fundamental importance and versatility To date, multiband electronic structure is proven to be of crucial importance in rather versatile superconducting systems, such as MgB 2 In this Letter, we examine the interplay between intraand cross-band pairing in two-band superconductors and its experimental signatures. We reformulate the mean-field equations for the superconducting order parameter, going beyond the Suhl, Matthias and Walker (SMW) extension of the BCS theory where i, j = 1, 2 represent the band index, and σ =↑, ↓ the spin. Here are the pairing amplitudes, and i (k) is the band-dependent kinetic energy of the electrons. We note that Eq. ( where Ω is the average energy scale of the effective interaction, and   , the upper left 2×2 inner matrix corresponds to the well established SMW case In what follows, we simplify our indices as 11 ≡ 1, 22 ≡ 2 and (12) ≡ 3. Next, we use the Gor'kov Green's functions formalism to obtain the pair amplitude equations and the pair amplitudes are given by ∆ , where φ i is the phase of the pair amplitude. The crosspairing pair amplitude ∆ 3 hybridizes the energy spectra of the two BCS-like excitation branches: where We emphasize here that the angle θ will introduce new degrees of freedom in our system depending on the combination of the couplings, as will be shown later. The excitation gaps ∆ ± (θ) coincide with the minimum energy of the excitation branches E ± (θ). These are the two gaps ∆ ± present in the density of states (DOS), however these gaps no longer correspond to the energy needed to break intraband Cooper pairs (as is conventionally the case). Instead, they describe the energy needed to disallow either intra-or cross-band pairing. The self-consistent equations for the pair amplitudes are given by: where , and β = 1 k B T . Note that these pairing amplitudes (i.e. the order parameters in the problem) do not correspond to the measurable gaps ∆ ± . Before solving the above formalism to reveal new physics brought by crosspairing, we introduce parabolic bands and dimensionless effective couplings, λ ij = g ij N j (0), where N j=1,2 (0) is the band-dependent density of states and N 3 (0) = N 1 (0)+N 2 (0). We start by solving Eq. ( In the miniplots above Fig. To quantify the effects of crosspairing, it is instructive to take the example of the best known two-gap superconductor MgB 2 0.275 0.032 λ i3 0.032 0.032 0.274 λ i3 0.032 λ i3 λ i3 0.1 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.22 The above matrix is asymmetric because of different DOS associated with each band. λ i4 is the coupling to the π bands, and third column and row correspond to the coupling to the crosspairing channel, with λ i3 as a free (small) parameter. Other coupling constants are taken from literature, and yield the experimentally verified gaps of MgB 2 (≈ 7 and 3 meV) in absence of crosspairing (λ i3 = 0, see Fig. Last but not least, we discuss the phase-frustrated solutions of Eq. ( 0.51 λ 12 λ 13 0.5λ 12 0.39 λ 13 0.5λ 13 0.5λ 13 0.25 Here λ 12 is taken negative, which is the standard way to obtain the sign change in the band-dependent order parameters (as reported in Ba 0.6 K 0.4 Fe 2 As 2 In the example shown in Fig. tion, the pair amplitudes recover the same phase (θ = 0) until the expected BCS critical temperature of ≈ 80 K. In experiment however In summary, although mostly neglected to date, the cross-band pairing in multiband superconductors is certainly of importance in materials with hybridized or energetically close bands in the vicinity of the Fermi level. In this regime, the interplay between intra-and cross-band pairing leads to several unique effects. For one, crossband pairing increases the splitting between intraband gaps, with a tendency to decrease the weaker gap towards an entirely novel "gapless" state, signatures of which will still be observable since vanishing gap does not imply vanishing order parameter(s) in this regime. The crosspairing also introduces the possibility of a phase frustration between the pairing channels, leading to novel transi-tions as a function of temperature (such as s +-→ s ++ ), and likely nontrivial response of the superconductor to e.g., magnetic field Besides the needed generalization to the case of multiple (3+) bands, the outlook of the present study is very broad. It includes understanding the effects of impurities, particularly magnetic ones where DOS signatures of crosspairing near a gapless state can overlap with the Majorana zero-energy bound state g