Field electron emission (FE) has relevance in many different technological contexts. However, many related technological papers use a physically defective elementary FE equation for local emission current density (LECD). This equation takes the tunneling barrier as exactly triangular, as in the original FE theory of 90 years ago. More than 60 years ago, it was shown that the so-called Schottky-Nordheim (SN) barrier, which includes an image-potential-energy term (that models exchange-andcorrelation effects) is better physics. For a metal-like emitter with work-function 4.5 eV, the SNbarrier-related Murphy-Good FE equation predicts LECD values that are higher than the elementary equation values by a large factor, often between around 250 and around 500. By failing to mention/apply this 60-year-old established science, or to inform readers of the large errors associated with the elementary equation, many papers (aided by defective reviewing) spread a new kind of "pathological science", and create a modern research-integrity problem. The present paper aims to enhance author and reviewer awareness by summarizing relevant aspects of FE theory, by explicitly identifying the misjudgment in the original 1928 Fowler-Nordheim paper, by explicitly calculating the size of the resulting error, and by showing in detail why most FE theoreticians regard the 1950s modifications as better physics. Suggestions are made, about nomenclature and about citation practice, that may help to diminish misunderstandings. Field electron emission (FE)--sometimes called "cold FE" or often simply "field emission"--is a well-known electron emission process Field electron emission occurs in very many different technological contexts, either constructively, as a means of creating an electron source, or destructively, as a cause of electrical breakdown. In both cases, it would be helpful, either for design purposes or for breakdown-analysis purposes, to have equations that reliably describe expected FE current densities and currents. However, the situation is confused by the widespread use in FE literature of a physically inadequate elementary emission equation [eq. ( Calculations by The existence of these problems has been known More generally, there is growing concern over the integrity of scientific research (e.g., ref. 10 and references therein, and ref . 11). As part of this, it seems likely that there may develop concern over the reliability of scientific reviewing, and, later, political interest in this issue. It seems to the author that the present situation in FE can be seen as a mild theoretical variant of "pathological science" as described by Langmuir By "pathological science", I mean continuing situations where groups of scientists firmly convince themselves of the validity of some assumption or the adequacy of some approximation, when (a) there is strong independent scientific evidence that the assumption/approximation is not true/adequate, and (b) scientists outside the group do not accept the validity of the assumption/approximation. This is an extension of the term "pathological science" to be a neutral name that includes theory-oriented situations where community effects, as discussed in refs 11-13, seem to be operating (though I do not subscribe to the extreme viewpoint adopted by It can also be argued that journals and learned societies that uncritically publish papers containing inadequate equations, when it has been firmly established for 60 years that these equations are inadequate (and that much better equations are known), also have a research-integrity problem-and might find it difficult to justify their actions to a well-informed formal external enquiry. Precisely why this use of a defective FE equation persists is extremely unclear, and probably there is no single reason. It may be that some researchers (both authors and reviewers) are simply unaware that the equation is inadequate, or are unaware of the size of the error, or regard omission of a factor of value 300 (or thereabouts) as an "approximation" not important in their particular research topic, or--when developing technology--regard it as better to use an equation that is simple rather than a more accurate one that is marginally more complicated. Or researchers may not accept the scientific validity of the 1953/56 corrections and simply ignore them. Or researchers may be unduly influenced by statements in the original 1928 FN paper (see Section IVD below). Alternatively, as suggested by Whatever the cause or causes, I regard it as vital that this use of a clearly defective FE equation be discontinued in research contexts, as soon as may be achieved. The aims of the present paper are to provide information intended to help this process and to help and encourage reviewers to challenge the use of defective FE equations in research contexts, by using the arguments set out here if it helps. In what follows, the paper describes more of the general background relating to FE equations and their limitations, briefly summarizes some relevant developments in FE theory over the last 90 years, explicitly demonstrates the size of the error, explains why FE theoreticians (and other scientists outside the subject area) believe that the 1950s physical assumptions are correct (and hence that Murphy-Good theory is better physics than the original Fowler-Nordheim theory), and makes some suggestions about nomenclature and citation practice that may help to diminish confusion. In accordance with common practice in electron emission literature, this paper uses the "electron emission convention" in which "field" F, "current density" J, and "current" I are taken as positive quantities that are the negatives of the corresponding quantities as defined in conventional electrical theory. For reference, all universal constants used are given to 7 significant figures, but it is expected that these will be appropriately approximated in practical applications. In many cases, real field emitters are needle-shaped or post-shaped, with rounded ends. The emitter apex radius of curvature affects tunneling probabilities, and also affects issues relating to emission area. However, past current-voltage data analysis has normally used the planar emitter approximation, which assumes that emitters can be modeled as having a smooth flat planar surface, with effectively constant emission area. This had been thought an adequate assumption for emitters with apex radii of curvature greater than about 10-20 nm, but recent suggestions Although there is a strong need to move forwards with FE theory, to deal more accurately and comprehensively with data interpretation from needle-shaped and post-shaped emitters, and some initial steps have been taken (e.g., refs. 4, 15), the present paper focuses on difficulties that exist within the framework of the planar emitter approximation. My thinking is that the outcome of the present proposals, together with other It also needs stressing that all the FE equations discussed below, except eq. ( In this context, the aim here is to improve the quality of this "first approximation". In any theory of FE, a key component is the "core" equation that gives the local emission current density (LECD) J L in terms of the local work function φ and the local value F L of surface electric field. "Auxiliary" equations are also needed, in order to relate a characteristic value of local field to the measured voltage, and the measured current to a characteristic LECD value. These auxiliary equations can be written in various different forms, but are not of significant concern here. For the core FE equations, many different forms and approximations have been proposed, even for the smooth planar emitter-surface models under discussion here (e.g., see ref. 18). Four physically different core FE equations are relevant to the present discussion. All FE equations employ in their derivations some model for the variation with distance of a quantity M that describes the tunneling barrier and is called here the electron motive energy. In planar-geometry models, this quantity is given by M(z) = U e (z)-E n , where U e (z) describes the variation of electron potential energy with distance z measured normally outwards from the emitter's electrical surface, and the normal-energy E n is the component (of the tunneling electron's total energy) associated with motion normal to the emitter surface. Both U e (z) and E n need to be measured from the same energy reference level, often taken as the emitter's Fermi level (in which case the normalenergy is denoted by ε n .). The barrier is the region where M(z)≥0. where e is the elementary positive charge, and H [≡φ-ε n ] is the zero-field barrier height. By contrast, derivations of the Murphy-Good-type equations ( where ε 0 is the vacuum electric permittivity, K F is the Fermi energy, and z c is a cut-off distance defined by applying the criterion M SN (z c ) = -K F to eq. (2a). This motive-energy form is sometimes called the Schottky-Nordheim (SN) barrier. The original 1928 Fowler-Nordheim (FN) FE equation has the form 5,19,20 where a and b are the FN constants This simplified equation is convenient for undergraduate teaching, since a simplified derivation can be demonstrated without the use of research-level mathematics, but it also became widely used in the research literature after about 2005, possibly partly as a result of a poorly-worded statement in a widely cited paper relating to FE from carbon nanotubes The (1956) Murphy-Good (MG) zero-temperature FE equation where J kL SN is the so-called kernel current density for the SN barrier, and v F is a particular value (appropriate to a SN barrier characterized by φ and F L ) of a special mathematical function 23 v(x). This function v(x) is a special solution of the Gauss Hypergeometric Differential Equation, and the Gauss variable x is the independent variable in this equation. t F is a particular value of a second special mathematical function t 1 (x), defined by eq. ( For operation at non-zero temperatures, a temperature-dependent correction factor should in principle be inserted into eqns (3), ( In the 1956 derivation 9 of eq. ( At a corresponding level of approximation, a function t 1 (x) (or simply t(x)) is defined by (e.g., ref. 22) and given by another simple good approximation: It has also been formally shown (e.g., see Section IVB in ref. 25, and set μ=f) that these formulas are applied to MG theory by setting x=f, where the scaled field f (for a SN barrier of zero-field height φ) is defined by where c [≡ (e 3 /4πε 0 ) 1/2 ] is the Schottky constant (see Table A weakness of both the FN and MG treatments is that they disregard the existence of atoms, by considering smooth structureless flat surfaces, rather than crystallographically structured flat surfaces. To recognize the quantitative uncertainty resulting from this approximation (and others), the present author has introduced a version of eq. (5a) in which t F -2 is replaced by a correction factor (or "knowledge uncertainty factor") λ of unknown exact value (e.g., see ref. 18). This results in the socalled Extended Murphy-Good (EMG) FE Equation Current thinking It can be seen that, in both eq. ( Another feature of the mathematical developments in FE theory in the last ten years has been the realization that a very useful scaled form This results in the scaled equation where v F has here been written explicitly as a function v(f) of f. A work-function of 4.500 eV yields the values η≅ 4.3868, θ≅ 6.774×10 For the exactly triangular barrier, the corresponding scaled equation is obtained by replacing v(f) in eq. ( Setting x=f in eq. ( The prefactor t F -2 will make a very small contribution, but by far the largest contribution to the improvement factor K comes from the ratio J kL SN /J L el , which is given approximately by This expression provides qualitative understanding of the origin of the improvement factors. For φ=4.500 eV, the factor expη has a value near 100; the other factor provides some additional improvement. However, better numerics are obtained by using the high-precision formula Some illustrative values are shown in Table As indicated above , the correction factor v F in eqns ( The underlying physics was first addressed in detail in a paper [Bardeen is the only person to have been awarded the Nobel prize in Physics twice. One of these (with Shockley and Brattain) was for the practical realization of the transistor, where a significant contribution from Bardeen was to develop understanding of how electron surface states affected transistor operation. Kroemer, one the three scientists who found the mathematical mistake in the In the context of the planar emitter approximation, this issue divides into two separate questions: (a) Where is the emitter's electrical surface (i.e., the reference surface from which the electrical distance z is measured) relative to the surface-atom nuclei? (b) What are the electrical distances for the inner (z in ) and outer (z out ) edges of the tunnelling barrier ? For a SN barrier of zero-field height φ, there are well established expressions for z out and z in (z out >z in ). These can be written (e.g., see eq. ( On substituting which for φ= 4.500 eV reduces to Resulting values are shown in Table With planar surfaces, the electrical surface is the "reference plane" that z must be measured from if the electrostatic potential (-eF L z) is to have its correct value at large distances. In the simplest models, image effects are also measured from this surface Surprisingly, the issue of electrical-surface location has rarely been addressed in the specific context of field electron emission, though there are two recent discussions Recently For safety, we take d rep as equal to the lower of the estimates for a negatively charged surface, namely 157 pm. We can then make estimates of the distances (from the plane of the surface-atom nuclei) of the inner edge (d in ) and outer edge (d out ) of the tunneling barrier. These estimates are shown in Table For tungsten, d NN /2= 137 pm. Table Weinberg In the ideal world, the above issue would be settled by experiment, but in fact it is very difficult to do this. At a casual level, if some experimental effect that depends on current density can be explained by eq. ( Another complication arises when eq. ( An alternative approach would be to plan experiments specifically to test the theory. But here the need would be to compare experimental results with deductions from both alternative theories, and to show that theory based on the SN barrier is significantly superior. For example, the field electron energy distribution measurements of Gadzuk and Plummer A wider (but incomplete) survey of possible methods was undertaken some years ago This issue of how to establish a decisive experimental test of the proposition that the Murphy-Good equations are superior to the original Fower-Nordheim ones is "unfinished business". It may be easier to formulate a decisive test of this type when issues related to data-analysis from needle-shaped and/or post-shaped emitters are better understood, with one possible route (Popov, Kolosko, Filippov, and Forbes, unpublished work) being measurement of the value of k in the empirical FE equation for measured current-voltage I m (V m ) data, namely where B and C are initially treated as constants. The main present difficulty with this approach seems to be getting experimental I m (V m ) data that is sufficiently noise free. For the ET barrier to be better physics than the SN barrier, something like the following proposition would need to be true. "That, in a quantum-mechanical world the classical Schottky effect is not a real effect but an artefact of classical thinking, and that all phenomena attributed to the Schottky effect are in fact due to tunneling through an exactly triangular barrier." There are several contexts in physics, in particular in electronic device theory, where it is assumed that the Schottky effect operates, for example the theory of photocathodes and the theory In such contexts, the proposition that the Schottky effect is an artefact of classical thinking would, almost certainly, receive little or no credibility. In summary, the current position appears to be as follows. (1) From the theoretical point of view, there is very strong evidence that the SN barrier is better physics than the ET barrier, and hence that the Murphy-Good-type FE equations are better physics than the ET-barrier-based equations. (2) At present, it is difficult to conclude that there is experimental evidence decisively in favor of the SN barrier as being better physics, but against this there is no known experimental evidence that is decisively in favor of the ET barrier. (3) There are successful neighboring communities that design, build and sell devices with theory that assumes that the Schottky effect is real and (in the case of Schottky emitters) that tunneling through a SN barrier occurs. In these circumstances, it seems fairly clear that the better scientific position, at present, is to accept that the SN barrier is better physics than the ET barrier. In any case, to do otherwise would disturb a lot of physics, going back to the work of Schottky As things stand at present, it is perhaps not totally impossible in principle that a valid scientific case could be made for preferring the ET barrier over the SN barrier, at least in some circumstances, but the onus is on those who believe that "Fowler-Nordheim is better than Murphy-Good" to make a case that is compatible with all the existing evidence. Note that this discussion has been about emission from metals. There is some evidence 47 that exchange-and-correlation effects outside a graphene sheet or a carbon nanotube cannot be well represented by a classical image PE. But even in this case the SN barrier is probably a better starting point than an ET barrier, with the most obvious simple model for such a situation being one in which a "weakening factor" w is included in the image PE, which then becomes (-we 2 /16πε 0 x). The author is inclined to think is that the primary cause of the pathological situation discussed in this paper is often lack of awareness. Two practices of the wider FE and electron emission communities may contribute significantly to this. The first is the system for naming equations, which tends to be "ancestor-oriented", both in field electron and in thermal electron emission. The various equations that the present paper refers to as FE equations are often all called "the Fowler-Nordheim Equation". The problem is that different groups of researchers tend to apply this name to physically different equations: most FE theoreticians regard eq. ( Apart from generating confusion, this nomenclature practice tends to direct attention back towards the original 1928 FN paper, with its known weakness in physical thinking, and to disguise the fact that there are numerical differences between the predictions of the various equations. The author's present view is that all these (and the many other equations used to describe FE) are better described as "field emission equations" or "field electron emission equations" (with both terms abbreviated to "FE equations"). The different core equations should be given distinctive names, It is unfortunate that modern reviewing systems regularly allow this. A major problem is that the weakness in the 1928 paper is as follows (see Appendix A): FN clearly state that corrections of the type subsequently considered by Murphy and Good are small and not important: obviously, this gives the impression that use of the exactly triangular barrier is an adequate approximation. As shown earlier in this paper, this is not in fact true in modern contexts (unless you happen to think that discrepancies by a factor of up to around 500 are not important). By failing to give the references that would allow other scientists to judge for themselves, the many (though certainly not all) FE technological papers that do this--and the reviewing systems that facilitate it--are accidentally allowing modern FE scientific practice to become determined by "1928 thinking" rather than by the normal scientific processes of error detection and removal. Lack of awareness of the influence of exchange-and-correlation effects (as modeled by a classical image PE) on tunneling theory may also occur in other scientific and technological areas, an obvious example being the theory of nanoscale electronic devices. As integrated-circuit processing line-widths reduce towards 3 nm, it becomes obviously necessary to pay closer attention to tunneling-based mechanisms that might influence device quality or device failure rates. It would seem helpful, therefore, for undergraduate and graduate students to be made aware that image-PE-based theories might predict effects of this kind to be more severe than theory that neglects the role of the image PE. To take one example, the well-known semiconductor-device student textbook authored by Sze and Kwok Even though the theoretical evidence is clear and strong, my conclusion above was that, as yet (in FE), there is no decisive experimental evidence that the SN barrier is better physics that the ET barrier. There may be some who feel that it is better to stay with 90-year-old theory (rather than change to 60-year-old theory or 21st century theory) until the matter is resolved experimentally. This approach would probably be a mistake. In the planar emitter approximation (which is what most people currently use), technology development is best served by using the best theory currently available in that approximation, which means either eq. ( For the avoidance of doubt, it is necessary to stress that there is no suggestion whatsoever here of any scientific dishonesty--rather, the issue is one of collective scientific misunderstandings that have given rise to pathological science (including pathological reviewing). Obviously, there is no technological reward in the use of ET-barrier-based equations rather then SN-barrier based equations. In the context of electrical breakdown, which tends to occur when current exceeds a certain level, there is no merit in writing down an equation that under-predicts current levels by a factor of 300 or thereabouts. Likewise, when attempting to develop/investigate new emitter materials for high-current electron sources, there is no merit in writing down an equation that under-predicts the performance of the material/device by a factor of 300 or thereabouts. In the absolute scale of things, this error by a factor of 300 or thereabouts may not be that important, but it is an unnecessary and avoidable error that also tends to discredit the process of scientific reviewing. In principle, this error could easily be taken out of future FE literature by improved knowledge of FE theory amongst authors and by enhanced care in reviewing, making use of the detailed discussion given in Section 3. I would encourage my FE colleagues, when acting as reviewers, to assist in the process. Although other discrepancies exist in the original 1928 Fowler-Nordheim paper "It is not difficult to show generally, by comparisons with Jeffreys' † asymptotic solution of a similar equation, that for values of W not too near C the exact form of the potential peak and the rounding off at the top will not seriously affect the emission coefficient D(W). Our direct calculation for this very simple case is therefore sufficiently typical. For the Q of an exact solution has to be replaced by where V is the potential energy of the electron at any point and x 0 and x 1 are the points at which V-W vanishes. The integration range is shown in fig. Unfortunately, FN seem to have grossly underestimated the amount of rounding that occurs. Nowadays, it is easily shown by spreadsheet calculations that, for work function 4.50 eV and a barrier field of 5 V/nm (about the worst case for the typical operating range), the true shape of a SN barrier is as shown in Fig. This mistake is easier to see when it re-appears in eq. ( The relevant part of Nordheim's eq. ( In passing, note that in eq. (A2), and in all other relevant equations in Nordheim's paper, the there is a small correction to be made by including the image effect, this was not important. This suggests that Fowler's criterion of "importance" may have differed from that applicable to modern contexts. This is understandable. Relevant aspects of the metal-physics/emission-physics situation immediately before the FN work were as follows. (1) The physical origin of what was then called "auto-electronic emission" (modern FE) was not understood. (2) Lauritsen 54 had just found experimentally that, when auto-electronic-emission current-voltage data were plotted in the form ln{I m } vs 1/V m , then apparently straight-line plots were generated. (3) It was thought that thermal electron emission was essentially different from the auto-electronic emission of conduction electrons, and was due to the emission of "thermions", i.e. electrons in some form of specially excited state within the metal, different from that of the conduction electrons (for example, see ref. 54, and remember that Millikan had received a Nobel prize in 1923 for experimentally verifying Einstein's predictions about the photoelectric effect, and for measuring the electron charge). Historically, the FN paper had three main achievements. It showed that auto-electronic emission was in fact a wave-mechanical tunneling process (but credit for this should be partially shared with Oppenheimer And, probably most important historically, the FN paper argued (albeit briefly) that there was no need to postulate the existence of thermions: rather, both auto-electronic emission and the emission of thermions could be explained as the emission of conduction electrons from (what would now be called) a single electron energy band, under different conditions of field and temperature. Thus, the FN paper, together with Fowler's earlier paper It is understandable that, against the background of this major achievement, Fowler might--with considerable justification--have regarded temporary inaccuracies in calculating FE local current densities as not of any great importance, and be keen to stress this. It is also understandable that, in the modern context of predicting electrical breakdown and electron-source performance, the removal of unnecessary errors of order 300 does seem important. Given that modern FE literature tends to keep referring people back to the original 1928 FN paper, these historical differences may be a part cause of today's pathological FE literature. The criteria of scientific importance for FE in the 21st Century are clearly not the same as they were in the "golden years" of the late 1920s and early 1930s. material. The f-values used are based on the knowledge