We show that a capacitive wireless power transfer device can be designed as a self-oscillating circuit using operational amplifiers. As the load and the capacitive wireless channels are part of the feedback circuit of the oscillator, the wireless power transfer can self-adjust to the optimal condition under the change of the load resistance and the transfer distance. We have theoretically analyzed and experimentally demonstrated the proposed design. The results show that the operation is robust against changes of various parameters, including the load resistance. In the recent decade, wireless power transfer (WPT) became a remarkable research topic due to its vast real-life application potential. In the conventional WPT systems, including both inductive and capacitive ones, the power generator and the power receiver are designed to have the same resonance frequency to obtain high efficiency The proposed capacitive WPT design based on a selfoscillating circuit with an Op-Amp is schematically shown in Fig. The feedback of the self-oscillating circuit is characterized by the parameters C 1 , R L , ρ, and β, in which the wireless channel property C is embedded in ρ. This circuit can be analyzed theoretically and we have obtained two voltages V 1 and V 2 as functions of time t. Based on these analytical results, the oscillating period is obtained as while the self-oscillating condition reads On the other hand, the averaged power P delivered to the load can be calculated by the formula P = 1 , which gives the power ratio where P 0 = V 2 CC /R L is the power consumption on the load if the DC source V CC of the Op-Amp is directly applied on the load. We note that this power ratio is only a function of β and ρ. From these equations, it is clear that the proposed WPT can operate in a wide range of feedback parameters. We have experimentally implemented the proposed WPT design with an Op-Amp model TL072IP from Texas Instruments. As the main purpose is to demonstrate the robustness of the proposed WPT design, we use lumped capacitors C instead of real metal plates in the implementation. In the following, we will present the robustness of our design by showing T and P r while varying the feedback parameters. First of all, we fix the load resistance R L = 10 kΩ and study how the oscillating period T and the power ratio P r behave when we change the feedback parameter β. As examples, we have chosen three sets of ρ and C 1 configurations: ρ = 10 with C 1 = 100 nF, ρ = 2.8 with C 1 = 356 nF, and ρ = 1 with C 1 = 1 uF. The corresponding experimental results are shown as open symbols in Fig. In fact, the smaller measured P r is due to the voltage loss of the selected Op-Amp: when the Op-Amp is powered by DC voltage V CC , the actual output voltage of the Op-Amp is 15% less than the maximal possible output voltage V CC . Alternatively, if we calculate the power ratio reference to P 0 = V 2 o /R L where V o is the actual output voltage of the Op-Amp, the updated results are shown as the solid symbols in Fig. We note that, in Fig. 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 2 1 0 3 Next, we study the performance of the proposed WPT design under the change of the load resistance R L . In this case, we fix β = 0.2 and choose two configurations: ρ = 10 with C 1 = 100 nF and ρ = 2.8 with C 1 = 356 nF. The experimentally measured period T and the power ratio P r are shown as the open symbols in Fig. Based on the proposed self-oscillating circuit, we have shown that the self-oscillating capacitive WPT design 