Typical acoustic refractive metasurfaces governed by generalized Snell's law require several types of subwavelength subunits to provide an extra phase gradient along the surface. This design strategy, however, has several kinds of drawback. For instance, the inevitable viscous loss brought out by the complex subwavelength subunits, and the negligence of the coupling between adjacent subunits which leads to lowefficiency in wavefront manipulation, especially for large angles. To overcome these limitations, we propose a new type of refractive metasurface composed of only one straight channel and several surface-etched grooves per period. By harnessing the nonlocal coupling between the channel/grooves, and the evanescent modes inside them, superiorly feasible acoustic transmission manipulations can be achieved. Nearly perfect acoustic bending with transmission efficiency up to 95% is demonstrated with theory and experiments for an extremely large angle of 81°. The reported results introduce a novel concept of acoustic metasurfaces and offer a real leap towards the development of high-efficient acoustic devices for wavefront manipulation. Highly efficient wave manipulation via artificial structures is strongly desired in materials physics and engineering communities. As a thin compact structure, acoustic metasurfaces has attracted significant attention in recent years because of their unique functionalities and capabilities in controlling and transforming the wavefront asymmetric transmission It can be found however that, the devices to realize those functionalities and physical effects are mostly constructed based on the phase-gradient approach Recently, metasurfaces for anomalous refraction were revisited by several groups for both electromagnetic It has been pointed out that, because the nonlocal effect caused by the surface evanescent mode has not been taken into account in the design procedure, devices based on phase-gradient approach have intrinsic problem of efficiency. To solve it, the nonlocal effect was suggested to be pre-included into an impedance matrix profile, upon which the meta-atoms can be designed In this paper, we show alternatively that a refractive metasurface can also be designed as simple as a periodic sound-hard planar layer with one straight-walled channel and several surface-etched grooves per period. We name it as single meta-atom metasurface because there is only one channel per period in the structure. In the latter, we do not need a discretizing and matching procedure in the design procedure, which means, structure with very narrow channel and very thin wall can be avoided. As demonstrations, we show that, a structure with one channel and several grooves can perfectly refract a normal incident plane wave into directions with angles as 63°, 72° and 81°. The obtained structures with transmission efficiency over 95% are checked by finite element simulation supplied by Comsol Multiphysics. The physics for those structures is also investigated. We find that the power flow can be strongly redistributed in the lateral direction by the surface evanescent mode. These results suggest that the local power conservation condition in the surface-normal direction, which is considered as the basic requirement in the bi-anisotropic metasurface designing, is in fact unnecessary to be satisfied. The sample with refractive angle as 72° is further evidenced by experiment. The measured data perfectly agreed with the simulation results. It is necessary to point out that, although perfect metasurfaces with simple structure for electromagnetic waves have been reported recently We consider the structure plotted schematically in Fig. As is shown by blue arrows in Fig. Based on this understanding, we select the general grating theory to solve the problem. The advantage of this theory is that it can include explicitly the high-order evanescent modes, by which the interaction between the subunits can be fully taken into considered in the design procedure. According to the general grating theory, an incident wave from the negative y-direction will be diffracted as 0th, ±1st, ⋯, order diffractive components on both side of the structure. The design procedure can be started by adjusting the relative position, the width, and the depth of the grooves and channel, so that the structure can extinguish all the other propagation components except the one in the desired direction. However, the problem can hardly be solved in a direct way because there are too many parameters in the structure. In this paper, we employ the grating theory combined with an optimization algorithm to solve this problem. In addition, to guarantee a high compactness of the device and to simplify the design procedure, we restrict our research just on the configuration shown in the figure . To design such a metasurface, we develop a half-analytical method based on the general grating theory, by which the diffractive property of a structure with given channel and grooves can be rigorously calculated. With this method, the desired structure is searched by an optimization algorithm. The detail of the method and the description of the optimization procedure can be found in the supplemented material. As demonstration, metasurfaces with θt=63°, 72° and 81° under normal incident plane wave are searched, where θt is the angle between the direction of transmitted wave and surface normal. For these purposes, we first set the period of the structure as a=λ/sinθt , under which only the 0th and ±1st order diffractive components on both side of the structure are propagating modes, that means what we need to do is to find a suitable geometric substructure, by which the 1st order mode in transmitting end is enhanced and in the same time all the other propagating modes are extinguished. For sake of simplicity, we fix h=0.4λ, dw=0.05λ, tc=0.1a and w=0.05a for all the structures, and make the optimization only for the depth of grooves. The L value is chosen manually as small as possible to get the simplest structure. Under these setting, structures with L=6 for θt=63°, and L=5 for θt=72° and 81° are found. For example, to refract the normally incident plane into the direction with θt=72°, the depth of the grooves need to be [0.178(0.123), 0.203(0.017), 0.180(0.000), 0.220(0.000), 0.032(0.288)]λ, respectively. Structural parameters of the structure for θt=63° and 81° are listed in Tab. S1 in the supplementary material. for the structures with θt=63°, 72° and 81°, respectively. For clear eyesight, the field of the normal incident wave is not shown. From the simulation, the efficiency for Fig. 95.4%, respectively, which are closer to the ones obtained by the numerical calculation. To see the quality of the transmitted wave, we perform a Fast Fourier Transformation of the field along the cut line away from the lower surface 4a. The results show that there are only tiny kinks at kx/(k0 sinθt )=0 and -1, which means the power flow is almost completely in the desired direction for all three structures (see the details in the supplemented material). We have also checked the amplitudes of the pressure field in the grooves, and found that the maximum value in all grooves is less than 10 times of the incident one, which means there is no strong resonance in the structure. All these results show that the perfect metasurfaces with only a single meta-atom per period are obtained. Because there is only one channel per period in the structure, there should be strong evanescent modes along the surfaces, by which the power flow is squeezed into the channel in the input side and then is spread out with suitable phase delay along the surface in the output side. To see this effect, we choose to calculate the local intensity distribution of the field shown in Fig. The figure shows a new manner of how the power flow can pass through the structure, which is quite different from the one in the structures constructed by the discretizing and matching procedure. In the latter, the idea is to discretize and implement the surface with as many as possible meta-atoms (or say, channels) per period, because it is admitted that the power conservation condition should be locally satisfied along the whole surface. Here, we show that the power flow can pass through the metasurface by a completely different way. This means the local power conservation should be an over-requested condition in the previous metasurfaces designing (the phase-gradient and bi-anisotropic approaches), and should be one of the causes for the complexity of the structure. ( ) To show more details about the effect of the evanescent mode, we plot in Fig. the Iy value as the function of x in the upper and lower half-infinite mediums at different δy. Here δy means the distance away from the upper or lower interfaces. Results for δy=0, 0.05a, 0.1a, 0.5a and a are shown by different colors in the figures. To guide the eyesight, the position of the channel and grooves is also marked by green and blue rectangles, respectively. It can be seen from the figure that the effect of the evanescent mode is limited in the region around δy <0.5a. For all these curves in this region, the Iy value keeps negative in the position where the channel is connected, but keeps dropping from positive to negative in the positions where the grooves are connected. This is understandable because power flow can only pass through the structure from the channel, and the effect of the grooves is only to laterally transfer the power flow along the surface. From these two figures, we can confirm further that the local power conservation condition for is unnecessary. To verify the numerical result, we select the structure with θt =72° for the experimental demonstration. The schematic representation of the experimental setup is shown in Fig. We show in Figure In conclusion, we have developed a half-analytic method to solve the diffraction problem for a periodic soundhard planar layer with channel and surface-etched grooves. By combining this method with an optimization algorithm, acoustic refractive metasurface which can refract the incident wave into desired directions can be designed. As demonstration, refractive metasurfaces with refractive angles θt =63°, 72° and 81° for normally incident plane wave were designed. The predicted structures were investigated by the finite-element simulation and experiment, which provide a proof-of-concept of the designed transmitting metasurface. In contrast with the traditional refractive metasurface which are usually composed of many subwavelength meta-atoms, the structure designed by our method has only a single meta-atom per period. By this structure, we have found that the local power conservation condition along the surface-normal direction, which is considered as the basic requirement in the previous traditional designs, is in fact an over-requested condition which increases the complexity in metasurface design. Because the near field interaction between subunits exists in almost all of the subwavelength structure, the presented idea and developed method will be helpful for other metasurface designs and functionalities. The full wave simulations based on finite element analysis are performed using COMSOL Multiphysics Pressure Acoustics module. For Fig. The samples with 20 periods are fabricated using the stereo lithography apparatus (SLA) with photosensitive resin. The molding thickness of each layer during printing is 0.1mm. Organic Glass plates are added on the top and bottom of the samples (height is 15mm) to form a two-dimensional wave guide for measurement. Foams are distributed on sides of the waveguide to absorb sound wave with frequency above 3000Hz. Transducer both side of layer. The period along x-direction is a. The total thickness of the layer is h, the width of the channel is tc; the width of all of the grooves are set to be the same and denoted as t, the depth of the grooves on the upper (lower) surface are , (l=1,2,..., L), and the distance between nearest grooves is set to be equal and denoted as w. Because of the periodicity of the structure, an incident wave from the negative y-direction will be diffracted as 0th, 1st ,⋯, order diffractive components. 