A Seebeck coefficient measurement apparatus has been designed and developed, which is very effective for accurate characterization of different type of samples in a wide temperature range (80 -650K) simultaneously covering low as well as high temperature regime. Reducing complexity of technical design of sample holder and data collections has always been challenging to implement in a single instrument when samples are in different geometrical shape and electronic structure. Our unique design of sample holder with pressure probes covers measurements of different samples shapes (wires, thin films and pellets) as well as different resistivity ranges (metals, semiconductors and insulators). It is suitable for characterization of different samples sizes (3-12 mm). A double heater configuration powered by a dual channel source meter is employed for maintaining a desired constant temperature difference across the sample for the whole temperature range. Two K-type thermocouples are used for simultaneously reading of temperatures and Seebeck voltages by utilizing different channels of a multichannel digital multimeter. Calibration of the system has been carried out using constantan, chromel and alumel materials and recorded data is found to be very accurate and consistent with earlier reports. The Seebeck coefficients of standard samples of constantan (wire) and GaN (thin film) have been reported, which shows the measurement capability of designed setup with versatile samples. Thermoelectric materials are known to be as electronic materials capable of converting thermal gradients into electrical voltage and vice-versa Various challenges of instrument design Characterization of Seebeck coefficient in wide temperature range including low and high temperature range in single measurement system is still a great challenge. An accurate measurement with low cost system is highly desirable to explore the thermoelectric materials in wide temperature range. Thus, we have designed the sample holder which is very suitable and easy to fit in the cryostat, and dedicated automation of setup using Labview program is done for controlling and colleting the accurate data with desired sample gradient and sample temperature. In the present work, we have developed a steady state Seebeck coefficient measurement setup for wide temperature range (80-650 K). A low-temperature vacuum cryostat with very simple dipstick geometry has been designed for keeping sample holder assembly. The sample holder can be used for different sample shapes (wire, thin film, bulk, irregular and symmetric) and sizes (3-12 mm). Two heaters with live control of the hot and cold side temperature helps to maintain the temperature difference within permissible limit throughout the measurement. The compact design, controlled temperature difference, and capability to measure from 80 K to 650 K in a single run are the main silent features of this setup Detailed design and novelty aspects have been discussed further in the following sections. The Seebeck coefficient measurement is basically carried out by using two different methods, classified as integral and differential modes. In the former method, cold junction temperature (TC) is kept constant and the temperature of hot junction (TH) is varied. The Seebeck voltage (∆V) measured thus can be plotted as a function of hot junction temperature (TH). Advantage of this method is that a large Seebeck voltage is generated due to the large temperature gradient across the sample this minimizing errors due to any spurious fluctuations in the circuit The second method i.e. differential method is widely used and is given by Here SS, SW and ∆V are absolute Seebeck coefficients of sample, wire and measured voltage, respectively. This method doesn't require specific cooling arrangements and can be used for all materials Generally, low Seebeck coefficient materials such as copper, niobium, and platinum are used as to measure the thermoelectric voltage across the sample. Ideally, the temperatures and voltages should be read from exactly same points which requires the thermocouples and copper wire (for voltage) should be fixed at same points of sample requiring special design considerations Here Vpos and Vneg are Seebeck voltages measured by positive (chromel) legs and negative (alumel) legs of thermocouples wires, respectively. STC and Sneg are Seebeck coefficients of thermocouple and its negative leg, respectively. Similar equation using the positive legs of thermocouples can also be written as where Sneg is replaced by Spos. Where Spos is the Seebeck coefficient of positive leg of the thermocouple. This approach eliminates the requirement of additional connecting wires to measure the thermoelectric voltage across the sample. Singh et al. have implemented this strategy using single heater setup, and two thermocouples to measure thermo-emf voltages For linear varying Seebeck coefficients of cromel, alumel and K-type thermocouple in the temperature range of TC to TH, the above approximation will work perfectly, which is difficult to meet. The deviation from actual will increase as the temperature difference and non-linearity increases. The chance of inaccuracy in the finding of Spos, Sneg and STC can be eliminated by implementing the ethodology discussed by Patel et. al. Using equation ( The second term in equation ( The effective Seebeck coefficient for wires operating between temperatures TH and TC can be written If the negative legs of two thermocouples are used as connecting wires for reading Seebeck voltages, then SW can be written as Sneg. Similarly, the Seebeck coefficient for the thermocouple can also be written The interfacing and data acquisition program has been written in LabVIEW code. The power supply (using SMU) of the main heater is controlled and increased systematically to achieve a certain temperature (TH). The second channel of the SMU is for supplying power to the auxiliary heater to maintain temperature difference (∆T) within the permissible limit across the sample. The DMM starts acquiring data for different voltages only when a steady state of temperature is achieved. Different averaging schemes (multiple points or repetition) have been employed to minimize the error. The expression for STC and Sneg (equation ( The sample is mounted under the two copper pressure probes with or without the (In+Sb) eutectic layer for better thermal contact, depending upon sample requirement. After putting the SS cup holder, a low vacuum is created with a rotary pump and the dipstick cryostat is merged in liquid nitrogen dewar. All the input parameters and information (∆T, highest measurement temp., sample and file name, etc.,) is saved in the program before the run. Once the lowest steady state temperature is recorded (77 K) by both the thermocouples, the primary heater power is increased in small steps ensuring a temperature gradient (∆T) of the desired value (~5 K). Measurement methodology adopted ensures steady state equilibrium condition before each data recording. Various parameters (TH, TC, Vpos, Vneg, Rcj, data logging time, and heater powers) are recorded very fast (micro to mill seconds) using DMM scanner card switching option and resultant output quantities (STC, Sneg, Spos) are calculated and saved in a .xml file in real time. After this, the program increases the power of the primary heater for next higher temperature measurement. Auxiliary heater power is automatically adjusted to keep ∆T constant. Once the highest temperature is reached by the sample, measurement is stopped or the cooling cycle starts depending upon the input conditions. Instrument calibration was performed by using constantan, chromel, alumel (wires) and GaN (thin film) samples for the whole temperature range. The repeatability and reproducibility of data were verified by remounting the same sample before each successive measurements. Figure It can be pointed out that neither the equilibrium (steady state) time nor the temperature steps are predefined or user controlled. However, the temperature difference across the two ends of the sample (∆T) can be kept roughly fixed around the desired value (5 K in this graph). These parameters are dependent on steady state equilibrium conditions which itself depends on the thermal conductivity and dimensions of the given sample. The linearity of two curves over the whole temperature ranges show the stability of heater power control and measurements. The inset of figure By mounting an alumel sample and recording its Seebeck voltage through negative legs of thermocouple (alumel wires) should ideally give zero voltages as the circuit is completed by the same material. Any nonzero voltages in this configuration give maximum instrumental noise for all temperatures. In our system, we measured it by recording Seebeck voltage of alumel and chromel wires by using negative and positive legs, respectively as shown by curves "Érrors" in figure In conclusion, a simple, compact and fully automated Seebeck coefficient measurement setup is developed for accurate measurement in the wide temperature range (80-650 K). The temperature gradient is precisely controllable during measurement and thus the measurement of Seebeck coefficient at desired average sample temperature can be easily obtained. A unique design of dipstick cryostat and sample holder allow the characterization of varieties of samples without any constraint on its geometrical shape, size and resistivity range, which is the most important feature of designed instrument with a low cost hardware. Desired temperature gradient (∆T) can be achieved with two heaters powered by dual channel power supply, and thus heat flow can be controlled from both side of the sample. System uses minimum instrumentation and measuring probes, which also minimize the hardware complexity and reduction in noise interferences within its own wires used. Calibration of thermocouples and absolute noise has been performed with the help of constantan, chromel and alumel wires, and measured data from our setup are found to be very accurate, and well consistent with earlier report. Seebeck coefficient of n-type GaN thin films has been determined and compared with available literature, which shows the versatile nature and capability of the setup for characterization of various type of thermoelectric materials.