We study superconductivity of twisted bilayer graphene with local and non-local attractive interactions. We obtain the superfluid weight and Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition temperature for microscopic tight-binding and low-energy continuum models. We predict qualitative differences between local and non-local interaction schemes which could be distinguished experimentally. In the flat band limit where the pair potential exceeds the band width we show that the superfluid weight and BKT temperature are determined by multiband processes and quantum geometry of the band. Recent experimental discoveries of superconductivity in bilayer graphene twisted close to a "magic angle" θ * [1-3] call for a reconsideration of traditional theories of superconductivity [4, 5], in particular because the superconductivity occurs in a regime where the non-interacting electronic states form an asymptotically flat (dispersionless) band [6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13][14][15][16][17]. As the system is two-dimensional, the transition to superconductivity is bound to occur at the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) temperature T BKT [18][19][20] which can be determined from k B T BKT = π det[D s (T BKT )] Recently, it was found that D s has, in addition to the conventional contribution proportional to group velocity, a geometric contribution arising from multiband processes An outstanding problem in describing the TBG physics theoretically Here we use and compare with each other two of the previously used approximation procedures: (1) the renormalized moiré (RM) approach Theoretical models In the renormalized moiré lattice method (RM), we deploy the Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonian as , where ∆ iα = J c iα↓ c iα↑ and ∆ iαjβ = J 2 h iαβ are the superfluid order parameters, respectively. To reduce the number of lattice sites M within a moiré unit cell (around 12 000 for twist angle θ ∼ 1 • ), we apply a rescaling trick In the Dirac point continuum method (DP) we employ the low-energy We then write the total Hamiltonian as where N is the total particle number operator. To describe the superconducting state with a local pairing interaction λ we use H int = λ ls dr ψ † ↑ρ,ls (r)ψ † ↓ ρ,ls (r)ψ ↓ ρ,ls (r)ψ ↑ρ,ls (r), which is treated in the mean-field level Order parameters, superfluid weight, and pairing symmetry In experiments To determine the superfluid weight D s , we first solve order parameters from the BCS gap equations To obtain D s we use linear response theory. In the mean-field level In Ref. In Fig. As seen from Fig. BKT-transition temperature By computing D s , one can determine T BKT . In Fig. The difference of the two interaction schemes is further highlighted in Fig. In Figs. ture of T BKT which reaches its maxima near the halffillings of the hole-and electron-doped regimes, similar to experiments Discussion Our work shows that TBG is characterized by two distinct superconducting regimes. When ∆ is much smaller than the flat band bandwidth, the superfluid weight D s and the BKT transition temperature T BKT are well described by conventional theory of superconductivity. On the other hand, in this weak coupling regime the results are somewhat different for the RM and DP models. This is consistent with the low energy dispersion in TBG being very sensitive to the details of the model used Within both of our models, at θ * the crossover between the two regimes takes place for ∆ = 1 . . . 2 meV, implying T BKT ≈ 1.5 . . . 3 K. This is also the ballpark of the experimentally accessed critical temperatures Note added After submission of our manuscript, a related work were provided by Triton cluster at Aalto University. We acknowledge grants of computer capacity from the Finnish Grid and Cloud Infrastructure (persistent identifier urn:nbn:fi:research-infras-2016072533) Let us start by writing the Fermi-Hubbard model already presented in the main text: where for the kinetic hopping amplitudes t iαjβ we use the parametrization provided by the Slater-Koster table of interatomic matrix elements where for simplicity we have denoted the distance between r iα and r jβ as r = [x, y, z]. Here the z-axis is perpendicular with respect to the graphene layers. The first term in Eq. (S2) describes the intralayer hopping processes (z = 0), whereas the interlayer processes are mainly described by the latter term. Here b = a 0 / √ 3 is the distance between the nearest-neighbour carbon atoms, a 0 = 0.246 nm is the lattice constant of graphene, and c 0 = 0.335 nm is the interlayer distance. In our calculations we use parameters t 0 = -2.7 eV, t 1 = 0.297 eV, and β = 7.2. We restrict the interlayer hopping to the terms with r < 4b and consider only the nearest-neighbour intralayer hopping terms. For the interaction Hamiltonian, we use two different kinds of forms, namely the local attractive Hubbard interaction and the resonance valence bond (RVB) type nearest-neighbour pairing potential in order to see how the nature of the interaction Hamiltonian affects D s and T BKT . Local interaction has been extensively used in the past graphene In addition to local pairing potentials, also RVB and other non-local pairing schemes have been applied both in graphene , where S iα are spin operators, which is the usual Heisenberg antiferromagnetic Hamiltonian In our case we use RVB interaction but without the exclusion of the double occupancy, as in case of graphene the on-site repulsive Coulomb interaction between electrons is not necessarily large enough to justify the t-J model. Early treatments of planar organic molecules of σπ-bonds were heavily based on the RVB approach To evaluate the chosen interaction Hamiltonians, we apply standard mean-field decoupling which yields ) where the order parameters are ∆ iα = J c iα↓ c iα↑ and ∆ iαjβ = J 2 c jβ↓ c iα↑c jβ↑ c iα↓ . By using mean-field interaction terms (S3) and (S4) and by exploiting the translational invariance, it is easy to rewrite the Hamiltonian (S1) in the momentum space as where the diagonal (off-diagonal) blocks are the Fourier transforms of hopping (pairing) terms. Here M is the number of lattice sites per unit cell, V is the total area of the system and k belong to the unit cell of the reciprocal lattice. By solving the BdG eigenproblem The diagonal matrix D k contains the eigenenergies E ik , whereas the columns of the unitary matrix V k are the eigenstates |ψ ik . One can then write down the self-consistent gap equations for the order parameters with the aid of D k and V k . For the local interaction these read and correspondingly for the RVB where r rel jβiα ≡ r jβr iα , f is the Fermi-Dirac distribution, N is the number of unit cells, and 1 2M is a unity matrix of size 2M × 2M . The densities for each lattice sites can be solved from the following equations, The gap equations [Eqs. (S10) or (S11)] and density equations (S12) are solved iteratively with the fixed-point iteration scheme by choosing a random initial ansatz for the order parameters. The iteration is terminated when the order parameters and densities are converged to a stable solution of the gap equations. Due to the translational invariance, we can write ∆ iα = ∆ α , ∆ iαjβ = ∆ αβ and n iασ = n ασ . For local interaction there exist M order parameters (for each lattice site in the unit cell) and in case of RVB there are 3M order parameters to be solved (for each nearest-neighbour bond). From the obtained order parameters one can then compute the superfluid weight D s as explained in section II. When the bilayer graphene systems are twisted close to experimentally used magic angle θ * ≈ 1 • , the unit cell consists of around 12000-13000 lattice sites. Such a huge problem is computationally a rather heavy task and thus we decrease the number of lattice sites per unit cell, M , by applying a rescaling trick which keeps invariant two important observables, namely the Fermi velocity of a single graphene v F and the moiré superlattice periodicity a while increasing the twist angle θ and thus decreasing M . More specifically, the Fermi velocity is proportional to a 0 and t 0 , so that v F ∝ a 0 t 0 . On the other hand, the moiré periodicity is a = a 0 /2 sin(θ/2). With this information, one can introduce the following rescaling under which a and v F remain invariant where the primed quantites are the ones used in computations. With this trick one can apply much larger twist angles θ than the usual magic angle θ ∼ 1 • and thus have much less lattice sites per moiré unit cell than at θ ∼ 1 • . The rescaling is characterized by the rescaling parameter λ 1: larger λ means more aggressive rescaling and larger θ , whereas λ = 1 corresponds to the unscaled model. Most importantly, the rescaling is able to reproduce the flat bands and dispersive bands sufficiently well near the charge neutrality point as demonstrated in Fig. The rescaling approximation can be qualitatively understood by noting that under the rescaling the intraband hopping becomes smaller, i.e. the interband hopping terms become relatively more prominent and therefore one does not need to apply such a small twist angle to obtain flat band structures near the charge neutrality point. More aggressive rescaling, i.e. larger λ, yields a smaller amount of lattice sites per moiré unit cell. However, λ cannot be arbitrarily large as too strong rescaling cannot reproduce the original unscaled one-particle energy band structure. Feasibility of a specific rescaling λ depends on the value of θ. Some twist angles θ allow one to use more aggressive rescaling than some other twist angles. The unscaled tight-binding model yields reasonably narrow bands near the charge neutrality point for the twist angles in the range of around θ ≈ 0.95 • . . . 1.05 • so that the bandwidth of the flat bands at θ = 1.05 • is around 20 meV, whereas near 0.95 • it is less than 10 meV. In this angle range also the band gaps between the dispersive and flat bands are notable. Based on these remarks, one is tempted to use angles near 0.95 • as there the bandwidth is at smallest. However, it turns out that to reproduce the shape of these extremely narrow flat bands near 0.95 • requires extremely mild rescaling and so one has to deal with a large number of lattice sites within a unit cell. On the contrary, for less narrow bands one can apply a more aggressive rescaling. In Fig. In our RM computations we use θ = 1.0138 • and λ ≈ 4.3475 which yields M = 676 and θ = 4.4085 • , i.e. we use the dispersions depicted in Fig. In the main text we showed that at the flat band regime the RVB interaction breaks the C 3 -symmetry of the TBG lattice and consequently results in nematic SC states which manifest as an anisotropic superfluid weight. However, for weak enough RVB interactions, when the underlying symmetries of the lattice play a prominent role, one obtains isotropic SC states. This is shown in Fig. This transition to the nematic phase is visible also in Fig. For completeness, the spatial profile of the order parameters of the isotropic phase is shown in Fig. As described in Ref. In this section we go through very briefly the essential equations to compute D s in case of our RM and DP methods, show how D s can be split to conventional and geometric terms, and discuss why our results for D s are not in agreement with results of Ref. We compute D s by using the linear response theory stated in Ref. Here j p μ (a, b) = σ t ab r rel ab,μ c † aσ c bσ is the paramagnetic current operator and T μν (a, b)A ν (r CM ab ) = σ t ab r rel ab,μ r rel ab,ν c † aσ c bσ A ν (r CM ab ) is the diamagnetic current operator. By using the expression for the total induced current density, j μ (r CM ab ) = -δH(A)/δA μ (r CM ab ), and linear response theory, we obtain in the momentum and frequency domain the relation j μ (q, ω) = -K μν (q, ω)A ν (q, ω), where K μν is the current-current response function of the form and with ∂ μ ≡ ∂ kμ , are the diamagnetic and paramagnetic current parts, respectively. The superfluid weight D s is defined via the static Meissner effect (ω = 0) and by taking the proper long wavelength limit of the transverse component of the current response function, see e.g. Refs. 23 and 24. In the mean-field level we can simply use the limit This definition is equivalent with the one defined via the change of free energy due to the phase twist applied to the superconducting order parameter which leads to the form of D s μν ∝ ∂ 2 Ω(A) ∂Aμ∂Aν A=0 , where Ω is the grand canonical potential Be deploying the mean-field theory and Green's function formalism, it was shown in Ref. where the eigenstates and eigenenergies are solved from the BdG equation H k |ψ ik = E ik |ψ ik , τ z is a Pauli matrix acting in Nambu space, f is the Fermi-Dirac distribution, and V is the area of the sample. The difference quotient is interpreted as -f (E ik ) when E ik = E jk . In our TBG models the Hamiltonians are written in the superlattice-folded picture so that the k sum is over the moiré Brillouin zone (MBZ) and the i and j sums are over the bands enumerating the eigenstates for each k. In case of the local interaction used in Ref. The only difference compared to Eq. (S27) is the derivatives of the order parameters in the diamagnetic part. However, in our case the order parameters are always really small compared to the kinetic terms and therefore we can in practice ignore extra terms arising from the derivatives of the order parameters. Therefore, in case of RM method we apply (S27) for both the local and RVB interaction schemes by taking In the DP model we assume that most of the contribution comes from states near the Dirac points, so that after writing everything in the valley-separated formalism, Eq. (S27) reads (S29) where the eigenstates and eigenenergies are solved from the BdG equation (S21). In the case of the DP model we use Eq. (S29) to compute D s . A. The form of superfluid weight in the presence of C3 rotational symmetry It can be shown that the superfluid weight is isotropic in the presence of C 3 rotational symmetry. Let e 1 be a unit vector, and e 2 is obtained from e 1 by a C 3 rotation, i.e., e 2 = R( After a C 3 rotation, we get As TBG is an extremely complicated multiband system, it is highly instructive to decompose D s into the contributions of different one-particle Bloch states. We do this by using the method presented in Ref. where with the eigenenergy ↑,m,k [ ↓,m,-k ] and |± are the eigenstates of τ z with eigenvalues ±1. As in our case we in practice always have ∂ μ H k = ∂ μ H k (∆ = 0), it is straightforward to rewrite D s of Eq. (S27) in the following form: We apply this expression when studying in Fig. The matrix elements of the current operator can be further written as follows From Eqs. (S32) and (S33) we see that there exist two different kinds of terms: the diagonal matrix elements of the current operator depend only on derivatives of the one-particle energy dispersions while the off-diagonal elements only on the momentum derivatives of the Bloch states. Thus D s can be split into two terms: the conventional part D s conv that includes only the diagonal, i.e. intraband, current operator matrix elements (m 1 = m 2 and m 3 = m 4 ), and the geometric part D s geom that includes off-diagonal, i.e. interband, current operator matrix elements so that D s = D s conv + D s geom . The conventional part consists purely of the intraband current terms and is therefore zero for a single exactly flat band (as ∂ μ σ,m,k = 0). Other way to see this is to note that D s conv is inversely proportional to the effective mass of the electrons The importance of D s geom and the origin of the flat band superfluidity was for the first time addressed in Ref. which reaches its maximum value of unity when the states are not overlapping at all. One can define the quantum metric g n μν (k) by expanding (S36) as Here the higher order terms are ignored. Thus the quantum metric is related to the overlap of the quantum states. For example, in Ref. In addition to the present work, the role of the geometric superfluid weight in case of TBG was also highlighted in Ref. 30 by using a TBG continuum model developed in Ref. C. Comparison to the "upper" limit of D s derived in Hazra et al. In Ref. The first important point is that the authors of Ref. 22 deploy an effective model, developed in Ref. To further highlight that the upper limit of Ref. 22 works only on the weak coupling regime, let us write down their argument. The starting point is the expressions (S23)-(S26) which can be rewritten as where D s μν,dia = T μν is the diamagnetic part and correspondingly the paramagnetic contribution is D s μν,para = lim q→0 lim ω→0 [-i ∞ 0 dte iωt [j p μ (q, t), j p ν (-q, 0)] ]. It can be shown that the paramagnetic part is always zero or negative, thus it follows that D s μν,dia D s μν (usually in multiband systems the absolute values of dia-and paramagnetic parts are much larger than the absolute value of D s ). Therefore, the argument used by the authors of Ref. 22 is to compute the diamagnetic part D s μν,dia to obtain the upper limit for the total superfluid weight D s . ρk := H 1 kin,ρk + H 2 kin,ρk + H ⊥ kin,ρk -μ1 at valley ρ ∈ {+, -}, k ∈ MBZ is √ 3 2 e y ), the superfluid weight becomes D s = D s 11 (e 1 e 1 + e 1 e 2 + e 2 e 2 ), = D s 11 e x e x + e x -