The critical heat flux (CHF) corresponding to the departure from nucleate boiling (DNB) crisis is essential to the design and safety of a two-phase flow boiling system. Despite the abundance of predictive tools available to the thermal engineering community, the path for an accurate, robust CHF model remains elusive due to lack of consensus on the DNB triggering mechanism. This work aims to apply a physics-informed, machine learning (ML)-aided hybrid framework to achieve superior predictive capabilities. Such a hybrid approach takes advantage of existing understanding in the field of interest (i.e., domain knowledge) and uses ML to capture undiscovered information from the mismatch between the actual and domain knowledge-predicted target. A detailed case study is carried out with an extensive DNB-specific CHF database to demonstrate (1) the improved performance of the hybrid approach as compared to traditional domain knowledge-based models, and (2) the hybrid model's superior generalization capabilities over standalone ML methods across a wide range of flow conditions. The hybrid framework could also readily extend its applicability domain and complexity on the fly, showing an elevated level of flexibility and robustness. Based on the case study conclusions, the window-type extrapolation mapping methodology is further proposed to better inform high-cost experimental work. The reliability and economic competitiveness of a thermal system hinge upon its safety and regulatory measures. During the stage of system design and analysis, researchers and engineers typically leverage extensive experimental efforts and investigate evolutionary models that represent the state-of-the-art understanding in their fields of specialization-also known as domain knowledge (DK)-to predict various safety limits. However, engineering problems with sophisticated physical phenomena may present extreme challenges to establishing explicit mathematical expressions or building credible input/output causality. Therefore, such safety limits are often determined by overly conservative measures, as they are accompanied with significant margins to accommodate modeling errors and other potential uncertainties. One such engineering problem is the departure from nucleate boiling (DNB) crisis in a two-phase flow boiling system, widely encountered in high-power microprocessor cooling, in the refrigeration industry, in some medical technology fields, and more typically in nuclear power plants The corresponding heat flux, or critical heat flux (CHF), is a regulatory limit for commercial pressurized water reactors (PWRs) worldwide Unfortunately, the path for an accurate, robust prediction of CHF has been elusive due to lack of general agreement on the mechanism that triggers DNB With recent advances in computational capabilities and optimization techniques, methods based on machine learning (ML) provide an alternative approach to existing data-driven DK-based tools. Such an approach can be particularly useful in engineering fields where the physical phenomena are complex. Within this category, an artificial neural network (ANN) is one of many promising choices, as it has been shown to serve as a universal approximator of any nonlinear relations to a variety of disciplines, including those related to applied thermal engineering: from predicting solar radiation Applications in nuclear engineering have also increased but often face one key obstacle: lack of experimental or high-fidelity numerical data. In regard to the prediction of CHF, most nonproprietary measurements were conducted with steam-water mixtures in round tubes. None of the few publications in this field While standalone ML-based tools require minimal a priori knowledge and almost no explicit mathematical modeling, they can be prone to undesired, unphysical solutions due to their purely data-driven nature and "black-box" feature. Regardless of how advanced any ML method has become, prior knowledge in the field (i.e., DK) is still deemed important and useful by many researchers In this hybrid parallel framework, a conventional DK-based model is selected as the fixedstructure prior model, either data-or physics-driven. While DK serves to lay the groundwork and provide a baseline solution, ML is used to learn from the residual between actual and DK-predicted output (not from the final output as it is the case of a standalone ML-based model). Figure where n is the number of observations in the dataset. Similarly, at the validation/test stage (Fig. Two prior models are selected for this work: the Groeneveld 2006 LUT The Groeneveld CHF LUT The Liu model where ρ f is the liquid density at saturation and h fg is the latent heat of vaporization; δ, U B and L B are respectively the liquid sublayer thickness, vapor blanket velocity, and vapor blanket length. The key for the liquid sublayer dryout mechanism turns to the determination of these three parameters (i.e., δ, U B and L B ), along with related intermediate variables. A variety of physicsbased models are available in the literature Although the underlying mechanism was insensitive to channel geometry, considerations were only given to round tubes for closure relations in almost all the existing mechanistic models (including Liu). Liu et al. Among the various types of ANNs that exist, the feed-forward neural network (or multilayer perceptron, or simply NN in this article) has become the most popular in engineering applications for its superior performance when dealing with strongly nonlinear and complex relationships. Another ML method being used in this case study is the tree-based random forest (RF), a fast and reliable tool that requires minimal hyperparameter tuning and feature engineering. The feed-forward neural network is essentially a collection of multilayer (at least three layers: input, hidden, output), fully-connected units (see Fig. The random forest is a fast, flexible, tree-based ensemble learning method that produces robust results without much tuning of hyperparameters Fig. Relevant publications As mentioned in Section 2.1, the input features collected from raw data consist of pressure, mass flux, local/exit equilibrium quality, channel equivalent diameter, channel heated diameter, and heated length. The target/output is CHF, and the axial power profile is uniform. The experimental ranges of the dataset are summarized in Table be briefly evaluated in Appendix A. The experimental uncertainties were estimated a to be in the range of 5-15% Both NN and RF methods are trained and validated using the Keras application programming interface (API) with TensorFlow b backend and the scikit-learn library in Python 3.6. The 10-fold cross-validation technique is used to tune the algorithms and evaluate how well they generalize on unseen data. The dataset is randomly shuffled prior to cross-validation. The shuffled dataset is then evenly divided into ten validation. This process is repeated ten (10) times, with each of the ten (10) subsamples used exactly once as the validation fold. Given the relatively small size of the dataset, a separate test fold is not generated. This evaluation technique will be compared with the more conventional train-test split in Section 3.3 for out-of-sample predictions. 3 Results and discussion Previous work by Zhao -weight optimization and learning rate: Adam optimizer a marginally outperformed the classic stochastic gradient descent procedure, optimal learning rate = 0.001; -activation function (in hidden layers): the rectified linear unit (ReLU) b compared favorably to sigmoid c ; -network architecture: optimal configuration = 6/50/50/50/1 (the input layer has 6 units, each of the 3 hidden layers has 50 units, and the output layer has 1 unit); more hidden layers or units did not further reduce validation error; -number of epochs: convergence was reached after 600-800 epochs d ; -regularization: the validation error never increased with the number of epochs, and applying dropout (an efficient regularization technique that refers to randomly dropping out units during training Therefore, overfitting should not be a concern in this work. Similarly, hyperparameter sensitivity in a standalone RF was explored, and only minor changes in its performance were observed (i.e., RF requires minimal tuning). In summary, the bestestimate standalone ML-based CHF models comprised the following configuration: a The Adam optimization algorithm d Each epoch represents one forward pass and one backward pass of all the training examples. • NN: 6/50/50/50/1 architecture, Adam optimizer (learning rate = 0.001), ReLU activation, no regularization; • RF: 100 trees/estimators, 50%-70% features in each individual tree, no regularization. The comparison against the well-used LUT is detailed in Zhao et al. Elaborating the root cause of such scatter is challenging: it may be due to the presence of outliers in the training and/or validation dataset; or maybe the training and validation data do not follow the same statistical distribution, a key prerequisite to any meaningful validation/test solutions in ML. Leveraging prior knowledge will help reduce such scatter, since DK is capable of providing credible baseline solutions and ML is then used to assist DK and learn from the prediction mismatch. The hybrid (i.e., physics-informed ML-aided) framework described in Section 2.1 has been implemented for this case study. The prior model can be either the data-driven LUT or the physicsbased Liu model; the ML method can be either NN or RF. To evaluate the effect of prior models (LUT and Liu) on the performance of the hybrid approach, only tube results are compared (since the Liu model was developed for tube applications only). Hyperparameter tuning has revealed that within the hybrid framework, the ML structure can be simplified: in the NN, a single hidden layer of 30 units (i.e., 6/30/1 architecture) is sufficient to achieve the maximum performance; in the RF, only 50 trees (instead of 100) are needed. No other changes are made from the configuration presented in Section 3.1. Figure NN+Liu and RF+Liu in Fig. As shown in Fig. To evaluate the ML model's performance and detect potential overfitting, both crossvalidation and train-test split techniques are recommended. The latter, more straightforward traintest split was used in most prior work on CHF problems As discussed in Section 1, a main downside of data-driven DK models is their poor extrapolation performance, as they are often incapable of making reliable predictions on data that fall beyond their validity range. For its data-driven nature, a standalone ML-based model would also be exposed to such deficiency for data with a mass flux below the cutoff G cutoff , and a test group for data with a mass flux above G cutoff . The goal is to evaluate the performance of different ML (standalone and hybrid) methods at relatively high mass flux given that they are trained with relatively low mass flux data only. This approach is adopted since experiments at high flow velocity conditions can be costly and technically challenging in real-world engineering. Both standalone LUT and Liu serve as reference solutions as their validity ranges cover both training and test data in this example, that is to say that their extrapolation capabilities are not evaluated in this work. Performance of different models on tube data: mass flux extrapolation. As listed in Table In light of the promising performance of the hybrid framework, one may leverage existing experimental data to inform whether or not new measurements are needed for a targeted thermalhydraulic condition. Such initiatives are economically attractive for applications like DNB since measuring CHF can be expensive and time consuming The idea of using existing data to inform future experiments can be visualized via windowtype extrapolation mapping. For this case study, an example is given in Fig. This paper extends the predictive capabilities of DK-and ML-based methods to improve the safety and economic competitiveness of thermal systems that depend on accurate prediction of DNB-type CHF by introducing a physics-informed, ML-aided (hybrid) framework. A comprehensive evaluation has demonstrated the superior performance of the hybrid approach as compared to standalone models, and the following conclusions can be drawn from this case study: -By taking advantage of prior knowledge to lay the groundwork and using ML to capture the undiscovered information from the mismatch between the actual and DK-predicted target, the hybrid approach significantly outperforms the standalone models across a wide range of flow conditions with reduced scatter and unbiased parametric trends. -One of the key features of ML tools (standalone and hybrid) is their on-the-fly extensibility of applicability domain. -The cross-validation technique compares closely with the conventional train-test split, and it reduces error due to bias by creating more randomly generated subsets. -Within the hybrid framework, the ML structure can be made simpler than its standalone counterpart (to save computational cost when dealing with large datasets). -The hybrid approach results in more robust extrapolation capabilities than those obtained with standalone ML methods. -Within the hybrid framework, while the choice of DK model seems trivial for interpolation purposes, it is more important when it comes to extrapolation (in respect of the ML-aided component), especially when the training dataset is relatively small. -The proposed methodology of window-type extrapolation mapping leverages existing data to help inform whether or not new measurements are needed for a targeted thermalhydraulic condition. Both model and data complexity can be further extended with no extra burden on training/validation (and testing, if data size becomes much larger). The input feature dimension will likely increase if other channel geometries are included, such as rod bundles in a nuclear reactor. Engineered flow (e.g., nanofluids) and surface (e.g., oxidation, wickability, wettability) characteristics can also be included in the feature vector, as they all have exhibited significant impacts on CHF (at least at low pressures) The generic hybrid approach along with its associated methodology of window-type extrapolation mapping proposed in this work are suitable for a broad spectrum of applications in nuclear reactors and other thermal systems, where domain knowledge and experimental (or highfidelity numerical) data are available. Such a versatile, user-friendly framework provides insight into how conventional engineering fields could benefit from the new era of artificial intelligence. As can be seen in Figs. A.1d-A.2, the two ML methods agree closely with each other and with measurements of plate data: about 90% of predicted data fall within ±20% uncertainty. The LUT tends to dramatically under-predict the one-side heated plate CHF. This underestimation is consistent with previous assessments In addition to the baseline case, two sets of sensitivity study have been carried out to assess the robustness and effectiveness of the standalone ML methods: h ) rather than the hydraulic diameter (D e ) is recommended for making the diameter correction, as the former feature better describes vapor formation and development in subcooled and low-quality flow