: Detectors that can simultaneously provide fine time and spatial resolution have attracted wide-spread interest for applications in several fields such as high-energy and nuclear physics as well as in low-energy electron detection, photon science, photonics and imaging. Low-Gain Avalanche Diodes (LGADs), being fabricated on thin silicon substrates and featuring a charge gain of up to 100, exhibit excellent timing performance. Since pads much larger than the substrate thickness are necessary to achieve a spatially uniform multiplication, a fine pad pixelation is difficult. To overcome this limitation, the AC-coupled LGAD approach was introduced. In this type of device, metal electrodes are placed over an insulator at a fine pitch, and signals are capacitively induced on these electrodes. At Brookhaven National Laboratory, we have designed and fabricated prototypes of AC-coupled LGAD sensors. The performance of small test structures with different particle beams from radioactive sources are shown. Low-Gain Avalanche Diodes (LGADs) In a silicon processing clean room, thin substrates can be worked only if they are attached to a thick supporting layer for handling: the thin substrate layer can be either an epitaxial layer, grown over a thick low-resistivity wafer or a thin wafer, wafer-bonded to another wafer and then thinned down at will. In both cases, the back acts as a uniform ohmic contact and all the processing takes place on the front side. Here, once the electrodes are patterned in shape of pads or pixels, 2D spatial information can be obtained. However, for a uniform multiplication to occur along the entire surface of the sensor, the pad dimension must be far larger than the substrate thickness. For example, in the ATLAS High Granularity Timing Detector (HGTD) A sketch of an AC-LGAD structure, as compared to a standard LGAD, is shown in figure One of the main differences between AC-LGADs and standard LGADs is the replacement in AC-LGADs of the n++ layer by a much less doped n+ layer, see below for details. Moreover, the electrodes, which the read-out electronics is connected to, are metal pads separated from the n+ layer by a thin insulator. Since the n+ layer is continuous, these metal electrodes over the insulator experience a low inter-pad resistance R n , and this can cause two effects. First, a potentially large thermal Johnson noise can be fed into the front-end electronics. This effect can be made negligible by reading out the electrodes with short shaping times: a fast read-out (sub-GHz bandwidth) is in any case beneficial to achieve optimal timing resolution. Second, signal loss occurs if R n << (ωC AC ) -1 , where C AC is the effective capacitance of the metal pad towards the n+ layer. Considering a simple lumped model for a complicated impedance network of sheet resistances and capacitances, C AC is given by the parallel plate approximation C AC = diel • A/d diel , where A is the metal area and d diel the thickness of the dielectric. It is clear that dielectrics as thin as possible are preferable: a limiting factor is that, for the same voltage difference between the n+ layer and the front-end electronics, electric fields inside the dielectric must not exceed the dielectric critical field E c , which causes dielectric rupture. For example, if the maximum voltage difference is 10 V and the critical oxide field is 1 MV/cm (for comparison, for a good thermal oxide, E c ∼ 6-9 MV/cm), the minimum dielectric thickness is 100 nm. This consideration also sets a lower limit on the area of the pixel to ensure C AC is large enough for a given R n , and this may limit the size of the pixelation. By reducing the implantation dose of the n+ layer, i.e., making it as resistive as possible, we can increase R n . The lower limit to the dose is set by the sum of the dose of the gain layer and the integral of the doping concentration of the substrate: this sum can be just shy of 5 • 10 12 cm -2 . A larger value of the n+ dose can be foreseen to account for the over-depletion of the substrate, or in case large voltages are to be applied to achieve the target gain. In this design a highly-doping n++ implant is still present at the edge of the device, embedded into the Junction Termination Edge (JTE), and DC-connected to a voltage source for electron current draining. Electrons are first collected by the n+ layer and from it by an electrode contacting the n++ implant at the periphery of the device. The back of the device is uniform, and acts as an ohmic contact. At the edge of the active area of the device, the same termination used in LGADs is used for AC-LGADs: a JTE consisting of a deep diffused n+ implant prevents the development of high fringe electric fields in this regions, and thus the onset of early breakdowns Since AC-coupled electrodes do not collect charge, the current induced on the AC-LGAD pads is bipolar with zero net integral, with a first peak accounting for the drift of the multiplication holes into the substrate and a second peak, of opposite polarity, to account for diffusion of the electrons within the n+ toward the n++ contact at the edge of the device. The latter charge movement will induce signals also in nearby pixels: this effect can be attenuated by making the n+ layer to float through a large value resistor R GND connected between ground and the n++ contact. Electrons collected at the n+ layer will then discharge slowly to the n++ contact, with a time constant given approximately by R GND • C n+ , where C n+ is the capacitance of the n+ layer towards the rest of the world. This time constant is much larger than the read-out time, so that the opposite polarity pulse amplitude is negligible. For this first, proof of concept, production of AC-LGADs at BNL, photolithographic masks developed for previous LGAD fabrications at BNL were used, while three main changes took place: the n++ implant, the contact structures and the metal layer. The following details the main changes. • The mask that in the LGAD production defines the n++ layer in AC-LGADs is used to define the resistive n+ layer; however this is 10-time less doped to increase its resistivity in AC-LGADs. • A new mask was designed to define the n++ implantation at the edge of the device, embedded into the JTE (figure • A new mask was designed to remove the contacts in the active areas, while contacting the n++ at the edge of the device. • A new mask for the metal layer was designed. Several electrode arrays differing for pixel size and pitch were placed in the active area of small test structures (figure The process flow follows the one detailed in It must be pointed out that the depletion of the n+ layer is not negligible, causing the gain layer to be effectively deeper from the junction than for standard LGADs. Impact ionization strongly depends on the distance that electrons travel in a high electric field, so that the dose of the gain layer must be accordingly adjusted (lowered) to avoid a premature breakdown. Figure The performance of the AC-LGAD structures designed and fabricated at BNL is measured together with the one of LGADs and diodes that are fabricated on the same wafer as the AC-LGADs. Measurements of static electrical performance, gain, induced signal, cross-talk between pixels, and timing are carried out and detailed in the following. The main difference between the LGAD and AC-LGAD devices is the implantation dose of the phosphorus layer that makes the junction with the gain layer. In the LGAD case, a standard high dose is used, while in the AC-LGAD case a 10-time less doped implant is used to increase the resistance of such a layer. Figure LGADs results compatible with those obtained in previous batches, as detailed in ref. To test the performance of the AC-LGAD as compared to the standard LGAD, we mounted a sample of each type of devices on a multi-channel board that consists of 16 input channels, each of which includes an independent Transimpedance Amplifier (TA). To characterize the TA, we also mounted a diode fabricated in the same wafer as the AC-LGAD, and we irradiated the diode with fluorescence X-rays emitted by a 65 Tb target (K α = 44 keV) excited by alpha particles from 241 Am. By means of a 1 GHz scope, a number of the resulting signal waveforms were acquired and the average value of their integrals is measured to be 9.4 pV • s, which provides the absolute calibration of the TA. Subsequently, in an AC-LGAD the n++ layer at the periphery of the device was DC-connected to a TA input and from the distribution of the waveform integrals from a 90 Sr beta source an average value of 204 pV • s is extracted. From the calibration and extracting from the C-V scan a depleted thickness of 32 μm, a gain of about 90 is derived for a bias voltage of -80 V. Using one of the nine AC-coupled pads of the AC-LGAD shown in figure The induced signal produced in an AC-LGAD by different types of particle beams from radioactive sources is studied by simultaneously reading out three pixels in the 3 × 3 array of the AC-LGAD with 200 μm × 200 μm pixel size and 220 μm pitch, see figure Figure Trig min ratio has shorter tails. The above measurements were carried out using beta radiation from a 90 Sr source and are representative of the sensor response to a particle beam close to minimum ionisation, which can penetrate the full substrate thickness. Tests were also conducted with X-rays that produce localised charge in the sensors, using 55 Fe radioactive sources that generate X-rays of about 6 keV. Figure Similarly to the measurements with the 90 Sr source, the ratios of the V min between the neighbouring and triggering pixel channels for signal waveforms generated by X-rays from a 55 Fe source are measured, see figure The time resolution σ t associated to the sensor jitter, driven by sensor noise, is calculated using the following formula (see ref. , where σ noise is the r.m.s. voltage noise of the system, S the mean signal amplitude, and dS dt the slope of the signal (slew rate) as a function of the time t. Using as particle beam the beta radiation from a 90 Sr source impinging on the 3 × 3 array of AC-LGAD pixels as in figure A novel silicon device concept, the AC-LGAD, for fast-timing and high-granularity pixel detectors has been tested at BNL. Leveraging the experience on the fabrication of standard LGADs, wafers containing several AC-LGAD structures have been designed, fabricated and characterized. The specific design and fabrication process developed at BNL for AC-LGADs is outlined. The prototypes show good electrical characteristics, a gain value of 80, i.e., comparable to those of standard LGADs, and a timing resolution associated to the detector jitter that reaches approximately 20 ps. Further optimization of the fabrication process will increase the breakdown voltage by fine tuning the gain layer implantation parameters, the resistance of the n+ layer and the granularity of the pixelation. These improvements will allow to reach higher operational bias voltage, faster timing performance and finer spatial resolution.