We have realized a microstrip based THz near field cantilever which enables quantitative measurements of the impedance of the probe tip at THz frequencies (0.3 THz). A key feature is the on-chip balanced hybrid coupler which serves as an interferometer for passive signal cancellation to increase the readout circuit sensitivity despite extreme impedance mismatch at the tip. We observe distinct changes in the reflection coefficient of the tip when brought into contact with different dielectric (Si, SrTiO 3 ) and metallic samples (Au). By comparing to finite element simulations we determine the sensitivity of our THz probe to be well below 0.25 fF. The cantilever further allows for topography imaging in a conventional atomic force microscope mode. Our THz cantilever removes several critical technology challenges and thus enables a shielded cantilever based THz near field microscope. In condensed matter research there is a strong desire for new experimental tools that can measure the local electrical properties of materials and buried layers at high frequencies and with high spatial resolution First, we will revisit the concept of scanning near field microscopy with shielded cantilevers as it is currently being used in microwave microscopy and we will identify the key features a THz cantilever should comprise. We then present the con-cept of our THz on-chip interferometer. Finally, we demonstrate how this concept enables impedance measurements with a THz cantilever that is compatible with conventional atomic force microscopy (AFM). The principle of scanning near field microscopy with a shielded microstrip (MS) cantilever is illustrated in Fig. The tip-ground plane capacitance C t is generally given by the size and geometry of the cantilever close to the tip, which results in values of the order of C t ∼ 10 -15 F . Since Z ∝ 1/iωC, at GHz frequencies (ω = 2π f , f ∼ 10 9 Hz) the terminating impedance is large Z ∼ 10 6 Ω Z 0 and therefore the reflection coefficient becomes Γ 1. This means that most of the signal is reflected back into the cantilever when the tip is floating over the sample. We will refer to this part of the signal as scattered signal because it does not carry information about the sample itself. When the tip is in contact with the sample, the desired contributions from the tip-sample interaction thus only lead to small variations on top of an otherwise large Γ, which is obviously difficult to detect. It is therefore highly desirable to minimize the scattered signal in the detector line and to become sensitive to those contributions only, which originate from the tip-sample interaction. FIG. At microwave frequencies this problem has been addressed by making the cantilever and the tip part of a resonator While at microwave frequencies such circuitry can be incorporated rather easily, this is not straight forward at THz frequencies because many required technologies are not readily available. In order to realize a shielded impedance microscope cantilever at THz frequencies it is therefore plausible to aim for an on-chip THz circuit solution that can be patterned close to the tip with lithographical means. We identify the following key properties such a circuit should provide: 1) separation of the in-going and reflected signal to facilitate signal processing. 2) Cancellation of the scattered signal in the detector line. 3) Sensitive response when the tip is brought into contact with a dielectric or a metallic sample. 4) Short signal lines to minimize losses. In the following section we will present and demonstrate a circuit that fulfills all of these requirements. Figure We can now use these properties, signal splitting and phase delay, to build an on-chip interferometer that is highly sensitive to impedance changes at the cantilever tip: We attach transmission lines of finite length L 2 and L 3 = L 2 + ∆L at ports 2 and 3, respectively, as shown in Fig. where A corresponds to the total signal amplitude, Φ c = 3π/2 is the total phase accumulated in the coupler, Φ L2,3 refer to the phase picked up due to the signal traveling down the respective arms and ∆Φ 2,3 is the phase picked up due to reflection at the terminations of arms 2 and 3, respectively. For our purposes it is convenient to express Eq.1 as which indicates that signal cancellation in the detector line is achieved for (3) As shown in Fig. In order to test this concept, we have realized a series of balanced branchline couplers on a Si substrate using the technol-ogy described by Finkel et al. Figure Next we demonstrate how, owing to the sharp interferometer cancellation conditions, the circuit is highly sensitive to contributions from Φ ∆L . Figure We can further use the analytical model to analyse theoretically the circuit's response to a load capacitance C load connected in parallel to C t , representing a sample in a scanning probe experiment (cf. lumped element diagram in Fig. We will now describe how this detection scheme can be implemented and used in a scanning probe cantilever to detect impedance changes at the probe tip. Figure In fig. The measured THz response of the cantilever is shown in Fig. Our cantilever can be used to detect changes in the tip impedance when landed on a dielectric or metallic sample. This is demonstrated in Fig. In order to quantitatively understand the cantilever response we use FE modelling of the full circuit and we include a load capacitance C load in parallel to C t to take into account contributions from the sample materials (cf. fig. Finally, we like to point out some aspects that we aim to improve for future THz cantilever generations. Firstly, even though our fabrication technique provides useful devices, the current yield is rather low (≈ 10%). This is mostly related to the use of the black wax, which is needed to protect the THz circuitry from chemicals during the release step, but which also induces mechanical stress, resulting in loss of a large number of cantilevers. Secondly, in its current design the substrate, which serves as a handling wafer, faces in the same direction as the tip. This limits the surface region on the sample, that can be reached by the cantilever to approximately the cantilever length (∼ 300 μm). In order to lift this constraint, developing a flip-chip technology may provide the most suitable means to bond a handling wafer to the top side of the cantilever chip. At the same time, however, it will be important to maintain access to the circuitry with landing probes. Thirdly, our experiments have shown that due to the folded geometry of the balanced branchline coupler the circuit response deviates slightly from that of the un-folded geometry tested on a substrate (Fig. We have presented a shielded THz probe suitable for impedance microscopy in the sub-mm band (0.3 THz). As a key challenge for the realization of such a device we have identified the necessity to carry out common mode cancellation and impedance matching at THz frequencies close to the cantilever tip in order to enable sensitive detection of small changes of the tip impedance. We have addressed these challenges by developing an on-chip circuit that can be patterned on the cantilever which comprises a balanced branchline coupler. The coupler functions as an on-chip interferometer and in this manner achieves the required common mode suppression as well as high sensitivity to small impedance changes. To demonstrate the basic functionality of this concept, we have realized a set of devices on substrates and we have characterized their response at THz frequencies. The results can be directly modeled within an analytical model of the circuit. Furthermore, a fabrication technology has been developed that allows for patterning the circuit on a free standing cantilever including the tip. When the released cantilever is landed on different dielectric (Si, SrTiO 3 ) and metallic (Au) samples we observe distinct THz responses which enable us to determine the corresponding capacitive load at the cantilever tip using finite element modelling. Our cantilever removes several critical technological challenges towards scanning impedance microscopy at THz frequencies. In order to compute the response of the balanced hybrid coupler we describe the signal evolution in the coupler in terms of forward and backward travelling waves in the transmission lines and the reflection coefficents Γ ms and Γ s at the open and shorted transmission line, respectively. Using Kirchoff's rules for the voltage and current at each node of the hybrid, we can construct a system of equations that allows us to determine the voltage measured at the detector line at port 4 upon signal injection at port 1. (The full set of equations is provided in the Supplementary material). To describe wave propagation along each transmission line segment with length L and impedance Z we use the frequency dependent wave propagation factor e γL and , ε e f f = 4.47 and α extracted from a direct measurement of a 130 μm transmission line. For the low impedance lines we have used Z =Z l = 37 Ω. The branch lengths of the coupler are L = 130μm. To calculate the open terminating capacitance C t of the open MS line we have used together with the following closed form expression: e f f -0.189(w/h) 0.8544 + 0.87) for which we have used the stripline width w = 3.75 μm, dielectric thickness h = 3 μm, ε e f f = 4.47, PECVD SiN x dielectric constant ε r = 5.9 The circuit diagram of the hybrid coupler with the corresponding forward and backwards travelling wave voltage amplitudes a i is depicted in fig. while we obtain for the currents at this point of the circuit Likewise, we obtain for node 2 and For the arm to the open microstrip terminating with Z ms we get For nodes 3 and 4 we obtain in the same fashion: This directly leads to the set of equations 0 = -a 11 F la 12 B l + a 13 B h + a 14 F h (25) a inc2 = -a 2 + a 11 F l + a 12 B l (26) with α and β are as given in the appendix to the main text. L = 130 μm is the branch length of the coupler, L 2 = 49 μm the arm length to the open termination and L 3 = L 2 + ∆L the length of the arm terminating in a short to ground, as given in the main text. The terminating impedance of the open microtrip line is frequency dependent, and given by Z ms = f /(iC t 2π) with C t = 0.163 fF (see appendix of the main text). The impedance of the short-to-ground terminated arm is purely Ohmic, Z s = 1.6 Ω. To obtain the response for signal incident at port 1 we set a inc1 = 1 and a inc2 = 0 and solve the set of equations A7 -A20 at each frequency. Coefficient a 2 (cf. fig. 2. Detailed fabrication procedure of the THz cantilever 1. Etching of substrate to define the tip position • Preparation of the wafer. Take 4" HRFZ Si wafer with 50nm LPCVD SiN. Spin PMMA 950K A6 at 3000 rpm speed. Bake for 2 min @ 180°C on the hot plate. • E-beam lithography. We use a Raith EBPG 5200. Align the center in the aligning microscope, adjust the rotation so that the flat side is along microscope's Y axis (horizontal). Dose 1250 μC/cm2, highest beam current with spot size >100nm, step size 70nm. Develop in MIBK:IPA 1:1 standard solution for 60s, dry in spin dryer for 2 min, check pattern in the microscope. • Dry etch. We use a Leybold Fluorine RIE. Dry etch for 60s in CHF3 with end point detection laser focused on the open square in the center. • Strip the PMMA in Acetone overnight + fuming nitric acid for 1 hr. Check the pattern in the microscope. • optical lithography. Make sure the wafer is clean. Spin AZnLOF 2020 at 3000 rpm, bake at 100 C hot plate for 2 min. Expose the wafer in EVG setup using TIPS layer markers (the only present so far), make sure the flat on the mask corresponds to the flat on the wafer, also in aligning microscope the orientation of the labels on mask and wafer should match. Contact exposure for 15 s, 2 min post exposure bake at 110 C hot plate, develop in AZ826 MIF developer for 60 s (10 s after clearing of unexposed areas), rinse in DI water, dry, check pattern in the microscope. Critical feature is the gap around the tip and the break-off bridge from tip to the bulk. When defocusing at tip location the same clear diagonal cross should show up, if not really clear add some extra time in the developer. • Cleaning step. 10-30 s of O2 plasma etching, (Leybold Fluor), 50 W, 50 mBar, 50 sccm. It is very important there are no resist residues in clear areas. If there is unremoveable dirt better clean thoroughly and start AZnLOF over. • Deposition. Deposit 10 nm Ti + 300 nm Au in Temescal at normal angle, rates are 0.5 A/s for Ti and 1 A/s for Au. At higher rates the heat will melt photoresist causing troubles in lift-off. • Lift-off. Overnight in NI 555 resist remover from AZ at 80 °C, also in ultrasonic bath at 60°C. Flush with DI water shower at full strength. Rinse in IPA, water, 1 hr fuming nitric acid. ANY organic residue can spoil next PECVD SiN deposition step, and that is irrecoverable. • Make sure wafer is clean from any organics! Deposit 3 um layer of (high quality) PECVD SiN (Oxford Instruments PlasmaPro 80) 6 hrs. • Deposit Cr-layer. Deposit 100 nm Cr (Temescal FC-2000). • Spin resist Spin PMMA 950K A6 at 3000 rpm, bake for 5 min on 150°Chotplate. • E-beam lithography of the Cr hard mask. Use ground layer markers for auto alignment, same recipe as e-beam in step 1. Develop in IPA:MIBK 1:1 for 60 s, check in the microscope. • cleaning step. • When the Cr mask is of sufficient quality, strip PMMA in acetone/nitric acid. • Check in the microscope that all uncovered areas in the mask are uniform. • Stick the wafer to 1mm Si carrier wafer using organic white thermal paste. Apply paste uniformly leaving 5 mm clear area near the edge, press the wafer to the carrier wafer with paste on it on a hard surface with cleanroom tissue over. • Dry etch SiN in Bosch etcher, usually takes 7-7.5 minutes, wait 1 min after the EPD level saturates. EPD must be focused on the open square in the center. • Check the resistivity of contact area of uncovered gold near the flat, both in 4W and 2W modes using 4W probe, if resistivity is OK check in the microscope the smaller features and gold color there, should be clean gold without change in color between different places on the wafer. • Dissolve white paste in IPA/acetone (ultrasonic bath 40°C), if necessary wipe white paste residues with IPA cleanroom tissue, rinse in IPA 5min, rinse in DI water, dry up. • Strip Cr layer in Cr01 (30 min). 5. Filling of the vias (here we descripe the procedure using electroplating) • Fix the wafer in the holder of the electroplating setup with a bronze spring over an uncovered Au area near flat edge of the wafer, connect the spring to the WE wire using a crocodile clamp. Put the wafer in the solution so that the open areas near the flat edge do not touch the solution. Gold plate for 10 min with frequent checks in a profiler (dektak), rinse carefully, dry and check in the microscope that vias look filled up (no significant focus shift between surface in the via and SiN surface, larger features like ground landing pads have slightly rougher surface). • When sufficiently plated, clean the wafer in DI water excessively, check in optical microscope, possibly in AFM. • Same recipe as step 4, Cr mask, e-beam, O2 plasma, Bosch. Or SF6 plasma. • Deposit 30 nm Cr (Temescal FC2000). Spin PMMA 950K A9, 3000 rpm, bake 15 min at 150 C. • E-beam lithography as in step 4, 1250 dose, develop 1:1 60s, check in microscope, O2 plasma, Cr development in Cr01, check in microscope. • Mount in Temescal, pump overnight, ion gun sputtering/cleaning for 30 s, deposit Ti-Au (2nm-300nm). Lift-off in NMP (ultrasonic bath, 60°C , overnight). Nitric acid clean 15 min. Rinse in H 2 O. Check in the microscope. Etch Cr conducting layer in Cr01 (15min). Possibly check vias in probe station using central chip test structures. • For protection of the front side use a layer of regular photoresist. Spin regular photoresist on the backside at 3000 rpm, bake 2 min @ 100°C on the hotplate. Use backside alignment in mask aligner (EVG 620 NUV), 6s exposure, developer 60 s. Check in microscope, start over if necessary. • Dry etch SiN on the backside in SF6 or CHF3 plasma. Strip photoresist (acetone+nitric acid). • Put the wafer on a hotplate covered with Al foil, heat up to 120°C , paint it's circuitry side carefully with black wax stick (Apiezon W100) leaving 8 mm space near the edge uncovered. After cooling down, put the wafer in the bonding tool (EVG520 Wafer bonder), put flags on top, put Sp wafer on top of flags, align Sp to the wafer. Close the lid of the bonder, pump down to 1mbar, heat up to 120°C, apply center pin, wait 30 min, apply min pressure, wait 2 hrs or more, remove pressure, cool down, vent). After that the black wax should be uniformly distributed between wafers. Clean the bonding tool table carefully with toluene, wipe with IPA. 10. Removal of the substrate/Cantilever release • KOH bath. After the temperature reached 80°C, etch native oxide on the wafer with 10 s CHF3 plasma etch, immediately after that start KOH etching. • After 4 hrs of etching at 85°C, we move the wafer stack to a special KOH bath with horizontal positioning, keep etching at 70°C for 6 hrs (until the membrane/gold is visible). Rinse carefully in water, then in IPA, let it dry vertically, inspect in microscope. Soak in DI water several times, a few hrs in total. Dissolve black wax in Toluene, soak the wafer separately in several fresh toluene solutions until perfectly clear ( 1 day in total), rinse sereval times in PA, let it dry vertically. Break the wafer into chips.