We present a first-principles approach for computing the phonon-limited T1 spin relaxation time due to the Elliot-Yafet mechanism. Our scheme combines fully-relativistic spin-flip electron-phonon interactions with an approach to compute the effective spin of band electrons in materials with inversion symmetry. We apply our method to silicon and diamond, for which we compute the temperature dependence of the spin relaxation times and analyze the contributions to spin relaxation from different phonons and valley processes. The computed spin relaxation times in silicon are in excellent agreement with experiment in the 50-300 K temperature range. In diamond, we predict intrinsic spin relaxation times of 540 μs at 77 K and 2.3 μs at 300 K. Our work enables precise predictions of spin-phonon relaxation times in a wide range of materials, providing microscopic insight into spin relaxation and guiding the development of spin-based quantum technologies. Introduction. Spin relaxation in centrosymmetric crystals primarily occurs through the Elliott-Yafet (EY) mechanism Accurately predicting spin-phonon relaxation processes remains an open problem, particularly due to the challenge of quantifying spin-flip e-ph interactions Recently developed first-principles methods for computing e-ph interactions and relaxation times Here we present a first-principles method for computing the spin-flip e-ph coupling matrix elements and the T 1 spin-phonon relaxation times (SRTs). Our approach assumes no relationship between the matrix elements for spin-flip and momentum scattering, and treats spinor wave functions and SOC through fully-relativistic DFT and DFPT calculations Spin-flip interactions. In centrosymmetric materials, the Bloch states with band index n and crystal momentum k can be decomposed into effective up and down spin states, denoted as ⇑ and ⇓, which diagonalize the Ŝz operator in the Kramers degenerate subspace (1) arXiv:1906.01109v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 3 Jun 2019 The key ingredients for computing the SRTs are the spinflip e-ph matrix elements which quantify the probability amplitude to scatter from an initial Bloch state |nk⇑ to a final state |mk + q⇓ with opposite effective spin, by emitting or absorbing a phonon with mode index ν and wave vector q due to the Kohn-Sham potential perturbation ∆ Vνq To compute the SRTs, we obtain the effective spin states and from them the spin-flip e-ph matrix elements g flip mnν (k, q) on fine BZ grids. We calculate the effective spin states from the spin matrix S(k), which provides a matrix representation of the spin operator Ŝz in the wave function basis Interpolation. Since DFPT calculations of ∆ Vνq on the fine BZ grids needed to converge the SRTs are prohibitively expensive, we interpolate the spin-flip e-ph matrix elements and spin matrices using Wannier functions . (3) The spin-flip e-ph matrix elements are finally computed between all pairs of electronic states with opposite sign of the effective spin. Our interpolation scheme can accurately reproduce spin-flip e-ph matrix elements obtained by combining effective spin states with perturbation potentials computed directly with DFPT (see the Supplemental Material [37]), thus enabling precise calculations of SRTs. Spin relaxation times. The band-and k-dependent spin-flip e-ph relaxation times, τ flip nk , are computed using lowest-order perturbation theory where ε nk and ω νq are the electron and phonon energies, respectively, and f nk and N νq the corresponding temperature-dependent occupations. Converging the BZ sum in Eq. ( The temperature-dependent SRT, τ s (T ), is the main physical observable computed in this work. It is obtained as an ensemble average of the spin-flip relaxation times . (5) Numerical methods. We apply our approach to investigate spin relaxation in silicon and diamond. We obtain their ground state and band structure using DFT with a plane-wave basis with the Quantum ESPRESSO code Temperature-dependent SRTs. Figure Due to its weak SOC and correspondingly long SRT, diamond is a promising material for spintronics and spinbased quantum technologies. However, SRT measurements have not yet been reported in diamond due to challenges related to spin injection Spin-flip versus momentum scattering. Our quantitative approach reveals stark differences between the spin-flip and the momentum-scattering interactions. Figure Lastly, we compare the spin-phonon and momentum relaxation times. The momentum relaxation time τ p is defined as the usual (spin-independent) e-ph relaxation time Phonon dispersions in silicon and diamond, overlaid with a color map of the ratio g flip ν (q)/g tot ν (q) between the spin-flip and the momentum-scattering e-ph matrix elements. The two matrix elements differ by orders of magnitude for the branches shown in red. The data shown are the square root of the gauge-invariant trace of |g| 2 for a low-energy spindegenerate conduction band used to analyze spin relaxation mechanisms in experimental data There is no discernible direct proportionality between the spin and momentum relaxation times -rather, they both exhibit an approximate T -n temperature dependence, but with different values of the exponent n (see Fig. Conclusion. In summary, we have developed a quantitatively accurate approach for computing spin-flip eph interactions and SRTs due to the EY mechanism. The workflow proposed in this work is general -it can be adapted to different perturbation potentials, including perturbations from defects 