Discovering and optimizing commercially viable materials for clean energy applications typically takes over a decade. Self-driving laboratories that iteratively design, execute, and learn from material science experiments in a fully autonomous loop present an opportunity to accelerate this research. We report here a modular robotic platform driven by a model-based optimization algorithm capable of autonomously optimizing the optical and electronic properties of thin-film materials by modifying the film composition and processing conditions. We demonstrate this platform by using it to maximize the hole mobility of organic hole transport materials commonly used in perovskite solar cells and consumer electronics. This demonstration highlights the possibilities of using autonomous laboratories to discover organic and inorganic materials relevant to materials sciences and clean energy technologies. Optimizing the properties of thin films is time intensive because of the large number of compositional, deposition, and processing parameters available The experimental approach of iterating between automated experimentation and machine-learning-based experiment planning has resulted in early successes in addressing high-dimensional problems in experimental physics experimentation with the goal of discovering a thin-film composition with the highest possible "pseudomobility". Each iteration of the workflow involves: As a first step in proving out the methodology, we designed Ada to target organic hole and electron transport layers that are ubiquitous in advanced solar cells ( How each of these factors affect the hole mobility of amorphous spiro-OMeTAD remains difficult to model This optimization process often takes months to complete and slows the translation of new organic hole and electron transport layers for solar cells and related devices. Ada autonomously optimizes the hole mobility of spiro-OMeTAD by: (i) measuring and mixing solutions of HTMs, dopants, and plasticizers; (ii) depositing solutions as thin films on rigid substrates; (iii) annealing each film for a specified duration (iv) imaging each film to detect morphologies, defects, and impurities; and (v) characterizing the optical and conductivity properties to produce surrogate hole mobility data. This data is received by ChemOS Phoenics uses a sampling parameter to explicitly bias experimental design towards exploration or exploitation in an alternating fashion, and has been shown to outperform random and systematic searches Precursor solutions are spin-cast as thin films on glass substrates, which can then be annealed up to 165 °C (Fig. Conventional methods are simply not compatible with the time scale needed for efficient autonomous optimization The pseudomobilities of spiro-OMeTAD thin films were optimized by iteratively designing film compositions with variable annealing times and dopant concentrations (tables S1, S2). Solutions prepared from stock solutions of spiro-OMeTAD and a cobalt(III) dopant (along with a fixed amount of the plasticizer 4-tert -butylpyridine) were spin-coated onto substrates to yield thin films. Each film was annealed, imaged, and analyzed to determine a pseudomobility value that was relayed to ChemOS . Fig. 3A chronicles how the doping ratios and annealing times were varied during optimization for two independent experimental campaigns. Each of the two 35-sample campaigns took under 30 h (including time for restocking consumables) and each had one failed sample. This failure rate is typical for our system. An important outcome is that both campaigns converged on the same global maximum for both doping ratio (~0.4 eq.) and annealing time (~75 s) to deliver films with the same maximum pseudomobilities. This reproducible endpoint is significant and demonstrates that Ada can successfully navigate a broad experimental space (see table While the eventual rejection of the local maximum confirms that the explore-exploit functionality of Phoenics can prevent the search from becoming stuck near local optima, we were curious why Ada identified a local maximum at high doping levels. Subsequent investigations of the dark field images of these films revealed annealing-induced dewetting of the films containing intermediate amounts of dopant (Fig. We report here the first use of a self-driving laboratory to optimize composition and processing parameters for thin-film materials. This proof-of-principle study targeted the optimization of a type of thin organic semiconducting film common to advanced solar cells, but the modularity of our robotic platform and control software enables the rapid incorporation of new experiments, techniques, analytical hardware, and algorithms. The Ada platform can therefore be easily tailored for a range of inorganic and organic materials and applications, and even be coupled to automated organic synthesis methodologies developed for the pharmaceutical industry During the optimization experiments, the robotic platform was periodically restocked with consumables. These include 3" × 1" × 1 mm microscope slides (VWR VistaVision), 2mL HPLC vials (Canadian Life Science) , 200μL pipettes (Biotix M-0200-BC) and various stock solutions. Cleaning of the microscope slides and preparation of the stock solutions are further detailed below. All reagent solutions were prepared in an atmosphere dried over anhydrous calcium sulfate 75 × 25 × 1 mm microscope slide substrates were cleaned through multi-step sonication. First, the slides were sonicated for 10 min in a 5% v/v solution of Extran ® in deionized water. The sides were then sonicated sequentially in deionized water, acetone, and 2-propanol for 10 minutes each step. The slides were stored in 2-propanol and dried with filtered air before use. The robot used is a Selective Compliance Assembly Robot Arm (SCARA)-type robot (N9, North Robotics; www.northrobotics.com) which performs the robotic manipulations in our workflows. This robot is driven by a controller (C9, North Robotics), which also provides auxiliary controls for third-party instruments and components used by the robot. The controller and additional peripherals are controlled by a computer running a Python script based on open-source libraries (see https://gitlab.com/ada-chem ). The precursor solution for each sample was prepared by mixing varying amounts of: The thin-film samples were prepared via spin-coating with a custom-built spin-coater provided by North Robotics. The microscope slides were spun at 1000 rpm and 0.100 mL of the precursor solution was dispensed at a normal incidence at the center of the slide. Rotation continued for 60 s. The To perform a transmission measurement the mechanical shutter was opened, the upper reflection lamp internal shutter was closed, and the lower transmission lamp internal shutter was opened. To perform a reflection measurement the mechanical shutter was closed, the lower transmission lamp internal shutter was closed, and the upper reflection lamp internal shutter was opened. A 75 × 25 × 1 mm glass slide coated with 50 nm aluminum was purchased from Deposition Research Lab Inc. for use as a reflectance baseline. The true specular reflectance of the prepared reference sample was measured with an Agilent Cary 7000 Universal Measurement Spectrometer (UMS) using the Cary Universal Measurement Accessory (UMA) to hold the sample at 10° from normal. The sensitivity of the BLACK-Comet and DWARF-Star spectrometers were set by increasing the integration time (in ms) of the detectors until the signal was between 80% and 95% of saturation, where saturation was 2 16 counts. For transmission measurements, the sensitivity was determined with no sample present, and for reflection measurements, the sensitivity was determined with the calibrated aluminum mirror. The bright and dark baselines for transmission were completed with no sample present and with the transmission lamp on and off, respectively. The bright and dark baselines for reflection were completed with the calibrated aluminum mirror present and with the reflection lamp on and off, respectively. The known true reflection of the aluminum mirror, obtained from the Cary 7000, was used to define the bright reflection baseline. For each film fabricated by the robotic platform, UV-Vis-NIR spectra were collected by the robot, which holds samples in the optical path of the spectrometer using the vacuum substrate handler. First the reflection and transmission spectra of a blank glass substrate were collected, followed by analogous reflection and transmission spectra of the annealed thin film on an identical substrate. The spectra of the uncoated and coated substrate were used to compute an approximation to the absorbance of the thin film, as described in the UV-Vis-NIR data processing section. The spectra of each thin film and the spectra of the blank substrate were measured at seven positions spaced ~1 mm apart near the center of the substrate. Reflection and transmission spectra were measured at normal incidence and were assumed to be entirely specular and incoherent. This assumption is reasonable as long as surfaces and interfaces scatter a minimal amount of light, and interference fringes in the spectra are minimal. At any wavelength/energy, the raw reflection (R 0 ) and transmission (T 0 ) of the blank substrate can thus be related to the reflectivity/transmissivity (R g /T g ) of the glass-air interface, and to the single-pass transmission of the glass substrate (X g ) using the following equations: These equations can be solved for R g , T g , and X g . Since a thin film on a glass substrate is a multilayer system, additional assumptions are needed to process the film/glass spectra analytically. In this work, the refractive indices of the film and substrate were both expected to be ~1.5, and thus the reflection at the film-glass interface could be ignored without significant distortion of the result. This simplification allowed for the raw reflection (R 1 ) and transmission (T 1 ) of the film/substrate to be incorporated into a similar set of equations as above while introducing only three new parameters: In this second set of equations, R f and T f are the reflectivity and transmissivity of the film-air interface, respectively, and X f is the single-pass transmission of the thin film. Solving these equations for X f gives the corrected transmission of the thin film. The corresponding absorption of the film is: This quantity can be calculated at each measured wavelength/energy to give the corrected absorption spectrum of the film at each of the seven measured positions. 4-point probe conductivity measurements were performed with a Keithley Series K2636B System SourceMeter ® Instrument with a Signatone Four Point Probe Head (part number SP4-40045TBN, 0.040" tip spacing, 45 gram pressure, tungsten carbide tips with 0.010" radii) connected through a Signatone Triax to BNC feedthrough panel (part number TXBA-M160-M). The current on the outer probes was stepped from 0 to 4 nA in 0.8 nA steps. The system was stabilized at each step for 0.5 s, and the potential across the inner probes was integrated for 25 power line cycles (at 60 Hz). The slope of the potential as a function of the current sourced afforded the resistance. No correction factors were applied to the resistance measurement, as the size of the slide is significantly larger than the spacing between the probes. The conductance of each film was measured at seven positions spaced ~1 mm apart near the center of the substrate. These positions matched those used in spectroscopy measurements. Conventional theory describes the conductivity (σ) of p-type semiconductors as the product of the elementary charge (e), the density of positive charge carriers (ρ h ), and the mobility of these same charge carriers (μ). In numerous examples, ρ h is treated as an independent variable programmed by doping fraction, while μ is an intrinsic material property found to vary with temperature, applied voltage, disorder, and doping fraction In this work, the value of μ for each HTM film was extracted from sheet resistance 4-point probe and UV-Vis measurements using the following methodology. The hole mobility of the HTM is expressed as: where the hole conductivity of the HTM is assumed to approximate the total conductivity due to the heavy p-doping of most measured conditions and the high intrinsic mobility of holes relative to that of electrons known to exist in spiro-OMeTAD. σ is defined as: where R S is the sheet resistance, t is the film thickness, dV/dI is the linear change in voltage (V) with respect to current (I) at low V and I extracted from the 4-point probe measurement, and C is a geometric correction factor tied to the ratio between the probe tip distances and the rectangular dimensions of the film. The redefinition of R S here is valid for any 4-point probe measurement in which t is significantly less than the distance between adjacent probe tips. ρ h is defined as:- where ρ HTM is the total density of redox active HTM sites in the film and [HTM + ]/[HTM] is the fraction of active sites carrying a positive charge at any given time. This fraction is not necessarily equal to the ratio of dopant to HTM in the film, since not all dopants oxidize HTM material quantitatively. ρ HTM can be converted to a molar concentration by: where N A is the Avogadro constant and 1000 N A is the unit of conversion between m -3 and M. The ratio of [HTM + ] to [HTM] is the same as the ratio of ρ h to ρ HTM . This yields: which can be used in conjunction with Beer's law to incorporate data from the UV-Vis spectrum of the film in question. The resulting equation: includes the molar extinction coefficient of the film (ε), the film thickness (t), and the reflection-and substrate-corrected absorbance (Abs HTM+ ) of the film in the wavelength range of 500±5 nm, where all absorption can be attributed to HTM + . This final expression for ρ h is only valid when the programmed dopant:HTM ratio is at or below 1:1 so that minimal HTM 2+ exists in the film. Finally, μ h can be defined in terms of both experimental results: This expression is crucially independent of film thickness, allowing for accurate optimization over the full compositional and processing variable space employed in this work. Dividing out the constants in the final equation above yields a parameter termed pseudomobility: Pseudomobility is equivalent to the quotient of film conductivity and p-type carrier density and provides a useful measure of relative mobility that can be utilized in optimization experiments. The pseudomobility of each thin film was calculated independently at each of the seven characterized positions. The pseudomobility value passed to the optimization algorithm was the mean value of the seven positional pseudomobilities. After each thin film experiment, the realized experimental parameters and resulting Table Table Table * *