We present a detailed theoretical description of quantum coherent electron transport in voltagebiased cross-like Andreev interferometers. Making use of the charge conjugation symmetry encoded in the quasiclassical formalism, we elucidate a crucial role played by geometric and electron-hole asymmetries in these structures. We argue that a non-vanishing Aharonov-Bohm-like contribution to the current IS flowing in the superconducting contour may develop only in geometrically asymmetric interferometers making their behavior qualitatively different from that of symmetric devices. The current IN in the normal contour -along with IS -is found to be sensitive to phase-coherent effects thereby also acquiring a 2π-periodic dependence on the Josephson phase. In asymmetric structures this current develops an odd-in-phase contribution originating from electron-hole asymmetry. We demonstrate that both phase dependent currents IS and IN can be controlled and manipulated by tuning the applied voltage, temperature and system topology, thus rendering Andreev interferometers particularly important for future applications in modern electronics. An interplay between quantum coherence and nonequilibrium phenomena is an intriguing topic in condensed matter physics. Hybrid metallic heterostructures composed of superconducting (S) and normal (N) terminals constitute an important playground to realize and investigate rich physics associated with the above phenomena. In these systems -frequently called Andreev interferometers -long-range quantum coherence is induced due to the superconducting proximity effect, while non-equilibrium conditions can be created by virtue of biasing different terminals with external voltages and/or temperature gradients Yet another remarkable effect is the so-called πjunction state that can occur in systems with two normal and two superconducting terminals interconnected by normal metallic wires forming a cross. Applying a phase twist φ to two superconducting terminals of this cross-like Andreev interferometer one induces dc Josephson current I S (φ) between these terminals just like in usual SNS junctions Recently three of us demonstrated It should be emphasized that asymmetric topology of cross-like Andreev interferometers plays a crucial role for this effect: With the aid of simple charge-conjugation symmetry arguments to be outlined below one can demonstrate that by making the interferometer in Fig. Here we will argue that the physics of asymmetric cross-like interferometers is actually even richer than that discussed in our previous studies The structure of the paper is as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the system under consideration, describe the quasiclassical formalism used throughout our paper and elucidate the charge-conjugation symmetry properties of this formalism important for our further considerations. In Sec. III we focus our analysis on the limit of highly resistive NS interfaces, in which case it is possible to obtain a full analytic solution of our problem. Our key results and the corresponding discussion are formulated in Sec. IV. In Sec. V, we briefly summarize our findings. Further technical details are relegated to appendices. Below we will consider cross-like Andreev interferometers schematically depicted in Fig. Obviously, electric current can flow between Sterminals (superconducting contour) as well as between N-terminals (normal contour) being dependent on external bias V , temperature T and phase difference φ. The task at hand is to determine the distribution of voltages and electric currents in our structure in the presence of long-range quantum coherent effects, and to demonstrate the importance of geometric and electron-hole asymmetries in our problem. We will adopt the standard quasiclassical formalism 1 aimed at describing non-equilibrium quantum properties of hybrid metallic structures like the one in Fig. This matrix Green's function obeys the normalization condition Ǧ2 = 1 and satisfies the Usadel equation where D stands for a diffusion coefficient and τz is the Pauli matrix in the Nambu space. In what follows it will be convenient for us to employ the so-called Riccati parameterization A similar representation holds for the advanced Green's function since ĜA = -τ z ( ĜR ) + τz . The spectral part of the Usadel equation then becomes With the aid of the standard representation for the Keldysh Green's function ĜK the kinetic part of the Usadel equation can be cast to the form Here j T = tr( Ǧ∇ Ǧτ z ) K and j L = tr( Ǧ∇ Ǧ) K represent the spectral densities of respectively electric and thermal currents, f L and f T are respectively symmetric and anisymmetric parts of the electron distribution function, stands for the supercurrent density, and the kinetic coefficients D L , D T and Y are defined as Note that the kinetic coefficient (12) explicitly accounts for the presence of the electron-hole asymmetry in our system. Resolving the Usadel equations one can evaluate the electric current density j in our system defined as where σ N is the Drude conductivity of a normal metal. As usually, the Usadel equation ( What remains is to define the boundary conditions at two NS interfaces. Here, we will restrict our analysis to the tunneling limit, i.e. we assume that the transmission of both NS interfaces is small compared to unity. This limit is accounted for by the well-known Kupriyanov-Lukichev (KL) boundary conditions 34 where Ǧ is the Green's function in the normal wire, ǦSC denotes the bulk Green's function of the corresponding and phase χ equals to either φ L or φ R depending on the terminal. The parameter r is defined as where A is the interface cross section and G is the normalstate conductance of the interface. Note that within the applicability range of KL boundary conditions (15) and depending on the relation between G and the conductance of the normal wire of length L, the parameter r can in general take any value both smaller and larger than unity. Let us define charge-conjugated Green's function as It is straightforward to verify that the function (19) represents a solution of the Usadel equation ( Resolving the Usadel equation ( where the index i labels the wires N 1, N 2, S1 and S2. The electrostatic potentials V 1 and V 2 as functions of both the phase φ and the bias voltage V are determined from the current conservation conditions combined with the condition can also be expressed as functions of φ and V . In general all these currents are 2π-periodic functions of φ. Extra geometric symmetries of our structure may enforce higher symmetries for the above currents rendering them, e.g., either purely even or purely odd functions of φ. In particular, it is instructive to distinguish two special cases: (i) symmetric connectors to S-terminals (implying that l S1 = l S2 and r L = r R ) and (ii) symmetric connectors to N-terminals (l N 1 = l N 2 ). It follows immediately (see also Appendix A for more details) that in both cases (i) and (ii) the current I S turns out to be an odd function of φ, i.e. whereas the current I N is even in φ, Hence, for partially symmetric cross-like Andreev interferometers (in both cases (i) and (ii)) the Aharonov-Bohm-like contribution to the current I S vanishes and we are back to the situation of only 0-or π-junction states considered in Refs. In what follows we will, therefore, address the most general case of fully asymmetric interferometers with l N 1 = l N 2 and l S1 = l S2 . Let us now employ the above equations and evaluate the Green's functions for the structure depicted in Fig. Let us assume that tunnel barriers at both NS interfaces are sufficiently large and, hence, anomalous correlations penetrating into the normal-metal wires from the superconducting terminals are strongly suppressed. In this case, one can linearize the spectral part of the Usadel equation and get where ) is an effective Thouless energy of our setup. The same equation also holds for γ. Here and below, we also assume E Th ∆ enabling us to restrict our analysis to subgap energies | | < ∆. The boundary conditions take the form Equations in the first two lines follow directly from the continuity of γ and from the spectral current conservation at the central node (with coordinate set equal to zero). The equation in the third line implies that anomalous correlations vanish at the boundaries with both Nterminals. Finally, the two equations in the last line just represent KL boundary conditions at the left and right NS interfaces characterized by parameters r L and r R respectively (defined in Eq. ( Resolving the linearized Usadel equations with the above boundary conditions, we obtain where Then, for the spectral supercurrent density, one readily finds The above analytic solution of the spectral part of the problem enables one to easily derive the applicability condition for the linearized Usadel equation (25). Setting functions γ to be much smaller than unity within the normal wires and making use of Eqs. ( Note that depending on the system parameters these conditions may substantially deviate from simple inequalities r R,L 1 which one could naively expect to be sufficient in order to linearize the Usadel equations. Below, we proceed similarly to the above subsection, and resolve the kinetic equations perturbatively by formally expanding them in 1/(r i r j ), where i, j = L, R. In the zeroth order, we have (33) with the boundary conditions Equations in the first line account for boundaries with both N-terminals, the second line represents KL boundary conditions at both NS interfaces, whereas the last equation just reflects both electric and energy currents conservation and, hence, it remains valid to all orders. In fact, the condition j L,S1/S2 = 0 is also valid to all orders at energies | | < ∆, since subgap excitations do not contribute to the energy current flowing into the Sterminals. We observe that -to the zeroth order -functions f T depend linearly on the coordinate along the wire in the normal contour, whereas in the wire that belongs to the superconducting contour these functions remain constant equal to Here, R N1 and R N2 are normal-state Drude resistances of the normal wires connected to terminals N 1 and Note that with the aid of the above zeroth order solution combined with KL boundary conditions one can establish the spectral electric current in the superconducting contour to the next order in parameter ∼ 1/(r L r R ). Indeed, the latter conditions can be written in the form j (1) With this in mind, the electric current conservation condition yields which after some algebra can further be cast to the form This equation together with the condition V 2 -V 1 = V defines electrostatic potentials of both normal terminals V 1 and V 2 demonstrating that these potentials depend not only on V and T , but also on phase difference φ between the superconducting terminals. The latter dependence clearly illustrates the importance of long-range proximity induced quantum coherence effects spreading not only into the superconducting contour but also into the normal contour, thereby influencing the potentials of both normal terminals. It follows from Eq. (38) that both electrostatic potentials V 1 and V 2 depend on cos φ, thus being even functions of φ. The above perturbative analysis of the kinetic equa-tions can be justified if the interface resistances are much larger than the resistances of the corresponding attached normal wires Having determined V 1 and V 2 , we are ready to find the electric current in the superconducting contour. It reads where The first term in the right-hand side of Eq. (41) represents the Josephson contribution, the second term (proportional to both 1/(r L r R ) and cos φ) defines the coherent Aharonov-Bohm-like current, while the last term has to do with the Andreev conductance of SN interfaces. As already mentioned above, Eq. ( Let us now explicitly evaluate the distribution of voltages and currents in our cross-like Andreev interferometer. We first determine electrostatic potentials of the two normal terminals, V 1 and V 2 , and then evaluate the currents in both superconducting and normal contours which depend on these potentials. According to Eq. (38) the corresponding Aharonov-Bohm term is proportional to ∼ 1/(r L r R ), i.e. it has the same order as the other two terms ∼ 1/r 2 L and ∼ 1/r 2 R . On the other hand, in the limit l S1 , l S2 D/∆ considered here and at high enough voltages E Th e|V 1,2 | < |∆| the Aharonov-Bohm contribution becomes exponentially suppressed as ∝ e - √ e|V1,2|/E Th and, hence, it can be treated as a small perturbation. Then we obtain The presence of the φ-dependent term in Eq. ( B. Current IS in the superconducting contour Following our previous analysis Here I 0 (V ) defines a dissipative Andreev-like term entering Eq. ( This formula turns out to be in a good agreement with the numerical solution of Eq. ( Just like in the case of transparent SN-boundaries Note that in the particular case r R = r L = r, the expression (47) vanishes identically implying that a more accurate treatment is required in this case. The corresponding analysis can be worked out and yields As far as the temperature dependence of I S is concerned, we point out that, while the Aharonov-Bohm-like contribution I AB decays as a power law with increasing T > eV , the Josephson term I J decays exponentially, thus becoming negligible as compared to I AB in the hightemperature limit T E Th . In the case of fully transparent NS-interfaces the temperature dependencies of both even and odd in φ components of I S have already been studied elsewhere Let us now turn to the electric current I N flowing between the two normal terminals. This current also demonstrates a 2π-periodic dependence on phase φ and can be represented as a sum of even and odd in φ contributions: The first -even in φ -term again describes the Aharonov-Bohm-like contribution At the same time, the presence of the odd periodic in φ contribution to current I N is curious. In contrast to the superconducting contour, here term I odd N (φ, V ) obviously cannot be attributed to the Josephson effect, and its physical nature requires further analysis. For simplicity, let us assume that all cross sections are equal A i = A. Then, we obtain where j ) is the corresponding spectral current in the normal contour. Since the current I odd N in Eq. ( where R S1 = l S1 /(A S1 σ N ) and R S2 = l S2 /(A S2 σ N ) are the normal state Drude resistances of the wires connected to the superconducting terminals. We also note that the current in Eq. (51) vanishes identically for l S1 = l S2 (and r S1 = r S2 ) and/or l N1 = l N2 , in full agreement with our symmetry considerations in Sec. IIC. It is also interesting to study current I N (φ, V ) at different values of r. This can be done by numerically solving the Usadel equation (2). In Fig. The even in φ current amplitude I even N (V ) saturates to a non-zero value at large voltages (see Fig. This is in contrast to I ∞ AB (r) which scales as 1/r 4 . In order to complete our analysis of the current I N , we note that with increasing temperature T > eV the even in φ contribution to this current decays as a power law similarly to I AB (T ), which could serve as a signature of the Aharonov-Bohm-like effect. In contrast, the odd in φ contribution I odd N (T ) behaves qualitatively similarly to the Josephson term I J (T ) decaying much faster than I even N (T ) and becoming invisibly small already at temperatures of order several E Th . In this work we performed a detailed analysis of a nontrivial interplay between proximity induced long-range quantum coherence and non-equilibrium effects in crosslike Andreev interferometers as well as of its impact on electron transport properties of such devices. We emphasized a crucial role of various symmetries in our problem. The charge conjugation symmetry encoded in the Usadel equations allowed us to establish an important general relation (20) which, in turn, helps to demonstrate that topology of cross-like Andreev interferometers is essential for determining charge transport properties of these devices. We showed that in symmetric interferometers, the current I S in the superconducting contour is an odd function of the superconducting phase difference φ. In other words, the even in φ Aharonov-Bohm-like contribution vanishes identically in such structures. These setups can only support the voltage-controlled Josephson current, and demonstrate switching between 0-and π-states depending on the applied voltage bias. In contrast, non-vanishing Aharonov-Bohm-like currents do survive in asymmetric structures. The physics of such devices is dominated by a trade-off between Josephson and Aharonov-Bohm-like quantum coherent contributions to the current I S , leading to the (I 0 , φ 0 )-junction state at sufficiently high bias voltages The current I N (φ) flowing in the normal contour is also 2π-periodic function of the superconducting phase difference φ, i.e. it is directly affected by the proximity induced long-range quantum coherence. With the aid of our symmetry arguments we demonstrated that in symmetric Andreev interferometers, the current I N (φ, V ) is an even function of φ associated with the Aharonov-Bohm-like contribution. A non-trivial effect discovered here is that in asymmetric cross-like interferometers the current I N develops an odd harmonics I odd N , cf. Eq. ( Finally, we note that electron-hole symmetry violation is believed to also be responsible for large thermoelectric effects in Andreev interferometers To conclude, we developed a detailed theory of quantum coherent charge transport in phase-and-voltagebiased asymmetric cross-like Andreev interferometers. The electron currents in both superconducting and normal contours demonstrate the presence of both even and odd 2π-periodic in φ contributions. We identified key physical mechanisms responsible for different contributions to these currents, and described their non-trivial behavior depending on the applied voltage, temperature and the system topology. Our findings allow for full control of the current pattern in biased Andreev interferometers, thus rendering them particularly promising for future applications in modern electronics. In the case of fully transparent SN interfaces and in the limit of high voltages E Th e|V 1,2 | < ∆ one can also derive an explicit expression for the odd harmonic of the current I N . Employing the approach developed in Ref. where x is the distance from the crossing point, and F R c is the anomalous Green's function evaluated at this crossing point Here we defined The function Fc can be recovered from Eq. (B2) by replacing F c by -Fc and χ 1,2 by -χ 1,2 . Then it is straightforward to derive the function Y and evaluate the integral in Eq. ( As shown in the inset of Fig. 