Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging relies on conventional electronics that is increasingly challenged by the push for stronger magnetic fields and higher channel count. These problems can be avoided by utilizing optical technologies. As a replacement for the standard low-noise preamplifier, we have implemented a new transduction principle that upconverts an MR signal to the optical domain and imaged a phantom in a clinical 3 T scanner with signal-tonoise comparable to classical induction detection. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging is a well-established and non-invasive tool for routine clinical diagnostics and basic research. Its utility would benefit from enhanced signal-to-noise and acquisition speed-the key performance parameters for MR imaging-and is the focus of considerable research efforts. Two trending developments are higher magnetic fields and more detection coils in arrays. Yet most technical innovation relies on the same principle of matching a detection coil to a low-noise preamplifier in the receiver chain of the scanner Fig. In its first implementation, the transduction scheme had problems with excess noise which we addressed in the following ways: first, the RF bias was filtered twice to reduce its sideband noise at the detection frequency. Once through an external filter and then through a filter built into the detection circuit. Such sideband noise can limit sensitivity We imaged a phantom (Fig. In summary, we have implemented MR imaging with direct optical detection and amplification of the MR induction signal thus bringing the technical benefits of optical signal processing to the receiver chain of an MR scanner. To the best of our knowledge, this work represents the first successful implementation of direct electro-mechanooptical transduction in an MR system. We clearly see the expected image and spectrum for our phantom and coil, and a noise-background compatible with the mechanical motion's Lorentzian linewidth plus an offset from optical noise. The transducer's spectrum shows a signal-to-noise comparable with a commercial system, although still not as high, and a transduction bandwidth that is narrow compared to standard preamplifiers. However, both features can be improved greatly with straightforward improvements such as increasing the RF bias amplitude, reducing the capacitance in parallel with the transducer, and especially by decreasing the membrane-capacitor gap We fabricated the transducer in a cleanroom using standard techniques-see The bottom electrode contained a hole, aligned to the center of the membrane, where light could pass through. Laser light was coupled into the cavity through this hole, using a gradient refractive-index lens attached to the backside of the transducer chip. We achieved optical alignment by first centering the membrane with respect to a silicon chip attached to the backside of the transducer chip. The silicon die had a large, square, and centered hole that guided the lens and ensured alignment to the cavity. Light was supplied through a fiber-pigtail terminated in a glass ferrule, with the ferrule and lens aligned by a glass tube that snugly fitted both. By changing the distance between ferrule and lens, we maximized the light delivered by the fiber, focused through the lens, reflected from the sample, and collected back into the input fiber. Finally, all components were fixed permanently with glue. The full circuit used to detect the imaging signal is shown in the supplementary information. The RF coil was a flat spiral coil with four windings and an outer diameter of 50 mm, wound with a 1.6 mm diameter silver wire. It had an inductance estimated to be 490 nH from simulation. A segmenting capacitor was inserted we only used it as a vacuum chamber. It could maintain vacuum below 1 × 10 -3 mbar up to five hours after disconnecting from its pump because it contained two molecular sieves (activated charcoal and sodium aluminum silicate), both cooled to liquid nitrogen temperature (77 K). When mounting the transducer in the cryostat, we tried to align the membrane perpendicular to the main magnetic field. Without this alignment, the mechanical linewidth broadens, likely due to the Lorentz force on the charges in the membrane. Laser light came to the transducer through a custom fiber-feedthrough Inside the scanner room, we connected the trigger signal directly to the detuning trap on the circuit and also sent the trigger outside to modulate the RF bias. That same cable also carried the transduced signal back into the scanner. Two bias-tees handled the routing by frequency discriminating the low-frequency trigger and the high-frequency signal. A separate cable carried the RF bias. Outside the scanner room, the RF bias had its pulsemodulation input connected to the trigger and its output split 50/50. One part became the bias drive and we amplified it before sending it to the detection circuit through and external filter. The other part became the local oscillator in a mixer that frequency-shift the optically detected signal back to the MR signal frequency. The output of this mixer was the input of the scanner's receiver channel. We added a DC bias onto the RF bias drive with another biastee, right after the first bandpass filter for the RF bias and before the long cable going into the scanner room.