Thermoelectric properties of nanocomposites are numerically studied as a function of average grain size or nanoparticle density by simulating the measurements as they would be done experimentally. In accordance with previous theoretical and experimental results, we find that the Seebeck coefficient, power factor and figure of merit, zT, can be increased by nanostructuring when energy barriers exist around the grain boundaries or embedded nanoparticles. When we simulate the performance of a thermoelectric cooler with the same material, however, we find that the maximum temperature difference, max T ∆ , is much less than expected from the given zT. This occurs because the measurements are done in a way that minimizes Joule heating, but the Joule heating that occurs in operating devices has a large effect for these kinds of materials. The same nanocomposite but without energy barriers at the grain boundaries has a lower measured zT but a higher max T ∆ . The physical reason for these results is explained. The results illustrate the limitations of zT as a figure of merit for nanocomposites with electrically active grain boundaries. To address the challenge of increasing the thermoelectric materials figure of merit, zT, Hicks and Dresselhaus suggested in 1993 that zT might be enhanced in nanostructures The physics of interfaces due to nanoscale inclusions or grain boundaries has been studied and various models have been proposed. In Based on these prior studies, we model the interfaces as electrostatic potential barriers using full, numerical simulations of random structures. The details are discussed in Section II. Two different types of nanocomposite thermoelectric materials are examined. The first is p-type polycrystalline Bi2Te3, and the second is p-type crystalline Bi2Te3 with embedded silver nanoparticles. We use these as model systems for which experimental data is available We focus in this paper on polycrystalline nanocomposites, but similar results (discussed in the supplementary information) are observed for nanocomposites with embedded Ag nanoparticles. For the case where the grain boundary acts to deplete the grain, energy barriers for majority carriers result, and we find in accordance with experiments, that the Seebeck coefficient, power factor and figure of merit, zT, can be increased by nanostructuring, but when we simulate the performance of a thermoelectric cooler, we find that the maximum temperature difference, max T ∆ , is much less that what would be expected from the given zT. An important finding is that conventional measurements of the thermoelectric parameters of nanostructured thermoelectric materials may provide overly optimistic predictions of device performance. This occurs when the grain boundaries are electrically active because Joule heating, which is negligible in the zT measurement plays a strong role under device operating conditions. The same nanocomposite but with no potential barriers at the grains has a lower zT but produces a higher max T ∆ in a TE cooler. The physical reason for these results will be explained. The paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the numerical techniques for the twodimensional electrothermal simulations. Also described in Sec. II are the material parameters used in the simulations and the treatment of grain boundaries. Section III presents the results in terms of zT vs. grain size where zT is extracted three ways: 1) by simulating the measurement of the individual thermoelectric parameters, 2) by simulating Harman method measurements In this study, we use the semiconductor device simulation program, Sentaurus, which solves the coupled partial differential equations that describe electrothermal transport in semiconductors Equation ( In this work, Bi2Te3 was chosen as a model thermoelectric material, because it has a simple rhombohedral crystal structure, its material properties are relatively well-known Because thermoelectric materials have highly non-parabolic and complex band structures, the first step was to use density functional theory (DFT) calculations with Quantum Espresso The simulated electrical resistivity and Seebeck coefficient vs. hole density of p-type, crystalline Bi2Te3 are shown in Fig. 4 10 cm × . For the subsequent simulations of polycrystalline materials, each grain was doped at this optimal point to ensure that any performance increase observed in the polycrystalline material was due to grain boundary effects. To simulate nanocomposites, a random distribution of grains was first generated, and then the grain boundaries were defined. The algorithm used to generate this random geometry is described in the supplementary material. The grain boundaries were 100 nm thick. A simple thermal interface resistance was added in the middle of each grain boundary region to account for the additional thermal resistance. The value of this thermal interface resistance was set to agree with Grain (~ 4x10 19 ) (a) experimentally reported trends in thermal resistivity vs. grain density to produce results consistent with experiments. The resulting band bending is about one-half of the band gap. As shown in Fig. The generated polycrystalline geometry was used as an input to the Sentaurus Device simulator. It was critical to resolve the band bending within and near the grain boundaries. For polycrystalline materials, a fine mesh on both sides of the grain boundary was needed. The added burden of a dense mesh is the main reason why we used 2D simulations instead of 3D. A full 3D simulation of a geometry that is large enough to be statistically meaningful would have taken days. As discussed in Sec. VI, simulations of 1D nanocomposites show results that are very similar to those obtained by 2D simulations; it is likely, therefore, that the effects found in the 2D studies would not change in 3D. (See the supplementary information for a description of how the 1D simulations were done.) The Sentaurus simulations used tables of transport parameters vs. carrier density for all thermoelectric parameters; these tables were generated using LanTraP with the aforementioned DFT calculations. Phenomena such as the Thomson effect and mobility variations with doping density were, therefore, automatically included. For each random sample, we computed the conductivity by applying a small voltage (0.1 mV), computing the resulting current, and converting the result to a conductivity for the sample. To compute the Seebeck coefficient and thermal conductivity, we applied a small temperature difference (1 K), and simulated the resulting open circuit voltage, which yields the Seebeck coefficient and heat flux, from which, we determine the thermal conductivity. From the three parameters, we could compute a material figure of merit, zT, for the sample. We also determined the zT by simulating a Harman measurement The simulated Seebeck coefficient for polycrystalline Bi2Te3 as a function of average grain size is shown in Fig. As noted above, the Seebeck coefficient of the sample increases substantially when the Seebeck coefficient of the grain boundary is high and the thermal conductivity of the grain boundary is low where ( ) is the Seebeck coefficient of the grain (grain boundary), GB t is the thickness of the grain boundary, and κ κ is the thermal conductivity of the grain (grain boundary). Figure , but the grain boundary is thin, that it has only a small effect on the overall Seebeck coefficient unless the thermal conductivity of the grain is also very low. This expectation is confirmed by the results shown Fig. Figure ( ) Grain boundaries are thin, but as Fig. where T is the temperature. This is the method most commonly used to report the measured zT of nanocomposite materials. The second way zT was determined was from simulated Harman measurements, which we label as ( ) . The third way zT was determined was from the maximum cooling temperature, max T ∆ , of a simulated thermoelectric cooler, ( Because the simulated cooler is ideal with no contact resistances or thermal shunts, we expect values for ( ) max zT T ∆ that are similar to those obtained with the first two methods. (A small difference might be expected because of the temperature dependence of the thermoelectric parameters.) The key question in this paper is whether the ( ) , , zT S σ κ predicted from Eq. ( zT T ∆ deduced from eqn. ( Also shown in Fig. Figure The difference between the zT predicted from the individually measured electrical and thermal conductivities and Seebeck coefficient (or from a Harman measurement) and the zT deduced from the cooler operating at max T ∆ originates from the nature of the measurements. Seebeck coefficients are measured by creating a temperature gradient across a sample and then measuring the opencircuit voltage. To minimize the effects of temperature dependent material parameters, the temperature gradient applied across the sample is typically very small -a few Kelvin One-dimensional simulations of the structure shown in Fig. , which conventional measurements would give for the Case 3 nanocomposite. Figure One way to understand these effects is in terms of the compatibility factor discussed by Snyder, et al. To understand quantitatively why the temperature profile shown in Fig. From the open-circuit voltage for a sample of length, L, we can deduce the Seebeck coefficient for the polycrystalline sample from ( ) Equation In this work, we examined the electronic performance of nanostructured thermoelectric materials using first-principles informed two-dimensional numerical simulation. It is now well-established that phonon scattering from grain boundaries or imbedded nanoparticles lowers the lattice thermal conductivity, which increases the material figure of merit, zT. Our focus was on the electronic performance of these materials -specifically on materials in which the depletion of carriers near grain boundaries (or around embedded nanoparticles) increases the Seebeck coefficient. Simulations of these materials with electrically active grain boundaries confirm that when the Seebeck coefficient of the grain boundaries is larger than that of the grains, the overall Seebeck coefficient of the sample only increases significantly when the lattice thermal conductivity is low where the Seebeck coefficient is high. More importantly, we showed that when the zT of the nanocomposite is determined from standard measurements of σ , κ , and S , it provides an overly optimistic estimate the performance of a thermoelectric cooler. When we compare a nanocomposite with reduced lattice thermal conductivity due to grain boundary scattering to another nanocomposite that also has potential barriers at the grain boundaries, we found that the one with potential barriers had a higher measured zT, but it produced a lower max T ∆ in a TE cooler. The parameter space for thermoelectric nanocomposites is large. We have explored only the case for which the grains are optimally doped and the grain boundaries deplete the grains and bend the bands by about one-half of the bandgap. Nevertheless, we expect the conclusions to apply more broadly -potential barriers increase the measured zT of a nanocomposite but reduce the performance of a thermoelectric cooler made from the same nanocomposite. Electrically active grain boundaries of the type examined here are particularly sensitive to Joule heating, which occurs during device operation but not during the measurement of zT. Although we only examined thermoelectric coolers, the same conclusion may also apply to electrical power generation from thermoelectric devices.