Quantum dots proximity-coupled to superconductors are attractive research platforms due to the intricate interplay between the single-electron nature of the dot and the many body nature of the superconducting state. These have been studied mostly using nanowires and carbon nanotubes, which allow a combination of tunability and proximity. Here we report a new type of quantum dot which allows proximity to a broad range of superconducting systems. The dots are realized as embedded defects within semiconducting tunnel barriers in van-der-Waals layers. By placing such layers on top of thin NbSe 2 , we can probe the Andreev bound state spectra of such dots up to high in-plane magnetic fields without observing effects of a diminishing superconducting gap. As tunnel junctions defined on NbSe 2 have a hard gap, we can map the sub-gap spectra without background related to the rest of the junction. We find that the proximitized defect states invariably have a singlet ground state, manifest in the Zeeman splitting of the sub-gap excitation. We also find, in some cases, bound states which converge to zero energy and remain there. We discuss the role of the spin-orbit 1 In a quantum dot (QD) residing at close proximity to a superconductor, the excitation spectrum is governed by an interplay between induced superconductivity, charging energy, and chemical potential. Such coupling was initially studied by integrating dots into Josephson junctions ('S-QD-S' Devices) which may be studied in the strong or weak coupling regime. A trivial system can exhibit a zero-energy spectral feature when the lower spin branch of the Zeeman split doublet state becomes degenerate with the singlet. Observing this crossover is an experimental challenge: It requires the energy scale gμ B H (where g is the Landé g factor, μ B is the Bohr magneton and H is the magnitude of the field) to become significant while the superconductor retains a finite gap. To observe such splitting, some studies employed materials with a high g factor, In this work we fabricate and measure tunnel devices consisting of TMD barriers placed on top of NbSe 2 , as reported in our earlier works. Figure The problem of a quantum dot that is coupled to a superconductor and to a normal metal is usually formulated in terms of the Anderson impurity model. This model accounts for tunneling between the dot and respective electrodes, and for the on-site electrostatic repulsion on the dot. The full solution of the model requires sophisticated computational tools and is beyond the scope of this paper. However we gain sufficient intuition by considering the case of a 'superconducting impurity': were E 0 is the energy level of the dot, d † σ , d σ are the creation and annihilation operators for spin σ, n σ = d † σ d σ is the number operator for spin σ, and U is the electrostatic repul- The ground state of the system can be either the doublet or Ψ -, depending on the interplay between U , E 0 and Γ s . Tunneling experiments probe the energies corresponding to transitions where the number of electrons in the system is changed by one. In superconducting dots this process requires a transition between singlet and doublet states, with the energies: . While the simplified picture presented here is correct only in the limit of large superconducting gap, and doesn't take into account Kondo correlations, we believe that it qualitatively accounts for the observed data. Figure An important knob for the control and study of dot-bound states is magnetic field. Application of field lifts the degeneracy between the two doublet states, with a Zeeman energy E z = ±gμ B H. Lifting of the doublet degeneracy allows the distinction between a singlet and a doublet ground state. When the ground-state is a doublet, application of field shifts its energy downwards, increasing the doublet-singlet energy difference and thus merely increasing the observed excitation energy. If, however, the ground-state is the singlet state, the excitation energy splits, eventually leading to a cross-over when the Zeeman energy equals ξ. Figure When the Zeeman energy equals the zero field ξ, a degeneracy between the singlet and the lower energy doublet state occurs, giving rise to a zero energy conductance peak. Further increase of the magnetic field beyond this crossover field, leads to a shift of the ground state to the lower doublet state, a crossover whose spectroscopic signature is the disappearance of the higher energy split peaks. 9 This is accompanied by crossing of the lower energy split peaks. Since the conduction in the junctions reported here consists of both tunneling through the quantum dot and tunneling directly between the normal metal and the superconductor, the higher energy peaks tend to merge with the above-gap conduction, thus hindering the observation of the former spectroscopic signal. The latter signal -crossing of the split peaks at zero energy -was evident in many of the measured devices (supplementary figure Figure ABS pinning to zero energy, beyond some critical in-plane field, is a feature repeatedly seen in proximitized nanowires. In principle, the system discussed here possesses the required ingredients for the formation of topological superconductivity that breaks time reversal symmetry and Majorana bound states: superconductivity, strong spin orbit coupling, and magnetic field which is applied perpendicular to the direction of the SOC. Formation of topological superconductivity is unlikely, as topological systems require the proximitized region to be large in at least a single dimension, to enable the formation of edge states. Since the sub-gap features reported here are in all likelihood associated with atomic scale quantum dots, as evident in the observed low g factor, we can rule out the topological origin of the stable ZBCP that is discussed in the context of nanowires. A different possibility for the formation of zero bias peaks comes from the Kondo effect. It was shown that the ground state of a quantum dot coupled both to a superconductor and to a normal metal can be either the doublet or superconducting singlet as discussed, or a Kondo singlet that involves a superposition between the electrons in the dot and the electrons in the normal lead. Furthermore, the actual reduction in the magnitude of the superconducting gap can pin the excitation energy of the dot to zero by level repulsion. In summary, we show that vdW tunnel junctions using TMD barriers may serve as a platform to study the proximity between quantum dots and superconductors. This platform is set in the extreme limit of quantum dots whose dimensions are on the atomic scale, and also in the presence of a strong Ising spin orbit coupling. Our results suggest that the zero field ground state of such dots is analogous to the BCS singlet state, which can be tuned by the application of in-plane magnetic field. Finally, the formation of stable zero bias spectral features at finite magnetic fields calls for further theoretical investigation.