Discharge and electron-impact excitation lead to the production of metastable helium atoms in two metastable states, 2 1 S 0 and 2 3 S 1 . However, many applications require pure beams of one of these species or at least a detailed knowledge of the relative state populations. In this paper, we present the characterization of an original experimental scheme for the optical depletion of He(2 1 S 0 ) in a supersonic beam which is based on the optical excitation of the 4 1 P 1 ← 2 1 S 0 transition at 397 nm using a diode laser. From our experimental results and from a comparison with numerical calculations, we infer a near unit depletion efficiency at all beam velocities under study (1070 m/s ≤ v ≤ 1750 m/s). Since the technique provides a direct means to determine the singlet-to-triplet ratio in a pulsed supersonic helium beam, our results show that the intrabeam singlet-to-triplet ratio is different at the trailing edges of the gas pulse. Atoms and molecules in electronically excited states are considered as "metastable", if transitions to lower-lying energy states are forbidden by electric-dipole selection rules. Because of their long natural lifetimes (≥ 10 -5 s) and their high internal energy (≥ 10 eV), the metastable states of the noble gases play an important role in a variety of environments including planetary atmospheres, flames and plasmas Over the years, there has been continuing interest in the use of metastable species for a variety of applications Metastable noble gases have been subject to many fundamental studies of autoionizing collisions at thermal and at ultracold temperatures Metastable noble gases can be produced in a variety of ways, including electron-beam bombardment, discharge excitation, charge transfer, optical pumping, and thermal excitation Beam purification can be achieved in several ways, e.g., by beam deflection in a magnetic field In this work, we demonstrate an original and very efficient approach to the optical depletion of He(2 1 S 0 ) in a supersonic beam using optical excitation via the 4 1 P 1 ← 2 1 S 0 transition at a vacuum wavelength of 396.58509 nm A schematic drawing of the experimental setup, which consists of the optical system and a vacuum apparatus, is shown in Fig. Experiments are carried out in a set of three vacuum chambers. Inside the first chamber, a pulsed supersonic beam of metastable helium atoms is produced by a He gas expansion into vacuum and subsequent discharge excitation. The supersonic beam is generated by a high-intensity, short-pulse solenoid valve (CRUCS, d = 100 μm orifice diameter, 40 • cone, copper body) whose characteristics are described in Ref. Laser excitation is done at a distance of z 0 ≈ 130 mm from the valve exit, in close proximity to the skimmer (b = 1 mm diameter, see Fig. Another set of Faraday-cup-type detectors (FC 2 and FC 3 in Fig. During the experimental runs, the three vacuum chambers are held at pressures of approximately 2 • 10 -6 mbar, 2 • 10 -7 mbar and 3 • 10 -10 mbar, respectively. Laser radiation at 397 nm, used to drive the 4 1 P 1 ← 2 1 S 0 transition, is generated inside a standard, home-built external cavity diode laser system (NDU4316 laser diode by Nichia). To allow for a straightforward frequency tuning of the diode laser, the laser frequency is locked to the output of a wavelength meter (High Finesse, WS7, 60 MHz absolute accuracy, 2 MHz relative accuracy) using digital PID control. For this, the difference between the measured wavelength and the user-set wavelength is converted into an error signal and a corresponding analog voltage using MATLAB code and a digital-to-analog converter (DAC). This voltage is used to control the piezo element which adjusts the laser grating, and hence, the laser wavelength. The mean sampling rate and the stability of the laser lock are ≈ 100 Hz and 2 MHz, respectively. [39] The absolute frequency of the wavelength meter was initially obtained by comparing the wavenumbers of the two hyperfine-structure components and the crossover resonance in the 7 Li D 2 line A Fabry-Pérot interferometer (FPI, finesse F ≈ 48) and a photodiode (PD) are used to monitor the single-mode operation of the laser. A lens is attached to the entrance of the FPI unit to achieve the mode-matching for the cavity (not shown in Fig. The remaining laser radiation is overlapped with the He beam at right angles to minimize Doppler broadening of the 4 1 P 1 ← 2 1 S 0 transition originating from the longitudinal velocity distribution of the supersonic beam. To increase the interaction time with the sample, the laser beam is retro-reflected through the He beam using a high-reflectivity mirror (M6 in Fig. To minimize influences by shot-to-shot fluctuations of the helium beam source, the laser beam was toggled between open and closed in between two subsequent shots of the pulsed valve using a fast mechanical shutter (SRS, SR475). A servo-motor-controlled neutraldensity filter wheel allowed for a fast and accurate setting of the laser power (between 0-50 mW) admitted into the chamber. The laser power was measured on a power meter (Coherent, OP-2 VIS) outside the vacuum chamber. Transmission losses at the entrance window into the vacuum chamber (9 %) were taken into account in the analysis. The semiaxes of the elliptical laser beam parallel and perpendicular to the He beam propagation axis were determined at the position of the interaction region as a = 0.54 mm and b = 0.23 mm (intensity full width at half maximum (FWHM)), respectively, using a beam profiler (LaserCam-HR, Coherent). To quantify the depletion efficiency, we have numerically solved the rate equations for the system using Mathematica and Matlab codes following standard procedures. Even though excitation to the 4 1 P 1 state involves decay routes via eight electronic states, as shown in Fig. The rate equations for interaction with non-polarized light can be written as follows ) where N i , N e and N f denote the populations of the 2 1 S 0 state, the 4 1 P 1 state and the 1 1 S 0 state, respectively. At t = 0, all the population is assumed to be in state i, i.e., N i = 1. The Einstein A coefficients were taken from the NIST Atomic Spectra Database ( It depends on the incident laser power P l , the transition frequency ν 0 , the frequency detuning from resonance δν and the interaction area A l . To simplify the calculation, an elliptically shaped light beam with a homogeneous intensity distribution is assumed, so that where a and b are the semi-axes of the laser beam at FWHM (see above). A solution of the rate equations in the presence of the light field, and taking into account the population relaxation into a new equilibrium after laser irradiation (where Γ ei = 0), results in a Lorentzian line profile which accounts for the natural linewidth and for power broadening. The line profile, obtained from the procedure above, is then convoluted with a Gaussian distribution of standard deviation σ = √ σ D + σ l to take into account Doppler broadening (σ D ) and the laser linewidth (σ l ) as additional line-broadening mechanisms. In our experiment, the contribution from Doppler broadening is due to the transverse velocity component of the supersonic beam. The Doppler linewidth is linearly dependent on the helium beam velocity v. The Doppler width at FWHM is assumed as where c is the speed of light, and the opening angle depends on the orifice diameter d, the skimmer diameter b and the distance between nozzle and skimmer z 0 . A Doppler shift of the spectral line is not taken into account owing to the close-to-perpendicular geometry between the supersonic beam and the laser beam. Contributions by other line-broadening mechanisms are negliglibly small and thus not taken into account. Fig. if the same detection efficiency is assumed for both metastable states. As can be seen from Fig. These thermal electrons are produced during the discharge process and may lead to a deexcitation of He(2 1 S 0 ) to He(2 3 S 1 ) Since the optical quenching efficiency does not depend on the absolute value of the singletto-triplet ratio, integrated signal intensities were used for the further analysis (integration range between 250-365 μs). Using Eq. 5, an average singlet-to-triplet ratio r of 0.69 is To quantify the optical depletion efficiency, measurements were done at various laser detunings, laser powers and at three different helium beam velocities. The experimental results were then converted to He(2 1 S 0 ) state populations taking into account the average helium singlet-to-triplet ratio. From the experimental results at v = 1070 m/s at a laser power of 38 mW in Fig. To interpret the experimental results, a global fit procedure with two adjustable fit parameters was used for the numerical calculations. On the one hand, an effective orifice diameter d eff was used to factor in the spatially broad distribution of metastable helium atoms which results from discharge excitation. As second parameter, an effective optical intensity I eff was assumed to account for the inhomogeneous intensity distribution of the laser beam in the interaction zone. The inhomogeneous beam profile also results in a variation of the laser interaction time with the atoms in the supersonic beam. However, a change in laser interaction time is analogous to a variation of the laser intensity. Therefore, the laser interaction time was kept at a constant value of t int = N (2a) /v at each helium beam velocity, where N is the number of passes of the laser beam through the interaction volume. From a global fit to all the experimental datasets shown in Fig. The Doppler linewidths resulting from d eff = 4.8 mm are in between σ D = 99 MHz (at v = 1070 m/s) and 157 MHz (at v = 1750 m/s). The Doppler widths are thus much higher than the laser linewidth, which we estimate as σ l ≤ 20 MHz from the FPI fringe pattern. The true laser linewidth is probably much smaller than that, but it could not be determined to a higher accuracy owing to the low finesse of the FPI. Therefore, the uncertainty of the laser linewidth does not significantly alter the outcome of the calculations. Deviations between theory and experiment can be attributed to the assumptions made in the numerical simulation, e.g. the use of a uniform laser intensity distribution. Experimental factors, such as small wavelength drifts inside the wavelength meter due to thermal fluctuations, can also not be ruled out. The use of a double-pass configuration (mirror M6 in Fig. The uncertainty of the singlet-to-triplet ratio provides a lower limit to the maximum quenching efficiency at each beam velocity. At v = 1070 m/s, the ratio can be directly inferred from Eq. 5 (see above) and the resulting quenching efficiency is thus known to a high accuracy. At v = 1500 m/s and at v = 1750 m/s, Eq. 5 may not hold owing to the decreased depletion efficiency (as a result of the increased Doppler width). In these cases, the average singlet-to-triplet ratios were determined by comparison with the results from numerical calculations. At zero detuning, unphysical negative He(2 1 S 0 ) state populations would be obtained at the highest laser powers if the ratios were assumed to be 10 % lower. If the ratios were 10 % higher, the experimental results and the numerically calculated values would not agree. Therefore, the maximum on-resonance quenching efficiencies at a laser power of 38 mW are 100 +1 -0 % at v = 1070 m/s, 98 +2 -5 % at v = 1500 m/s and 97 +3 -5 % at v = 1750 m/s. In this paper, we have described an original and very efficient technique for the optical depletion of He(2 1 S 0 ) state population in a supersonic beam. This scheme is comparably inexpensive and easily implemented using commercial or home-built diode laser systems. In the future, we are planning to use a laser lock based on saturated absorption spectroscopy. This will ensure a continuous on-resonance operation of the diode laser, and it will avoid the use of an expensive wavelength meter. The optical depletion scheme will be especially beneficial for collision experiments. For example, in our laboratory, this setup will be used for the study of quantum-state-controlled reactive collisions between metastable helium atoms and lithium atoms. The optical quenching of He(2 1 S 0 ) will allow us to elucidate the relative contributions of the two metastable states of helium to the reaction, and it will thus make it possible to accurately describe the different reaction channels. 