In this work, we study the spin transport at the Ferromagnet|Noncentrosymmetric Superconductor (F|NCSC) junction of a Ferromagnet|Noncentrosymmetric Superconductor|Ferromagnet (F|NCSC|F) spin valve. We investigate the Tunnelling Spin-Conductance (TSC), spin current and Spin Tunnelling Magneto-Resistance (STMR), and their dependence on various important parameters like Rashba Spin-Orbit Coupling (RSOC), strength and orientation of magnetization, an external in-plane magnetic field, barrier strength and a significant Fermi Wavevector Mismatch (FWM) at the ferromagnetic and superconducting regions. The study has been carried out for different singlet-triplet mixing of the NCSC gap parameter. We develop Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian and use the extended Blonder -Tinkham -Klapwijk (BTK) approach along with the scattering matrix formalism to calculate the scattering coefficients. Our results strongly suggest that the TSC is highly dependent on RSOC, magnetization strength and its orientation, and singlet-triplet mixing of the gap parameter. It is observed that NCSC with moderate RSOC shows maximum conductance for a partially opaque barrier in presence of low external magnetic field. For a strongly opaque barrier and a nearly transparent barrier a moderate value and a low value of field respectively are found to be suitable. Moreover, NCSC with large singlet component is appeared to be useful. In addition, for NCSC with large RSOC and low magnetization strength, a giant STMR (%) is observed. We have also seen that the spin current is strongly magnetization orientation dependent. With the increase in bias voltage spin current increases in transverse direction, but the component along the direction of flow is almost independent. Spintronic devices, such as Spin Valves (SVs) or Magnetic Tunnelling Junctions (MTJs) have received a lot of attention over the years due to the significant progress in fabrication techniques. Traditional MTJs are composed of two ferromagnets in close proximity, normally separated by an insulator or a normal metal. When a current is allowed to flow, it interact with the exchange field of the first ferromagnet and induces a polarization in the spin degrees of freedom. The second ferromagnet is introduced as spin detector, where spin current is measured Over the last two decades, the interplay between ferromagnetic and superconducting order potentially enhances the interest in exploring Ferromagnet|Superconductor (F|S) hybrid structures for low temperature spintronic applications Traditionally, conventional superconductors are introduced as a spacer in MTJs. However, conventional superconductors are highly irreconcilable with ferromagnetism as the exchange coupling of a ferromagnet destroy the singlet pairing of the Cooper pairs Rashba Spin-Orbit Coupling (RSOC) To understand feasibility of ferromangetism and superconductivity, and also the role of magnetization in F|S hybrids, many superconducting spintronic SVs had been extensively studied theoretically Transport properties in several F|Singlet SC The paper is organized as follows. We briefly discuss theoretical framework of the proposed setup in the Sec. II. The results and the discussions are presented in Sec. III. Finally, we summarize our work in Sec. IV. FIG. We use the standard Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) formalism to describe the behaviours of the Electron-Like-Quasi (ELQ) particle and Hole-Like-Quasi (HLQ) particle amplitudes with spin σ. The schematic overview of the proposed setup is shown in Fig. where, u nσ and v nσ are the wavefunctions of ELQ particles and HLQ particles respectively. The hat sign represents a 2 × 2 matrix, ǫ n are the energy eigenvalues can be obtained by diagonalizing the BdG Hamiltonian in the respective layers. Ĥ0 is the single particle Hamiltonian of the system, defined as The first term in this Eq.( 2 and E F i are respectively the single particle kinetic energy and the Fermi energies in the respective layers. Here, we use standard units, viz., = m = μ = 1. U 0 δ(x) is the delta like barrier potential appears at F|NCSC interface with U 0 as the strength of spin independent barrier potential. B is the in-plane external magnetic field and ĤR is the RSOC, can be defined as where, U R represents the strength of RSOC, êx is an unit vector directed normal to the interface and k = -i∇. The last term in Eq.( The gap matrix ∆αβ (r, r ′ ) appear in the Eq.( In general, ∆ ↑↓ (r, r ′ ) appearing in Eq.( Thus in view of Eqs.( where, h xy = h 0 (sin θ m cos χ m -i sin θ m sin χ m ), h z = h 0 cos θ m and g k± = U R (k x ∓ ik y )Θ(x). Here Θ(x) is the Heavyside step function can be defined as In order to obtain the momenta k + (k -) for the electron(holes) in the soft F-layer, we diagonalize the BdG Hamiltonian appearing in the Eq. as the strength of magnetization of the left ferromagnetic layer, X as the strength of magnetization per unit Fermi energy and E F F as the Fermi energy of electrons and holes in that region. In a similar way, we represent the momenta of the ELQ(HLQ) particles in the superconducting region by q + (q -), which are defined as where, E F S is the Fermi energy of ELQ and HLQ particles in the superconducting region. Since, in the tunnelling mechanism the parallel component of momenta is conserved. So we can write, where, θ F and θ A are respectively are the angle of incidence of the electron in F-region and the Andreev reflected angle for the hole in the superconducting region. θ e is the angle of refraction for the ELQ particles, while θ h is the angle of refraction for the HLQ particles. Since, the Fermi energy in NCSC is quite different from a ferromagnet, so to characterize this, we introduce a FWM parameter λ. Physically, it is a dimensionless parameter defined as the ratio of the Fermi momentum (q F S ) in the superconducting region to Fermi momentum (k F F ) in the Ferromagnetic region, i.e. λ = qF S kF F . The wave function Ψ F (x) in Flayer with any arbitrary orientation of magnetization is given by where, we define ê1 = (1, 0, 0, 0) T , ê2 = (0, 1, 0, 0) T , ê3 = (0, 0, 1, 0) T , ê4 = (0, 0, 0, 1) For up spin incident particle we choose s ↑ = 1, s ↓ = 0, while for a down spin particle s ↑ = 0, s ↓ = 1. θ m and χ m are the polar angle and azimuthal angle of magnetization corresponding to the magnetization vector in the soft ferromagnetic layer. r ↑ e (r ↓ e ) appearing in the Eq.( In a similar way, the wave function Ψ NCSC (x) in NCSClayer can be written where, ). φ is the superconducting phase factor, t ↑ e ( t ↓ e ) corresponds to the transmission coefficients for up(down) spin of ELQ particles, while t ↑ h ( t ↓ h ) represents the transmission coefficients for up(down) spin of HLQ particles. The amplitudes of wavefunctions of ELQ particles and HLQ particles are given by The reflection coefficients (r σ e , r σ h ) and the transmission coefficients (t σ e , t σ h ) in the wavefunctions can be determined under the following boundary conditions: where, U int = U 0 δ(x) + H R is the interacting potential. To calculate the spin conductance G S (E), we have used the extended Blonder -Tinkham -Klapwijk (BTK) approach while for a downspin incoming electron, the the spin conductance Thus, in view of this the angularly averaged spin conductance can be written as where G N is the tunnelling conductance for N|N (N for normal mattel) junction and has the following form: C. Spin Tunnelling Magneto-Resistance (STMR) It is seen from Eqs.( where, G P S (E) and G AP S (E) respectively corresponds to the spin conductances at parallel and anti-parallel orientations. Due to the non-collinear orientation of magnetization in the two ferromagnetic layers of the F|NCSC|F SV, a spin current S is generated and flows through the system even in absence of a charge current. Thus the spin current can be totally controlled by the strength and the orientation of exchange fields. Moreover, the spin currents in the ferromagnetic layers generate a torque which tends to rotate the magnetizations. The spin continuity equation can be written as where, is the Spin Transfer Torque (STT) and η(x) is the spin density operator related to magnetization as m(x) = -μ B η(x) . The spin density is in general has a tensor form since it has both direction of flow in real space and a direction in spin space. However, it can be reduced to vector form by the quasione-dimensional nature of the geometry. The spin current can be defined as we can write S in terms of quasi-particle amplitudes and energies using Bogoliubov transformations: where u nσ and v nσ are the quasi-particle and quasi-hole amplitudes. γ n and γ † n are Bogoliubov quasi-particle annihilation and creation operators respectively, which satisfy the following expectation values: is the Fermi function which is dependent on temperature T and quasi-particle energy ǫ n . Calculating the reflection, transmission coefficients and inserting Bogoliubov transformations In this work, we study the spin transport quantities, more specifically TSC (G S ), STMR and the spin current (S) for a F|NCSC|F SV. We have plotted the spin conductance G S (E) from the equation (20) as a function of baising energy E scaled by the gap amplitude ∆ of NCSC. Since NCSCs posses a mixed pairing state, so to understand the interplay of pairing symmetry on spin transport we have introduced the gap amplitude parameter |∆ ± |, where For most of our analysis we choose ∆ s = ∆t 3 . However to understand the impact of singlet-triplet mixing ratio on the spin conductance, we have also considered different mixing ratios too. Furthermore, to study the spin conductance spectra we set the magnetization strength, polar angle and the azimuthal angle of magnetization respectively as X = 0.9, θ m = 0.25π and χ m = 0.5π. It is to be noted here that the densities of the local charge carries in different regions of F|NCSC heterostructure are different. Again, the Fermi momenta for a ferromagnet is also quite different from a NCSC. So to incorporate this point we introduce a dimensionless parameter (λ), which characterizes the FWM at the different regions. Though λ can have any arbitrary values, however for high temperature superconductors FWM is found to be less than unity In most of the earlier works on tunnelling spectroscopy From the previous works, it is found that the role of RSOC in NCSC is too notable. Though RSOC has a very pivotal role in superconducting pairing, but its interplay with magnetization, magnetic field is still need to be understood. So in view of this in Fig. A nearly similar characteristics are also seen in Fig. It should be noted that the spin conductance is non zero even at θ m = 0 and it has a strong correlation with orientations of magnetization (θ m , χ m ), magnetization strength (X), the in-plane magnetic field (B) and RSOC (Z R ) as seen from Figs. It is already seen from the preceding section that the orientation of magnetization plays a significant role in the formation of ABS and pairing mechanism in NCSC. Moreover, the formation of spin current, STMR and triplet-singlet correlation in an SV are also dependent on the orientation of magnetization. Thus the significance of an in-plane magnetic field in the context of SV devices is highly inherent. So to investigate the role of in-plane magnetic field B on spin conductance, we have studied the variation of G S with E/∆ t for different choices of B as shown in Fig. It is of our interest to study the role of pairing amplitude on spin conductance. So, in Fig. Over the last two decades, MTJs have gained attention owing to its robust physics along with the potential applications in spintronic devices. The discovery of giant Tunnelling Magneto-Resistance (TMR) We have seen from above that the role of barrier width Z 0 is too inherent to determine the STMR value of an MTJ. Thus to understand the role of Z 0 completely we have also studied the variation of STMR (%) with Z 0 in Fig. To understand the role of exchange coupling and its interplay with the external bias voltages and in-plane magnetic filed applied to the proposed system, we have examined the behaviour of the spin current that exist in the SV. More specifically, we have investigated the components of spin current (S x , S y , S z ) as a function of the spatial coordinate x at low bias (E = 0.5) in top panel and high bias (E = 1.5) in bottom panel of Fig. In summary, in this paper we have investigated the spin transport in the F|NCSC|F SV. More specifically, the TSC, STMR and the spin current have been studied for an experimentally suitable parameter set of the proposed SV. To study the normalized TSC at the F|NCSC interface we use an extended BTK approach and the scattering matrix formalism. We consider a Rashba type spin orbit coupling (RSOC), different strength, alignments of the exchange field and also for different singlet triplet mixing ratios of the gap amplitudes to study spin conductance. Furthermore, we consider an in-plane external magnetic field to develop the BdG Hamiltonain. We also consider a experimentally suitable value of the FWM for our investigation of spin conductance, STMR and spin current. We have also studied the STMR and spin current for different orientation of exchange field. Our results reveals many useful information of the F|NCSC|F SV system. It is seen that the spin conductance has a strong dependence on RSOC, barrier width, singlet-triplet correlation, in-plane magnetic field and magnetization. For a SV with nearly transparent barrier, NCSCs with moderate RSOC show large conductance in absence of magnetic field. It is seen that with the rise of magnetic field the spin conductance and the formation of of ABS gets suppressed. However, for partially and strongly opaque barriers, a very low and moderate value of magnetic field is suitable for formation of ABS. Beside that it can also be concluded that ABS can be tuned by singlet-triplet pairing ratio, in-plane magnetic field and also by RSOC. For fabrication of superconducting spintronic device, NCSC materials with more singlet components than triplet are mostly found to be suitable. There exist a ZBSCP and a ZBSCD which strongly indicate that spin conductance is orientation dependent. In addition, we have seen a significantly large STMR (%) for the proposed setup. It is found that for fabrication of superconducting MTJs with opaque barrier, NCSC with large RSOC and high magnetization strength is highly suitable. But for a nearly transparent and partially opaque barrier, NCSCs with moderate RSOC, low magnetic field and low values of magnetization strength is strongly preferred. Moreover, from the study of spin current we have seen that it is strongly orientation dependent. With the increase in bias voltage spin current increases in traverse direction but the component along the direction of flow is almost independent. We sincerely hope that the results of our work on F|NCSC|S SV will shed some light in the field of superconducting spintronics which can be utilized to fabricate practical devices in near future.