It was recently reported that, in the highly overdoped side of single-crystal La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 films, the transition temperature T c and zero-temperature superfluid phase stiffness ρ s (0) will obey a parabolic scaling T c = γ • √ρ s (0). Parabolic scaling indicates a quantum phase transition from a superconductor to a normal metal, for which there has been scant understanding [Nature 536, 309-311 (2016)]. The current study shows that, using the quantum critical model for zero-temperature Cooper pairs [EPL 118, 57007 (2017)], parabolic scaling can be exactly derived, where γ = γ(ε F , a) is uniquely determined by the Fermi energy ε F and the minimal lattice constant a of superconducting materials. For single-crystal La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 films, we calculate the theoretical value of γ , which yields 4.29 • K 1 2 ⁄ and is in accordance with an experimental measure value (4.2 ± 0.5) • K 1 2 ⁄ with high accuracy. Our formula for γ can be further tested by investigating other BCS-like materials. To explore the potential origin of high-temperature superconductivity in copper oxide materials, much research has focused on the universal correlations among physical quantities controlling the superconducting mechanism. One of the earliest patterns was called Homes' law Recently, by investigating the overdoped side of single-crystal La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 films, Bozovic et al. observed that T c and ρ s (0) obeyed two-class scaling where T M ≈ 12K , T Q ≈ 15K , α = 0.37 ± 0.02 , T 0 = (7.0 ± 0.1) • K , and γ = (4.2 ± 0.5) • K 1 2 ⁄ . In particular, two-class scaling equation ( [T M , T Q ] Recently, Tao proposed a quantum critical model where the theoretical value of γ is in accordance with the existing experimental result with high accuracy. Before beginning our computation, we first outline the basic idea of Tao's model First, we expand the order parameter φ(T) around T c to obtain the free energy density of the Landau-Ginzburg equation: where |T -T c | ≈ 0 and ∇ denote the spatial derivative. Here λ 2 (T, T c ) and λ 4 (T, T c ) are undetermined parameters. Second, by applying Gor'kov's Green function method into the BCS theory with , where n s (0) denotes the zero-temperature superfluid density, ζ(x) is the Riemann zeta function, ε F is the Fermi energy of superconducting materials, and m * is the effective mass of a Cooper pair. Third, T c is assumed to be sufficiently low so that L(T, T c ) is valid at T = 0. Since quantum fluctuations around T = 0 cannot be omitted, equation ( where ∂ τ denotes the imaginary-time derivative, and the imaginary time τ ∈ [0, 1 T ] with T = 0. Different from thermal critical behaviors (T > 0), the case of T = 0 is referred to as the quantum critical behavior, which requires that the order parameter φ(0) is a function of space q and imaginary time τ Based on the relativistic perspective (such as the Klein-Gordon equation), the coefficient of |∂ τ φ(0)| 2 has been set to be same as that of |∇φ(0)| 2 To this end, equation ( Cooper pairs: For homogenous superconductors, the field equation yields 2m * , where equations ( 2m * denotes the zero-temperature superfluid phase stiffness of homogenous materials Equation ( To deal with quantum fluctuations, we need to assess the quantum partition function of equation ( where Λ denotes the momentum cut-off, which implies that quantum fluctuations with length scales less than 1 Λ can be omitted. Here D denotes the dimension of superconducting materials. Equation This section shows how Tao's model leads to the exact parabolic scaling equation (2). To deal with quantum fluctuations, Tao Here we adopt Wilson's proposal. For crystal materials, a rigid renormalization theory can be defined on a cubic lattice of a lattice unit where a denotes the minimal lattice constant of superconducting materials. Obviously, single-crystal La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 films are crystal materials Applying the renormalization group approach to equation ( when T c → 0, λ 4 (0, T c ) yields a fixed point depending on the momentum cut-off Λ, that is which, up to the one-loop correction, leads to parabolic scaling where ρ s (0) = n s (0) 2m * . At T = 0, we assume: where m e denotes the rest mass of an electron. Since Bozovic et al. investigated single-crystal La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 films Using equation ( films, it provides the theoretical value in accordance with the experimental result. Substituting ħ = c = k B = 1 into ħ ≈ 6.58 × 10 -16 • eV • s , c ≈ 2.99 × 10 8 • m • s -1 , and k B ≈ 8.62 × 10 -5 • eV • K -1 obtains: The reference Substituting the data from equations ( By equations ( Finally, we investigate the hidden physical meaning of equation which using equation (10) yields: For D = 2, equation (24) clearly indicates a phase transition point T c = 0. In the highly overdoped side, with increased doping, La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 becomes more metallic, and increased doping induces a quantum phase transition from a superconductor to a normal metal Private correspondence from Professor Steven Weinberg.