Zirconia nanotubular layer with an outer tube diameter  25 nm was synthesized by potentiostatic anodization. The Zr/ZrO2-NT/Au memristive structure is fabricated using stencil mask and magnetron sputtering techniques. Currentvoltage characteristics are measured in full cycles of resistive switching with varying parameters of the applied harmonic voltage. An equivalent circuit with unidirectional electrical conductivity for the studied structure is proposed. Estimates of the electrical resistance of memristors in high-and intermediate resistivity states are performed. The high synaptic plasticity of memristors based on the Zr/ZrO2-NT/Au structure is shown. Developing of hybrid schemes that have analogous-digital architecture combined with crossbar structure is one of the promising directions for fabrication of neural chips, neurocomputing systems and artificial neural networks (ANNs) nowadays Biological systems have synaptic weight of connection between neurons regulated by ionic flow. It is many known values of synaptic weights and possibility to change them that enables learning and functioning in biological systems As a rule, the connections between neurons in biological systems and, consequently, in the existing variety of ANN architectures are unidirectional in terms of excitation propagation It is known that memristive behavior is caused by mobility of cation and anion vacancies, etc. in insulator layer. Its thickness and presence of defects determine electrical resistance in low-(LRS), high-(HRS) and intermediate resistivity states (IRS) Therefore, the aim of this work was to synthesize, characterize and study static current-voltage (CV) characteristics of layered structure with unidirectional electrical conductivity based on anodic zirconia. The Zr/ZrO2-NT/Au memristor structure was fabricated by anodizing of Zr metal and magnetron sputtering of Au top layer on the surface of the oxide layer. The Zr metal foil of 120 m thick was used to synthesize the ZrO2-NT layer by anodization. The Zr foil was pre-washed with acetone, etched in a solution of HF:HNO3:H2O = 1:6:20 acids, intensively washed with distilled water and dried in air. Synthesis of the oxide layer was carried out in a two-electrode cell at a constant voltage of 20 V for 15 min, where Zr foil was an anode and a steel plate as a cathode. The electrolyte was an ethylene glycol solution containing 5 wt. % H2O and 1 wt.% NH4F. All chemical reagents were analytical grade purity. Gold contacts were sputtered using a stencil mask of 100 holes with a diameter of 1 mm by magnetron unit Q150T ES Quorum Technologies on the surface of the obtained Zr/ZrO2-NT sample. Deposition was carried out for 500 s, as a result of which the thickness of the Au contact was 50 nm. Thus, 100 samples of memristors of Zr/ZrO2-NT/Au sandwich-structure were formed. The morphology of the synthesized structures was study with a scanning electron microscope SIGMA VP Carl Zeiss. The current-voltage measurements in the static operation mode were carried out with the original installation Fig. structure Fig. From Fig. Basing on the above mentioned the inset on Fig. 