Electrodynamic theory applied to the analysis of TE n0p mode resonances in ferromagnetic spheres placed either in metallic cavities or in the free space is compared with Walker-Fletcher's theory of so-called magnetostatic modes. The influence of the diameter of the sample, its permittivity and the permittivity of the surrounding media on the resonance frequencies of a few modes is analyzed. It is shown that the dominant resonances are essentially related either to negative values of the diagonal component of the permeability tensor or, for clockwise circularly polarized magnetic fields, to negative effective permeability. The electrodynamic theory is used to determine the saturation magnetization (Ms) from measured TE n01 frequency differences. Measurements on different samples confirmed that Ms can be determined using an electrodynamic approach with uncertainties of the order of 2% regardless of sample sizes, metal enclosures or static magnetic field values. As it is well known, at microwave frequencies several resonances can be excited in a ferromagnetic sphere biased with a static magnetic field. Such ferrimagnetic resonators find applications in tunable microwave filters, oscillators, and power limiters The microwave magnetic properties of ferromagnetic materials magnetized above saturation along the zdirection of an appropriately chosen coordinate system can be quantitatively described with the Polder tensor μ̿ derived from the Landau-Lifshitz equation For a lossless material, the tensor components take the form where: H 0r = H 0 /M S , w = f /f m , f m = γM S , H 0 is the internal static magnetic field, M S is the saturation magnetization, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, and f is the frequency. More details can be found in Appendix A. Resonance frequencies of isolated ferromagnetic spheroids were analysed for the first time by Walker where , m (n) is the mode index related to the coordinate φ () shown in Fig. Magnetostatic theory allows to accurately determine the resonance frequencies of fundamental and higher-order modes if the following conditions are satisfied: 1. The diameter of the ferromagnetic sphere, d, is much smaller than the free space wavelength at a given resonance frequency (d << ). Otherwise, the magnetostatic model overestimates the resonance frequency. The influence of d and εf on the resonance frequency of the dominant mode ([1 1 0]), has been analysed using approximate methods 2. The sample is far enough from metal objects, such as cavity or strips, affecting the field distribution of the mode. 3. The ferromagnetic sphere is located in vacuum as the magnetostatic theory doesn't allow to consider other surrounding media. However, it has been recently shown that the rigorous electrodynamic analysis of the mode of uniform precession lacks the aforementioned drawbacks Either of the discussed TDEs can be used for the determination of Ms of ferromagnetic spheres. Dillon where fi is the measured frequency and wi is the corresponding normalized frequency obtained with a chosen TDE. White Extensive studies of resonances occurring in ferromagnetic spheres based on the magnetostatic TDE have been performed by P. Röschmann and H. Dötsch where losses have been neglected. Fig. [n, n-1, 0] modes In general, all the modes of any n and m indices, and r = 0, are located between the FMR level, w = H0r (μ = -∞), and w = (H 0r (1 + H 0r )) 0.5 (μ = 0) for a high enough H 0r . The effective permeability for the [n, n, 0] modes is given by the formula μ r = -n+1 n and it converges to μ r = -1 for n → ∞. Concluding, modes solved with the magnetostatic TDE are mostly related to the negative values of either the diagonal permeability μ or the effective permeability μ r . In this section, we present Δw(H0r) plots of the modes for the unshielded and shielded YIG sphere with d = 5 mm computed using the electrodynamic TDE and utilize electrodynamic mode notation (TE n0p ). The diameter of the cavity was assumed to be D c = 10 mm. Extensive measurements of resonances of a single-crystal spherical YIG sample of diameter d = 5 mm have been already performed To the authors' knowledge, the electrodynamic TDE is the only known means of quantitatively predicting such behavior. The frequency offset, Δw, increases in the presence of a metallic shield, especially for the lower order radial modes since the rate of evanescent decrease of the fields outside the sphere is smaller. It can be confirmed in Fig. Frequency offsets obtained for TEn01 modes, n = 1 ... 3, are shown in Fig. Experiments have been performed in the setup shown in Fig. As is postulated in this paper, considering variations of the frequency spacing between the TEn0p modes using the electrodynamic TDE, it is possible to improve the accuracy of the determination of M s . The procedure to obtain Ms from the set of measured resonant frequencies fk, fl obtained for different external magnetic bias values H k ext is as follows: 1. As a starting point, take an initial value of Ms based on knowledge of the material or determine Ms using Eq. ( 2. Compute wk and wl for each H k ext using the electrodynamic TDE. 3. Compute Ms for each H k ext using Eq. ( However, the magnetostatic model gives rise to about 7 % of error in M S if TE201 and TE101 modes are cavity co er analyzed due to the erroneous prediction of Δw21 at the given magnetic bias. The use of the latter pair of modes has the practical advantage that it is easier to couple to the TE201 than to the TE301 mode. Analysis of the methods applicable to the measurement of Ms using Eq. ( Contrary to experiments, these coefficients obtained with the magnetostatic model are constant with H0r and other parameters. It should be mentioned that the scattering theory (see Eq. ( Results of our computations of TEn0p modes in shielded and unshielded ferromagnetic spheres employing a rigorous electrodynamic approach confirm that these modes can be treated as ordinary electromagnetic resonances in a gyrotropic, dispersive and lossy magnetic medium. The magnetostatic model of these resonances allows to analyze only some of their properties, most notably resonance frequencies for sufficiently small samples. Most of the dominant resonances that exist in small ferromagnetic spheres below the frequency of FMR are related either to the negative effective permittivity value (μ r ) for circularly polarized [n,n,0] (also known as TEn01 using electrodynamic notation) and [n,n-1,0] modes or to the negative value of the diagonal component μ of permeability tensor. The presented electrodynamic theory allows for accurate measurements of the basic parameters of magnetic materials including, but not limited to, the saturation magnetization. (kR 1 )} H n+ 1 2 (2) (k 0 R 1 ) -μ r {nH n+ 1 2 (2) (k 0 R 1 ) -k 0 H n-1 2 (2) (k 0 R 1 )} J n+ 1 2 (kR 1 ) = 0 (6a) n, p are elevation (related to  in Fig. For the TEn0p modes of free oscillations of an isotropic sphere having permeability μ r , relative complex permittivity ε f , and immersed in dielectric medium having permittivity ε d , as in Fig. k 1 = ω(ε f μ r ) 0.5 /c, k 2 = ω(ε d ) 0.5 /c Y -Bessel functions of the second kind. When equations (6a) or (7a) are solved with respect to the complex angular frequency ω ̂, the Q-factors can be determined as Q = ω ′ /2ω ′′ .