Nanocellulose prepared from the natural material has a promising wide range of opportunities to obtain the superior material properties towards various end-products. In this research, commercially available natural cotton was treated with aqueous sodium hydroxide solution to eliminate the hemicellulose and lignin, then cellulose was collected. The collected cellulose was subjected to acid hydrolysis using sulphuric acid to obtain nanocellulose. The prepared nanocellulose was further characterized with the aid of Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction and Scanning Electron Microscopy to elucidate the chemical structure, crystallinity and the morphology. For the past few decades, researchers have paid an attention to nanoscience and nanotechnology, because of its dynamic properties and applications Cellulose is the major biodegradable polymer abundant on the earth. It is found in structural components of the cell wall of all green plants Acid hydrolysis is the common method used for the preparation of NC All reagents procured were of analytical grade and used without additional purification steps. Commercially available Cotton was used as the source material. Sodium hydroxide pellets (NaOH) and sulphuric acid were received from Sigma-Aldrich. All experimental solutions were prepared using de-ionized (DI) water. The synthesis of NC follows a systematic procedure. Commercially available cotton was initially made into powder without impurities. The powdered sample was then treated with alkali solution NaOH solution. After this process cellulose was obtained. This sample was further subjected to acid hydrolysis. During the entire process of preparation, DI water was used as the solvent and stirred for ensuring uniform mixing. The pH was checked at every step and maintained as neutral. Fig. Commercially available Cotton was brought and ground in order to make a powder. 5% NaOH was added to the sample and was subjected to stirring constantly at room temperature for 4 h to get homogenous mixing. Then, it was washed and filtered several times with DI water adjusted to a neutral pH for the removal of lignin and hemicelluloses. The filtrate was dried at 80 °C for a day. The alkali treated cotton was then added to the 10 ml of concentrated sulphuric acid and 20 ml of DI water, heated at 40 °C with constant stirring for an hour to get a well-mixed solution. It was then washed several times with the water adjusted to a neutral pH. The prepared suspended solution was centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 15 min. The obtained nanocellulose was dried at 80 °C in order to obtain a nanocrystalline powder. The obtained cellulose was monitored by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), Xray diffraction (XRD) and Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). FTIR (Spectrum 65, Perkin Elmer, USA) analysis was from 4000 to 500 cm -1 . The index crystallinity of the sample was measured by X-ray diffractometer (D8 advance ECO XRD system with SSD160 1D Detector) using Cu-Ka radiation wavelength of 1.5406-1.54439 Å. The samples were scanned in 2θ range of 15-70°. SEM observation (ZEISS DSM 940A) was at 20 kV. Nanocellulose (NC) is the polymer material that can be obtained cheaply from the plant sources. NC has a wide range of daily applications, including as foam, cloth, food, paper, and safety materials. In addition, in the industrial sector NC plays a pivotal role with medicine, hygiene and adsorbent products, emulsion, cosmetic and pharmaceutical. Recent developments in the nanotechnology brought enormous developments with NC-based materials and made significant achievements. In this study, nanocellulose from the natural fibre has been generated by treating with aqueous sodium hydroxide solution followed by the acid hydrolysis. NC was obtained by following the methods outlined above and subjected to FTIR, XRD and SEM analyses to characterize the chemical group, crystallinity and the surface morphology. Infrared spectroscopy works based on the atoms' vibrations in a molecule to be tested. When the test molecule absorbs infrared radiation, the chemical bonds in it vibrate and able to stretch, contract or bend. Infrared spectra of the controlled sample displayed in the out of plane O-H stretching at 3342.64 cm -1 ; C-O stretching at 1050-1120 cm -1 ; The vibration of C=O carbonyl ring stretching occurred at 1728.22 cm -1 . C-O and C-H bonds are in the polysaccharide aromatic rings, whereas alkali treatment minimizes the hydrogen bonding by eliminating hydroxyl groups by a reaction with NaOH Fig. Where, is peak intensity of crystalline part and is counter reading at a peak intensity of the amorphous material. The surface morphology of the cotton samples was monitored by a Zeiss DSM 940 A under accelerated electrons with 15 kV of energy using SEM. The shape of this fibre indicates an increase in its specific area, favours chemical reaction such as acid hydrolysis. The rod shape increases the area of the surface and creates the fibre to be more reactive (Fig. NC was successfully extracted from the natural cotton and the characterization results with Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, Scanning Electron Microscopy and X-ray diffraction analyses on the cellulose material show a good level of purity and high crystallinities. The crystallinity index for the obtained NC is 91.7%. Utilization of sodium hydroxide concentration promoted the preservation of the structure of cellulose and favoured the hydrolysis of the components with the amorphous state and the cost-efficient products from cotton. The result proves that cotton can be used to produce NC which in turn can be utilized for downstream applications.