The effect of applying a positive voltage pulse (Urev = 10 -150 V) directly after the negative high power impulse magnetron sputtering (HiPIMS) pulse (bipolar HiPIMS) is investigated for the reactive sputter deposition of TiN thin films. Energy-resolved mass spectroscopy analyses are performed to gain insight in the effect on the ion energy distribution function of the various ions. It is demonstrated that the energy of a large fraction of the ions can be tuned by a reverse target potential and gain energy corresponding to the applied Urev. Microscopy observations and x-ray reflectometry reveal densification of the films which results in an increase in the film hardness from 23.9 to 34 GPa as well as an increase in compressive film stress from 2.1 GPa to 4.7 GPa when comparing conventional HiPIMS with bipolar HiPIMS (Urev = 150 V). High power impulse magnetron sputtering (HiPIMS) is a physical vapor deposition technique that has attracted significant attention during the past years. When compared with direct current magnetron sputtering, HiPIMS is known to produce a significant amount of ions of the sputtered material with a slightly broadened ion energy distribution function (IEDF) which both has implications to the controllability of the process and quality of the deposited films. _______________________ † These authors contributed equally to the work. Despite a broad ion energy distribution, the HiPIMS discharge is still dominated by thermalized ions. Therefore, the control of the energy of the incoming ion flux to the growing film is generally achieved by applying a substrate bias. This, however, becomes challenging when depositing insulating films or using non-conducting substrates and even impossible when considering grounded substrates that can occur in some industrial deposition systems. Recently, the introduction of bipolar HiPIMS wherein a reversed (positive) pulse is applied to the target following the negative pulse has promised great potential to solve these challenges. In this mode of operation a portion of the IEDF can be shifted with an energy proportional to the magnitude of the applied reversed potential, Urev. This is a consequence of the fact that a region of the plasma, near the cathode, achieve an increased plasma potential with a value close to Urev resulting in acceleration of ions leaving this near-target-region. Earlier we reported on the effect of the application of bipolar HiPIMS on the IEDF of the ions during sputtering of Ti in pure Ar. The experiments are performed in a cylindrical high vacuum system (with a base pressure of 1.3 ́10 -4 Pa, a radius of 22 cm and a height of 30 cm) equipped with a sputtering magnetron cathode (TORUS Circular, Kurt J. Lesker Company). A Ti target (50 mm in diameter, 99.9% purity) is mounted on the cathode. During sputtering an Ar flow (99.997% purity) of 50 sccm and a N2 flow (99.995% purity) of 0.35 sccm is used. The total pressure is maintained at 0.66 Pa using a throttle valve. The cathode is connected to a pulsing unit which is fed with negative and positive pulse potentials as programmed by a synchronization unit (a HiPSTER prototype from Ionautics AB). The negative pulse (the conventional HiPIMS pulse) has a length of 30 μs and is operated at a repetition frequency of 700 Hz. Each individual HiPIMS pulse is immediately followed by a 200 μs long positive pulse when operated in bipolar mode. The voltage and current waveforms are recorded through a 1:100 voltage divider and a current clamp (Chauvin Arnaux C160) connected to a digital oscilloscope (Tektronix TDS 2004C). A PSM003 ion mass spectrometer (Hiden Analytical Ltd) capable of measuring ion energies up to 100 eV is used for measuring the IEDF of Ar + (36 amu), Ar 2+ (40 amu), Ti + (48 amu), Ti 2+ (48 amu), N + (14 amu) and N2 + (28 amu) ion species. The sampling orifice, which is aligned with the center of the Ti target at a distance of ~8 cm, has an opening of 300 μm in diameter and is grounded during the measurements. The energy step size is set to 0.1 eV while the acquisition per data point is set to 200 ms corresponding to 140 pulses averaged per data point. During the acquisition of the IEDF presented in this work the reverse voltage (Urev) was set to 0, 25, 50 and 75 V. For thin film deposition substrates of Si (100) with dimensions of 1 ́ 1 cm are used. Prior to deposition the substrates are cleaned in an ultrasonic bath of acetone followed by a bath of isopropyl alcohol for a total time of 10 minutes. The samples are blown dry using N2 and mounted in a rotatable sample holder which exposes one sample at a time at a distance of ~8 cm away from the target. The reverse voltage (Urev) was set to 0, 10, 50, 100 and 150 V and the substrates were kept at floating potential during the depositions presented in this work. X-ray diffraction (XRD) is done using a PANalytical X'Pert PRO in Bragg Brentano (Ɵ-2Ɵ) geometry for texture characterization of the films while a PANalytical Empyrean system with a four-crystal Ge (220) monochromator and a two-bounce triple axis Ge (220) analyzer is used for Ω rocking curve measurements from which the curvature of a single crystal substrate can be derived Nanoindentation analyses is done using a Hysitron TI-950 Triboindenter equipped with a Berkovich diamond probe. A constant load of 0.6 mN, for which the indentation depth did not exceed 10% of the film thickness, is used to execute a minimum of 15 indents in each sample. The microstructure was investigated by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (FEI Tecnai G2 operated at 200 kV). Prior to analysis, cross-sectional specimens are prepared by a two-step procedure consisting of mechanical polishing followed by Ar + milling at shallow incidence angle of 4° from the sample surface, with 5 keV ions initially then the ion energy was decreased to 2.5 and 1 keV. High angle angular dark field (HAADF) combined with scanning-TEM (STEM) analysis is obtained using a camera length of 140 mm. The film deposition rate is calculated using observed film thicknesses from scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Leo 1550 Gemini) images of film cross-sections. Each film is imaged in three different places across the sample length. The discharge voltage (UD) and discharge current (ID) waveforms recorded are shown in Fig. The ID waveform changes slightly when Urev is varied with an increased delay in current rise with an increase in Urev from 4.9 μs to 5.3 μs and finally to 9.2 μs for the different Urev values, respectively. Accordingly, the ID, max also increases with Urev as a consequence of the constant Pavg and constant pulse length applied. Fig. XRR measurements reveal a clear shift to higher critical angle (not shown) when Urev is increased which means that the film density increases with the application of bipolar HiPIMS. The density is calculated from these measurements and gives a film density of ~5.1 g/cm 3 for Urev = 0 V, ~5.2 g/cm 3 for Urev = 10 V, and a maximum of ~5.3 g/cm 3 for Urev =150 V. The density errors given in Fig. In the case of the film deposited with Urev = 150 V, there is small displacement between the film and the silicon substrate, indicating potential delamination. Representative HAADF-STEM micrographs from the films are also shown in Fig. The deposition rates are shown in Fig. It is clear from the results presented in Fig. Poolcharuansin and Bradley have earlier shown that during the off-time period the electron density decays by two orders of magnitude. The IEDFs for Ti + and for N + of the conventional HiPIMS discharge, shown in Fig. The IEDFs for the bipolar HiPIMS seen in Fig. Regarding the slight decrease in deposition rate observed in this study, it is different from what has been observed for Cu-deposition by Wu et al. A small effect on the apparent deposition rate loss can come from the densification of the film, see Fig. The XRD studies of the deposited thin films show that the films are polycrystalline and there are no significant change in orientation texture between film grown with or without the reversed pulse. Previous works on HiPIMS-deposited TiN films show that it is possible to change the texture by applying a substrate bias Several studies The effect of operating the HiPIMS process in bipolar mode is clearly demonstrated in the reactive sputter deposition of TiN thin films. An increased film density, hardness and compressive stress are the result of the application of the reversed voltage pulse following the HiPIMS pulse. IEDF measurements show that a large portion of the ions generated by the HiPIMS pulses are accelerated with the full applied potential Urev. Varying Urev from 0 (conventional HiPIMS) to 150 V did not result in any change of the film texture but resulted in an increase in ion energies, in a densification of grain boundaries, in an increase of the film compressive stress from 2.1 to 4.7 GPa and in an increase in the hardness from 23.9 to 34 GPa.