Pathologies associated with calcified tissue, such as osteoporosis, demand in vivo and/or in situ spectroscopic analysis to assess the role of chemical substitutions in the inorganic component. High energy X-ray or NMR spectroscopies are often impractical or damaging in biomedical conditions. Low energy spectroscopies, such as IR and Raman techniques, are often the best alternative. In apatite biominerals, the vibrational signatures of the phosphate group are generally used as fingerprint of the materials although they provide only limited information. Here, we have used first principles calculations to unravel the complexity of the complete vibrational spectra of apatites. We determined the spectroscopic features of all the phonon modes of fluor-apatite, hydroxy-apatite, and carbonated fluoroapatite beyond the analysis of the phosphate groups, focusing on the effect of local corrections induced by the crystalline environment and the specific mineral composition. This provides a clear and unique reference to discriminate structural and chemical variations in biominerals, opening the way to a widespread application of non-invasive spectroscopies for in vivo diagnostics, and biomedical analysis. Calcium orthophosphates form the main inorganic component of normal and pathological calcified tissues in vertebrates The functional bio-properties of apatites rely heavily on the shape of the nanocrystals Many experimental techniques have been used to inspect the subtle structural changes associated with the specific chemical composition in apatites. X-ray spectroscopies (such as XPS photoemission So far, the standard approach to inspect apatites with vibrational spectroscopies was the recognition, within the entire spectra, of the four characteristic vibrational modes of the phosphate subunits. In apatites, the phosphate groups are stabilized as orthophophate anions PO 3- 4 (i.e. fully deprotonated form), electrostatically compensated by the surrounding Ca 2+ cations. However, due to its high reactivity, there are no vibrational spectra available in the literature for the isolated monophophate in the gas phase, and such measurements are usually performed in water solution. Despite the profuse efforts In this paper, using ab initio theoretical methods, we first investigate the effects of the solvent on the vibrational properties of PO 3- 4 , then we illustrate the dependence of the vibrational modes of the phosphate group in fluor-apatite, hydroxy-apatite, and carbonated fluor-apatite crystals. We also discuss features of the vibrational spectrum associated with crystalline effects and chemical composition. Our results point clearly to the effect of the local environment on the overall vibrational properties of the system, providing a set of representative vibrational markers univocally associated to microscopic nature of each crystal. This provides a quantitative reference for experiments to improve the current understanding in investigative and therapeutic studies of calcified tissues. More generally, the systematic identification of such chemical fingerprints is a mandatory step towards the standardization of clinical protocols. The PO 3- 4 ion has a T d tetrahedral symmetry and nine vibrational modes corresponding to the representation Γ vib = 2T + E + A; the four different frequencies are labelled ν 1 , ν 2 , ν 3 , and ν 4 . The non-degenerate frequency ν 1 corresponds to the symmetric P-O stretching (A 1 symmetry), ν 2 corresponds to the doubly degenerate O-P-O bending mode (E symmetry); ν 3 frequency arises from the triply degenerate T 2 mode involving the asymmetric P-O stretching and also P motion. The ν 4 mode (T 2 symmetry) is associated to the triple degenerate asymmetric O-P-O bending. All the modes are Raman active, while only ν 3 and ν 4 are infrared active. When the orthophosphates are in aqueous solution to form HPO 2- 4 and H 2 PO - 4 ions the symmetry is reduced to C 3v and C 2v , respectively. This implies the progressive split of the degenerate vibrations, the shift of the non-degenerate ones and activation of the previously infrared-forbidden modes ν 1 and ν 2 . The coordination with the water molecules of the solution and the formation of H-bonds changes the charge distribution within the phosphate ions, further affecting the vibrational spectrum of the PO 3- 4 ion In order to overcome this problem, we optimized the orthophosphate ion within an implicit CSM which reproduces the dielectric response of the solvent (panel 6). The vibrational frequencies of the corresponding ground state structure are summarized in Figure2(b) and Table Apatite is a family of molecular crystals [M 5 (PO 4 ) 3 X] 2 that occur in nature in several crystalline phases ( e.g. hexagonal, monoclinic) and several compositions (M=Ca 2+ , Sr 2+ ; X=OH -, F -, Cl -, Br -). Isolated orthophosphate groups (PO 3- 4 ) symmetrically arranged with respect to a mirror glide plane, corresponding to an ideal P6 3 /m space group (n. 176, see Figure In order to highlight subtleties beyond the phosphate group, we focus on three calcium structures, namely fluor-apatite (FAp), hydroxy-apatite (HAP), and carbonated fluor-apatite (CFAp) in their hexagonal crystalline phase. The three crystal structures are shown in Figure The phosphate group occurs in all apatites as fully protonated tetrahedral anion, the presence of the other chemical species in the mineral such as Ca, F, OH, or CO 3 , determines the symmetry of the whole crystal and influences the functional properties. FAp has 42 atoms per cell corresponding to 126 phonon modes that can be classified according to the S 6 (-3) symmetry as: A g , A u , 1 E g , 1 E u , 2 E g , and 2 E u ; acoustic modes are given by the representation Γ ac =A u + 1 E u + 2 E u , the remaining ungerade modes are IR active and the gerade modes are Raman active. HAp has 132 independent phonon modes classified by symmetry as: A, B, While most previous experimental and theoretical reports restrict their study to the Brillouin zone center (Γ) phonons, we provided a full characterization of the dielectric ( e.g. dielectric tensor, Born charges, Raman tensor) Starting from the vibrational and dielectric properties we simulated the IR and Raman spectra of the selected apatites (Figures 3). Polarized Raman spectra along with the table with polarization selection rules for backscatteing geometries are reported in Figure Here, we focus on the frequency range [400-1300] cm -1 , which corresponds to the phosphate bands; lower energy modes [0 -400] cm -1 will be discussed in the next Section. The crystalline field induces distortions in the PO 3- 4 tetrahedra that change the internal bond lengths and angles, and misaligns their orientation with respect to the ideal symmetry planes, giving rise to shifts and splittings of the ideal PO 3- 4 normal modes. Consequently, the resulting internal PO 3- 4 vibrational bands depend on the actual crystallographic structure of each compound. The latter is responsible for the huge variability in the definition of the phosphate vibrations and in the assignment of the single PO 3- 4 modes from the experiments. The presence of unintentional HPO 2- 4 impurities Table Despite such variations, the theoretical IR and Raman spectra are in general good agreement with the experimental measurements on fluoro- The identification of the phosphate modes, albeit important in the apatite recognition, is not sufficient to explain the complexity of vibrational spectra of these minerals. For instance, the longrange Coulomb interaction associated to the internal polar character of apatites leads to a net LO-TO splitting to several phonon bands (Figure One alternative route to inspect the composition of apatite mineral is the analysis of the low frequency modes ([0 -400] cm -1 ), often known as lattice modes since they stem from the rotational modes of the PO 3- 4 groups along with the translational modes of the Ca 2+ , and PO 3- 4 sublattices and non-metal elements (F -, OH -, CO - 3 , OH -). A part from the obvious three acoustic modes, all other modes in this range are generally complex and involve the displacement of all chemical species, clearly seen in the atom-projected phonon density of states shown in Figure From top to bottom panel, Figure In order to further prove this statement, we considered three alternative apatite crystals that have been experimentally studied, namely Sr-fluoroapatite (SrFAp), antiparallel hydroxyapatite (HAp ↑↓ ) and hydroxy-fluoroapatite (HFAp), whose atomic structures are shown in Figure The high frequency Raman spectra of SrFAp, HAp (↑↓) , and HFAp are in agreement with the phosphate analysis discussed above, the low energy spectra are shown in Figure In summary, selected features in the IR and Raman spectra of calcium orthophosphates have been used extensively to characterize the chemical composition of biomininerals and analyze the interplay between chemistry, crystals nanoscale morphologies, and biological functions. The value of such spectroscopic techniques for in vivo and/or in situ analysis is unquestionable, especially in the research regarding calcified tissue deterioration. Other techniques, such as X-ray photoemission, may easily provide interpretation but are not generally applicable to monitor chemical changes, for instance, during fluorination. We have shown that theoretical spectroscopies provide a solid tool to quantitatively fingerprint spectra and extract information until now mostly ignored. Our results point to the crucial contribution of the solvent in analyzing spectra of phosphate ions, show how phosphate modes are affected by surrounding ions, and present strategies to quantitatively detect the chemical composition of apatites by analyzing the full vibrational spectrum. The synergy between first principles vibrational spectroscopies and experiments could facilitate the study of normal or pathological calcified tissues. Total-energy-and-forces optimization where carried out within the density functional theory (DFT) framework, as implemented in the Quantum Espresso Underestimation of the band gap with the standard DFT functionals is corrected by including a Hubbardlike potential on each chemical species, within the DFT+U frameworks along the lines described, e.g., in Refs. 60, 61. The optimized values for the studied compounds are obtained by means of the pseudohybrid Hubbard Density Functional approach (namely ACBN0) The phonon eigenvalues and eigenvectors are computed starting from the ab initio calculation of the interatomic force matrices obtained with a finite-differences/finite-fields approach Molecular anions PO 3- 4 and HPO 2- 4 are simulated in cubic cells of dimension (14.0 × 14.0 × 14.0) Å3 , where a jellium background is inserted to remove divergences in the charged cells. The dielectric effect of the environment (both water and apatite) on molecular phosphates is included through the continuum solvation model (CSM), a Ref.