Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is an effective method for studying the electrochemical systems. The interpretation of EIS is the biggest challenge in this technology, which requires reasonable modeling. However, the modeling of EIS is of great subjectivity, meaning that there may be several models to fit the same set of data. In order to overcome the uncertainty and triviality of human analysis, this research uses machine learning to carry out EIS pattern recognition. Raw EIS data and their equivalent circuit models were collected from the literature, and the support vector machine (SVM) was used to analyze these data. As the result, we addresses the classification of EIS and recognizing their equivalent circuit models with accuracies of up to 78%. This study demonstrates the great potential of machine learning in electrochemical researches. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is to study the mechanism of electrode materials, solid electrolytes, conductive polymers and corrosion protection by measuring the change of impedance with sinusoidal frequency The structure of these equivalent circuit and the value of each element can be measured and fitted. Consequently, the details of the electrochemical systems and the properties of the electrode processes can be analyzed by using the electrochemical meaning of these components The model selection should reflect the practical significance, and the consequence discussion are based on the assumption that there is an accurate model. At present, the common method is screening out several potential equivalent circuit models according to the different applications, and then using mathematical fitting to simulate the corresponding pattern. Nevertheless, when several trusted models are available, they should be sorted to find the most reasonable model. Therefore, many subjective factors and judgments involved in the process of analyzing the equivalent circuit of EIS. How to choose the suitable equivalent circuit model is the critical step in the EIS technology. Machine learning is a kind of algorithm which automatically analyzes and obtains the rule from the data and uses the rule to predict the unknown data The mechanism of SVM is that data points are regarded as p-dimensional vectors, and these points can be separated by (p-1)-dimensional hyperplanes. There may be many hyperplanes that can categorize the data. SVM can find the best hyperplane which maximizes the distance to the nearest data point on each side. SVM has been applied to pattern recognition (pattern recognition) problems such as portrait recognition (face recognition), text classification (text categorization) and so on. In this paper, a SVM was constructed to analyze the suitable model of EIS results. The raw EIS data were collected from published articles, which focus on the electrochemical energy storage applications (i.e. batteries and supercapacitors). Hundreds of EIS data and their equivalent circuit models were studied by SVM. To conduct this research, the first step is to establish an EIS database, thus we extracted over 250 sets of EIS data and their equivalent circuit from published papers. There are two main reasons to extract data from the existing literature. First, there are a lot of related researches, suggesting that the total amount of data is large enough. Considering that the test instruments, test specifications and selected parameters used by each researcher are very different, it can provide enough universality for our data analysis process. On the other hand, in the published papers, the equivalent circuit models of EIS must have been carefully During the process, the normalized EIS is used as the input data and the corresponding equivalent circuit as the output data. The data analysis system is established by machine learning algorithm. The whole process is shown in Figure The EIS data we selected come from electrochemical energy storage devices, especially lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors. 5 main equivalent circuit models are summarized as shown in Figure The reason why these five types is from the essence of EIS equivalent circuit. All these models consist of three components, which are impedance, constant phase element (CPE) and Warburg element (W). Impedance is a general term for the hindrance of resistance, inductance and capacitance. In the actual test, capacitors in EIS experiments often do not behave ideally. Instead they act like a constant phase element (CPE). Warburg element is used to describe the electrode behavior when the charge diffuses through a barrier layer. At very low frequencies, charged ions can spread deep and even penetrate the diffusion layer to produce a finite thickness Warburg element, which, if the diffusion layer is thick or dense enough, will result in even at a low limit of frequency, forming an infinite thickness of Warburg elements. On the basis of obtaining 5 typical patterns, we list the representatives of several data under each type (Figure One of the most important parameters in the SVM is the penalty coefficient "C", that is, the tolerance to the error. The higher the C is, the more intolerable the error, meaning that SVM is easier to overfit. The smaller the C is, the easier it is to underfit. By testing of different C values, it is found that the overall perofrmance is best when C equal to 1. Gamma is an argument that comes with the RBF function after it is selected as the kernel. Implicitly determines the distribution of the data after mapping to the new feature space. The larger the gamma, the less the support vector; the smaller the gamma value, and the more the support vector. The number of support vectors affects the speed of training and prediction. With the increase of gamma, the accuracy of training set increases, but the accuracy of test set decreases, indicating that there is a tendency of over-fitting. In sum, using RBF kernel function, when C is 1, gamma is 0.1, which can achieve good accuracy in train set (84%) and test set (78%). The errors of the experiment were mainly caused by the small number of data. Also, the EIS data used in this research come from electrochemical energy storage devices. In the future, we will expand the database to electrochemical corrosion, electrolytic water and other fields and to override as many EIS patterns as possible. This work applied SVM to deal with EIS and provide classification suggestions for EIS equivalent circuit model. A large number of EIS were extracted from published papers, and five typical equivalent circuit models were summarized. SVM using RBF kernel function achieves an acceptable prediction result (78%). More importantly, this work shows the great potential of machine learning electrochemical researches.