A series of Sr(Co1-xNix)2As2 single crystals was synthesized allowing a comprehensive phase diagram with respect to field, temperature, and chemical substitution to be established. Our neutron diffraction experiments revealed a helimagnetic order with magnetic moments ferromagnetically (FM) aligned in the ab plane and a helimagnetic wavevector of q = (0, 0, 0.56) for x = 0.1. The combination of neutron diffraction and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements show that the tuning of a flat band with d x 2 -y 2 orbital character drives the helimagnetism and indicates the possibility of a quantum order-by-disorder mechanism. The exploration of materials in proximity to quantum phase transitions is a fruitful area for discovering exotic states of matter due to the strong influence of quantum fluctuations. This idea can be traced to Villain who coined the name order-by-disorder when investigating frustrated insulating magnets 1 . The central idea refers to the fact that quantum fluctuations, akin to classical entropic effects, can lift the large degeneracy of ground states and favor a particular order, hence the term orderby-disorder 2 . This is considered to be the quantum equivalent to the theme used to explain a variety of phenomena including surface tension and DNA folding, and has been employed to explain unconventional superconductivity In the AFe 2 As 2 (A =Ca,Sr,Ba) family of iron pnictides, it is well known that the superconducting electron pairing is attributed to antiferromagnetic (AF) spin fluctuations We successfully synthesized single crystals [Fig. Single crystals of Sr(Co 1-x Ni x ) 2 As 2 were grown from solution using a self-flux method with the ratio Sr:(Co 1-x Ni x ):As = 1:5:5. The elements were placed in an aluminum oxide crucible and sealed in an evacuated quartz tube. After heating slowly below 830 • C, the mixture was cooked at 1200 • C for 20 hours and then slowly cooled down to 1050 • C at a rate of 3 • C/h and then down to 800 • C at 10 • C/h. Single crystals were obtained by cleaning off the flux. The typical crystals were about 1 cm 2 in size and a few mm in thickness [Fig. Temperature-and field-dependent dc magnetization measurements were performed on a Quantum Design (QD) Physical Property measurement system (PPMS) in Beijing Normal University and a Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS) in Louisiana State University. Neutron powder diffraction (NPD) data for compound Sr(Co 0.9 Ni 0.1 ) 2 As 2 were collected at the NIST Center for Neutron Research on the high resolution powder neutron diffractometer (BT-1) with neutrons of wavelength 1.5403 Å (at 295 K) and 2.0775 Å (at 30 and 5 K) produced by using Cu(311) and Ge(311) monochromators, respectively. Collimators with horizontal divergences of 15 ′ , 20 ′ and 7 ′ of arc were used before and after the monochromator and after the sample, respectively. Data were collected in the 2θ range of 3-168 • with a step size of 0.05 • . The structural parameters were refined by Rietveld refinement using the GSAS and EXPGUI programs For single crystal diffraction measurements on Sr(Co 0.9 Ni 0.1 ) 2 As 2 , we define the momentum transfer Q in three-dimensional reciprocal space in Å-1 as Angle-resolved Photoemission Spectroscopy (ARPES) ARPES measurements were performed at the Dreamline beam line of the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility using a Scienta DA80 analyzer and at the beam line 13U of the National Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (Hefei) equipped with a Scienta R4000 analyzer. The energy and angular resolutions were set to 15 meV and 0.2 • , respectively. Samples were cleaved in situ, yielding flat mirror-like (001) surfaces. During the measurements, the temperature was kept at 20 K and the pressure was maintained better than 5 × 10 -11 Torr. The magnetic susceptibility χ(T ) measured for Sr(Co 1-x Ni x ) 2 As 2 with x = 0.125 is shown in Fig. In classical molecular-field theory In order to understand the evolution of this magnetic state with x, we systematically explore χ(T ) for Sr(Co 1-x Ni x ) 2 As 2 single crystals. In Fig. In Fig. In order to understand the changes that occur with x in Sr(Co 1-x Ni x ) 2 As 2 , we probed the magnetic structure at zero field and T = 4 K for x = 0.1 via neutron diffraction experiments. We chose to explore a Sr(Co 0.9 Ni 0.1 ) 2 As 2 single crystal as these samples displayed the highest T c with one of the largest μ sat for this series. Figure In Fig. In nominally pure SrCo 2 As 2 , a flat band exists at an energy just above the Fermi level near the M point of the Brillouin Zone (BZ) In Fig. In ACo 2 As 2 systems, density functional theory (DFT) plus DMFT calculations suggest that FM instabilities are due to a flat band residing near the E F . However, experiments show an evolution from AF order in CaCo 2 As 2 In many helical magnetic systems such as MnSi 42-44 or Cr 1/3 NbSe 2 On the other hand, quantum fluctuations in a paramagnet near a FM instability can make significant contributions to the free energy and stabilize unusual magnetic order 2,5,6 . In Sr(Co 1-x Ni x ) 2 As 2 , the d x 2 -y 2 band is flat along both the in-plane Γ -M and out-of-plane Γ -Z directions. The massive quantum particle-hole excitations can strongly affect the flat band dispersion at the mean-field level and, as a consequence, a helical magnetic order with certain momenta can be induced. However, the presence of flat band requires physics beyond the conventional itinerant spin density wave (SDW) theory with Fermi surfaces nesting, but may be a realization of the quantum-order-by-disorder mechanism. In conclusion, we discovered a novel helical magnetic order in Sr(Co 1-x Ni 2 ) 2 As 2 and established the phase diagram with systematic studies of the magnetic susceptibility. By combining neutron diffraction and ARPES experiments, we have established a close connection between the d x 2 -y 2 flat band and the helical magnetic order. Based on these results, we suggest that the helical magnetic order in Sr(Co 1-x Ni x ) 2 As 2 is driven by quantum fluctuations and the system is likely in the vicinity of at least one quantum critical point. Note added: Recently, a paper studying 52 on the same material as the present work was posted on arXiv. The main experimental results of the two studies are consistent with each other.