Random microstructures of heterogeneous materials play a crucial role in the material macroscopic behavior and in predictions of its effective properties. A common approach to modeling random multiphase materials is to develop so-called surrogate models approximating statistical features of the material. However, the surrogate models used in fatigue analysis usually employ simple microstructure, consisting of ideal geometries such as ellipsoidal inclusions, which generally does not capture complex geometries. In this paper, we introduce a simple but flexible surrogate microstructure model for two-phase materials through a level-cut of a Gaussian random field with covariance of Matérn class. Such parametrization of the covariance function allows for the representation of a few key design parameters while representing the geometry of inclusions in a more general setting for a large class of random heterogeneous two-phase media. In addition to the traditional morphology descriptors such as porosity, size and aspect ratio, it provides control of the regularity of the inclusions interface and sphericity. These parameters are estimated from a small number of real material images using Bayesian inversion. An efficient process of evaluating the samples, based on the Fast Fourier Transform, makes possible the use of Monte-Carlo methods to estimate statistical properties for the quantities of interest in a given material class. We demonstrate the overall framework of the use of the surrogate material model in application to the uncertainty quantification in fatigue analysis, its feasibility and efficiency, and its role in the microstructure design. 1. Introduction. Real materials, employed in engineering applications or that occur in nature, possess random heterogeneous microstructures, which play a crucial role in their macroscopic behavior and in determining their effective properties A common approach to modeling random multiphase heterogeneous materials is to develop so-called surrogate models that ideally mimic key macroscale features of the material. These models approximate the geometric distribution of phases, and effective properties are calculated using homogenization, often implemented using Monte-Carlo methods. Such surrogates for two-phase materials have been used to study and to characterize properties of the porous media, e.g., permeability Alternatively, realistic microstructures can be obtained experimentally by extracting and analyzing samples from real materials, e.g., Computed Tomography (CT) or Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). These methods are time-consuming and expensive, possibly destructive, and cannot be deployed on a large database. In order to complete the experimental databases, one can use algorithms to generate artificial microstructures, based on the statistical information from only a small number of original samples. Such stochastic reconstruction methods provide effective tools for efficient reproduction of heterogeneous microstructures In this paper, we first propose a simple but flexible surrogate microstructure model for two-phase materials. Key design parameters of the microstructure are provided, while the geometry of inclusions or pores is represented in a general setting, which permits a close representation of the microstructure of materials. In a second stage, we use the surrogate microstructure as the representative volume element (RVE) for a fatigue analysis of the Dang Van type We define our surrogate material model through a level-cut of a Gaussian random field While defined only by a few "design" parameters, such a surrogate model is able to mimic a large class of random heterogeneous two-phase media. These parameters can be estimated from a small number of real material images by approximating the image statistical descriptors by the surrogate ones. Here, we use Bayesian inversion to find the probability distributions of the design parameters, from which they are then drawn for each material sample. The intensity field is constructed by convolving the Matérn-type covariance with the white noise. In the case of statistically homogeneous media, this can be done by Fast Fourier Transform. Moreover, the Fourier Transform of the Matérn covariance is given in a closed analytical form. This leads to a very efficient sampling process, which makes possible the use of Monte-Carlo methods to evaluate statistical properties for the quantities of interest in a given material class. An important goal of this work is to demonstrate the overall framework of the use of the surrogate material model in applications to homogenization and fatigue analysis, its feasibility and efficiency, and its role in the microstructure design. The paper is structured as follows. First, we describe in detail the properties and assumptions underlying the construction of a class of surrogate material models in Section 2. We present the level-set of Gaussian field model (Subsection 2.1), the Matérn covariance (Subsection 2.2) and the microstructure reconstruction technique from real material images (Subsection 2.3). In Section 3, we give the formulation of the associated linear elasticity problem together with the description of quantities of mechanical interest used in fatigue analysis. The simulation results are taken up in Section 4, including analysis and prediction of damage evolution and failure (Subsection 4.1), and a discussion of the use of the resulting models for the design of microstructure employing the process parameters (Subsection 4.2). We present final discussions and conclusions in Section 5. 2. Surrogate material model. Let us consider a random two-phase composite material in a bounded domain D ⊂ R d , d = 2, 3, the phases representing a matrix with inclusions (e.g., pores, precipitates, etc.). For a particular microstructure realization, the material phases are defined by the characteristic function where Ω is the space of the material samples (as in where κ I and κ M are the corresponding properties of the inclusions and the matrix, respectively. 2.1. Level-cut of a Gaussian field. The characteristic function of the material phase can be expressed as a level-cut of an intensity field m(x x x; ω): ω ∈ Ω, where the level τ ≥ 0 controls the volume fractions of the inclusions. We define the intensity m(x x x) as a zero-mean Gaussian random field Let us denote the standard deviation of m(x x x; ω) by σ = C(x x x, x x x). Then, since sign(|m τ σ , we can consider the Gaussian field σ -1 m(x x x) instead of m(x x x) with the level parameter τ σ . Thus, without loss of generality, we can assume C(x x x, x x x) = 1 and thus σ = 1. The first two moments of the random field χ(x x x, ω) are given in closed form, similar to Lemma 2.1. Let S 1 = E [χ(x x x)] and S 2 (x x x, y y y) = E [χ(x x x) χ(y y y)] be respectively the one-and two-point correlation functions From (2.4), it follows that the level-set parameter τ is uniquely defined through the given expected volume fraction φ 0 , (2.6) where erf(x) denotes the Gauss error function. Remark 2.2. Defining in (2.3) the phase through the absolute value of m(x x x; ω), see also In what follows, we will write a stationary function of two arguments x x x and y y y as a function of the distance r = x x xy y y . The microstructure morphology of the above level-cut model is defined by the covariance function C(x x x, y y y) of the intensity field m(x x x; ω). Parametrization of this covariance provides the so-called "design" parameters of the microstructure. In general, this covariance can have an infinite dimensional parameter space. In order to reduce the model and to have a limited number of design parameters, one can consider a projection of the material onto a reduced material class, that is, one may consider a parameterized class of covariance kernels. Here we use the Matrn covariance class with unit standard deviation σ = 1 and Matérn kernel where Γ and K ν denote the Euler Gamma function and the modified Bessel function of the second kind In particular, Θ Θ Θ = 2 Id Id Id corresponds to an isotropic covariance with correlation length . In general, Θ Θ Θ can be written through a rotation and scaling as . . . where the matrix R R R defines a rotation of axes in R d , and k , k = 1, . . . , d, are the correlation lengths in each axis direction. The Matérn covariance model (2.7) is widely used in statistics It is shown in Id - where W ∼ N (0, Id) is a spatial white noise in R d , and the normalization parameter η is given by . In practice, equation (2.8) is solved on a bounded domain with arbitrary boundary conditions In the general case, the shape operator can be spatially varying: Θ Θ Θ = Θ Θ Θ(x x x) (see, for example, where F -1 denotes the operator of the inverse Fourier Transform, Ŵ is the Fourier Transform of the white noise W, and Ĝ is the Fourier Transform of the Green's operator for the operator in (2.8), which is given by (see [4, Vol.II, section 8.13, formula (3)]) . Use of the Fast Fourier Transform algorithm in convolution (2.9), along with periodic boundaries, makes possible a fast generation of the synthetic samples. Thus, given design parameters φ 0 (or τ ), ν and Θ Θ Θ, the process of generating a microstructure realization for the surrogate material model described above can be summarized as follows: 1. Draw a realization of the spatial white noise W(x x x). 2. Compute the corresponding intensity field m(x x x) by solving (2.8). For the stationary case, it is given by convolution (2.9), computed using FFT. 3. The characteristic function χ(x x x) of the inclusions phase is given by the level-cut • The parameter φ 0 is the expected volume fraction of the inclusions (or porosity). • The regularity parameter ν defines the differentiability (smoothness) of the inclusions interface. • The shape operator Θ Θ Θ defines the metric to measure the distance in the covariance function and thus controls the form of the inclusions: their size, anisotropy level (aspect ratio) and orientation. Remark 2.3. In , where V pore and S pore denote the volume of the pore and the surface of the pore interface respectively, and V total is the total volume of the sample. A correction factor of 0.833 is taken into account due to the digitized structure of the surface We use the Matérn covariance class because of its flexibility, i.e. it covers a large variety of morphologies (microstructural shapes) with a relatively simple parametrization. Nevertheless, other convenient covariance kernel can be used instead (see, for example, Let us suppose that several binary images (realizations ω) χ(x x x; ω) of a real material are given. Under the stationarity assumption, we can approximate the two-point probability function S 2 (r) of this material with the spatial average where x x x k runs through all the voxels in all the provided images, χ(x x x) being zero outside the images (zero padding), and N n is the number of points x x x k + r r r n belonging to the images. We compute the cross-correlation (2.12) using FFT with zero padding. The two-point probability function S 2 (r) = E [χ(x x x; ω)χ(x x x + r r r; ω)], r = r r r , is the probability of the event when two points separated with distance r are in the same phase. Then, the random variable z k (r r r; ω) = χ(x x x k ; ω)χ(x x x k + r r r; ω) has the Bernoulli distribution with parameter p = S 2 (r). In (2.12) we compute the sum of "trials" of z(r; ω, x x x), which is, thus, from the Binomial distribution. Since this tends with a large number of trials to the normal distribution N p, p(1-p) N with the probability density function, we have Thus, the product of the densities for all r r r n provides the likelihood for our Bayesian inverse problem: , where we can substitute the real two-point correlation S 2 (r) within our surrogate model. The surrogate two-point probability function is given by formula (2.5): where C(r; ξ ξ ξ) is the intensity field covariance kernel, φ 0 is the average volume fraction of the pores (porosity), τ is given by (2.6), and ξ ξ ξ denotes the vector of design parameters of the model. In our case, C(r; ξ ξ ξ) is of Matérn type in the form (2.7) with unit variance σ = 1, and Assuming a uniform prior, the posterior distribution is simply determined by the likelihood. We use the Laplace approximation of the posterior: we approximate it with a multivariate lognormal distribution log N (log ξ ξ ξ M LE , Σ Σ Σ), where the maximal likelihood estimator ξ ξ ξ M LE is given by and the covariance matrix is approximated with In the isotropic case, we have Θ Θ Θ = 2 Id Id Id. Then simply plays the role of the characteristic length scale and does not affect the microstructure morphology. So, we simply fix ≡ M LE as a deterministic parameter. In what follows, we will perform a mechanical analysis on the surrogate microstructure with periodic boundary conditions under a given mean cyclic loading. The output of the computation will be analyzed in terms of quantities of interest for a standard high cycle fatigue analysis. The goal is to estimate the uncertainty of these quantities with respect to the variability of the underlying surrogate microstructures. From the point of view of a fatigue design method, the surrogate microstructure represents the material RVE and carries the statistical features of the real material as discussed in the previous sections. Moreover, the RVE represents a material point of a large structure and the given cyclic loading is the local shakedown response of the structure under service loading. In order to simplify the discussion and the subsequent computations, we will next only consider an elastic material behavior for the RVE. This assumption does however not restrain the generality of the present method and can be applied to materials with plasticity, viscosity, damage, etc., and can equally cover multiples material phases. 3.1. Linear elasticity problem. Let D = (0, 1) 3 be a representative volume element (RVE) of a heterogeneous two-phase material. The phases are defined by a stochastic characteristic function χ(x x x; ω) as in (2.1), periodic on D. The material is submitted to the macroscopic stress Σ Σ Σ to be imposed on average on the RVE, which results in a macroscopic strain E E E. Thus, for all x x x ∈ R d , the total displacement field u u u(x x x) is of the form where the fluctuation ũ u u(x x x) is periodic on D. Under the assumption of small strains, the local microscopic strain tensor field, observed on the stochastic RVE after loading, is and then condition (3.1) can be written in terms of strains: where ε ε ε(x x x) has zero mean and is periodic on D, and E E E denotes the macrostrain. The local stress tensor field σ σ σ(x x x) is , where C C C(x x x) is the fourth order stiffness tensor, K(x x x) and G(x x x) are the bulk and shear moduli, respectively, which are defined by the phase χ(x x x): where K I , G I are the bulk and shear moduli of the inclusions, and K M , G M -of the matrix, respectively. The equilibrium is given by where Σ Σ Σ denotes the macrostress. Thus, for a given macrostress Σ Σ Σ, we want to find the local strain field ε ε ε(x x x) = E E E + ε ε ε(x x x), such that the macrostrain E E E and the fluctuation ε ε ε(x x x) = 1 2 ∇ũ u u(x x x) + ∇ũ u u(x x x) t are the solution of the system 3.2. Mechanical Quantity of Interest for multidimensional loading. The high cycle fatigue analysis of metals is based on an elastic shakedown assumption at the structural scale and on material observations at the microscopic scale. Moreover, plasticity is driven by the deviatoric part of stresses, and cracks and porosities are opened by the positive spherical part of the stresses, which provides a natural split in the stress space. Therefore, a characteristic loading path can be characterized by a combination of bulk and shear loading as follows: where the angle θ varies from 0 to π/2 and characterizes the share of hydrostatic and deviatoric loading respectively. Lode coordinates of this loading are z = cos θ, r = sin θ and θ s = 0. In the stress space, the loading is a unit vector in the meridional plane (z, r) and varies continuously from an isotropic traction with eigenstress ( 3 ) obtained at θ = 0 to a pure shear with eigenstress (- We can compute for a given microstructure χ(x x x; ω), x x x ∈ D, the elastic solutions σ σ σ 0 (x x x; ω) and σ σ σ π/2 (x x x; ω) corresponding to the loads Σ Σ Σ 0 and Σ Σ Σ π/2 , respectively. We decompose the local stress field σ σ σ(x x x) into a deviatoric part s s s s s s s s s = σ σ σ -1 3 tr(σ σ σ)Id Id Id and a spherical part 1 3 tr(σ σ σ)Id Id Id, and introduce the local "traction" tr + (σ σ σ) = max(tr(σ σ σ), 0). Then, for each angle θ, we can obtain the associated quantities and deduce the associated combined quantity of interest over the volume D is the microscopic damage parameter, and s s s = √ s s s : s s s. This weighted combination of deviatoric norm and of positive trace is often used in practical fatigue criteria We are interested in the expected value E [Q(θ)] and the variance Var [Q(θ)], which are functions of θ, and the "worst" loading combination will be the one leading to the maximum expected value max The quantity Q presents the mean squared damage parameter around the maximum point. Since, in general, the maximum point can be a singularity, the integral (3.3) of the damage parameter is preferred as quantity of interest. Having the estimation of the damage parameter in hand, one can proceed with the analysis of the number of loading cycles to failure 4. Fatigue Analysis: results and discussions. In this section, we apply the surrogate microstructure model, discussed in Section 2, to the linear elasticity problem, formulated in Section 3, in order to perform a risk analysis of a heterogeneous material with respect to fatigue. Access to the fast microstructure sampling algorithm allows the approximation of the probability distribution of the fatigue criteria using Monte-Carlo methods. Furthermore, we can construct in this way a mapping from the microstructure design parameters to quantities of interest, which can serve for analysis of the influence of the microstructure morphology properties on the quantities of interest. Thus, in this section, we discuss two types of results: • First, using the Laplace approximation for Bayesian inference of the microstructure design parameters (see Section 2.3), a surrogate material is reconstructed from a few CT images of a real material. The statistical properties of the simplified fatigue criteria (3.3) for the surrogate material are analyzed using the Monte-Carlo method, employing a fast Fourier-based sampling process and linear elasticity solver. • Second, we perform the sensitivity analysis of the fatigue criteria and the homogenized elastic moduli with respect to the design parameters: porosity φ 0 and pore regularity ν. This makes possible the optimization of the microstructure design with respect to fatigue. All simulations have been performed using an Intel Xeon E5 processor (48x 3.00GHz) and 504 GB RAM, computing Monte-Carlo samples in parallel. Each Monte-Carlo iteration includes: 1. Sample surrogate microstructure using Matérn covariance kernel (Section 2). 2. Solution of the linear elasticity problem (3.2) for the loadings θ = 0 and θ = π/2 to obtain the local strains and stresses for the current microstructure sample (Section 3). Given the problem linearity, the results for intermediate loads θ ∈ (0, π/2) are computed as linear combination of the cases θ = 0 and θ = π/2. Runtime of one such iteration is about 1.5 s for a 2D sample of 2 8•2 ≈ 6.5 • 10 4 voxels, or about 70 s for a 3D sample of 2 7•3 ≈ 2 • 10 6 voxels. The linear elasticity problem (3.2) is solved in terms of local strains, using a Fourierbased Krylov solver, proposed by The estimator τ MLE corresponds to porosity φ 0MLE ≈ 0.014, ν varies in (1.0, 1.26). The correlation length is ≈ 0.256 mm. With the design parameters in hand, we can generate the surrogate microstructure samples in 2D or in 3D. The original CT images and the surrogate 2D and 3D samples are presented in Figure For the surrogate material, we compute the quantity of interest Q(θ) for different loading types θ, using 20, 000 3D samples of 2 7•3 ≈ 2 • 10 6 voxels. The angle θ is discretized with 45 equidistant points in [0, π/2]. The probability distributions of the quantity of interest Q(θ) are shown in Figure In what follows, Q is associated with the load , which corresponds to 0.3 π < θ max < 0.32 π. We want to study the sensitivity of the quantity of interest Q (3.3) to the two design parameters: porosity φ 0 and pore regularity ν. To be representative, a volume element has to be of size much larger than the correlation length . So we consider a unit square as RVE and fix = 0.05. For each φ 0 and ν, we solve the plane-strain problem (3.2) on 10, 000 2D samples with 2 8•2 ≈ 6.5 • 10 4 voxels. Young's modulus is 1 GP a for the material matrix and 0 in the pores, material Poisson ratio is 0.3. Solution examples for ν = 0.5 and ν = 10 with porosity φ 0 = 0.1 are shown in Figure Figure where Σ Σ Σ θ is the imposed macro stress, and E E E θ is associated computed macro strain (see Subsection 3.2). In this work, we have demonstrated a framework for uncertainty quantification in fatigue analysis using a surrogate microstructure model. The proposed microstructure model presents a trade off between computational performance, realistic random microstructure reconstruction and the small number of design parameters. The approach presented here is quite general, although for specifity we have focused on the simple case of statistically isotropic media. The anisotropy can be included through the shape operator Θ Θ Θ in (2.7). Modifying the ratio of different correlation lengths, we change the pore aspect ratio. In more sophisticated cases, when Θ Θ Θ(x x x) depends on the position, the procedure can be still based on the solution of the SPDE (2.8), however, the FFT can not be employed any more. In this work, we have considered covariances of Matrn class We also demonstrated the use of the model in the fatigue analysis, and we have studied the influence of the regularity of the pore interface on the statistical properties of the simplified Proof. We show the formulas (2.4)-(2.5) for S 1 and S 2 in two steps. First, we consider S 1 . Since the intensity m(x x x; ω) is a Gaussian random field, the mean of the phase χ(x x x; ω), defined by (2.3), satisfies Let us consider the volume fraction of all inclusions Then, its average over samples The mean volume fraction φ 0 can be also directly related to τ by the Gauss error function erf(•), i.e., Now let us focus on S 2 . We denote the bivariate Gaussian covariance matrix by , where g = C(x x x, y y y)/σ 2 , where C(x x x, y y y) is the covariance function of the Gaussian field m(x x x; ω). Then, Hence, the two-point correlation function of the phase χ is given by S 2 (x x x, y y y) = 1 we have that S 2 (x x x, x x x) = φ 0 and lim x x x-y y y →∞ S 2 (x x x, y y y) = φ 2 0 . Alternatively, given T (τ /σ, 1) = 1 4 φ 0 (1 -1 2 φ 0 ), changing the variable z = 1-t 1+t in (A.1) and z = 1+t 1-t in (A.2) leads respectively to S - 2 (x x x, y y y) = φ 0 -4T (τ /σ, 1) - Similar but more general formula can be found in 