We demonstrate conversion of up to 4.5 GHz-frequency microwaves to 1500 nm-wavelength light using optomechanical interactions on suspended thin-film lithium niobate. Our method utilizes an interdigital transducer that drives a free-standing 100 μm-long thin-film acoustic resonator to modulate light travelling in a Mach-Zehnder interferometer or racetrack cavity. Owing to the strong microwave-to-acoustic coupling offered by the transducer in conjunction with the strong photoelastic, piezoelectric, and electro-optic effects of lithium niobate, we achieve a half-wave voltage of V π = 4.6 V and V π = 0.77 V for the Mach-Zehnder interferometer and racetrack resonator, respectively. The acousto-optic racetrack cavity exhibits an optomechancial single-photon coupling strength of 1.1 kHz. Our integrated nanophotonic platform coherently leverages the compelling properties of lithium niobate to achieve microwaveto-optical transduction. To highlight the versatility of our system, we also demonstrate a lossless microwave photonic link, which refers to a 0 dB microwave power transmission over an optical channel. Conversion of information between the microwave and optical domains is a key ingredient for classical and quantum hybrid signal processing, computing, and networking To address the weak microwave-to-mechanical conversion of current integrated devices, we use free-standing LN thin-film acoustic (i.e. mechanical) resonators with low-loss optical resonators. Using an interdigital transducer (IDT), our acousto-optic devices demonstrate up to 50% coupling efficiency from microwave inputs to acoustic resonator modes, thereby enabling efficient optical modulation using Mach-Zehnder interferometers (MZI) and racetrack cavities. Our approach benefits from the strong piezeoelectricity and electro-optic effects of LN We utilize IDTs to drive our acoustic resonators due to their efficient electromechanical coupling and ease of fabrication. Notably, IDTs are widely used in electro-acoustic signal processing at up to hypersonic (greater than 1 GHz) frequencies Figures To fabricate each device, three layers of electron beam lithography are used to define the LN optical waveguides, the opening slots for the acoustic resonator and the release of the LN layer, and the metal electrodes needed for IDT. The LN is etched using reactive ion etching, and the fabricated devices feature a sidewall angle of 70 • . The metal electrodes are defined using a lift-off process: PMMA resist is patterned as a sacrificial layer, then a 75-nm-thick gold layer with a 8-nm-thick chromium adhesion layer is deposited using electron-beam evaporation, and the device is immersed in a solvent to lift off the resist. Finally, the release of the LN device from the substrate is achieved using buffered oxide etchant, which removes the underneath sacrificial oxide layer through the completely etched slots of the LN layer. Our acoustic resonator mediates the microwave-to-optical conversion by coupling to the microwave input via the IDT and modulating light due to acoustic modes (Fig. The contributions of moving boundary, electro-optic and photoelastic effects are calculated by integrating the products of the acoustic and optical field components with the corresponding coupling matrices. Acousto-optic interaction strengths between various acoustic modes and optical TE or TM mode are summarized in Table We experimentally characterize our acousto-optic MZI using a tunable C-band laser, a vector network analyzer (VNA), and a photoreceiver that features a sensitivity of ∼800 V/W (Fig. We evaluate the acoustic resonances and the microwave-to-acoustic coupling of our devices by measuring the microwave reflection (S 11 ) of the IDT. Our acoustic resonator exhibits multiple resonances in the range between 1.0 and 4.5 GHz (Fig. We characterize the optical modulation induced by the acoustic resonance by the opto-acoustic S 21 spectrum, where the driving port 1 of the VNA is connected to the IDT of the acoustic resonator and the detecting port 2 is connected to the photoreceiver [Fig. in which R PD (I rec = 0.25 mW) is the sensitivity of (optical power at) the photoreceiver, with derivation given in Sec. 2 of Supplementary Materials. We find V π = 4.6 V (5.8 V) using S 21 = -17.4 dB (-19.3 dB) at the resonance frequency of 3.33 GHz (2.24 GHz), and due to the 100 μm length of our acoustic resonator, we obtain V π L = 0.046 V•cm (0.058 V•cm), agreeing with that predicted by our simulation. Compared with MZI, our racetrack cavity features loaded optical Q factor of 2.2 × 10 6 for TE-polarized light of wavelength 1574.9 nm, corresponding to a linewidth of 95 MHz (Fig. allowing us to operate in the microwave sideband-resolved regime. With the laser blue-detuned by the acoustic resonant frequency from the optical resonance, we generate an optical sideband by the acoustic resonant mode and enhance it using the racetrack resonator (Fig. where κ (γ) and κ e (γ e ) are the total loss and external coupling rate of the optical (acoustic) mode, respectively. Ω m is the frequency of the acoustic mode, and R load = 50 Ω is the impedance of the input microwave source. Eq. 2 is derived from the equation of motion for the dynamics of the acousto-optic cavity (see Sec. 3 in Supplementary Material), We estimate the acousto-optic single-photon coupling strength to be g 0 ∼ 1.1 kHz between the 2.17 GHz acoustic mode and the fundamental TE optical mode, which is in good agreement with our theoretical predictions (see Table Another important figure of merit is the photon number conversion efficiency η from the microwave frequency to the optical sideband frequency, and it describes the device performance at the single photon level. From the derivation described in Sec. 3 of the Supplementary Material, the photon number conversion efficiency η is given by where C 0 = 4g 2 0 /(γκ) is the single-photon cooperativity, n cav = κ e I opt /(Ω 2 m ω 0 ) is the intracavity optical photon number for the blue-detuned pump light, 2κ e /κ (2γ e /γ) describes the external coupling efficiency of optical (acoustic) mode. Based on the experimentally extracted rates (Table As shown in Eq. 3, the photon number conversion efficiency depends on both optomechanical cooperativity (C 0 ) and the microwave-to-mechanical coupling strength (described by 2γ e /γ). Recent progress of LN OMCs A microwave photonic link enables low-loss long haul transport and flexible manipulation of microwave signals using optical devices by up-converting microwave frequencies to optical frequencies. To benchmark our acousto-optic racetrack device, we demonstrate a narrow-band microwave-photonic link using our acousto-optic racetrack cavity, and a link gain of 0 dB is achieved without the need of an optical amplifier within the link (after the modulation of our acousto-optic device), which would significantly increases the noise of the link. The optical pump light is amplified to ∼500 mW by an erbium-doped fiber amplifier and is blue-detuned by the acoustic resonant frequency Ω m from the optical resonance (Fig. Parking the laser at Ω m detuning from the optical mode, up to 3rd order harmonic signals are observed at the photodiode output with a microwave power of 5 mW (Fig. We demonstrate an integrated acousto-optic platform on thin film LN, which converts acoustic waves in microwave domain to optical light by a generalized acousto-optic interaction. Efficient microwave-to-acoustic coupling has been achieved using our IDT-coupled LN thin-film acoustic resonator. This addresses the coupling issue of current OMC-based platforms using mechanicallymediated microwave-to-optical converters. To further improve the photon number conversion efficiency, a variety of efforts in acoustic and photonic engineering can be made. For example, the acoustic resonator can be operated under vacuum and cryogenic environments to achieve higher Q factors, and the clamping loss of the suspended structures can be further reduced using phononic crystals Beyond microwave-to-optical conversion, our acousto-optic platform could also find applications in gigahertz frequency optical comb generation, on-chip optical routing and optical mode conversion. In these applications, the acoustic resonator could strongly enhance the signal in microwave domain and allow low microwave power operations. Compared to microwave electromagnetic resonators, the high acoustic f Q product and smaller acoustic mode volume of our on-chip acousto-optic resonator could enable quantum optomechanics at room temperatures with smaller footprints. We perform a 2D numerical simulation of our device cross-section (Fig. The single-mode optical waveguide of our device supports fundamental TE and TM modes (Fig. The acousto-optic interactions are calculated by integrating the optical and acoustic modes with matrices that describe moving boundary, photoelastic and electro-optic effects. Calculations here are based on theory formulated in previous works In our work, the acousto-optic interactions are described by the change of optical mode index due to the acoustic mode. The acoustic mode amplitude α, defined by the maximum displacement, is normalized to a single phonon occupation of the acoustic resonator using Ω = 1 2 m eff Ω 2 α 2 , where Ω is the acoustic frequency. The effective mass m eff of the acoustic mode is given by where D defines the 2D simulation domain and the coordinate variable r ∈ D. L a is the length (perpendicular to the simulation cross-section) of the acoustic resonator, ρ is material mass density, and Q is the displacement field. The electric field of the optical mode is denoted as E, s refers to strain, and E refers to the electric field of the acoustic mode. The mode index modulated by the moving boundary effect is given by where n is the optical mode index, n is the normal vector of the boundary facing outward, and D is the electric displacement field of the optical mode. The subscripts and ⊥ indicate the parallel and perpendicular components to the boundary. The permittivity for the optical electric field is denoted as , while ∆ = LNair , and ∆ -1 = -1 LN --1 air . The mode index modulated by the photoelastic effect is given by where 0 is the vacuum permittivity, and where p jk are the primary elasto-optic coefficients in the condition of a constant electric field for lithium niobate (LN), where the secondary effect via piezoelectricity and electro-optics is excluded where r jk is the primary electro-optic coefficients in the condition of constant strain in which secondary effects via piezoelectricity and photoelasticity is excluded. The above matrix is rotated according to the crystal orientation in our device. The overall relative refractive index change due to a single phonon is given by, ∆n 0,tot = ∆n 0,MB + ∆n 0,PE + ∆n 0,EO . (S6) The half-wave-voltage-length product V π L, characterizing the modulation efficiency, defines the voltage that is required to achieve a π phase shift for a modulation length L. Here, we derive the V π L from the simulated refractive index changes with additional information on Q factors and coupling of the acoustic resonator. While the overall refractive index change in Eq. S6 quantifies the optical phase shift (or index change) due to a single phonon in the acoustic resonator, one must relate the in-cavity phonon number to the applied microwave power. As discussed later in Sec. 3, the in-cavity phonon number is given by where N in = P in Ω m is the phonon input rate with the resonant frequency Ω m of the acoustic mode and input power P in . The decay are and external coupling rates of the acoustic mode is γ and γ e , respectively. Given the input impedance R in = 50Ω, the relation between input power and peak voltage V p is given by The number of in-cavity phonons N pn required for a π phase shift is given by, where λ is the optical wavelength. Taking Eqs. S7 and S8 in to Eq. S9, we derive the V π L of the device: Calculation of acousto-optic single-photon coupling strength g 0 For our thin-film acoustic resonator that is coupled to an optical racetrack cavity, the acousto-optic single-photon coupling strength g 0 can be derived using the 2D simulation results using where ω 0 is the optical resonant frequency, and η cav is the ratio of waveguide length in the acoustic resonator to that of the racetrack cavity. 1.5. Estimate V π L and g 0 using the numerical simulation results We estimate the V π L for the MachâĂŞZehnder interferometer (MZI) and g 0 for the acousto-optic cavity from simulation. To be consistent with the experiments, the typical measured acoustic and γ e /γ = 0.15 (corresponding to a 3 dB dip in S 11 measurements) are employed in the following calculation. The length of the acoustic resonator (in direction perpendicular to the simulation cross-section) is L a = 100 μm. The output impedance of the microwave source is R in = 50 Ω. For the acoustic-optic cavity shown in Fig. Here we relate the half-wave voltage V π to the measured opto-acoustic S 21 for the acousto-optic MZI. The phase modulation of one optical path is given by where E 0 is the input optical field of the MZI, φ b is the bias phase between two optical paths, and V is the applied voltage. The other optical path of MZI is not modulated, and the optical field is given by E p2 (V) = E 0 / √ 2. The optical field at the output of the MZI is given by The output optical power is thus given by The optimum microwave to optical conversion occurs at the bias phase φ b = π/2, which corresponds to the output intensity at half maximum. Measured using a potodetector, the opto-acoustic S 21 for small input signal is given by where I rec is the DC optical power received at the photodetector, and R PD is sensitivity of the photodetector. Using Eq. S15, we can derive V π of the acousto-optic MZI by the opto-acoustic S 21 measurements. Our acousto-optic cavity operates in the sideband resolved regime, that is the frequency of the microwave signals are greater than the decay rate of the optical mode. For a weak microwave signal, the optical transmission is thus close to unitary at the optimum conversion wavelength, which corresponds to that detuned from the optical resonance by the microwave frequency. Phenomenologically, this can be understood as the light being reversibly pumped into, and out of, the optical cavity due to the acoustic modulation. Thus, we consider the acousto-optic cavity as an intensity modulator and the relation in Eq. S15 is also used to derive the effective V π . Here we consider an acousto-optic system with an acoustic resonator driven by a microwave signal through the piezoelectric effect. The Heisenberg-Langevin equations of motion for an optical cavity a coupled to an acoustic resonator b are given by where a and b are the annihilation operators of optical and acoustic modes, respectively, g 0 is the single-photon coupling strength between the optical and acoustic resonators, ∆ = ω 0 -ω p is the optical detuning with the pump laser frequency ω p , the optical resonant frequency is ω 0 , κ = κ i + κ e is the loss of optical mode with intrinsic loss κ i and external coupling rate κ e , Ω m is the acoustic resonant frequency, γ = γ i + γ e is the loss of acoustic mode with intrinsic loss γ i and external coupling rate γ e , and a in and b in are the optical and microwave input field, respectively. To solve the equations of motion, we consider a single frequency microwave driving b in of the acoustic resonator given by b in = B in e -iΩ d t , (S18) where Ω d is the driving frequency, B in is the amplitude of the input field, and the input microwave power is P in = Ω m |B in | 2 . In the weak optical mode limit, i.e. g 0 a † a Ω m , the optical back action term (ig 0 a † a in Eq. S17) on the acoustic resonator is neglected. Taking Eq. S18 into Eq. S17, the acoustic amplitude b is solved using For a resonant microwave drive (Ω m = Ω d ), the in-resonator phonon number N pn is related to the input microwave power by Taking Eq. S19 into Eq. S16, the equation of motion for the optical mode is re-written as where G = g 0 B is the frequency shift of optical mode due to the acoustic field that is present. We numerically solve Eq. S21 to investigate the optical transmission spectra with various microwave input powers. We note that the Eq. S21 assumes a weak optical input and a linear acoustic resonator. The normalized optical transmission T under a continuous optical pump a in is given by As the optical mode is being modulated by an acoustic mode at microwave frequency Ω d , the optical transmission T is expected to associate an oscillation at the same as well as higher order frequencies due to nonlinearity. However, in experiment, the optical transmission spectra are captured by a low frequency (10 MHz) data acquisition card, which does not respond to gigahertz frequencies. Numerically, we use an average to calculate the quasi-DC component of the optical transmission using where time t 1 is set to be greater than the initial stabilization time in numerical calculation of a, and the average time window ∆t is chosen to be the integer periods of the driving signal, i.e. N/Ω. The numerically-calculated optical transmission spectra (Fig. The parameter S 21 is defined as the normalized microwave power generated by the receiving photodetector, which is generated by beating the pump laser and the optical sideband at the photodetector. To derive the power in the optical sideband, we decompose the optical amplitude a into a series of sidebands: where A q is the amplitude of optical sideband of order q. At the weak microwave input power (i.e. G κ) limit and in the sideband resolved regime (i.e. Ω m κ), we only consider the first order of optical sidebands, i.e. q = 0, ±1 and, for simplicity, we write the amplitude as, A 0 , A + , A -. The Eq. S21 is thus decomposed into sidebands, where A in is the input optical amplitude. The solution of Eq. S25 is given by For the scenario the pumping laser is blue detuned from the optical resonance by the acoustic resonant frequency (∆ = -Ω m ), and the microwave input is on resonant with the acoustic mode (Ω d = Ω m ), the in-cavity optical amplitude for the enhanced sideband A -is given by, where acousto-optic coupling strength Since the pump laser is detuned from the resonant, the transmitted amplitude of the pump laser is close to the input A in . The output microwave voltage U from the photodetector caused by the beating between the transmitted pump laser and the generated optical sideband given by where optical power I opt = ω 0 A 2 in , ω 0 is the optical frequency, and R PD is the response of the photodetector in the unit of V/W. The output microwave power is then given by where R load = 50 Ω is the impedance of the network analyzer. The opto-acoustic transmission S 21 is given by Using the experimental results of the acousto-optic cavity (Fig. We extract the acousto-optic coupling strength g 0 = 1.1 kHz from the experimental results shown in Fig. The photon number conversion efficiency η relates the number of generated optical sideband photons coupled out of the cavity √ κ e A -to the input microwave photons. For weak microwave input signals, the conversion efficiency η is given by where C 0 = 4g 2 0 /(γκ) is the single-photon cooperativity, n cav = κ e I opt /(Ω 2 m ω 0 ) is the intracavity photon number of the blue-detuned pump light, 2κ e /κ is the external coupling efficiency of the optical mode, and 2γ e /γ is the external coupling efficiency of acoustic mode by the IDT. Using the experimentally-extracted values summarized in Table We experimentally investigate the acoustic mode profiles using transmission-mode microwave impedance microscopy 