In this article we review recent progress in the understanding of multiband superconductivity and its relationship to odd-frequency pairing. We begin our discussion by reviewing the emergence of odd-frequency pairing in a simple two-band model, providing a brief pedagogical overview of the formalism. We then examine several examples of multiband superconducting systems in each case describing, both, the origin of the band degree of freedom and the nature of the odd-frequency pairing. Throughout, we attempt to convey a unified picture of how odd-frequency pairing emerges in these materials and propose that similar mechanisms are responsible for odd-frequency pairing in several analogous systems: layered two-dimensional heterostructures, double quantum dots, double nanowires, Josephson junctions, and systems described by isolated valleys in momentum space. We also review experimental probes of oddfrequency pairing in multiband systems, focusing on hybridization gaps in the electronic density of states, paramagnetic Meissner effect, and Kerr effect. It is well-established that the symmetries of a superconducting order parameter influence many of the physical properties of a superconductor A more accurate description of conventional superconductivity, however, starts with a retarded phononmediated interaction, described by Eliashberg theory The prototypical example is the superconductor-ferromagnet (SF) junction, in which numerous theoretical works have demonstrated that the breaking of spin-rotational symmetry can convert conventional s-wave spin-singlet Cooper pairs to odd-ω spin-triplet pairs In this article we focus on several recent works exploring the intriguing possibility of realizing odd-ω pair correlations in multiband superconductors, without the need for magnetism or interfaces. In 2013 it was shown that odd-ω pairing should arise ubiquitously in such systems due to the presence of interband hybridization It is important to note that the presence of additional band degrees of freedom in these multiband superconductors leads, not only to novel methods of inducing odd-ω pairing, but also to a broader classification scheme for the symmetry of the Cooper pairs. For a generic superconducting system with multiple bands crossing the Fermi level, we write the anomalous Green's function as the time-ordered expectation value: 〉, where σ i , x i , α i , and t i represent the spin, positions, band, and time degrees of freedom. We emphasize that this band index has its origin in the electronic degrees of freedom of the superconductor and could stem from any of the indices characterizing the system, including the atomic orbital, sublattice, layer, dot, lead, or valley indices, as we discuss in Sec. 3.4. Accounting for the symmetry under the exchange of each of these pairs of indices we necessarily have F (1, 2) = -F (2, 1). This leads to eight possible symmetry classes In the remainder of this article we provide, in Sec. 2, a pedagogical overview of the emergence of odd-ω pairing in a simple two-band model due to interband hybridization, as well as a discussion of when we should expect to find odd-ω pairing in a generic superconducting system. Following the overview, we focus in Sec. 3 on specific proposals for realizing odd-ω pairing in wellknown multiband superconductors, and also in materials and systems possessing related active electronic degrees of freedom, such as layer, dot, lead or valley indices. In Sec. 4 we discuss proposed experimental signatures of odd-ω pairing in multiband superconductors. Finally, in Sec. 5 we conclude our discussion. Odd-frequency Pairing To illustrate the emergence of odd-ω pairing in multiband superconductors we study the pair amplitudes associated with the following two band Hamiltonian using the basis: where c † σ,α,k (c σ,α,k ) creates (annihilates) a fermionic quasiparticle with spin σ in band α and with momentum k, together with the definitions: where σ0 and σi =1,2,3 are the identity and Pauli matrices in spin space. Here ξ α,k is the energy dispersion of band α, Γ is a measure of the interband hybridization, and ∆ α,k is the superconducting order parameter in band α, here assumed for simplicity to be spin-singlet in nature, although it is trivial to extend the derivation to spin-triplet pairing. We note that this kind of interband hybridization, Γ, is intrinsic to a superconductor whenever there is a mismatch between the the quasiparticles of the normal state and the orbital character of the Cooper pairs or, alternatively, it can arise from scattering processes in the presence of disorder To study the pair amplitudes associated with Eq. ( where τ is imaginary time and T τ is the τ-ordering operator. With these definitions, it is straightforward to derive the following equations of motion: where we have Fourier-transformed the Green's functions from imaginary time, τ, to Matsubara frequency, i ω n , and 1 is the 8×8 identity matrix in band × spin × particle-hole space. For simplicity, we assume timereversal symmetry such that ξ α,-k = ξ α,k and for the moment we also set Γ = Γ * . After some straightforward algebra we find that the anomalous Green's function, F , is given by: where we define: From Eq. ( Inspecting the intraband pairing, given by the diagonal elements of the matrix in Eq. ( If we relax the assumption that the interband hybridization is real, instead setting Γ = |Γ|e i φ , we find that the odd-ω pair amplitude is given by where ρ2 is a Pauli matrix in band space and D ′ k,i ω n is still an even function of k and i ω n . From Eq. ( To understand how the results for the simple two-band model generalize to more complicated models, it is instructive to consider a generic model: where the indices n, m label all degrees of freedom for the quasiparticles, including: spin, position, band/orbital, sublattice, etc. It is easy to see that the Hamiltonian in Eq. (1) is a particular example of a Hamiltonian of this form. Moreover, any Hermitian Hamiltonian with a BCSlike order parameter may be written in this form. To examine the pair amplitudes for the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Here, the ˆ-symbol denotes matrices with indices n,m running over all quantum numbers describing the quasiparticles, including position, spin, and any band or similar degrees of freedom. From Eq. ( where we define ĥ, ∆ * ≡ ĥ ∆ -∆ ĥ * . Clearly, when ĥ, ∆ * vanishes, the system has only even-ω pairing, given byω 2 n + ĥ2 -1 ∆. Thus the condition for the emergence of odd-ω pairing, in a general mean field theory, is given by: ĥ ∆ -∆ ĥ * = 0. ( For the simple two-band model in Eq. ( If the system under consideration is translation invariant we can Fourier-transform from real-space to momentum space and we find the following condition for odd-ω pairing: ĥk ∆k -∆k ĥ * This condition is in fact identical to a measure of "superconducting fitness" recently discussed by Ramires and Sigrist Having derived the general criteria for odd-ω superconductivity to appear in multiband systems, we now discuss real examples of multiband superconductors in which odd-ω pairing has been predicted to emerge. We begin by covering examples in which band degrees of freedom are intrinsic to the superconductor, arising from either different atomic orbitals or a sublattice index, forming what would properly be known as a multiband superconductor. We then discuss superconducting systems in which the additional electronic degrees of freedom are not strictly speaking band indices but have their origin in some other aspect of the system, considering the cases of two-dimensional (2D) bilayers, onedimensional (1D) nanowires, zero-dimensional (0D) quan-tum dots, superconducting leads in Josephson junctions, and isolated valleys in momentum space. In this subsection we discuss the emergence of oddω pairing in the multiband superconductor Sr 2 RuO 4 , which was recently examined by Komendová and Black-Schaffer Additionally, it has been observed that the superconducting phase exhibits spontaneous time-reversal symmetry breaking using muon spin-relaxation measurements While the superconducting state of Sr 2 RuO 4 is controversial, the normal state properties are now quite well-understood with experiments where the k-dependence of the matrix elements has been suppressed for brevity and where the indices 1, 2, and 3 correspond to the ruthenium d x y , d xz , and d y z orbitals, respectively. Here, it is assumed that the order parameter is either spin-singlet or mixed spin-triplet Before assuming precise values for the tight-binding model in Eq. ( Focusing specifically on parameters which faithfully reproduce the three bands of Sr 2 RuO 4 , γ, α, and β, Ref. Next we discuss a recent work demonstrating the emergence of odd-ω pairing in the heavy-fermion superconductor UPt 3 To capture the essential features of the Fermi surfaces appearing at either the Γ-point or the A-point in UPt 3 the following normal state tight-binding Hamiltonian has recently been employed written in the basis described by ) where c † kmσ creates a fermionic quasiparticle with crystal momentum k, on sublattice m = {1, 2}, and with spin σ = {↑, ↓}. Here, ξ k is an even function of k describing the intra-sublattice hopping, ǫ k is a complex-valued intersublattice hopping term, and the function g k is odd in k and describes the spin-orbit coupling. In Eq. ( The superconducting order parameter in UPt 3 is widely believed to belong to the E 2u irreducible representation with spin-triplet m z = 0 pairing where σi and ρi are Pauli matrices in spin and sublattice space, respectively, , and η i are complex numbers parameterizing the phase diagram Notice the unusual combination of spin-triplet f -wave terms being odd in spatial parity and spin-triplet d-wave terms being even in parity. This combination is caused by the nonsymmorphic lattice symmetry Using the Hamiltonian and order parameter in Eqs. ( From the matrix structure in Eq. In this subsection we discuss the emergence of odd-ω pairing in buckled 2D honeycomb lattices with proximityinduced superconductivity, investigated in Refs. More specifically, in Ref. where c † i σ (c i σ ) creates (annihilates) as fermionic quasiparticle at site i with spin σ, 〈i , j 〉 sums over nearestneighbor (NN) sites, i , j , of the honeycomb lattice, 〈〈i , j 〉〉 sums over next-nearest-neighbor (NNN) sites. Here, t represents the NN hopping parameter and λ SO is the spin-orbit coupling due to NNN hopping, where ν i j = ±1 depending on whether the vector from site i to j is oriented clockwise or counterclockwise around the hexagonal plaquette where μ is the chemical potential in the absence of any applied voltage, λ V is proportional to the applied voltage, and ζ i = ±1 depending on whether i belongs to sublattice A or B. At finite doping, the normal state described by Eq. ( As is well-known, for λ V < λ SO the Kane-Mele Hamiltonian in Eq. ( One common aspect of the previously discussed examples is that, odd-ω pairing emerges from the hybridization of a discrete set of multiple bands. These multiple bands offer an expansion of the set of allowed Cooper pair symmetries, as illustrated in Table One proposal by Parhizgar and Black-Schaffer Another set of proposals rely on double-quantum dots coupled to superconductors In a similar spirit to the proposals involving double quantum dots, odd-ω pairing has also been proposed in double nanowires coupled to a superconducting substrate Odd-ω pairing has also been explored in conventional Josephson junctions The above examples involving bilayers, double quantum dots, double nanowires, and Josephson junctions, all utilize spatial separation to obtain an additional index akin to the band index, but it is also possible to obtain such an index using a separation in reciprocal space. In particular, the transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) may be described by an effective model governing the physics of separate points in the Brillouin zone, so-called valleys. In these systems, the valley index can thus behave like an effective band degree. Using a low-energy effective model to describe the two k-space valleys of a single layer of TMD proximity-coupled to an s-wave superconductor with Rashba spin-orbit coupling, Ref. Having shown how odd-ω superconductivity is ubiquitous in many superconducting systems, we now present several experimental signatures that have been proposed to measure the odd-ω pairing. Due to its intrinsically dynamical nature, with a zero equal-time amplitude, oddω pairing has proven to be notoriously hard to probe directly, still, as seen below, there are a growing number of known signatures of odd-ω pairing in multiband superconductors. Shortly after the initial theoretical proposal for the emergence of odd-ω pairing in the two-band model defined in Eq. ( Computing the DOS in this manner, it was found that, as expected, in the presence of two different gaps ∆ 1 = ∆ 2 , and in the absence of interband hybridization, Γ = 0, the DOS is simply a superposition of the DOS of two superconductor with coherence peaks at E = ±∆ 1 and E = ±∆ 2 , respectively, see Fig. Solving for these crossing points, it can be shown that, in general, there could be two avoided crossings at different positive energies. However, assuming the initial quasiparticle bands do not intersect, i.e. ξ 1,k = ξ 2,k for any k, then only one of these is a true avoided crossing. For quadratic dispersions with effective masses m i and chemical potentials μ i , this condition will be true as long as (μ 1 -μ 2 )/(m 1 -m 2 ) > 0. In this case, one can show that hybridization gaps will emerge if and only if Γ = 0 and ∆ 1 = ∆ 2 , which are exactly the same as the conditions for odd-ω interband pairing While, hybridization gaps are a robust and simple probe of odd-ω pairing in the kind of two band model considered in Ref. One of the defining properties of superconducting states is their response to magnetic fields. As was first discovered by Meissner and Ochsenfeld In Ref. For the model in Ref. where K is the Meissner kernel, which can be written in terms of the Nambu-Gorkov Green's functions: Ĝ, F , and F . Furthermore, assuming equal masses m 1 = m 2 = m and chemical potentials μ 1 = μ 2 = μ for the two bands, the contribution to the Meissner kernel, K , takes on a relatively simple form: where e is the charge of the electron, c the speed of light, T the temperature, and V vol is the volume of the system in d dimensions. Using Eq. ( where the odd-ω pair amplitude is necessarily given by the coefficient proportional to ρ2 (second Pauli matrix in band space), since that is the only possibility consistent with the symmetry constraints given by Fermi-Dirac statistics. From Eqs. ( where all of the terms are strictly positive except for the contribution from the odd-ω pairing. This explicitly demonstrates that, in this case, odd-ω pairing always contributes paramagnetically to the Meissner kernel, thus countering the flux repulsion due to the conventional even-ω Cooper pairs. The authors went on to show that this pattern holds for all of the even-ω and odd-ω pair amplitudes in the three of the cases described above, demonstrating that, in a generic two-band model, all even-ω Cooper pairs exhibit diamagnetism while all oddω pairs exhibit paramagnetism It has long been known that when polarized light is reflected from the surface of a magnetic material, the polarization of the reflected light can be shifted by an angle θ K relative to the incident beam. This phenomenon, known as the Kerr effect, gives a direct probe of the breaking of time-reversal symmetry in magnetic materials. In recent years, the Kerr effect has also been applied to study time-reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB) order parameters in superconductors, in the absence of magnetism In particular, Taylor and Kallin where we have suppressed the k-dependence on the lefthand side for brevity. This implies that, in addition to a TRSB order parameter, either interband hybridization or a complex interband order parameter are essential for the observation of the Kerr effect in a clean two-band superconductor without magnetism. In Ref. In this article we have reviewed recent work on the possibility of odd-ω pairing in multiband superconductors. After a brief pedagogical examination of the emergence of odd-ω pairing in a simple two-band model we extended the formalism to derive a general criterion for the emergence of odd-ω pairing in any superconductor with an equal-time BCS order parameter, ∆, and normal state Hamiltonian, h, given in Eq. ( We then discussed several previous works in which multiband superconductors are predicted to host odd-ω pairing. In particular, we focused on Sr 2 RuO 4 After discussing examples of systems which are predicted to host odd-ω pairing, we reviewed three different experimental probes which are relevant for odd-ω pairing in multiband systems: hybridization-induced gaps in the electronic density of states To conclude, the ubiquity of odd-ω superconductivity has been shown in a wide variety of superconducting materials and systems, ranging from traditional multiband superconductors, to systems where other electronic degrees fo freedom provide an effective band index, including systems with layer, dot, wire, lead, and valley indices. Most importantly, as we demonstrated, the basic principles leading to the emergence of odd-ω pairing in all of these diverse superconducting systems can be understood from a simple unifying criterion. Additionally, these odd-ω pair amplitudes have been demonstrated to play multiple roles in determining the properties of these systems. Considering the generality of these phenomena, we believe that many more systems are likely awaiting discovery as odd-ω superconductors and that as odd-ω pairing is related to more observable properties it will grow in importance as a means to characterize and understand these systems. Copyright line will be provided by the publisher Copyright line will be provided by the publisherJuly 30, 2019 