The promise of machine learning has been explored in a variety of scientific disciplines in the last few years, however, its application on first-principles based computationally expensive tools is still in nascent stage. Even with the advances in computational resources and power, transient simulations of large-scale dynamic systems using a variety of the first-principles based computational tools are still limited. In this work, we propose an ensemble approach where we combine one such computationally expensive tool, called discrete element method (DEM), with a time-series forecasting method called auto-regressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) and machine-learning methods to significantly reduce the computational burden while retaining model accuracy and performance. The developed machine-learning model shows good predictability and agreement with the literature, demonstrating its tremendous potential in scientific computing. Machine learning has emerged as one of the most promising technologies in the past decade due to its capability to provide valuable insights into vast amounts of data generated during the Internet era. Rapid democratization of machine learning tools has allowed for the successful adoption of the technology in a wide range of fields including robotics, computer vision Over the past decade, a tremendous growth in computational power, easily accessed through cloud computing platforms, has been observed. Even then, simulations based on first-principles models of natural systems and in particular, time-variant problems of these systems remain prohibitively expensive for most practical problems. Many of these models such as Molecular Dynamics (MD) Most practically relevant transient problems require simulations on the order of hours or days, however stability and computational burden only allows for a few minutes of simulations. Zonal or multi-compartmental modeling A great deal of opportunity exists if we can efficiently learn the behavior of the system from a few time-steps (completed in a feasible computational time) and forecast it in time space to remove the need for running these computationally expensive simulations until completion. In light of the above-mentioned challenges, there is an obvious need for a broadly applicable ensemble modeling framework to overcome computational limitations and move towards high fidelity predictive models that can bridge the gap between coarse-grained systems and real systems in a computationally affordable manner. In order to overcome the challenges of performing transient simulations, we propose the use of a time-series forecasting method known as auto-regressive integrated moving average (ARIMA). ARIMA has been previously used in weather forecasting and stock market prediction; however, its application to first principle models has not been reported so far to the best of our knowledge. ARIMA can be used to train on data generated from high fidelity transient simulations and then forecast key relevant physical quantities of interest. As ARIMA is learning from the entire simulation dataset, it has capability to capture start-up transients, local heterogeneities and temporal evolution of the solution. ARIMA can be an excellent tool to probe when the real system under investigation will reach to the desired state, and also the spatial distribution of time-variant physical quantities at that desired state. Taking it a step further, a machine learning predictive model can be built on ARIMA results for reaching the desired state as a function of multidimensional system parameters. Machine learning models are quick to probe and preserve the information of high fidelity models making it an excellent tool for real-time analysis, optimization, and model-based control of the system of interest. We selected particulate mixing as our test problem for framework development due to its broad applicability in pharmaceutical, food and agro-sciences industries. Solid particles mixing is indispensable to achieve desired product quality with respect to content uniformity and reproducible manufacturing across scales in many industrial processes such as drying, blending and granulation We will further focus our attention to applications of particulate mixing in the pharmaceutical industry. Downstream process development of pharmaceutical solids, also known as the active pharmaceutical ingredient or API, involve a variety of complex chemical and physical unit operations, some of which are poorly understood. Post reaction and crystallization steps, slurry is pressure transferred to an agitated filter dryer (AFD) from the crystallizer for filtration and drying as the active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) obtained during the crystallization step is typically potent and thus human-exposure should be minimized. For drying, heat is provided from jacketed vessel walls. Intermittent agitation is usually performed to achieve uniform heat transfer across the API bed. An unoptimized agitation protocol will lead to potential agglomeration and/or attrition which would significantly impact the particle size distribution (PSD) achieved at the end of the drying and required for oral drug product formulation downstream. Particulate mixing also impacts the blending and granulation steps right before tableting and thus impact the content uniformity and drugability of each tablet. Unfortunately, though very critical, particulate mixing is a poorly understood phenomena. A first-principles modeling technique such as DEM can reveal the underlying mechanistic aspect of particulate mixing, however like all other high-fidelity scientific computing techniques discussed above, DEM also suffers from the requirement of enormous computing power as practical systems of interest are quite large. For example, API particles of 10 μm size at the manufacturing scale filter dryer (0.88 m diameter and fill level of 20 cm) yields a system comprising of more than 20 trillion particles which would take around 7000 CPU core-years to simulate one minute of physical time for particle mixing. Hence, DEM simulations are feasible and limited to systems with small number of particles or equivalently larger particles for the same fill level. Computational requirements significantly increase further if we are dealing with cohesive particles or need to simulate for longer transient periods. Thus, over the years, a large body of DEM simulations In this work, we present an ingenious framework for utilizing ARIMA and ML models for computationally expensive transient models (Figure Segregation Index from DEM simulations DEM simulations of cohesive granular pharmaceutical particles were performed in a manufacturing scale agitated filter dryer equipment. DEM equations are explained in detail in supplementary section S.1. Similar systems can be found in food, agriculture, mining and chemical industries where particle or powder handling is quite common. In DEM simulations, particle motion is described in a Lagrangian framework wherein, equations of motion are solved for each particle or each particle acts as a computational node. At each time step, the forces acting on a particle are computed. A multitude of forces can be acting at the granular particle scale such as friction, contact plasticity, cohesion, adhesion, liquid bridging, gravity and electrostatics depending upon the system under study In total, 65 simulations were performed for one minute of physical agitation time by varying the material properties encompassing a range of particle radius R, particle density ρ, coefficient of restitution e, cohesive energy density γcohesion, tangential friction μ f , Young's modulus E and process parameters covering a span of number of particles NP, impeller speed RPM, and cake height h. The typical average time for each of these DEM simulations was over a month. Figure The extent of particle mixing is quantified using the Segregation Index parameter, ψ The asymptotic value of ψ for a system would tend to 1 when approaching random uniform mixing, however the time required would depend on a number of factors, which have been investigated in this study. During mixing, spatial arrangement of the particles changes with time resulting in the evolution of the segregation index. At any time, the extent of mixing of particles will be different in different regions of the domain indicating a spatial distribution of ψ as shown in Figure The caveat with a longer agitation period is that it can affect particle size distribution because of particle attrition Instead of simulating for the entire physical operation time which is prohibitively large, we chose to simulate for one minute of operation and project the results (segregation index with time) in time-space using a time-series forecasting method, ARIMA to overcome the prohibitively large simulation time of a high-fidelity simulation technique like DEM. ARIMA We chose to do time-forecasting of Segregation index, ψ, which is an indicator of the extent of particulate mixing. ARIMA predictions were verified on all DEM generated data by training on ψt=0 to ψt=T/2, where T is the total time step of the DEM simulation and predicting on the latter half (t=T/2+1 to t=T), as can be seen in Figure Post-verification, the ARIMA model was used to forecast the trend of ψ and the time required to reach the desired state of uniform random mixing, i.e. ψ ~ 1 as shown in Figure ARIMA, though applied here on ψ, could have been applied on another time-varying physical quantity of interest such as torque, stress, and kinetic energy depending on the needs of the study. ARIMA is a powerful tool to reduce the computational cost and time by several orders of magnitude, in terms of core-hours, as indicated in Table In this work, ARIMA forecasted uniform mixing time was taken as the response variable to be predicted as a function of a set of input parameters such as material and process properties. Implementing sophisticated machine learning methods such as neural networks was tempting but not practical because of the dimensions of the dataset making it vulnerable to over-fitting. Random forest outperformed (R 2 =0.79) the other methods because of averaging the results from multiple trees generated from a randomly selected subset of the data. Partial Least Squares Regression (PLSR), Support Vector Regression, and regularized linear regression technique Elastic Net were inferior in performance as compared to random forest with an R 2 of 0.70, 0.72 and 0.71 respectively, also can be seen in Figure Having obtained the predictive ML model, we sought to gain mechanistic insight in the system by probing which descriptors impact the response variable the most by a process known as feature selection. RT-RF, our best ML model, identifies the importance of the descriptors rather than weights attached to the descriptors like a linear regression model. Importance of a feature is quantified by calculating the percentage change in mean-squared error by changing the value of the descriptor. According to RT-RF, fill level, impeller rotation and particle radius, in decreasing order of significance, are the most informative descriptors to impact uniform mixing time which is in good agreement with some recent works At larger fill levels, particles need to be displaced to a greater extent to achieve uniform mixing leading to an increase in mixing time i. A large amount of resources and time are spent in a variety of industries dealing with solid handling in developing a robust, scalable and reproducible process combined with technology transfer to manufacturing sites, a lot of which happens in an ad-hoc manner. Fundamental scientific tools, though accurate, have prohibitively large computational cost, particularly for transient cases while most industrial processes, either batch or continuous, have a transient component in their operation. The study presented here shows that for a complex and relevant case of cohesive powder mixing, a novel approach based on time-series forecasting using ARIMA and ML can provide tremendous insights and guide mechanistic framework by pointing key descriptors that impact the outcome the most. The overall framework presented here is quite simple and powerful and can be adopted in a variety of engineering and scientific problems that are transient in nature. An easier extension of the framework can be done in the field of computational fluid dynamics (CFD) to probe various heat and mass transfer limited or phase transition systems. Similarly, it can be used in the field of molecular dynamics (MD) to predict the rate or final packing form of materials or biological entities like DNA or proteins. Coupling of fundamental tools with ARIMA and ML would reduce the computational time to probe a large descriptor set and provide predictions on the behavior of the system under new conditions and/or, additionally, the optimal way of operating the system. From an industrial perspective, the ML models can become part of model-predictive control and coupled with PAT and automation providing endless opportunities. A python code 32 was customized to forecast the segregation index. As the mixing time is a complex function of the descriptors, one ARIMA model would not work best for all the data. So, ARIMA hyperparameters (p,d,q) were sampled between 0 and 100, 0 and 2, 0 and 2 respectively for all the simulations. Given that errors at previous time steps are unobserved variables, maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) was performed in order to find the best model. Akaike Information Criterion 27 (AIC) score was used to select the best ARIMA model after comparing each model against other models. ARIMA python codes were run on the Anaconda 33 platform using jupyter notebooks. All the simulations took O(minutes) for completion, which reflects on the power and scalability of the method. The time complexity of ARIMA is a function of the number of values of hyperparameters to sample rather than the number of particles or the values of the other descriptors, as compared to the DEM simulations where computational time significantly depends on the fill level and the number of particles. Machine learning methods such as Elastic Net Regression (EN) 