Transparent titania coatings have self-cleaning and anti-reflection properties (AR) that are of great importance to minimize soiling effect on photovoltaic modules. In this work, TiO 2 nanocolloids prepared by polyol reduction method were successfully used as coating thin films onto borosilicate glass substrates via adsorptive self-assembly process. The nanocolloids were characterized by transmission electron microscopy and x-ray diffraction. The average particle size was around 2.6 nm. The films which have an average thickness of 76.2 nm and refractive index of 1.51 showed distinctive anti soiling properties under desert environment. The film surface topography, uniformity, wettability, thickness and refractive index were characterized using x-ray diffraction, atomic force microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, water contact angle measurements and ellipsometry. The self-cleaning properties were investigated by optical microscopy and UV-Vis spectroscopy. The optical images show 56% reduction of dust deposition rate over the coated surfaces compared with bare glass substrates after 7 days of soiling. The transmission optical spectra of these films collected at normal incidence angle show high anti-reflection properties with the coated substrates having transmission loss of less than 6% compared to bare clean glass. Sunlight is an abundant energy source that is not distributed evenly on earth's surface. Low latitudes, arid and semi-arid areas, within 35°N to 35°S, receive the highest direct normal irradiance 1 . Seven of the world deserts, located between these two latitudes, are able to meet the energy needs globally with solar power generation technologies, including photovoltaic (PV), concentrated photovoltaic (CPV), and concentrated solar power (CSP) systems 1 . Nevertheless, solar cells and solar collectors in sandy areas, e.g. the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) regions are subjected to severe deposition of sand and dust particles on the glass surface of the cells or collectors in a process called fouling 2 . Fouling is defined as the deposition of foreign particles such as fine sand particles on a heat transfer surface forming an insulating layer that reduces the rate of heat transfer 2, 3 . Although several ways have been reported so far to clean soiled surfaces such as the use of electrostatic dust removal 4 , mechanical removal methods that are mainly comprised of a broom or a brush driven by a machine 5 , and the use of surfactants 2 , it should be noted that solar panels are usually mounted in regions with difficult accessibility such as the roof of buildings, making thereby the solution based on self-cleaning coatings highly preferable compared to conventional cleaning methods. Self-cleaning nanofilms were developed to be coated on solar cell array. These films are made of hydrophobic or hydrophilic material which involves two different strategies. In the case of hydrophobic films, studies have suggested that super hydrophobic surfaces form microstructures and/or nanostructures that enhance the contact angle of water. So, when water droplets hit the surface, it would quickly roll off, carrying dust and other particles away 6 . On the other hand, the most popular hydrophilic material studied for self-cleaning applications is titanium dioxide (TiO 2 ) 7-10 . Self-cleaning using TiO 2 films involves two stages; first, a split of organic dirt via photocatalytic process in the presence of ultraviolet light, and second, the diffusal of water to the whole surface instead of getting together due to the hydrophilicity of TiO 2 and hence rinsing the dust. In addition to its hydrophilic properties and high photo reactivity, titania also exhibits long term stability, good mechanical and chemical properties, in addition to high thermal resistance together with low toxicity and costs The functional characteristics of titania is related to its crystal structure and morphology which both depend on the preparation method. In order to reduce the accumulation of contaminants on PV surfaces, self-cleaning properties should be combined with the efficient photo catalytic activity of titania. Both self-cleaning and AR properties depend on the surface nano-texture and roughness In this work, TiO 2 nanocolloids were prepared via modified polyol reduction method and used as self cleaning coating for glass substrates. These coatings were characterized by atomic x-ray diffraction, force microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, ellipsometery, optical microscope, UV-Vis spectroscopy and contact angle measurements. Moreover, the effect of soiling on the optical transmission properties of the coated glass was investigated and the effectiveness of the anti-soiling properties was evaluated and compared to uncoated glass surfaces. TiO 2 nanocolloids synthesis. TiO 2 nanocolloids were prepared by polyol reduction method In order to obtain powder nanoparticles for x-ray diffraction analysis, the prepared colloidal suspension containing the residual polyol and the nanoparticles were left to cool down at room temperature, and then centrifuged at a speed of 5000 rpm for 20 min followed by washing with pure ethanol. The procedure of centrifugation and ethanol-washing was repeated five times. Finally, the obtained powders were dried in an oven (Thermolyne, Thermo Scientific) overnight at 50 °C. Preparation of coating films. Borosilicate plate glass slides (Chemglass CG-1904-36) of 25 mm × 10 mm × 2 mm (width × length × thickness) were used as work pieces. Before deposition, the glass substrate samples were cleaned with ethanol and rinsed with deionized water. Then, each substrate sample was soaked in Piranha solution which was prepared by mixing sulfuric acid (H 2 SO 4 , concentration of 5-6%, Merck) with hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 , concentration of 30%, Merck) in a volume ratio of 2:1 for 30 minutes. Later, the samples were thoroughly rinsed with deionized water and left to dry in the oven at 70 °C for another 30 minutes. The dried glasses were then dipped in nanocolloids for 2 hours (Fig. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis was carried out using FEI TALOS X operated at 200 kV. The TEM specimens were prepared by sonicating the as-prepared TiO 2 catalyst powder in ethanol. One drop of the solution was then placed onto a 200 mesh TEM copper grid coated with a lacey carbon support film (Ted Pella) and dried in air. We used Image J software for the determination of particles size distribution. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the synthesized nanoparticles and thin films were acquired using a Rigaku Ultima IV X-ray diffractometer equipped with fixed monochromator which was used for the data collection. The XRD was operated at 40 KV and 40 mA with divergence slit and scattering slit of 2/3degree, divergence height limiting slit of 10 mm and a receiving slit of 0.3 mm. Continuous scans on the samples were carried out between 10-90 2θ degree with 0.02 degree step size and 1 degree/minute data collection time. The crystallite size of the TiO 2 nanoparticles was estimated from XRD line broadening using Scherrer equation where, D is the averaged dimension of crystallites; K is the Scherrer constant, an arbitrary value that falls in the range 0.87-1.0 (usually assumed to be 0.9); λ is the wavelength of X-ray; and FWHM is pure diffraction broadening of a peak at half height, due to crystallite dimensions located at 2θ. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) images were obtained using SEM Model JCM-6000PLUS NeoScope to observe the morphology of coating layers of TiO 2 in different positions of the glass cross sections. SEM/SEI topographical images were obtained on the three glass samples with magnification of 500X and 200X and resolution of 256 × 192 Pixels at an accelerating voltage 10 kV, an energy range 0-20 KeV and high vacuum mode. AFM characterization was carried out using a Dimension Icon model AFM with NanoScope V Controller (Bruker AXS, USA) operating in PeakForce mode. All measurements were made in ambient conditions using NSG30 silicon tapping mode probes (NT-MDT, Russia). Optical transmittance spectra of the coated samples were recorded in the 200-1000 nm range using a Jenway-67 Series Spectrophotometer. Optical analysis of the coated surfaces was performed using Olympus (IX73) optical microscope. The objective lens of 40X magnification was used. The surface wettability was evaluated by measuring the contact angle of deionized water droplets deposited on the film surface under ambient conditions using Rame-Hart with three replicates. The acquired images have been elaborated with Drop Image software to obtain the average contact angles. The thin film thickness and refractive index for all samples were measured using J.A. Woollam WVASE Ellipsometer. Each sample was tested using 2 ellipsometer angles (65° and 70°), and light wavelength scan between 300 and 1000 nm. The ellipsometer measures the changes in the light polarization state and generates a graph of the changes in ellipsometeric angles (∆, ψ) as a function of wavelength. In the analyses of the ellipsometric data, the samples were treated as composed of a TiO 2 thin film on a thick SiO 2 substrate. For simplicity, a basic Cauchy model for transparent films was used to fit the data, and the average thickness and refractive index of the TiO 2 layer were calculated numerically from the ψ and ∆ functions Figure The X-ray diffraction patterns of the synthesized titania nanoparticles and the deposited TiO 2 thin film are shown in Fig. Figure Figure Moreover, Fig. Table The measured contact angles of the deposited films show medium hydrophilicity and the values are in total agreement with what was reported earlier for anatase TiO 2 thin films deposited on glass substrates as summarized in Table In order to investigate the effect of sunlight exposure on the hydrophilic property of the coated samples, the contact angle was measured after the samples were left to soiling process for a week. The value of the contact angle is found to be around 41°. This slight reduction in the contact angle (which was measured to be 43° before light exposure) is rather expected Literature survey has shown that contact angle of TiO 2 , for either water and/or different liquid, decreases (surface becomes more hydrophilic) during UV irradiation with dependence on the intensity and time of irradiation. On the other hand, the hydrophilic surface can be reversed to a hydrophobic one (having higher contact angles) when it was kept in the dark conditions for a period of time To investigate the effect of coating on the optical transmission of the glass substrate, UV-Vis spectra was collected for the coated and uncoated glass surfaces before and after soiling for 7 days. The Spectra are shown in Fig. The enhanced performance of the coated sample is due to several factors. First, the synthesized material is TiO 2 anatase which is well known for its high photocatalytic activity. The self-cleaning process using TiO 2 films involves two stages; first, a split of organic dirt via photocatalytic process in the presence of ultraviolet light. This stage is very critical as it reduces the presence of the sticky material that attracts the deposition of dust and other particulate material on the surfaces. The second factor is the hydrophilicity of TiO 2 films. Coating films of solar panels in desert and arid regions is preferred to be hydrophilic since further scheduled cleaning from time to time using water is essential to eliminate the dirt from the surface by the diffusal of water to the whole surface instead of getting together and hence rinsing the dust. The low refractive index enhances transmittance which is one of the main factor for film coatings specifically applicable for solar panels Photocatalytic TiO 2 coatings are known for their excellent self-cleaning behavior and anti-reflection properties, where very thin water layer formed on the hydrophilic surface can easily wash-off the dirt particles. In the present work, we reported on a costly efficient and simple preparation method of the optically transparent, good wettability towards water and photocatalytic TiO 2 coatings on glass substrate for self-cleaning applications. TiO 2 nanocolloids particles were successfully synthesized via polyol reduction method and were subsequently used as coating onto borosilicate glass substrates via adsorptive self-assembly process. Our films were characterized by atomic force microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, ellipsometry and water contact angle measurements. The self-cleaning capability of the films was investigated after several days of dust accumulation by optical microscopy and UV-Vis spectroscopy. Our results showed that the coated glass samples have transmission loss of less than 6% along with 56% reduction in dust deposition rate compared with bare uncoated glass, paving the way to their application on PV panels, light-weight window and/or door polycarbonates for excellent self-cleaning applications. ScIentIfIc REPORTS | 7: 9466 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-07826-0