The discovery of superconductivity at 200 K in the hydrogen sulfide system at large pressures The potential of metallic hydrogen as a high-T c superconductor DFT predictions in the La-H system proposed LaH 10 to be thermodynamically stable against decomposition above 150 GPa. A sodalite type-structure with space group F m-3m and T c ∼280 K was suggested above ∼220 GPa (see Fig. Even if it is tempting to assign the record superconductivity to the F m-3m phase predicted previously We start by calculating with DFT the lowest enthalpy structures of LaH 10 as a function of pressure with stateof-the-art crystal structure prediction methods the R-3m, C2 and P 1 (not shown) phases. These phases not only imply a distortion of the H atoms, also show a La sublattice without an fcc arrangement, and thus should be detectable by x-ray. The fact that many structures are predicted underlines that the classical V (R) energy surface is of a multifunnel structure tractable to many different saddle and local minima, as sketched in Figure This picture completely changes when including the energy of quantum atomic fluctuations, the zero-point energy (ZPE). We calculate the ZPE within the stochastic self-consistent harmonic approximation (SSCHA) Our results further confirm that the structure of LaH 10 responsible for the 250 K superconductivity is F m-3m. This is completely consistent with the fcc arrangement of La atoms found experimentally The F m-3m phonon spectra calculated in the harmonic approximation from the Hessian of V (R) show clear phonon instabilities in a broad region of the Brillouin zone (see Figure Flagrantly, the breakdown of the classical harmonic approximation for phonons makes impossible the estimation of T c below ∼250 GPa in the F m-3m phase and questions all previous calculations In summary, this work demonstrates how quantum effects are of capital importance in determining the ground state structures of superconducting hydrides, challenging all current predictions and evidencing flaws in standard theoretical methods. It also illustrates that quantum fluctuations are indispensable to sustain crystals with huge λ's (λ reaches a record value of 3.6 at 129 GPa for LaH 10 ) that be otherwise destabilized by the colossal electron-phonon interaction to distorted (low symmetry) structures reducing the electronic density of states at the Fermi level (see Extended Data) Science Foundation; and grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (No.16H06345, 18K03442 and No. 19H05825) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan. Computational resources were provided by the Barcelona Superconducting Center (project FI-2019-1-0031) and the Swiss National Supercomputing Center (CSCS). Author contributions. The project was conceived by I.E. and J.A.F.-L. The SSCHA was developed by I.E., L.M., R.B., M.C. and F.M. In particular, R.B. developed the method to compute the quantum energy Hessian and the anharmonic phonon dispersions, and L.M. developed the method to perform a quantum relaxation of the lattice parameters. I.E. and F.B. performed the SSCHA calculations. A.S. T.K., T.T., R.A. and J.A.F.-L. conducted studies on structure prediction and superconductivity. All authors contributed to the editing of the manuscript. Competing interests. The authors declare no competing interests. Calculation details. First-principles calculations were performed within DFT and the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) as parametrized by Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof (PBE) In the harmonic phonon calculations for the F m-3m and R-3m phases, we used the primitive and rhombohedral lattices, respectively, with one LaH 10 formula unit in the unit cell. A 20×20×20 Monkhorst-Pack shifted electron-momentum grid was used for these calculations with a Methfessel-Paxton smearing of 0.02 Ry. The DFT calculations performed for the SSCHA on supercells were performed on a coarser electron-momentum grid, which would correspond to a 12×12×12 grid in the unit cell. We explicitly verified that this coarser mesh yields a fully converged SSCHA gradient with respect to the electronmomentum grid, thus, not affecting the SSCHA minimization. The DFT supercell calculations for the SSCHA minimization on the C2 phase were performed keeping the same k-point density. All phonon frequencies for q-points not commensurate with the supercell used in the SSCHA minimization were obtained by directly Fourier interpolating the real space force constants obtained in this supercell, which are calculated form the Hessian of E(R). For the F m-3m phase the SSCHA calculation was performed both on a 2×2×2 and 3×3×3 supercell containing, respectively, 88 and 297 atoms. The phonon spectra shown in Figure As shown in Ref. ΦΛ Φ. ( Bold notation represents matrices and tensors in compact notation. In Eq. ( Φ the quantum statistical averages taken with the SSCHA density matrix of the n-th order derivatives of V (R), and Λ a tensor that depends on the temperature and Φ. 1 is the identity matrix. As we show in Extended Figure Φ = 0 has a negligible effect on the phonons obtained from the Hessian defined in Eq. Φ is neglected throughout, and all superconductivity calculations in the F m-3m and R-3m phases are performed making use of the phonon frequencies and polarization vectors obtained from the Hessian of E(R) with (4) Φ = 0. We also estimated T c with the phonon frequencies and polarization vectors obtained instead from Φ, resulting in a critical temperature 12 K lower within Allen-Dynes modified McMillan equation. This difference is small and within the uncertainty of the T c calculation between SCDFT and anisotropic Migdal-Éliashberg calculations (see Figure The Éliashberg spectral function, which we used for the T c calculations, is defined as where N E F is the electronic density of states (DOS) at the Fermi energy (E F ), n and m are band indices, k is a crystal momentum, nk is a band energy, ω qν is the phonon frequency of mode ν at wavevector q, and g ν nk,mk+q is the electron-phonon matrix element between a state nk and mk + q. We calculated α 2 F (ω) combining the SSCHA phonon frequencies and polarization vectors obtained from the Hessian of E(R) with the electronphonon matrix elements calculated with DFPT. For the F m-3m and R-3m phases, the electron-phonon matrix elements were calculated in a 6×6×6 q point grid and a 40×40×40 k point grid. These were combined with the SSCHA phonons and polarization vectors obtained by Fourier interpolation to the 6×6×6 q point grid from the real space force constants coming from the Hessian of E(R) in a 3×3×3 supercell for the F m-3m and in a 2×2×2 supercell for the R-3m. The Dirac deltas on the band energies are estimated by substituting them with a Gaussian of 0.004 Ry width. The calculated α 2 F (ω) functions for the F m-3m phase are shown in Extended Figures Crystal phase diagram exploration. To sample the enthalpy landscape of LaH 10 we employed the minima hopping method (MHM) Superconductivity calculations in the F m-3m phase. Superconductivity calculations were performed within two different approaches that represent the state-ofthe-art of ab initio superconductivity: Density functional theory for Superconductors (SCDFT) and the Éliashberg equations with full Coulomb interaction. SCDFT is an extension to DFT for a superconducting ground state where is the electron energy and β the inverse temperature. The kernels K and Z come from the exchange correlation functional of the theory (4) The full energy dependence of the DOS is accounted in the calculations, while the electron-phonon coupling is described by the α 2 F (ω) of Eq. ( The second approach we use to simulate the superconducting state is the anisotropic Éliashberg approach Here, Σ nk (iω i ) and ∆ nk (iω i ) are the normal and anomalous self energy, and V ph mn (q, iω μ ) and V C mn (q, iω μ ) are the k-averaged phonon-mediated interaction and Coulomb interaction, respectively. The explicit form of V ph mn (q, iω μ ) is given as where |g ν nm (q)| 2 is a k-averaged electron-phonon matrix element, and D ν (q, iω μ ) is a free-phonon Green's function, D ν (q, iω μ ) = -2ω qν /(ω 2 μ + ω 2 qν ). The electron-phonon matrix elements are calculated through a DFPT calculation with 6×6×6 q point grid, and are combined with the phonon frequencies and polarization vectors obtained by directly Fourier interpolating to this grid the force constants coming from the E(R) Hessian in the 3×3×3 supercell. For the Coulomb interaction, V C mn (q, iω μ ) is approximated by k-averaged static Coulomb interaction within the random phase approximation, 1 mk,nk+q (iω μ = 0). Using Eq. ( In Extended Data Table In Extended Data Figure Extended Data Figure Transition temperatures from other La-H compositions. Different compositions on the La-H phase diagram have been reported as thermodynamically stable. Presumably, the stabilization of these compositions and the measurement of different T c 's (see Drozdov et al. Conversely, in a later publication the same authors suggested other hydrogen rich system that is enthalpically competitive (LaH 11 ) and possibly responsible for other high-T c phases. In order to explore this possibility, we did consider structure prediction runs with this stoichiometry and found crystalline structures that were previously reported in Ref. Φ = 0 is perfectly safe. All these phonon spectra in the figures are obtained by Fourier interpolating directly the real space anharmonic force constants in a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell. Extended Data Table Extended Data Table * b = 0.09950, x = 0.10746 and y = 0.12810.