Correlation information in strongly correlated electron systems can be obtained using an extended Drude model. An interesting method related to the extended Drude model analysis of superconducting optical data was proposed recently, and it has attracted attention from researchers. This method aims to extract the optical self-energy of quasiparticles (or residual unpaired electrons) from measured optical data in the superconducting state. However, this residual optical self-energy is a partial optical self-energy. The interpretation and significance of this partial optical self-energy is unclear. We investigate this method using a reverse process with simple electronboson spectral density functions. With our obtained results, we conclude that the residual (or partial) optical self-energy is difficult to interpret because it contains unphysical features, in particular, a negative optical effective mass. The present study clarifies the extended Drude analysis method for superconducting optical data. Charge carriers in strongly correlated electron systems can be described by an extended Drude model, which is a single-band model approach. In this model, a new physical quantity appears, the memory function One can extract the electron-boson spectral density function (or Eliashberg function) from a measured reflectance spectrum using a well-known process The reverse process In this study, we address a recently proposed method by Dordevic et al. It is noteworthy that the residual optical self-energy is a partial optical self-energy in the extended Drude formalism. We investigated this method in detail with a correlated electron formalism using the inverse process with well-known typical electron-boson spectral density functions In this section, we briefly describe the reverse process where K(ω, Ω) and Γ op imp (ω) are the kernel of the generalized Allen's integral equation and the optical impurity scattering rate, respectively. For simplicity without losing the generality one may consider cases only at T = 0. In such cases, the kernels for normal and d-wave superconducting where Θ(x) is the Heaviside step function, E(x) is the complete elliptic integral of the second kind, and • • • θ represents the angular average over a range from 0 to π/4. ∆(θ) [=∆ 0 cos(2θ)] is the d-wave superconducting (SC) gap, where ∆ 0 is the maximum SC gap. The optical impurity scattering rate can be written as where Γ imp is a constant impurity scattering rate. It should be noted that the impurity scattering rate in the SC state is strongly dependent on frequency near twice of the d-wave superconducting gap, 2∆(θ). Once one has the imaginary part of the optical self-energy in a wide enough spectral range one can get the corresponding real part using a Kramers-Kronig relation as where P presents the principle part of the improper integral. The mass enhancement function [m * op (ω)/m b ] can be calculated from the real part using a relation between the two quantities as m * op (ω)/m b = -2Σ op 1 (ω)/ω+1, where m * op (ω) and m b are the optical effective mass and the band mass, respectively. It is worth noting that for convergence of the Kramers-Kronig (KK) relations between the real and imaginary parts of a complex function the function generally needs to be square integrable. However, the optical self-energy is not square integrable. Still the Kramers-Kronig relations can be valid if lim ω→∞ | -2 Σop (ω)/ω| is zero. Indeed, the magnitude of the optical self-energy divided by the frequency approaches to zero as ω → ∞ since lim ω→∞ [-2Σ op 2 (ω)] = 2π× the area under α 2 B(ω) where Ω p is the plasma frequency, which is directly associated with the charge carrier density (n) in the mode of interest, i.e., Ω 2 p = 4πne 2 /m b , where e is the elementary charge. Further, it should be noted that the extended Drude model is a single-band approach; here we call the intraband transition in the single band as "the extended Drude mode", which usually consists of two (coherent and incoherent) components, as mentioned in the introduction. Most of the spectral weight of the extended Drude mode is usually located in the lowenergy region close to the Fermi energy. However, the full extended Drude mode should be extended to infinity as per the simple Drude mode. If a theoretical system contains only a single extended Drude mode, the range of validity of the extended Drude model must be extended from zero frequency to infinity. In this case, the real and imaginary parts of the optical self-energy defined by the extended Drude model should form a KramersKronig pair; one can obtain the real part of the optical self-energy from the known imaginary part using Eq. ( In the SC state the optical conductivity where Ω sp is the superfluid plasma frequency, which should be smaller than the plasma frequency (Ω p ), and δ(ω) is the Dirac delta function. σ res 1 (ω) and σ res 2 (ω) are, respectively, the real and imaginary parts of the residual optical conductivity [σ res (ω)], which form a Kramers-Kronig (KK) pair. It should be noted that, in a finite frequency region (i.e. ω > 0), σ SC 1 (ω) and σ res 1 (ω) are equal to each other but they are different at ω = 0, i.e, σ SC 1 (0) = Ω 2 sp δ(0)/8 and σ res 1 (0) = 0. Therefore, only σ res 1 (ω) part of the full σ SC 1 (ω) can be seen in a measured finite frequency region and σ res 2 (ω) is not directly accessible. However, σ res 2 (ω) can be obtained from σ res 1 (ω) using the Kramers-Kronig relation 31 since they form a KK pair. Once σ res 2 (ω) is obtained the superfluid plasma frequency can be estimated using the second equation of Eq. ( The equation above can be rewritten as where H is the high-frequency background dielectric constant and SC 1 (ω) is the real part of the full SC dielectric function, which is related to the full SC optical conductivity as ̃ SC (ω) = It is worth to be noted that the superfluid plasma frequency (Ω sp ) can be independently obtained from a missing spectral weight of the full σ SC 1 (ω), which is the superfluid spectral weight located at ω = 0 and does not appear in a measured finite frequency region. The missing spectral weight can be obtained using the so-called Ferrell-Glover-Tinkham sum rule We note that the temperature-and doping-dependent evolutions of α 2 B(ω) of hole-doped cuprates have been well-established by various experimental techniques including optical spectroscopy where A SF (= 50 meV) and Ω SF (= 60 meV) are the amplitude and the characteristic frequency of the MMP model, respectively, and A M R (= 50 meV), W (= 10 meV), and Ω 0 (= 30 meV) are the amplitude, width, and center frequency of the sharp GP, respectively. The MMP model is shown in the dotted orange line and can be also written in a mathematical form SF ) with the same amplitude and characteristic frequency of the MMP mode described above. The correlation constant (λ) of α 2 B(Ω) is an important and robust quantity, which can be a measure of the correlation strength In Fig. In Fig. For the broad MMP model, two self-energies in normal and d-wave SC phases are quite similar to each other, which means that these two different material phases are not very well-resolved. In contrast, for the MMP+GP model, due to the sharp GP the (normal and SC) material phases are well-resolved in low frequency region (near Ω 0 + 2∆ 0 ). Therefore, the doping-and temperature-dependent evolutions of the GP can be clearly investigated from measured optical spectra Dordevic et al. Here we describe recent Dordevic et al.'s work Here the residual (or partial) optical self-energy is described in terms of the residual (or partial) optical conductivity. In this section we will demonstrate that the real and imaginary parts of the residual optical self-energy [-2 Σres,op (ω)] do not form a KK pair. We should note that the real and imaginary parts of the full SC self-energy [-2 ΣSC,op (ω)], which is described in terms of the full optical SC conductivity [σ SC (ω)], are known to form a KK pair 2 . This is one of the most important differences between the two optical self-energies: the partial one [-2 Σres,op (ω)] and the full one [-2 ΣSC,op (ω)]. Therefore, the residual (or partial) optical self-energy may not be a reliable (or well-defined) optical quantity. To investigate the two optical self-energies more in detail, first we calculated the full SC optical conductivities of the MMP and MMP+GP models in the d-wave SC phase for both Γ imp = 0.0 and 30.0 meV cases from the corresponding full SC optical self-energies shown in Fig. In Fig. Finally, in Fig. From our theoretical investigation, we found that the proposed method by Dordevic et al. contains two serious problems. One problem is associated with peaks in the imaginary part of the residual (or partial) optical self-energy; this method cannot be applied since the peaks cannot be simulated with a constant density of states (i.e., the normal phase) There has been a previously published literature We applied the proposed method Using a reverse process with the two typical MMP and MMP+GP model electron-boson spectral density functions, α 2 B(ω), using the generalized Allen's formulas [Eq. ( In our opinion, the full optical self-energy could not be decomposed even though the full optical conductivity could be decomposed because they were connected non-linearly by the extended Drude model. We hope that our study clarifies an unclear issue related to the extended Drude model analysis of the superconducting optical data of strongly correlated electron systems including cuprates and iron pnictides.