The fundamentals of Fourier Transform are presented, with analytical solutions derived for Continuous Fourier Transform (CFT) of truncated signals, to benchmark against Fast Fourier Transform (FFT). Certain artifacts from FFT were identified for decay curves. An existing method for Infrared Thermography, Pulse Phase Thermography (PPT), was benchmarked against a proposed method using polynomial fitting with CFT, to analyse cooling curves for defect identification in Non-Destructive Testing (NDT). Existing FFT methods used in PPT were shown to be dependent on sampling rates, with inherent artifacts and inconsistencies in both amplitude and phase. It was shown that the proposed method produced consistent amplitude and phase, with no artifacts, as long as the start of the cooling curves are sufficiently represented. It is hoped that a collaborative approach will be adopted to unify data in Thermography for machine learning models to thrive, in order to facilitate automated geometry and defect recognition and move the field forward. The aim of this work is to provide a framework for signal analyses and more precise understanding of scientific phenomena. It is done in hope that experimental scientists can use a more unified framework for the presentation of useful data, especially measured signals of interest. This will also provide the essential data required for Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning algorithms to produce useful insight for the advancement of science. As some of the findings may be offensive to some who have to defend their research areas, I decided to write it as an individual, to insulate institutions from any potential backlash. Over the years I have also provided advice to "technical experts" to avoid certain pitfalls in their supposed domains of expertise, to prevent the propagation of errors to the scientific community, as well as industry. One of the reasons for the generous advice to supposed internal competitors was to protect institutions of interest from any controversy arising from the use of specific methods. It was in 2016, when I was teaching a student about Fourier Transform, that I saw existing problems in certain areas of research. This data was not released in consideration of possible repercussions from certain individuals. I was told by a "technical expert" not to publish this, though his real intention will never be known. After much thought, the decision was made to organise the concepts and data into an article, to benefit the scientific community, as well as individuals and organisations that require the use of signal processing for their work. The current version is a draft, which serves as a milestone for the work done to date. It is done in hope that more advanced algorithms will be developed in the realm of understanding physical phenomena, via a more precise representation in the frequency space. It would be great if readers can provide feedback to improve the suggested techniques. Collaborators are certainly welcome. Fourier Transform has a long history as a fundamental technique for understanding the information in signals, in the frequency space. There are a large number of applications such as in image compression, signal analyses, understanding of energy spectra in turbulence, Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) for materials, and Thermography. Fourier Transform of a functionf (t) in time t is F (k), defined to be where k is the frequency in Hz. Inverse Fourier Transform is of the form: Most experimental measurements are conducted with limited resolution, either in spatial domain or temporal domain. As such, the common methods used would be Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT). For practical applications, it is common to use the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) to compute the results in frequency space, because well established algorithms produce results faster than direct computations. However, there exists certain applications where the DFT or FFT may produce undesirable characteristics. From the equations for Fourier Transform, it can be observed that these integrals represent areas under the curve of a function, split into real and imaginary space. Using FFT or DFT will result in uncertainties, as these methods represent said area as discrete rectangular blocks. Imagine if the measured signals can be represented accurately by different classes of functions. If the Fourier Transform of these functions have analytical solutions , the measured signals can be analysed in the frequency space via Continuous Fourier Transform (CFT), which is close to the exact representation of measured phenomena. The dependence on measurement resolution will also be reduced significantly. In practice, signals and phenomena are measured in a finite amount of time or space. These results could also be non-cyclic in nature, which leads to leakage in DFT and FFT. These results are essentially measurements that span infinite time or space, truncated via rectangular windows. It is interesting to note that the mere existence of these rectangular windows allows some of these integrals to be mathematically tractable, and relatively easy to implement in computational algorithms. Some simple functions will be used in the current work. The nature of the Fourier Transform allows for these simple functions to be added independently to represent signals or phenomena that look more complex e.g. a measured signal that can be represented by a polynomial and a sine function. However, it is important to ensure that the measured data is continuous in nature. All the solutions will involve truncation of the functions over the region of interest, to obtain the equivalent CFT for benchmarking with FFT. This region of interest is standardised as [0, t s ] as most measurements are done in the time domain, with reference to time 0. It is relatively trivial to derive the equivalent for other regions of interests by working from the point where the limits of the integrals are implemented. The solutions for the CFT of simple functions shall be presented below. For functions that are constants, Truncate the signal in range [0, t s ], we get This allows the theoretical computation of a truncated signal. For functions that are polynomial terms of the form a n t n , where n is a non negative integer and a n represents the corresponding coefficient, Truncate the signal in range [0, t s ], we get It is expected that this term reduces to the equivalent for constants when n is zero. For functions that are exponential with constants a and b, Truncate the signal in range [0, t s ], we get 2 [a e ats cos(2πkt s ) -1 + 2πke ats sin(2πkt s ) +i 2πk e ats cos(2πkt s ) -1 -ae ats sin(2πkt s ) ] ( For functions that are of the form sin(2πf t + φ) where φ is a constant phase shift, Truncate the signal in range [0, t s ], we get For functions that are of the form sin(2πf t + φ) with the special case of f = k, for a truncated signal in the range [0, t s ], we get, Note that the above solutions for truncated signals can be implemented readily via computer algorithms, for analyses of measured phenomena. Having introduced some analytical solutions for CFT, we move to examples of a practical applications e.g. using FFT on practical signals. As my current expertise is in Infrared Thermography, an example of a technique shall be presented henceforth to highlight the potential pitfalls of data presentation and understanding of phenomena resulting from the choice of FFT over CFT. In Thermography, one of the established techniques is Pulse Phase Thermography (PPT) Assuming that the temperature-time decay curves can be represented by exponential functions as presented before, it is possible to process the data using both FFT and CFT to make exact comparisons, while exploring the relative effects of different variables, without the other effects e.g. experimental error. In PPT, the variable of interest is the phase in frequency space, which is essentially the angle of a vector in the complex plane at a particular frequency, as the Fourier Transform results in complex numbers derived at every frequency. For a typical measurement done on 3D printed polymer samples, the measurements span 200 seconds, with 1 frame captured per second on infrared cameras. Assume a temperature decay curve of the form T = e at+b + c = e -0.025t+4.0 + 25.0 It was also identified by Galmiche et al. What this means is that the sampling time must increase in order to have a higher resolution in frequency space. It also shows that the sampling time is the limiting factor for the lowest frequency that can be reasonably resolved from a signal. In PPT, the lower frequencies enable deeper defects and structures to be observed, so there is value in measuring over longer periods of time. This needs to be balanced with practical issues such as disk space, data size, and measurement turnaround time. For exponential functions it is relatively trivial to extrapolate and enable the visualisation of such defects. However, temperature-time decay curves may not be represented well by exponential functions, as shall be shown later. Based on the given exponential function for temperature, it is also interesting to investigate the dependence of CFT and FFT on sampling time. These results for sampling frequency of 1 Hz are shown in Fig. Before going on to real signals, it is known that researchers such as Ibarra-Castanedo and Maldague Also, it is important to address the aliasing problem in PPT, to understand the motivation behind the current work. As shown before in Fig. Having established the precision with polynomial fitting with CFT on temperature-time decay curves, in terms of amplitude and phase in the fre-quency space, it is important to reiterate the purpose of this publication. In recent times, there are still new publications related to PPT and with FFT The experimental setup is the same as that of Goh et al. Two sets of measurements were obtained for the current study, using a 200 W heating system made from halogen lamps. Images were captured for 200 seconds at 1 frame per second, for heating of 100 (Test 1) and 70 (Test 2) seconds respectively. Image intensity and temperature values were obtained for comparisons. For the purpose of brevity, only 13 points were used to obtain temperature-time decay curves for comparisons. 9 points were selected from the centroids of embedded defects, and 4 reference points from sound regions (N, S, E, W) were selected to benchmark the proposed technique against existing ones. Sample images are shown in Fig. From the images, it can be seen that there appears to be better contrast for intensity than calibrated temperatures. Each image shows consistent dark pixels that do not change with time, which are due to dead pixels in the camera, probably due to damage from lasers. Purpose written algorithms were written by Goh et al. For a start, it is important to establish the optimum order for polynomial fitting of temperature-time decay curves obtained from experiments. This is an important step as the curves may not be exponential in nature. For the 13 points of interest, a purpose written algorithm was written to find the lowest possible order such that the maximum and mean errors of the fitted curves were below set tolerance values. The corresponding tolerance values for selected orders are shown in Table Temperature-time decay curves were obtained for the point where defect was 0.5 mm below surface, and the point N (north of the array of defects). Fig. By applying the proposed CFT technique on the polynomial fitted functions, it was possible to calculate the amplitude and phase in frequency space. Figs. In order to understand the relative contrast at different frequencies, selected frequencies were used, from 0.01 to 0.5 Hz. Results were obtained for the 13 points, and shown in Figs. 9 and 10, where amplitude and phase are shown against depth of defect (8 mm for sound areas). As expected, the phase contrast between defects at different depths were more prominent at lower frequencies, similar to the findings of Goh et al. In order to visualise the relative effects of frequency on amplitude and phase contrast at different depths, the results were shifted such that the mean value of the 4 sound points was zero. These results are shown in Figs. For PPT using FFT, it was established in the Introduction section that the effects of subsampling were prominent. Hence, it is of interest to understand the relative effects of subsampling on the amplitude and phase contrast, using FFT on selected frequencies of 0.01 and 0.02 Hz. Sample points were taken for the full 100 seconds for Tests 1 and 2, with full 100 points, as well as sample points taken every 2 and 4 points. These results are shown in Figs. In order to understand the effects of subsampling on the relative amplitude and phase contrast, these results were shifted such that the mean value of the 4 sound points was zero. The corresponding results are shown in Figs. Next, we conduct an assessment of existing methods used to retrieve the depth of the defects with PPT. It was proposed by Ibarra-Castanedo and Maldague The relative effects of subsampling on absolute phase contrast using polynomial fitting and CFT, are shown in Fig. A proposed polynomial fitting method with Continuous Fourier Transform (CFT) was benchmarked using Thermography measurements, to find consistent amplitude and phase information from truncated signals. It was shown that existing Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) methods implemented on Pulse Phase Thermography (PPT) measurements may not be ideal for a comprehensive understanding of phenomena due to inherent artifacts introduced by FFT. The proposed method was benchmarked for defects at different depths, as well as sound areas, with subsampling effects investigated. It was shown that the proposed method is consistent for both amplitude, phase and absolute phase contrast, as long as the sampling rates were sufficient to capture the start of the cooling curves. It is hoped that a collaborative effort across different labs will move the field forward, via a clearer understanding of Thermography, towards machine learning for Advanced Thermography. 