How does the shell explode into a series of fragments? The well-accepted explanation is Mott's theory, which considers fragmentation of shells is a random process controlled by defects. However, Mott's theory is inadequate in its energyequivalence assumption and is incapable in explaining the saturation of fragment length with the increase of expansion velocity. In this letter, we present a theory to explain the physical mechanism of fragmentation of shells and propose a high-efficient model for predicting the number of necks after fragmentation. We recognize that the pressurized gas is in close contact with the shell layer during an explosion and the internal pressure is transferred to the shell layer following the shear-lag principle. The fragmentation problem of shells is then analogous to the cracking behavior of the tree bark, and the closed-form solutions are obtained to describe the relationship between the expansion velocity and the number of necks with consideration of the strain-rate dependent strength of the shell material. The theoretical results show excellent correlation with the experimental results. Fragmentation of shells is an classic and elementary problem in fracture dynamics, corresponding to the phenomena that a shell body subjected to external pressure forces resulting in the multiple fracturing of the body. The simplified one-dimensional ring is generally introduced to investigate the failure behavior of fragmentation of shells, as shown in Fig. The principles governing the fragmentation process can be summarized as the following three criteria: 1) crack initiates in structure where stress exceeds the strength of the material, 2) stress is released as a result of fracture so that it falls below the strength of the material in other parts of the structure, and 3) energy consumed by forming the cracks is minimized. The second criterion promotes more cracks being generated while the third criterion suggests the opposite. The compromise between the two competing criteria determines the number and size of fragments. Before studying the fragmentation of shells, let's first introduce a nature phenomenon: the cracking behavior of the tree bark as show in Fig. Since the growth rate of the heartwood is higher than that of the tree bark, an expansion strain develops in the heartwood as the tree grows. This expansion strain is then transferred to the bark through the interfacial shear stress, based on the shear-lag principle Similar fracture mode is also commonly seen in other layered materials In this work, fragmentation of shells is considered to be analogous to the crack formation process in layered structures, for example, the tree bark. The shell is equivalent to the bark of the tree, and the high pressure gas produced by the explosion is equivalent to the growing trunk. The high-pressure gas and the shell stick tightly with each other before fragmentation, which is equal to the bark and heartwood adhere to each other during the growth of the tree. The scheme for the fragmentation process of shells is shown in Fig. Consider a shell as shown in Fig. Let p max be the maximum impulse pressure acting on the inner side of the shell and t d be the duration of the explosion. During an explosion, the impulse pressure p acting on the shells is very small for the initial stage (0 to t e ), followed by an approximately linear increase (t e to t d ), and then drop suddenly to zero The tensile stress in the thin shell is assumed to be uniform along the thickness direction. Based on the free-body diagram shown in Fig. by the following equation The constitutive equation of the inter-layer is where φ (s) is the elastic displacement of shell, G is shear modulus of inter-layer, h is the thickness of inter-layer. The tensile stress in the fragment, σ (s), is related to the elastic displacement of shell through Combining Eqs. ( The general solution of Eq. ( where C is to be determined from the boundary conditions. Substituting Eq. ( Considering the instant when necking has just occurred but gas has not leaked yet as shown in Fig. The maximum tensile stress occurs in the middle of segment as shown in Fig. Solving Eq. ( Consequently, the number of necks after fragmentation can be calculated by ) There are three important parameters in Eq. ( Shell fragmentation is a typical dynamic fracture problem, and the strain rate effect must be considered. Yu et al Fig. In summary, this letter presents a new theoretical model to explain the physical mechanism of fragmentation of shells. At the instant of explosion, a two-layer structure is formed, where the outer layer is the shell and the high pressure gas generated by the explosion can be considered as the internal layer. Thus, the fragmentation process of shells becomes similar to the process of crack formation for the tree bark. A theoretical model for predicting the number of necks after fragmentation is proposed based on the shear-lag principle, with consideration of the strain-rate dependent strength properties. The model is calibrated for the 1060 pure aluminum and AZ31 magnesium alloy, and the predictions show good agreement with the experimental results. Furthermore, it is shown that the strain rate effect strongly influences fragmentation of shells. The physical mechanism presented in this letter can also be used to explain the other fragmentation, such as a bullet impact on windows 