We investigate thin film resistive thermometry based on metal-toinsulator-transition (niobium nitride) materials down to very low temperature. The variation of the NbN thermometer resistance have calibrated versus temperature and magnetic field. High sensitivity in tempertaure variation detection is demonstrated through efficient temperature coefficient of resistance. The nitrogen content of the niobium nitride thin films can be tuned to adjust the optimal working temperature range. In the present experiment, we show the versatility of the NbN thin film technology through applications in very different low temperature use-cases. We demonstrate that thin film resistive thermometry can be extended to temperatures below 30 mK with low electrical impedance. For applications in cryogenics, it becomes more and more useful to cover large temperature ranges with a single thermometry. Most of the conventional ther-mometers like platinum for high temperature or germanium for low temperature do not allow measurements between ambient and very low temperature (< 50 mK) with the same sensor. Moreover, measuring with a high sensitivity low temperature is of crucial importance for monitoring cryogenic systems, high magnetic field coils, space satellite applications, bolometry, investigating thermal physics or characterizing materials below 1 K The current existing resistive thermometry such as Ge crystal, ruthenium oxide, based on zirconium oxynitride (Cernox) etc... may have intrinsic limitations since they are a not all versatile, for most of them cannot be downscaled and have high resistance at the lowest temperature (above 100 kOhm below 1 K) Consequently, being capable of measuring temperatures from 300 K to below 100 mK in various kinds of applications remains a challenge since commercial solutions cannot cover this large temperature range Among potential transducers, a particular kind of resistive materials can be of great interest for low temperature thermometry: the metal-to-insulator transition (MIT) materials As for Anderson case of MIT, a quantum phase transition is expected at T = 0 where the transition to the insulating state is driven by disorder. This can be obtained in numerous materials prepared as thin films or ultrathin films like InO x , NbSi, amorphous metal, TiN The deposition of NbN x is made by magnetron sputtering of a pure Nb target (99.95 %) in an Ar/N 2 gas mixture of high purities (99.99 %). The deposition chamber is maintained under vacuum with a turbo-molecular pump and a primary pump along with a liquid nitrogen trap (the pressure has to be less than 5 × 10 -7 mbar). Mass flow controllers precisely regulate the amount of gas injected into the deposition chamber, a butterfly valve allowing a fixed work pressure of 2 × 10 -2 mbar. The pulsed DC power supply allows electrons to follow helical paths around magnetic field lines undergoing more ionizing collisions with the neutral elements at the surface of the target. This forms an electric current with both AC and DC components. During their flight between the target and the substrate, niobium atoms react with the nitrogen ions of the plasma and form (niobium) nitride. This is essential because the nitrogen contents of the plasma will determine the nitrogen content of the final NbN layers. The variations of the resistance of this material as a function of temperature are very sensitive to the nitrogen content in the layers. The sputtering parameters as the gas mixture ratio, the frequency and the power supplied of the magnetron are carefully controlled to adjust the nitrogen content in the layer and achieve the good stoichiometric composition and microstructure. Depending on the ratio x =N/Nb, the electrical properties are very different. For x < 0.6, the material behaves like a superconductor with a critical temperature of about 15 K. For x > 1.1, the material behaves as a Mott-Anderson insulator characterized by a MIT transition at a temperature dependent on the nitrogen content of the layer. A material with a high nitrogen concentration like NbN 1.7 will give a thermometer having a metalinsulator transition at high temperature. Reversely, thin layers of NbN 1.6 will be perfectly adapted to low temperature thermometry (for more details on the composition analysis by Rutherford Back Scattering see Ref. In order to precisely adjust this crucial Ar/N 2 ratio, thin film of NbN are deposited on sapphires as test samples whose electrical resistance is measured between 77 K and 300 K. This electrical resistance ratio, called the resistive ratio RR (RR = R 77K /R 300K )) is used to qualify the expected properties of the NbN thin films. We generally deposit a layer of niobium nitride of about 70 nm using the same deposition parameters as those set during the test measurements done on sapphire. The layer thickness is monitored by the deposition time previously calibrated on test samples. Fig. The NbN thermometers are installed in the vacuum chamber of a dilution cryostat. They are shielded against high frequency variation of the electromagnetic (EM) field and all the electrical leads are filtering EM radiations above 50 kHz using passive filters at room temperature. All the thermometers have been calibrated on a speer carbon resistance, itself calibrated on a SRD1000 (having superconducting fixed points) and on a Coulomb Blockade primary thermometer Large thermometers deposited on silicon substrates (see Fig. As for the temperature dependence of the resistance, it departs from a regular Mott law R = R 0 exp(T 0 /T ) 1/4 as it has been observed in the past for higher temperature The temperature coefficient of resistance calculated through |α| = 1 R dR dT (shown in inset of Fig. Very low current source are commonly used to minimize thermometer self-heating. For each temperatures, linearity of I-V characteristic have been checked ruling out any potential over-heating, at 50 mK this has been done for current ranging from 20 pA to 1 nA. If we consider a thermometer of 1 kOhm and a measuring current of 0.5 nA, this implies a power dissipated in the electron bath of the thermometer of P = 2.5 × 10 -16 Watt. This power can be used to estimate the temperature difference between the electron bath and the phonon bath of the NbN film as well as the temperature gradient between the phonons of the NbN and the phonons of Si or SiN; for this, we consider only the small size NbN film of the following geometry: 70 nm thick, for a surface of 6 μm by 40 μm as presented in Fig. where P is the power dissipated in the electron bath, V the volume of the thermometer, T e-/N bN and T ph/N bN the temperature respectively of the electron and phonon bath of the thermometer, and g e-ph the electron-phonon coupling constant which is of the order of 10 2 W.K -5 .cm -3 (we take the same coupling constant as in amorphous NbSi, a very similar material Regarding the coupling between the phonon baths in the NbN and in the silicon substrate, a rough estimate of the Kapitza thermal conductance indicates an expected thermal conductance of the solid-solid contact between NbN and Si or SiN of K Kapitza = 1.4 × 10 -10 W.K -1 This part is dedicated to the test of NbN thermometry for temperature below 100 mK. To be adapted to the very low temperature, the RR has been decreased to 2.7. The measurement has been done in a dedicated dilution fridge. The sensor has been calibrated against a combined SRD1000-CMN1000 system The calibration in temperature down to 30 mK is shown in Fig. This work has been devoted to show the ability of NbN thermometry for low and very low temperature measurements. The versatility of NbN thermometers has been evidenced through the preparation of thermometers from millimeter to micrometer sizes. Through the possible change of nitrogen content in the thin films, a broad working temperature range can be obtained. Temperatures from above 300 K down to 30 mK, four orders of magnitude, have been measured with the same NbN transducer thanks to the continuous exponential decrease of resistance as the temperature is increased. A very high sensitivity has been shown down to 30 mK, allowing the detection of temperature changes as small as 20 μK. It is also highlighted that measuring very low temperatures can be addressed with the same thin film technology by adapting the nitrogen content. This is demonstrating all the capabilities of NbN thermometers that can be deposited on various dielectric support and adapted to any cryostat or downscaled sensor that requires the precise management of temperature over a very broad range.