Printing of metallic films has been preferred for roll-to-roll processes over vacuum technologies due to faster processing times and lower processing costs. Films can be produced by depositing inks containing suspended metallic particles within a solvent and then heating the films to both remove the solvent and sinter the particles. The resulting printed structure, electrical and mechanical behavior of the printed films has been studied to better understand their electromechanical response to loading and eventual brittle fracture. This study evaluated the electromechanical behavior of 1.25 μm printed Ag films using in-situ resistance and in-situ imaging methods. Digital image correlation was utilized with confocal laser scanning microscope images to better visualize crack initiation during tensile straining. This technique showed that cracks initiated earlier in the thicker areas of the film (crests) than in lower areas (troughs) because of a higher density of printing defects and the increased thickness. Electronic devices continue to be increasingly integrated into individuals' everyday life, with newly identified applications beginning to change design requirements. New requirements for devices have emerged including the need to reduce the relative electronic device weight and the ability of some devices to undergo bending and stretching while maintaining their electronic functionality. Manufacturing methods for flexible electronics, which are more bendable and/or stretchable than traditional electronic devices, are being developed To optimize R2R manufacturing processes further, researchers are exploring different film deposition methods including digital inkjet, gravure, and flexographic printing During digital inkjet printing a nozzle deposits individual droplets of ink into an array to create a metallic feature The specific parameters of a heating process that removes the remaining solvent and sinters the metallic particles vary for each ink blend depending on the specific components. After heating, the resulting structure of the printed metallic films has been shown to contain pores and relatively high surface roughnesses compared to vacuum deposited films on the same substrates. Studies of their mechanical behavior without a post deposition process suggests that these films behave as brittle materials However, additional work is needed to evaluate when mechanical damage initiates to provide insight into which factors influence the crack initiation process. This study is focused on exploring a new approach to tracking mechanical damage in printed films and correlating the damage to the electrical behavior. The use of digital image correlation (DIC) with confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM) laser intensity images will be demonstrated and how the local mechanical behavior correlates to the global electrical behavior. Printed films have a high surface roughness that creates a natural pattern necessary for DIC techniques. The DIC technique allows for local strain to be calculated by comparing CLSM laser intensity images taken during straining. The local strain measurements are then used to identify areas of high strain that then lead to fracture. A flexographic process was used to deposit 1.25 μm thick Ag lines that were 3 mm wide onto a DuPont Teijin Heat Stable substrate (OMET Varylex 530 system with PChem PFI-722 Ag nanoparticle ink). Further details of the printing process were described previously The normalized resistance of the Ag lines were monitored during monotonic tensile testing and compared to the predicted normalized resistance (R/R 0 ). The relationship between engineering strain and normalized resistance can be approximated by where l is the gage length during straining (l = l 0 + Δl) and it is assumed that the volume of the sample is held constant when there is no phase change (l x A = l 0 x A 0 ). Uniaxial tensile tests were performed on a MTS Tytron 250 universal tensile tester in displacement-controlled mode up to the maximum strain of 30% at a loading rate of 3.3x10 -4 s -1 . The electric resistance was measured in-situ during straining in four-point probe geometry with the contacts incorporated directly into the grips. More information on the set up has been previously published In-situ tensile straining with CLSM was performed utilizing an Anton Paar TS600 straining stage in conjunction with an Olympus LEXT 4100 OLS for surface imaging. The configuration consisted of the printed lines being strained at a rate of 10 μm/s initially using small straining steps (0.5% and 1% engineering strains) followed by 2% straining steps up to a maximum engineering strain of 12%. At each predetermined step, a 4 min pause was necessary to image the same surface area at three different magnifications. Two types of images were captured with the CLSM technique that tracked either the laser intensity or sample height. For DIC, only the laser intensity images were utilized and the 3-dimensional DIC software GOM Correlate A typical result of the relationship between normalized resistance and engineering strain for the printed Ag lines is shown in Figure What cannot be observed in Figure Closer inspection of the CLSM images taken at a higher magnification of a wave crest provide more details about crack initiation and propagation in flexographic printed films. At an engineering strain of 4%, it is difficult to observe cracks in the CLSM laser image (Figure Initially, only DIC can be used to evaluate the crack density (4-6% engineering strain) to directly observe cracks of the rough surface. However, the roughness does make DIC analysis possible to examine the early stages of crack growth in printed films (Figure The use of DIC as a characterization method of printed lines added insight into crack initiation and propagation within printed Ag lines. Surface images were collected using the CLSM technique that provided clear, laser intensity images of printed surfaces with relatively large surface roughnesses. The combination of the CLSM laser images and DIC made it possible to more thoroughly examine crack initiation at the local scale in the printed lines. Using DIC, the crack densities were more easily evaluated and showed that cracks initiated earlier in the thicker areas of the film (crests) than in lower areas (troughs) because of a higher density of printing defects and the increased thickness. This insight will be used to alter processing routes to decrease the surface wave amplitudes and printing defects in order to reduce initiation sites for cracks and therefore, indirectly, reduce electrical degradation resulting from applied strain. These results lead the authors to suggest that this technique is valuable when studying the fracture of materials with relatively high surface roughnesses where it is difficult to observe fracture processes. 