We prepare and study cement foam samples with well-controlled structure, i.e. containing monodisperse bubbles. We observe that the foam structure often changes before cement setting and identify ripening as the major destabilization mechanism at stake. Drainage plays only a minor role in cement foam destabilization except when bubble size is large. Then we show that a single stability criterion can be defined, for a large range of cement foams with different formulations. This criterion involves the bubble radius and the yield stress of the cement paste such as confined by and between the bubbles, at a given characteristic time after sample preparation. When it is unconstrained, a bubble has a spherical shape because of the air-liquid surface tension. Though, in a foam, bubbles are deformed by their neighbors. The structure of a foam was studied in 1873 by Joseph Plateau, who stated three laws known as Plateau's laws In cement foams, these destabilization mechanisms are expected to occur until cement paste hardening. Thus, to control the final bubble size and air distribution in the foam, one has to stop or slow down the three mechanisms. These mechanisms are affected by initial bubble size. For instance, the increase of bubble size for a given gas volume fraction results in the increase of the size of the film areas between the bubbles, which enhances coalescence. It also increases the size of the Plateau borders and nodes, which favors drainage Ripening, on the contrary, is reduced when bubble size increases. Indeed, it is caused by the capillary pressure inside the bubbles P c ≈ 2γ/R 0 , where γ is the air-liquid surface tension and R 0 the bubble radius. To avoid coalescence, liquid film must be stabilized by molecules or partially hydrophobic particles, which adsorb at air-water interfaces. The molecules, called surfactants, must be compatible with the highly alkaline cement solution and be present in sufficiently high amount Consistency of cement paste is also expected to play a major role in foam stability. High yield stress can stop drainage and ripening Therefore, the stability of fresh cement foams is expected to be observed for pastes with sufficiently high yield stress values, but stability can be observed also for low yield stress values. The aim of this paper is to reconcile those contradictory results and to propose a single stability criterion for cement foams. In the materials and methods, we describe how we prepare cement foams with controlled morphology and formulation, which allows for the factors controlling the stability of these cement foams to be investigated. First, the leading destabilization mechanism is identified. Then, the effects of bubble size and of cement paste yield stress are investigated. Finally, a global criterion for cement foam stability is defined. We use two cements. The first will be referred to as C1, it is manufactured by Lafarge, in Saint-Vigor factory and C2 is a CEM I cement from Lafarge, Lagerdorf. Their compositions and physical properties are specified in Table Two surfactants are used to produce the precursor foam. Tetradecyltrymethyl ammonium bromide (TTAB) is a cationic surfactant at purity above 99% pro- anionic surfactant provided by Stepan. Its molar mass indicated by the manufacturer is 382 g/mol and active content 68-72%. Surfactant chemical formulas can be found in Previous study showed that both surfactants are able to form stable foams in the highly alkaline cement paste interstitial solution Cement foams are prepared by mixing precursor aqueous foam and cement paste. Precursor foams are generated using the method described in Mixing of cement paste and precursor foam is carried out with a flow focusing device as described in and that therefore, the yield stress of the paste must be limited to a few tens of Pascals to avoid jamming in these channels. Each sample is obtained by filling a mold (diameter 2.6 cm, height 6 cm), through a layer-by-layer deposition process. Therefore, cement foam does not undergo strong shearing after its preparation, and bubbles are not broken during sample production. For each surfactant, all cement foam samples are prepared using the same mixing procedure, from water and cement mixing to casting. In the case of Steol samples, large amount of surfactant is added to cement paste 20 minutes after cement paste preparation to make the consistency of the paste decrease Samples are demolded one week after casting and the stability is visually assessed from the final morphology of the cement foam. Sample stability is evaluated according to the scale described below. Illustrations of the scale can be found in • 2: large stable area. In some areas (oftern the top of the bottom of the sample) the bubble size has changed before cement hardening, but most of the sample is stable • 1: small stable area(s). The morphology of most bubbles has evolved, yet, one or several area(s) containing at least several tens of bubbles can be observed. • 0: fully unstable sample, no stable area. Moreover the evolution of the bubble morphology of fresh cement foams is followed across the transparent molds. Note however that parietal bubbles are not fully representative of the bulk bubbles. In particular, Plateau borders are larger. For samples with large bubble size or low cement paste yield stress, this leads to the full coverage of the mold walls by cement paste. Obtained images are analyzed with freeware ImageJ program Besides, several samples are prepared by following a different procedure in order to stop one or two destabilization mechanisms. To prevent ripening, we use perfluorohexane saturated nitrogen instead of pure nitrogen To check the ability of surfactant to stabilize the foam films during several hours, we prepare an initial height h 0 =11 cm of aqueous foam in a glass column with diameter 2.6 cm. The generation method is the same as described in part 2. Note that the presence of perfluorohexane tends to make the foam swell. Indeed, there is C 6 F 14 in the bubbles but not in the air in the column above the foam. Difference in C 6 F 14 chemical potentials leads to transfer of nitrogen and oxygen from the air above the foam to the top bubbles. This swelling effect, which intrinsically results in a slight increase of foam height h, has been disregarded in the reported values of h. Several cement foams have been studied by X-ray tomography one or two months after the preparation. Two types of experiments have been performed. Images of one whole 2.6-cm-diameter and 6-cm-high sample and an addi- Resulting effective exposure time was therefore 4s. 3D tomographic reconstruction were performed at laboratoire Navier with the X-Act commercial software developed by RX-Solutions. Voxel size for the obtained images was 16.3 μm. Pores appeared black on the reconstructed images and interstitial cement pate was light grey. This allowed us to analyze the images with the freeware Im-ageJ program MorphoLibJ plugin France, where we could add our sample during the measurement time of the proposal 20171213. Anatomix is a 200 m-long beamline based on a cryogenic in-vacuum undulateur (U18). The tomography setup was therefore still in a temporary state and was composed of a small air-bearing rotation table from LAB (RT150v3) equipped with a small manual goniometer head from X-Huber, which maintained a 20 mm long small PMMA rod at the end of which the sample, approximately 5 mm in diameter, was glued. X-Ray radiographs of the latter were obtained with a 20 μm-thick LuAG scintillator mounted on a right angle kinematic cage from Thorlabs, containing a mirror reflecting the optical image towards the CMOS sensor of a ORCA flash 4.0 v2 camera from Hamamatsu, through a 10x microscopic objective from Mitutoyo, with a numerical aperture of 0.28 and a working distance of 33.5 mm. The optical definition of the sensor is 2048×2048 pixels and the pixel size is 6.5 μm, inducing a voxel size of the tomographic reconstructions, assuming a perfect parallel projection, of 650 nm. The undulator was set with a 7 mm gap and the beam was filtered by both a 10 μm Au filter and a 200 μm Cu filter, resulting in a large band pink beam centered on about 30 keV. Images were recorded synchronously with the continuous rotation of the table, at a frequency of 1 Hz, so that 2000 radiographs were recorded over a 180°total angle, in about 35 minutes. In addition, 50 so-called "dark" images were recorded in the same conditions without the beam and 50 so-called reference images were recorded in presence of the beam but without the sample. The averages of these darks and references allowed us to compute the attenuation of the sample, assuming classically an affine dependance of grey levels with attenuation. Finally, 3D tomographic reconstruction were performed at laboratoire Navier with the X-Act commercial software developed by RX-Solutions. Obtained volumes were images of 2048 3 voxels, coded on 16-bits, providing 3D attenuations maps over a 1.33×1.33×1.33 mm 3 subvolume of the samples. Even if their voxel size is of 650 nm, their actual spatial resolution is expected to be closer to 1 μm in their central part. Because of some residual imperfections of the manual alignment of the scintillator and the optics, images were slightly unfocused on their lower and upper parts, but the central zone of about 2048×2048×1200 voxels were of excellent quality. We estimate the yield stress of the reference cement pastes, i.e. prepared following the protocol described in 2.2.2 with addition of foaming solution (without bubbles) instead of foam. Yield stress is measured using simple spread tests: the paste is poured on a flat horizontal surface and the yield stress is obtained by the following formula where ρ, Ω and R spread are respectively the density, the volume and the average radius of the spread cement paste. Note that this formula requires that 1 P a τ y,0 100 P a TTAB cement foams are prepared with C1 cement. We have seen in a previous study To get a relation between W/C f and τ y,0 ,which will allow us to calculate τ y,0 for all cement foams samples containing TTAB, we fit these data point using the so-called Yodel where Φ perc is the percolation threshold and Φ max is the maximal solid frac- The global TTAB concentration after mixing of the precursor foam with the cement paste is between 0.7 and 2.4 g/L. Adsorption isotherms measured on pastes at W/C f =0.5 showed that partial adsorption on cement grains leaves a residual concentration in solution between 0.2 and 1 g/L and corresponding surface tensions (in synthetic cement pore solution) are comprised between 37 and 42 mN/m In the case of Steol surfactant, for both investigated concentrations, yield stress values are smaller than the yield stress of the same cement paste without surfactant (see paragraph 2.3.1). Therefore, all cement foams made with Steol are in the high Steol concentration regime, for which surface tension is γ Steol = 27 mN/m. During the six experiments presented in Fig. However, the height of the foam did not decrease for 10 hours in all cases. Foams made with synthetic cement pore solution are less stable than those made from distilled water, and the presence of C 6 F 14 decreases the collapse velocity; however, both these effects can be seen only after 10 hours. Note that for the smaller bubbles, mixing of cement paste and foam is sometimes not fully homogeneous at the bubble scale: small volumes of cement paste appear to be surrounded by foam of higher air content than the average value. For instance, structure of foams in pictures (c) and (d) in Fig. An example for the evolution of the morphology of a TTAB cement foam with R 0 = 365 μm is shown in Fig. More quantitatively, time for the bigger bubbles to reach twice their initial size is about 20 minutes after foam preparation when R 0 = 270 μm and 40 minutes after foam preparation when R 0 = 365 μm. In samples containing larger bubbles, gas fraction often increases from the bottom to the top of the sample when drainage is not prevented through rotation. Examples of slices obtained by X-ray tomography of a 11 cm high sample are shown in Fig. increases from 80% at the bottom to 85% at the top. This curve additionally shows oscillations of Φ over a length scale close to 1300 μm, i.e. the diameter of the bubbles (see inset), which could be a signature of a bubble crystalline structure. Some local minima and maxima are still observed when the curve is averaged over a height bigger than the bubble size (black curve). These local variations may be created during the mixing process or appear later during the drainage of the sample. In addition, drainage sometimes leads to a strong destabilization of bubbles at the bottom of the sample (see Fig. This occurs when the cement foam is flowing in the mold during the rotation stage, which is often the case when τ y,0 is too low. h=3 cm h= 10 cm In the following we do not consider the drainage-induced destabilization of the cement foam samples. A sample is considered as unstable when a major change of bubble size has occurred in the whole sample. Sample stability observations are gathered in Figs. We observe for both surfactants a significant effect of bubble size: all samples are stable when R 0 is high and unstable at very low R 0 . Minimum radius for stable foams depends however on the composition of the foams: 600 μm for TTAB and C1, and respectively 400 μm and 200 μm for Steol and C2 when τ y,0 =18 Pa and 3 Pa. On the contrary, the increase of the yield stress does not improve stability in the studied range, i.e. below 50 Pa (we recall that higher yield stresses can not be achieved with our mixing device). is the liquid density. Our results show that TTAB and Steol are able to prevent coalescence, even in the highly alkaline conditions in cement paste, which means that Π d,crit > 1000 P a. Note however that in foams, coalescence can take place even if Π d < Π d,crit , because bubble rearrangements can lead to film breakage due to dynamics, if liquid volume content is very low Drainage should stop if the yield stress of the cement paste exceeds a critical value τ c,d whose order of magnitude is given by where r refers to the radius of curvature of Plateau borders, as measured within their transversal cross-section. At high air content Φ > 99%, r ≈ R 0 / 3(1 -Φ) Ripening is expected to be slowed down or stopped when the yield stress of the interstitial material reaches the order of magnitude of the bubble capillary pressure Both critical stresses for drainage and ripening depend on the bubble radius R 0 . Eqs 3 and 4 are plotted in Fig Let us first calculate a rough estimation of drainage characteristic time t d as given by the ratio of the sample height H and the drainage velocity v: . The velocity is given by Darcy's law for pressure gradient induced by where k is the Darcy permeability and μ app the apparent shear viscosity of the cement paste. Permeability of a foam depends of the gas volume fraction and the bubble size For Φ = 0.83, this gives k = 5.10 -4 R 2 . To assess the apparent viscosity of the continuous phase, a rheological model must be chosen. The Bingham model describes well the rheological behavior of cement paste where the yield stress τ y and the plastic viscosity μ p depend on the paste formulation. We have measured the flow curves of three cement pastes with no surfactant, at water-to-cement ratio from 0.37 to 0.5 (results not shown here). For all three of them, stress at γ100 = 100 s -1 is close to 2τ y , i.e. μ p ∼ τ y / γ100 . At the scale of the Plateau borders and nodes, the gravity-induced stress is τ ∼ ρgr where r is the characteristic size of the channels and is close to the bubble radius R 0 as already explained in the previous paragraph. Following the above assumptions, the apparent viscosity is therefore: From equations 5, 6 and 8, we find that the characteristic drainage time is This gives, for τ y = 1 P a, t d ∼ 30 min when R 0 = 200 μm and t d ∼ 1 min when R 0 = 700 μm. The characteristic time for foam ripening is given by where K 2 is a diffusion coefficient. For nitrogen and low molecular weight surfactants K 2 ∼ 50 μm 2 /s. For polydisperse foams, the characteristic time given by equation 10 is the time during which the average bubble size grows from its initial value < R > to 2 < R >. In the case of monodisperse foams, ripening is delayed: first, there is an induction period during which defaults appear and grow in the foam. The duration of this induction period is difficult to estimate. Here, we chose to use equation 10 with < R >= R 0 to assess the time evolution of the defaults due to ripening. We obtain t r ∼ 50 min when R 0 = 270 μm and t r ∼ 90 min when R 0 = 365 μm. These calculated times are of the same order of magnitude than the observed ripening times (see Fig. In table We have identified foam ripening as the major destabilization mechanism. To go further, we introduce the Bingham capillary number, which compares the yield stress (stabilizing effect) with the capillary pressure inside the bubbles, which drives the ripening process: We expect that a suitable criterion for foam stability would be in the form of a critical capillary number Ca * y . As a first approach we use the yield stress of the reference cement paste τ y,0 (obtained from Fig. • The yield stress of the interstitial cement paste, i.e. confined between the bubbles, can be higher than the yield stress of the reference cement paste, i.e. the unfoamed cement paste where τ y,aq (Φ) = 0.6 γ R (Φ -0.64) 2 is the yield stress of aqueous foam with the same Φ value and c=110 is a constant. • Yield stress of cementitious materials at rest increases with time due to flocculation and creation of hydrate bonds between the particles These two issues suggest that the interstitial yield stress τ y,int at a relevant time t * after foam preparation should be considered instead of the reference yield stress τ y,0 . The time t * is expected to be set by the interplay of several complex mechanisms, such as hydration, liquid drainage and foam ripening, and the detailed analysis for such effect is by far beyond the scope of this paper. We have noticed that all the unstable samples (including both samples presented in Figs. We have measured the yield stress τ y,f oam of several cement foams at 15 min with the rheometry protocol described in Ca y,int (t * ) > 1 ( It is important to recall here the hypothesis leading to this criterion: • Destabilization is due to ripening. We have shown in paragraphs 4.1 and 4.2 that this hypothesis is true for the samples studied here, but it may fail when bigger bubbles are studied (R 0 1 mm) • Interstitial yield stress has been calculated using equation 12. This empirical relation has been obtained for interstitial fluids that are continuous compared to the size of the Plateau borders, and for values of the Bingham capillary number below 0.5. Therefore, care should be taken when Plateau border size is small (due to small bubble size or high gas volume content) and when the interstitial yield stress is high. • The value of t * required to define this criterion is expected to depend on the preparation method of the cement foam samples and can be affected, for instance, by the polydispersity of the foam and the setting time of the cement. We are able to get a single value of t * for all the samples studied here because all are initially monodisperse, and although two different cements are used, hydration time for both is roughly similar. The obtained value, t * = 15 min is of the order of magnitude of the drainage characteristic time for the smallest studied bubbles (see paragraph 4.2). We have investigated the mechanisms at stake in the destabilization of cement foam samples. We first note that a proper choice of surfactant can prevent coalescence of the bubbles up to cement hardening. For most of the cement foam samples, prepared either with anionic or cationic surfactant, ripening is the leading destabilization mechanism. Drainage is also sometimes observed when the yield stress of cement paste is very low or bubble size is large. In these cases, we observed that drainage takes place faster than ripening, which was found to be consistent with our calculation of the drainage and ripening characteristic times. Thanks to stability measurements performed on foams made from different formulations of cement pastes, i.e. surfactant and W/C ratio, with controlled bubble diameters, we have shown that the cement foam stability is governed by a single parameter, namely the Bingham capillary number calculated using the effective yield stress of the interstitial cement paste at time t * after the foam preparation, Ca y,int (t * ). Whatever the studied cement foam, the transition between stable and unstable foam is observed for the simple criterion Ca * y,int (t * ) 1. In this work, the gas volume fraction of the samples has been kept constant and both cement used have similar setting times. In addition, we have studied foams with initially very narrow bubble size distribution. As setting time and bubble size distribution are expected to set the characteristic time t * , it would be interesting to investigate how robust is our stability criterion when these parameters are allowed to vary within a large range.