Motivated by recent advances in the fabrication of Josephson junctions in which the weak link is made of a low-dimensional non-superconducting material, we present here a systematic theoretical study of the local density of states (LDOS) in a clean 2D normal metal (N) coupled to two s-wave superconductors (S). To be precise, we employ the quasiclassical theory of superconductivity in the clean limit, based on Eilenberger's equations, to investigate the phase-dependent LDOS as function of factors such as the length or the width of the junction, a finite reflectivity, and a weak magnetic field. We show how the the spectrum of Andeeev bound states that appear inside the gap shape the phase-dependent LDOS in short and long junctions. We discuss the circumstances when a gap appears in the LDOS and when the continuum displays a significant phase-dependence. The presence of a magnetic flux leads to a complex interference behavior, which is also reflected in the supercurrent-phase relation. Our results agree qualitatively with recent experiments on graphene SNS junctions. Finally, we show how the LDOS is connected to the supercurrent that can flow in these superconducting heterostructures and present an analytical relation between these two basic quantities. If a normal metal (N) is in good electrical contact with a superconductor (S), it can acquire genuine superconducting properties. This phenomenon, which is known as proximity effect, was first investigated in the 1960's In the last 50 years the Josephson effect in SNS weak links has been thoroughly investigated in numerous experiments in which the normal link ranged from standard normal metals In the regime, known as the clean limit, the mean free path is larger than both the junction and the coherence length. The LDOS is expected to display discrete ABSs inside the gap In a recent work Bretheau and coworkers The LDOS and the corresponding ABS spectrum in clean 3D SNS junctions have been discussed earlier in the literature. The impact on the ABS spectrum of non perfect interfaces In this Article, motivated by the experiments of Bretheau et al. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we introduce the system under study and describe in detail the quasiclassical Green's function formalism that we employ to compute the LDOS in clean 2D SNS junctions. In particular, we discuss in different subsections how to compute the LDOS in a fully transparent junction, how to account for the presence of a potential barrier in the systems and how to describe the role of a finite width of the normal region and the presence of a weak magnetic field. Section III is devoted to the description of the main results of this work. In this section we illustrate the impact of different factors, such as the length, the barrier transmission or the presence of a weak magnetic field, in the LDOS in the normal region of a clean SNS junction. In Sec. IV we present a discussion of the magnetic-field modulation of the LDOS in close connection to the work of Ref. Our goal is to calculate the local DOS in a clean (no impurities) 2D normal metal sandwiched by two identical s-wave superconductors, see Fig. In order to describe the electronic structure in this SNS heterostructure we make use of the quasiclassical theory of superconductivity, which in the clean case is based on the Eilenberger equation of motion where ĝ is the quasiclassical Green's function that contains the full information about the equilibrium properties of the system. This function depends on the energy E, the position r, the Fermi velocity v F , and it has the following matrix structure in Nambu (electron-hole) space Moreover, τ3 = diag(1, -1) is the third Pauli matrix and ∆ is the gap matrix that contains the information about the modulus and phase of the superconducting order parameter: Let us also say that the Green's function in Eq. ( where η is the broadening parameter and N 0 = m/π is the density of states per unit area of a 2D normal metal at the Fermi energy. The Eilenberger equation (1) contains the directional derivative along the Fermi velocity, which makes this equation effectively one dimensional. This implies that the Eq. ( where • • • vF stands for the average over the Fermi velocity directions. Another property of interest in this work is the supercurrent, i.e., the equilibrium current that can flow through the heterostructure when there is a phase difference between the superconducting electrodes. The supercurrent density at a temperature T can be expressed in terms of the quasiclassical Green's functions as follows where e is the elementary charge. We first consider a fully transparent (no potential barriers) clean 2D SNS junction of infinite width. We assume that the Fermi velocity is along x-direction, v F = v F e x (see Fig. where Here, ĝs h (x) corresponds to an homogeneous solution, while ĝs ± (x) are spatially-dependent ones. The general solution of Eq. ( where we defined τ± = 1 2 (τ 1 ± iτ 2 ). We now solve the Eilenberger equation assuming that the order parameter follows a step function: ∆(x) = ∆θ(|x| -L/2), i.e., there is no inverse proximity effect. For this purpose, we make following Ansatz for a trajectory starting at x = -∞ in superconductor 1 with the phase -φ/2 going straight through the normal metal with a length L and ending in x = ∞ in superconductor 2 with the phase +φ/2: where A, A ± , B 1,2 are unknown coefficients, which have to be determined with the help of the boundary conditions at the interfaces. We assume that the Green's function is a continuous function throughout the system, which leads to the boundary conditions at the two SN interfaces ĝs (-L/2) = ĝn (-L/2), ĝn (L/2) = ĝs (L/2). ( Using these boundary conditions and solving the problem in the opposite direction (φ/2 → -φ/2), we arrive at the following solution for the Green's function inside the normal metal where σ = ± denotes the direction of propagation (left of right), v F is the magnitude of the Fermi velocity and θ is the angle between the incoming trajectory and the direction perpendicular to the interface (see Fig. which gives us the resolved LDOS for a single trajectory of a length L. The LDOS in 2D, see Eq. ( To investigate the role of a finite transparency through the heterostructure, we consider now a SNS junction with a normal metal of length L and infinite width featuring a potential barrier in the middle (x = 0), see Fig. where D 0 is the transmission coefficient for θ = 0, i.e., for the trajectory perpendicular to the interface and R 0 = 1 -D 0 . In order to solve the problem analytically it is convenient to use the so-called Riccati parametrization in which for the quasiclassical Green's function is parametrized in terms of two coherent functions as follows With this parametrization the normalization condition ĝ2 = 1 is automatically fulfilled and from the Eilenberger equation, see Ref. (1), one can show that the coherent functions γ and γ satisfy the following decoupled firstorder differential equations [50] We now follow Ref. where R 1 , D 1 and R1 , D1 are given by The coefficients R 2 , D 2 and R2 , D2 are given by the analogous expressions. All the previous expressions fulfill R j + D j = 1 and Rj + Dj = 1. To show how to obtain the expression for the quasiclassical Green's function, we consider here the solution for γ 1 (Fig. where A is an unknown coefficient. By applying the boundary condition of Ref. (30) By repeating the same procedure for the other γ (γ) functions we obtain the full set of solutions in the normal metal Notice that since the LDOS does not depend on the position, we have omitted the spatial arguments in the coherent functions in Eqs. ( where Γn 1 is defined in Eq. ( . Finally, the total Green's function in the normal metal is the average of the incoming and the outgoing ones (37) The single trajectory and the 2D LDOS are obtained by inserting Eq. We now want to describe the effect of the presence of a weak (perpendicular) magnetic field and also consider the effect of having a finite width W in the normal region. By weak magnetic field we mean that one can neglect the orbital and Zeeman effects in the normal region and the role of the field is simply to spatially modulate the superconducting phase inside the electrodes. In other words, the magnetic field only enters via the gauge-invariant superconducting phase difference that becomes where φ 0 is a constant value superconducting phase difference, Φ is the magnetic flux enclosed in the normal region, Φ 0 = h/(2e) is the flux quantum, and y is the transverse coordinate (parallel to the SN interfaces), see Fig. To avoid reflections inside the superconductors we assume they are infinitely wide. From Eq. ( N (φ, σ, E, θ, h)dθdh. One of the questions that we discuss below is the relation between the LDOS and the Josephson current that flows across the junction. To establish such a relation, it is convenient to consider the case of a single trajectory at normal incidence. In this case, the Josephson current, see Eq. ( where W is the width of the normal metal and J s (φ, E, θ) = (1/2) [g n (φ, E, 1, θ) -g n (φ, E, -1, θ)] is the spectral current. By inserting Eq. ( where g n (φ, σ, , θ) is given by Eq. ( In this section we shall make use of the formalism developed in the previous one and explore systematically the role of different parameters in the LDOS of a clean SNS junction such as the length, the width, the transmission barrier, and the presence of a weak external magnetic field. For illustration purposes, we start in this subsection with the analysis of the trajectory-resolved LDOS in the absence of a magnetic field. In Fig. where n is an integer number, v F is the Fermi velocity, and φ is the superconducting phase difference difference. For long trajectories (L ξ = v F /∆) the previous equation reduces to (for energies much smaller than ∆) From this expression we see that in this long-junction limit the energy of the ABSs depends linearly on the phase, something that it is already apparent in Fig. Let us turn now to the analysis of the angle-averaged LDOS in the normal metal for junctions of infinite width and in the absence of an external magnetic field. In Fig. To understand the role of the junction length, we present in Fig. C. Presence of a weak magnetic field and the effect of a finite width In experimental setups, like that of Ref. where y is the transverse coordinate along the SN interfaces (see Fig. Here, we focus on the case in which the magnetic field is only applied to the junction and the constant part of the superconducting phase difference, φ 0 , can take an arbitrary value. In the next section we shall consider the situation where the junction is incorporated into a superconducting loop and φ 0 is determined by the magnetic flux enclosed in the loop. Making use of the formalism detailed in section II C, we have computed the results shown in Fig. In Fig. To explore the role of the junction in the presence of a weak magnetic field, we present the results for a junction of length L = 0.01ξ and width W = 10ξ in Fig. A. LDOS of a SNS junction embedded in a superconducting loop As mentioned above, the practical way to investigate the phase dependence of the LDOS in a weak link is by incorporating it into a superconducting loop and applying an external magnetic field. This is, for instance, what it was done in Ref. where we insist that Φ is the magnetic flux enclosed in the whole loop rather than the flux enclosed in the junction. To illustrate the magnetic flux modulation of the LDOS, we follow Ref. Now, we want to investigate the relation between the DOS and the dc Josephson current. Let us recall that in a short Josephson junction (L ξ), the whole supercurrent is carried by the ABSs. In particular, for a singlechannel point contact of transparency D, the ABS energies are given by E ± A (φ) = ±∆ 1 -D sin 2 φ/2. These states carry opposite supercurrents φ/π which are weighted by the occupation of the ABSs. Inspired by this expression, Bretheau et al. where Φ 0 = /2e is the reduced magnetic flux quantum, W is the width of the normal metal, and J s is the spectral current given by where L is the length of the normal metal and N n is the corresponding LDOS. This formula gives exactly Eq. ( which, however, is not always true. Actually, in section II D we proved that Eq. ( where N (x) is the LDOS along the system. By inserting the single-trajectory solution for the Green's function of Eq. ( The minus sign is due to the function sign(-E) in the Eq. ( where we defined the energy-dependent phase factor γ(E) = 2EL/v F + arccos(E/∆). The Green's function has poles for φ/2 -γ(E Bn ) = nπ, where n = 0, ±1, ±2, . . .. We find the local density of states The difference to the global density of states (only the δ-functions) is related to the leakage of Andreev states into the superconductor, which strongly depends on the energy of the bound state (and hence on the phase). The phase dependence is most striking in the short junction limit. Here we obtain a single bound state at E B (φ) = ∆ cos(φ/2) and therefore Obviously, the local density of states differs drastically from the simple δ-function and this explains the deviations from the heuristic formula and the full result illustrated in Fig. where E B (φ) = ∆ 1 -D sin 2 (φ/2). Hence, one has to be careful, when extracting the spectral supercurrent density and the current-phase relation from local tunneling measurements. With the goal to help to interpret future experiments, we have presented here a comprehensive theoretical study of the LDOS in clean 2D SNS junctions. Making use of the quasiclassical Green's function formalism, we have calculated both the LDOS and the Josephson current as a function of parameters such as the length and the width of the junction, the transparency of the system, and we have studied the role of a weak magnetic field. First, we have shown how discrete ABSs become visible inside the gap for short junctions. At finite reflectivity R a phase-independent minigap ∼ √ R∆ is present, but the LDOS still reflects the energies of the Andreev bound states. The phase dependence above the gap is rather weak and further decreased by a finite reflection. Next, we have studied the effect of a finite length of the junction. A finite reflection still leads to a minigap, but this diminishes for longer junction. Finally the spectrum of a long junction with the linear phase-dependent Andreev states is emerging. The effect of a magnetic field leads to a rather complex behavior. Interfering trajectories due to the finite flux lead to a vanishing phase-dependence of the density of states. This is in analogy to usual Fraunhofer suppression of the Josephson critical current for a mag-netic flux threading the junction. Generically, we observe that for ballistic transport, the minigap closes at a phase-difference of π and reopens for a finite flux. At large fluxes there is no gap anymore. To make a connection to the experiment of Bretheau and coworkers Finally, we have investigated the relation between the LDOS and the Josephson current proposed in Ref. 