We present waveguide integrated high-speed Si photodetector integrated with silicon nitride (SiN) waveguide on SOI platform for short reach data communication in 850 nm wavelength band. We demonstrate a waveguide couple Si pin photodetector responsivity of 0.44 A/W at 25 V bias. The frequency response of the photodetector is evaluated by coupling of a femtosecond laser source through SiN grating coupler of the integrated photodetector. We estimate a 3dB bandwidth of 14 GHz at 20 V bias, highest reported bandwidth for a waveguide integrated Si photodetector. We also present detailed optoelectronic DC and AC characterisation of the fabricated devices. The demonstrated integrated photodetector could enable an integrated solution for scaling of short reach data communication and connectivity. Ever increasing data traffic drives the need for scalable, high speed, and energy efficient connectivity in the datacenters [1-3]. Optical connectivity offers an excellent solution to data connectivity bottleneck in datacenters. Widely used 850 nm VCSEL based Multimode fiber (MMF) technology is reaching maximum capacity, however, proposal to extend the MMF toward Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM) would scale up the capacity to 400 Gbps. In view of that, IEEE proposed 400 Gbps roadmap [4] for short reach rack-to-rack communication by 2020. Adapting WDM would require integration of wavelength multiplexers and demultiplexers, light sources and detectors in a single module. Integrating all the functional elements as a single photonic integrated circuit would enable a compact, costeffective, and scalable platform. It is essential that the circuit should be able to guide light with low-loss and is compact with the integration of light sources and detectors. Silicon (Si) photonics has demonstrated such a versatile platform in 1310 nm and 1550 nm wavelength band In this paper, we present SiN waveguide integrated high-( (a a C ou pin g pipgiic y% speed Si pin photodetector on the SOI platform. Figure Experimental validation of the fabricated device was performed by measuring responsivity and bandwidth of the pho- todetector. Initial DC characterization is performed to determine the dark current and responsivity. Light is coupled into the chip using a grating coupler as mentioned earlier. For responsivity measurement, the optical power delivered into the waveguide is measured using a reference SiN waveguide with in and out coupler. The frequency response of the detector is measured using a femtosecond pulsed laser source 00 100 400 0000 0300 0 00 im e1ps Similar to DC measurement, we measured both waveguide 1D coupled and direct illumination frequency response. The femtosecond source of spot size 5 μm is illuminated on top of the intrinsic region to evaluate the frequency response of the detector. Figure As mentioned earlier, femo-second source is waveguide coupled into the detector through the grating coupler. Since the source was placed vertical to the grating coupler instead of the designed angle of 10 o , the power coupling was lower, however, sufficient to measure the pulse response. Figure verse bias are obtained with 115 μm long device. To the best of our knowledge, this is the highest reported 3dB bandwidth for waveguide integrated Si photodetector. In conclusion, we have successfully demonstrated an integrated lateral silicon pin photodetector in SiN-on-SOI platform. Silicon pin is realized using simple diffusion doping. SiN waveguides modes are coupled into the intrinsic region by an optimized inverse taper vertical coupler. We obtained the highest responsivity of 0.44 A/W at 25 V, and to the best of our knowledge highest 3dB cut off frequency of 14 GHz at 20 V bias for a waveguide integrated silicon photodetector. We find that bandwidth increase with increasing bias voltage reveals that the speed is limited by transit time which can be further improved by the narrower intrinsic width of the pin junction that can be achieved using implantation doping. The demonstration shows a feasible method to integrated standard Si process and SiN integration to achieved high-speed photodetector operating in short reach wavelength band. The demonstration allows integration of wavelength selective detection that can be used for short reach wavelength division multiplexing. 