Simultaneous spatio-temporal confinement of energetic electron pulses to femtosecond and nanometer scales is a topic of great interest in the scientific community, given the potential impact of such development on a wide spectrum of scientific and industrial applications. For example, in ultrafast electron scattering, nanoscale probes would enable accurate maps of structural dynamics in materials with nanoscale heterogeneity, thereby understanding the role of boundaries and defects on macroscopic properties. On the other hand, advances in this field are mostly limited by the electron source brightness and size. We present the design, fabrication, and optical characterization of bullseye plasmonic lenses for next-generation ultrafast electron sources. Using electromagnetic simulations, we examine how the interplay between light-plasmon coupling, plasmon propagation, dispersion, and resonance governs the properties of the photoemitted electron pulse. We also illustrate how the pulse duration and strength can be tuned by geometric design, and predict sub-10 fs pulses with nanoscale diameter can be achieved. We then fabricated lenses in gold films and characterized their plasmonic properties with cathodoluminescence spectromicroscopy, demonstrating suitable plasmonic behavior for ultrafast, nanoscale photoemission. Ultrafast electron sources have been extensively used as tools for scientific discovery over the past two decades. Such sources can now reliably produce electron pulses with femtosecond duration, which can be used as probes for dynamic microscopy and scattering measurements. Ultrafast electron-based measurements have provided insight into mechanisms of structural phase transitions in condensed matter In effort to increase brightness, researchers have developed radio-frequency-based electron guns (rf guns) capable of sustaining large electric field amplitudes at extraction and during acceleration. By providing an order of magnitude higher accelerating field (100 MV/m) than direct-current electron guns, the extracted peak current can be increased by orders of magnitude, from the μArange typical of electron microscopes to several A, while generating relativistic electron pulses with sub-10-fs duration Recently, nanostructured cathode surfaces have been demonstrated that couple the incident laser to resonant surface plasmon modes, which concentrate and enhance the optical-field intensity in localized areas of the surface. For example, nanogrooves designed to produce an in-groove surface plasmon resonance were patterned into gold-coated cathodes and were found to increase the photocurrent yield by 6 orders of magnitude over bare gold through multiphoton photoemission In this work, we propose and investigate the potential of bullseye plasmonic lenses for ultrafast, nanoscale photoemitters. Such structures concentrate optical fields to a single, central spot on a flat surface The system under study is a nanopatterned photocathode excited by ultrafast laser pulses with an 800 nm center wavelength. The pattern consists of equally-spaced, concentric annular grooves forming a bullseye plasmonic lens. The geometry is defined by the five parameters illustrated in Figure of incident light with electric field perpendicular to the grooves into surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs). A radially polarized laser at normal incidence is used so that the electric field direction is always perpendicular to the grooves and the launched SPPs are in phase. These SPPs then propagate and interfere to give maximum field enhancement at the structure center. We use gold as the plasmonic material, enabling fourphoton photoemission at 800 nm wavelength. Gold is oxidation resistant and provides effective photoemission surfaces; in fact, four-photon photoemission from gold cathodes patterned with linear gratings has been demonstrated We first simulate the electromagnetic fields for a lens under continuous-wave (cw) illumination to study their spatial distribution and the expected emission spot size. An 800-nm wavelength laser is focused at the surface using a numerical aperture (NA) of 0.07, giving a donutshaped in-plane intensity with peak-to-peak diameter of 4.5 μm. The lens has 4 rings with period p of 783 nm, which is the corresponding SPP wavelength in gold. This aims to satisfy momentum conservation between the normal incidence photons and the SPPs as given by the grating equation Here, k spp and k photon,xy are the in-plane wave vectors of the SPP and incident photon, respectively, while g is the grating vector and n is an integer. We set r i to be 783 nm to coincide with antinodes of the twodimensional (2D) standing wave formed by the interfering SPPs. This causes reflections from the edge to resonate, further increasing field enhancement. With these parameters fixed, we then performed a series of finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations in Lumerical The anticipated four-photon photocurrent density J 4 ∝ |E| 8 [19]; the photocurrent density enhancement is shown in Figure To study the emitter's temporal response and how it depends on the lens geometry, we performed impulseresponse FDTD simulations. Using incident laser pulses with 3-fs FWHM duration, we simulate the time-resolved electric field at the structure center, E z,center (t). The spectral response in the linear intensity regime is described by the complex transfer function T(ω), obtained from the Fourier transforms of the time-dependent incident and enhanced fields The frequency-dependent field enhancement is then given by |T (ω)|. We also use eq. 2 to compute the temporal response for Gaussian incident pulses of varying duration. We first study the four-ring bullseye lens optimized above (see Figure Effects on the response shape for varying incident pulse length (I inc FWHM) are shown in Figure We now present a series of impulse-response simulations while varying geometric parameters to clarify design rules for ultrafast photoemission applications. We first vary the number of rings, N , obtaining the simulated spectral response shown in Figure We then vary the depth of the grooves, d, obtaining the spectral response shown in Figure There is also a noticeable effect of d on the temporal response duration as shown in Figure These results lead to a few design rules for ultrafast applications. The depth and width of the grooves should usually be optimized for maximum field enhancement. The period can then be adjusted to center the resonance peak at the desired wavelength. Finally, the structure should have as many rings as possible to maximize photocurrent while maintaining enough bandwidth to achieve the required pulse duration. The optimal geometry ultimately depends on the photocurrent and pulse duration required. We fabricated bullseye lenses using two processes illustrated in Figure Here, we present cathodoluminescence (CL) spectromicroscopy measurements of plasmonic characteristics of fabricated lenses. In CL, an electron beam is focused on the sample and, by one or more mechanisms, light is emitted from the material We use CL to measure a few key plasmonic properties of these structures. For one, the plasmonic resonance in the central region can be mapped using CL spectromicroscopy. CL intensity has been linked to the radiative local density of optical states (LDOS) at the electron beam position, ie. the number of optical modes available at the excitation position that produce light We use scanning CL spectromicroscopy to probe the spectral and spatial characteristics of the surfaceplasmon resonance in our fabricated lenses. The electron beam is rastered step by step over the central plateau of the structure, and a full CL-emission spectrum is collected at each beam position. Spectra are obtained by focusing the reflected light from the mirror onto a multimode optical fiber with a 200 μm diameter and then dispersing it using a spectrometer consisting of an Acton 2300i monochromator (150 line/mm, 500 nm blazed grating) and Andor Newton electron-multiplied chargecoupled device (CCD). The dark current background is subtracted and spectra are normalized by the instrument response over the measured wavelength range. The opensource Python-based ScopeFoundry software developed to control this experiment is available online for further reference From this 3D data set, we can extract average emis-sion spectra from regions of interest. Average spectra over the region within 75 nm of the bullseye center are shown in Figure Other features in the maps are also present off resonance. For instance, bright spots are present in the map of the FIB-milled structure [Figure We note that there are key differences between CL mapping and the FDTD simulations used in section II. The excitation mechanism is different: FDTD simulates a radially polarized laser excitation and calculates the field enhancement at all positions, whereas CL mapping rasters an e-beam and collects the integrated light output as a function of e-beam position. This scanning local excitation provides a different spatial profile than expected for a global laser excitation based on FDTD. For instance, the CL emission is stronger when the electron beam is positioned at edges than the structure center, but this is not expected for the case of radially polarized illumination. Still, we can use CL mapping to visualize scattering sites and study the symmetry and smoothness of the plasmonic resonance mode, as discussed above. For more detailed discussion of the CL dependence on electron beam position, see the Appendix. To quantify and compare the resonance characteristics of structures made by FIB and EBL, we fit the resonance peaks in CL spectra collected using an e-beam at the lens center (where the plasmons generated match the circular symmetry of the structure) to determine the resonance wavelength and the FWHM. Average spectra from scan positions within 75 nm of the bullseye center are extracted from spectromicroscopy scans. The spectra are then re-binned into 2-nm wavelength bins and converted from wavelength to energy scale. The resonance peak is fit using a Lorentzian plus a parabolic background. Four structures made by each fabrication method were measured and analyzed. The converted spectra and peak fitting are shown in Figure We study the angle-resolved CL emission to infer the radial extent of effective plasmon propagation and grating coupling in the fabricated lenses. We both simulate and measure the CL far field for four-and 12-ring bullseye lenses. The far field is measured by positioning the electron beam at the structure center and imaging the parabolic mirror Using FDTD, the CL process can be numerically modeled The simulation box was gradually increased in order to collect larger angles and mesh dimension was decreased to achieve convergence. Simulated and measured far-field CL of four-ring lenses are shown in Figure We also fabricated and studied a 12-ring bullseye lens using FIB as shown in Figure We have presented a novel design for ultrafast nanoscale electron emitters which has several advantages for the next generation of electron-based instrumentation. First, the design is compatible with high accelerating fields while decreasing the source size by two orders of magnitude as compared to an unpatterned flat cathode. Electromagnetic simulations and cathodoluminescence mapping support that plasmonic resonance leads to a single dominant central peak in optical intensity which could be used to generate electron pulses with 140-nm FWHM (60-nm RMS) lateral size. Second, the emission surface can be made nearly atomically flat, suppressing emittance increase from surface roughness and from aberrations due to field curvature, differently from what happens with tips. Thirdly, the geometric parameters can be tuned to optimize the photocurrent and temporal re-sponse for application requirements without changing the emission spot size. The computations and experiments shown here support that the plasmonic properties and the spectral bandwidth of such structures are compatible with emission of sub-10-fs pulses. These plasmonic lenses could also facilitate emerging high-intensity modes of operation. For instance, they reduce the laser power required to access the optical field emission regime, in which the fields are strong enough to modulate the work function at the optical frequency. This operating regime is of great interest because it allows control of the photocurrent density at attosecond timescales, providing the potential to generate attosecond electron-pulse trains In terms of applications, the transverse brightness of such nanocathodes is expected to be more than 1 order of magnitude better than present state of art flat cathodes. Their use in rf environments would enable production of relativistically accelerated electrons with picometer emittance, which could be focused down to nanometer sizes and efficiently injected into advanced acceleration devices Using angle-resolved CL, we can observe this symmetry mismatch between plasmons and lens for off-center electron beam positions, shown in Figure For this reason, it is hard to quantitatively compare spatial profiles from CL spectromicroscopy and simulated field enhancement under laser illumination. One example of this is the observation that the CL emission is brighter when the beam is at the groove edge than at the center of the structure (see Figure Quantitative analysis of the spatial map is further complicated by the nature of the CL process. The total measured intensity of this emission depends on how the emission interferes in the far field and what parts of the emission are collected by the mirror. At both the node and edge positions, some of the emitted light is not collected by the mirror (see Figure 