In this paper, we present a coupled carrier-photon model that accounts for the timedomain interactions between carrier transport and light emission in Gallium Nitride (GaN)-based LEDs that hasn't been reported so far. Carrier transport is modeled using the drift-Diffusion formulation, whereas light emission and propagation is modeled using Maxwell's equations. The drift Diffusion equation is solved self-consistently with Poisson equation. The carrier transport and photon emission are coupled by formulating an appropriate relation between radiative recombinations and dipole sources such that the strength of the dipole sources is given by the radiative recombination rates gauged to an appropriate value. This gauging factor is obtained by calibrating the External Quantum Efficiency (EQE) of homojunction GaN LED with the experimental value. Solid State Lighting (SSL) is expected to reduce electricity consumption for lighting by at least 50% Future development and improvements in GaN LEDs require a deeper understanding of the physical nanoscale mechanisms and internal physics of the device. The parameters needed to improve the device performance can be investigated through numerical simulations of advanced models. The challenges that occur in modeling such devices are knowledge of a large number of III-Nitride material parameters and integration of carrier transport with optical domain. Numerical simulations help in developing the link between material properties and the performance of the device. They can also help to understand the nanoscale effects influencing the LED performance that cannot be explained experimentally. Therefore, advanced numerical simulation models of such LEDs have to be developed for future advancements. In this work, a coupled carrier-photon simulation model for GaN based LEDs is developed to study and analyze LED structures for SSL applications. The development of numerical models is important for LED optimization and development and also to explain physical mechanisms through formulation of theoretical models that can explain these affects. Numerous simulation studies have been investigated for electronic, optical and thermal problems using commercial simulation softwares such as APSYS, COMSOL, and SiLENSE etc. These simulation programs are based on the drift diffusion (DD) transport model, polarization models for heterostructure LEDs and radiative and non-radiative recombination models. These programs use approximate ray tracing models to determine the optical characteristics such as photon extraction, emission spectrum and optical power. To analyze a practical LED structure, a full-wave simulation model consisting of both the carrier transport and an appropriate optical model coupled with the carrier transport have to be investigated. In this work, we focus on developing a complete optoelectronic model that simulates electronic and optical proper-ties of GaN LED structures in time domain and also incorporates the coupling between the optical and electronic parameters. Thus, numerical simulations based on the DD transport model have been investigated for development and improved performance of these devices. 3D simulations of UV LEDs made from AlGaN/GaN quantum well structures were demonstrated for short range communication and SSL applications in Simulation studies focusing on improving the optical characteristics such as light extraction efficiencies in a GaN LED structure have also been addressed. Photonic crystal LEDs i.e. periodic arrangement of materials of different refractive indices on top of LEDs that can alter the propagation of photons such that total internal reflections at air/emitter interface are reduced have been demonstrated Therefore, these studies focused on improving internal quantum efficiencies or extraction efficiencies either through electronic simulation or optical simulations but not both simultaneously. The major deficiencies observed in such simulation studies are following. • The simulation models that link photon emission with the carrier trans-port describing the complete electronic and optical characteristics were missing. • Appropriate relation between electron-hole pair recombinations and current density inputs to the optical model was absent. • The dependence of light extraction efficiencies on electronic parameters was not demonstrated. • The dependence of carrier mobilities and Diffusion coefficients on applied bias was not classified. • The effect of hole transport parameters on GaN LED performance was missing. Therefore, in this work we attempt to develop a coupled electronic-optical simulation model for GaN LEDs. To achieve this task, a time domain electronic model should be formulated in order to perform simulation studies in conjunction with optical model using FDTD numerical technique. The coupled electronic-optical numerical model is developed based by linking the carrier transport with the photon emission. The radiative recombination rate obtained from the solution of carrier transport equations is coupled with the electric and magnetic fields obtained from the time domain solution of Maxwell's equations. The electronic model describing carrier transport is given by the following set of coupled equations (1)-(3) i.e. the Poisson's equation, the current density equation and the carrier continuity equations , , . where V is the electrostatic potential,  is dielectric permittivity,  is the volume charge density, Jn and Jp are electron and hole current densities, n and p are electron and hole densities, q electronic charge magnitude, () On the other hand, the optical model describing the photon or light propagation and emission in GaN LEDs is obtained from the solution of the following set of Maxwell's equations ( . , . where D, E, B, H and Jext are the electric flux density, electric field intensity, magnetic flux density, magnetic field intensity and current density vectors respectively. The photon emission is related to the band to band or radiative recombinations. Its propagation in an LED structure also depends on the absorption coefficient which is related to the absorbed power. Thus, there are two major terms that are involved in coupling the two models. First, the electron-hole pair recombinations for light generation. Second, the light absorption for the electron-hole pair generation. The first coupling parameter requires modeling an expression that represents electron-hole pair radiative recombination rate in terms of current density sources. Therefore, for a time domain simulation, the current dipole source Jext as function of radiative recombination rate Rrad and a time source s(t) for a GaN LED can be written as () where K is the proportionality constant or gauging factor in C-m, Pr is a random vector for dipole sources for random polarizations such that 2 The second parameter requires to link the optical carrier generation rate (Eq. 9) calculated from the EM fields to the carrier continuity equation. The time domain simulation of GaN LEDs is performed using Finite difference time domain (FDTD) numerical method which is a popular technique that has been widely used in computational electromagnetics problems. Several approaches have been made to numerically solve the carrier transport equations such as Monte-Carlo methods, Finite-Difference (FD) and Finite-Element (FE), Quasi Fermi level models and Quantum transport models Therefore, the FDTD algorithm for electronic-optical simulation of GaN LEDs is developed to simulate the carrier transport and photon emission. The resulting FDTD algorithm is used to model the active part of the device by solving the drift diffusion (DD) transport equations ( The closed form solutions of the basic carrier transport equations ( where , and ie, je are the number of grid points in x and y directions, respectively. , , , , ,, DA a i j i j b i j i j c i j r i j d i j r i j e i j r i j i j r i j Similarly, the finite difference approximations of current density equations, electron and hole continuity equations ( The scalar terms n, p, n  , p  , Dn and Dp are averaged for consistency. The field dependence of transport parameters i.e. mobilities and diffusion coefficients is incorporated in the electronic model through appropriate models as discussed in As discussed, the electromagnetic light wave propagation in GaN LEDs is described by the solution of the coupled partial differential equations representing the four Maxwell's equations ( Equations ( Expressing equations ( 1 The central difference approximations of spatial and temporal derivatives in equations ( where c is the velocity of light in the medium. The optical properties of dispersive materials are modeled by using a general auxiliary differential equation (ADE)-FDTD algorithm that can include multi-pole Lorentz-Drude or Lorentz model As discussed in section 2, the two major terms that couple the two models are the recombination rates for light emission and the generation rates for light absorption. The time domain expression for current dipole sources in terms of radiative recombination rates given by ( This implies the current density source inputs are computed from radiative recombination rate obtained from the electronic model. The time domain expression for optical generation rate given by ( ., , Therefore the time domain optical generation rate generation rate computed from EM fields obtained from the solution of optical model is used for the computation of carrier concentrations using the electronic model carrier continuity equations. The coupling between the two models through generation and recombination rates is demonstrated in coupled model algorithm shown in figure The formulated model is validated in two steps. First, by verifying the electronic transport model by simulating a GaN p-n junction in 1-D. Next, the coupled electronic-optical model is verified by simulating a p-n homo-junction GaN UV-LED and comparing it with the experimental results. The GaN p-n junction in 1D is simulated using electronic model FDTD algorithm at zero applied potential with the parameters given in Table A basic 2D p-GaN/ n-GaN homojunction UV LED with an emission wavelength at 365 nm is simulated. First, the structure is analyzed using the electronic model FDTD algorithm followed by optical simulation and then coupled model simulation. The simulated structure shown in figure The simulated steady state distributions of major parameters such as electrostatic potential, recombination rates and I-V characteristics are shown in figures 8-10. It can be seen from figure The optical model or coupled model simulation requires modeling of time source explicitly. The time source in the case of GaN LEDs is a continuous wave (CW) dipole sources representing CW emission in the active layer as discussed in section 2. For the optical model, a Gaussian pulse line source with a carrier wavelength at GaN emission is modeled using equation 39. ( ) ( ) where λ= 365nm (GaN emission frequency), t0 = 10f s, tp = 30f s. For the coupled model, the expression for continuous dipole source is given by 8 and it requires modeling the time signal s(t) as discussed in section 2. Therefore, s(t) is modeled in such a way that its time response is continuous and the output spectrum consists of emission linewidth with Gaussian distribution. In this way, the coupling equation 8 that converts radiative recombination rates into continuous random dipole sources with emission frequencies forms the base of coupled model excitation source. The continuous time signal with linewidth in the output spectrum s(t) is generated by summation of multiple continuous wave (CW) sources with random phases, where the weight of each CW source is given by a Gaussian distribution. Therefore, s(t) is given by the following equation ( is a Gaussian distribution function and φr is the random phase function. Thus, the input time source for GaN LED coupled model simulation is a continuous and random current dipole source. The optical properties of gold contacts are modeled using a six-pole Lorentz-Drude model The emission spectrum of homojunction GaN LED is compared with the experimental result An application of the coupled model for investigating improved LED designs in both electronic and optical aspects is presented in this section. An AlGaN/ GaN DH LED with holes in the metal contact i.e. array of metal contacts is proposed to achieve enhanced optical power through extraordinary transmission (EOT) that occurs only for TM polarization. Various studies have been proposed in the literature to increase the external efficiencies such as the use of metal nanoparticles, surface plasmons, nanoantennas, dielectric nanoantenna arrays, optical nanoholes We therefore investigate AlGaN/GaN DH with array of silver contacts (length L, thickness H, spacing S, number of contacts N) as shown in figure This configuration is obtained by determining the scattered power spectrum solved using Total-Field Scattered-Field (TFSF) theory. At resonance, the contacts scatter more power than off resonance. Therefore, the peak of the scattered power spectrum should be con figured to position at GaN emission frequency. The configuration obtained for the resonance condition at 365 nm emission frequency is L=40 nm, H=50 nm, S=100 nm and N=2 to 12. It is further optimized by determining the transmission spectrum of this contact array configuration with AlGaN layers. The final configuration enhancing the optical power is therefore obtained for L=40 nm, H=50 nm, S=100 nm and N=10. The coupled model simulation results for this structure are shown in figures 24-27. It can be seen from figures 24, 25 that the LED structure with silver contact array improves the current spreading in the device. This is attributed to the high potential distribution at the surface and also inside the GaN LED structure as compared to that of GaN LED with single p-contact. This effect can also be seen on radiative recombination rates shown in figure Therefore, the combined effect of both electronic and optical model i.e. improved currents, radiative recombinations and enhanced EM fields is reflected in the coupled model output optical powers and EQE. With these improvements, the EQE of AlGaN/ GaN DH LED as compared to homo-junction GaN LED, increased from 0.1755 % to 1.825 % with the silver contact array. An FDTD-DD algorithm for simulation of carrier transport and an ADE-FDTD algorithm for simulation of light propagation are presented. The major parameters involved in coupling the carrier and wave i.e. radiative recombination rates and optical generation rates are compared using coupled model, and it was found that the radiative recombination rates are more effective than the generation rates in coupling electronic and optical models. An appropriate relation describing the radiative recombination rates in terms of dipole sources is established. Therefore, an explicit time dependent dipole source representing continuous emission and whose strength is dependent on recombination rate is modeled for coupled model simulation. The FDTD analysis of homojunction and heterojunction GaN LEDs is performed with the electronic, optical and coupled model. Double heterojunction GaN/ AlGaN LEDs with holes in the metal electrode (silver contact array) is investigated as an application of the coupled model, where EQE is improved by almost ten times as compared to that of homojunction GaN LED. The coupled model can therefore be used to simulate real time domain carrierwave interactions in III-Nitride LEDs that cannot be performed by steady state electronic simulators or FDTD optical simulators alone. There-fore, to simulate carrier transport in conjunction with light propagation with time, the time domain electronic model coupled with the optical model is expected to find innovative applications in the field of solid state lighting. The authors wish to acknowledge the support of King Fahd University of Petroleum & Minerals in conducting this research work. 