A many-particle system must posses long-range interactions in order to be hyperuniform at thermal equilibrium. Hydrodynamic arguments and numerical simulations show, nevertheless, that a three-dimensional elastic-line array with short-ranged repulsive interactions, such as vortex matter in a type-II superconductor, forms at equilibrium a class-II hyperuniform two-dimensional point pattern for any constant-z cross section. In this case, density fluctuations vanish isotropically as ∼ q α at small wave-vectors q, with α = 1. This prediction includes the solid and liquid vortex phases in the ideal clean case, and the liquid in presence of weak uncorrelated disorder. We also show that the three-dimensional Bragg glass phase is marginally hyperuniform, while the Bose glass and the liquid phase with correlated disorder are expected to be non-hyperuniform at equilibrium. Furthermore, we compare these predictions with experimental results on the large-wavelength vortex density fluctuations of magnetically decorated vortex structures nucleated in pristine, electron-irradiated and heavy-ion irradiated superconducting Bi2Sr2CaCu2O 8+δ samples in the mixed state. For most cases we find hyperuniform two-dimensional point patterns at the superconductor surface with an effective exponent α eff ≈ 1. We interpret these results in terms of a large-scale memory of the high-temperature line-liquid phase retained in the glassy dynamics when field-cooling the vortex structures into the solid phase. We also discuss the crossovers expected from the dispersivity of the elastic constants at intermediate length-scales, and the lack of hyperuniformity in the xy plane for lengths q -1 larger than the sample thickness due to finite-size effects in the z-direction. We argue these predictions may be observable and propose further imaging experiments to test them independently. Hyperuniform point patterns, defined by a complete suppression of density fluctuations in the largewavelength limit Point patterns formed by vortex matter nucleated in type-II superconductors have been a paradigmatic soft condensed matter system for studying basic questions on statistical physics, such as the statics and dynamics of elastic manifolds in random media and glassy phases in general. This system has also been a playground to understand the rich interplay between elasticity, quenched disorder, thermal fluctuations, driving forces, anisotropic and finite-size effects, either at equilibrium or out of it Recent theoretical studies on the effect of hyperuniform pinning arrays Interestingly, as we show in this work, threedimensional systems made of many non-rigid interacting lines directed along the z-direction are generically expected to follow an hyperuniform point pattern for any constant-z cross section of the embedding space. This behavior arises mainly from the constraint that elastic lines can not start nor terminate inside the medium, and can be understood considering general hydrodynamic arguments valid in the solid and liquid phases, even including weak pinning in the liquid Motivated by the above predictions and open questions we experimentally study large wavelength vortex density fluctuations in magnetically decorated vortex structures over extended fields-of-view (thousands of vortices) in pristine, electron-irradiated and heavy-ion irradiated (namely with CD) Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ superconducting samples. In the observable spatial range we systematically find, for all samples and vortex densities probed, an effective hyperuniform behavior close to the one predicted for the line liquid in equilibrium under weak disorder. We argue that this result can be explained considering that larger wavelength density fluctuations have also a slower dynamics, and are thus effectively arrested by a realistic field-cooling process with finite temperature sweep-rate. We also show that dispersivity of the elastic constants is experimentally relevant, as well as finitesize effects in the direction of the applied field, which should ultimately kill the predicted asymptotic hyperuniformity at in-plane scales of the order of the superconductor thickness. The paper is organized as follows. In Section II A we define the main observables that we will use to study hyperuniformity in magnetically decorated vortex structures. In Section II B we review the hydrodynamic arguments supporting the emergence of hyperuniformity at any z-constant slice of a three-dimensional system of repelling elastic lines for different phases. In Section III we study the large-wavelength density fluctuations in magnetically decorated vortex structures nucleated in Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ samples with different types of disorder. In Section IV we discuss the theoretical interpretation of these results, and report new predictions expected for vortex matter in ad hoc experiments that might shed more light into this issue. In this section we describe the physical magnitudes that we study and the predictions obtained for the different vortex phases using a hydrodynamic approach, scaling arguments and numerical simulations of simple models. A. Cross-section hyperuniformity L x y r n (z) FIG. We will be interested in the two-dimensional largewavelength density fluctuations at a constant-z crosssection of a three-dimensional array of vortex lines nucleated in a real sample of thickness L. The average magnetic induction at equilibrium, B ≡ Bẑ, determines the number of vortices per unit area in any slice, n 0 ≡ B/Φ 0 , with Φ 0 = 2.07•10 -7 G.cm 2 the flux quantum. We model this system of individual vortex lines by considering directed elastic lines. We will also assume, as an approx-imation, that vortex lines do not present overhangs nor pinch-off loops, and that at a given instant the nth line can be appropriately described by a parameterized position r n (z) ≡ (x n (z), y n (z)) (see Fig. The structure factor of a given frozen two-dimensional point pattern with N 1 points at a constant-z cross section is defined as with q = (q x , q y ). For thick systems in the z-direction L → ∞, and the bulk value of S(q, z) is expected to be independent of z, namely S(q, z) ≡ S(q) [9]. A constant-z cross section pattern is considered hyperuniform if its two-dimensional large-wavelength (smallwave-vector) density fluctuations are suppressed lim q→0 S(q) = 0. (2) We will be particularly interested in the common cases where the structure factor vanishes isotropically as a power-law near the reciprocal space origin, with α ≥ 0 a characteristic exponent. In the asymptotic limit N 1, this property can be translated to the variance of the number N (R) of particles observed inside an hyper-spherical window with radius R, 2 . In the latter . . . denotes average over randomly-distributed windows and the expression is valid in the large-R limit. The variance is predicted to scale as For instance, a Poisson distribution of points is not hyperuniform since the number variance is extensive with the window volume, i.e. σ 2 N ∼ R d . A hyperuniform system is considered to be class-I if α > 1, class-II if α = 1, and class-III if 0 < α < 1. A large and diverse list of physical and mathematical systems for each class is given in Ref. 2. The equilibrium hydrodynamics of three-dimensional flux-line liquids have been thoroughly discussed in the past If the penetration depth of a superconductor is much smaller than the thickness of the sample, λ ab L, (see Fig. The starting point for the elastic line hydrodynamics of line liquids is the Landau free energy functional, where r = (x, y), c 44 (r -r , z -z ) and c 11 (r -r , z -z ) are the non-local tilt and compression modulii the two-dimensional vortex density fluctuations at layer z around its mean value n 0 and the two-dimensional tangent field density for a collection of N 1 vortex-lines positioned at r j (z) at a given constant-z cross section. We assume a slab geometry with a thickness L in the z-direction and an area A in the x -y plane such that n 0 = N/A ≡ B/Φ 0 (see Fig. Density fluctuations around the average can be measured in the reciprocal space by δn (q, z) = n (q, z)n 0 Aδ q,0 where q and q z are the wave-vectors in the inplane directions and in the average-z direction of the lines. Fluctuations are conveniently quantified by the full three-dimensional structure factor where . . . and . . . denote averages over disorder and thermal fluctuations, respectively. These averages can be calculated, at equilibrium, from Eq.( imposing the continuity of vortex lines It is usually agreed Density fluctuations are essentially controlled by compression modes The density fluctuations at a constant-z cross section S(q) of Eq.1 can be written as assuming a bulk system with statistical invariance along the z-direction. S(q) can thus be computed from S 3d (q, q z ) by integration over q z , S(q) ≈ 2π s 2π/s 0 dq z S 3d (q, q z ) We start by reviewing the ideal case without disorder at thermal equilibrium, V D = 0 in Eq. 5. In the absence of anisotropies in the x -y plane, we expect to have roughly the same three-dimensional structure factor for the liquid, S 3d liq (q, q z ), and the solid Abrikosov lattice, S 3d sol (q, q z ), vortex phases at small enough wave-vectors, S 3d liq (q, q z ) ≈ S 3d sol (q, q z ) = n 0 k B T q 2 q 2 c 11 (q, q z ) + q 2 z c 44 (q, q z ) , (12) In this expression obtained from Eq.( Neglecting for the moment the dispersivity along the z-direction (see Sec. IV for a specific discussion for our experimental case), and approximating c 11 and c 44 by their values at q z = 0, we obtain following Ref. 10 for a constant-z cross section of the liquid and solid vortex phases in a clean sample (i.e. V D = 0). If we assume constant c 11 (q, 0) and c 44 (q, 0) as q → 0 we find that Therefore, according to the classification of Ref. 2, in the ideal clean case the point pattern at any constant-z cross section is a class-II hyperuniform system (α = 1) for the liquid and solid Abrikosov lattice phases. Some examples of systems belonging to this hyperuniform universality class are quasicrystals, classical disordered ground states, zeros of the Riemann zeta function, eigenvalues of random matrices, fermionic point processes, superfluid helium, maximally random jammed packings, perturbed lattices, perfect glasses and density fluctuations in the early Universe. The presence of disorder introduces corrections to the prediction of Eq. ( If we again assume that c 11 (q, 0) and c 44 (q, 0) tend to constants as q → 0, we get as also found for the clean case. Note however, that the prefactor is different: Only when n 0 ∆/c 11 (q, 0) < k B T , the system crossovers to the line-liquid in clean samples. This case of α = 1 or class-II hyperuniformity is different to the α = 2 class-I hyperuniformity that is found for instance for pancake vortices interacting logarithmically in a thin-film superconductor or the two-dimensional onecomponent plasma system. The two-dimensional density fluctuations of a vortex structure in a constant-z cross section of a thick superconductor, described by Eq. ( Summarizing, for constant-z cross sections the vortex liquid phase is expected to be an α = 1 class-II hyperuniform system, either in the absence or presence of weak uncorrelated disorder. As mentioned, the Abrikosov lattice at thermal equilibrium is predicted to be a class-II hyperuniform system at constant-z cross sections. Disorder-driven corrections to the two-dimensional structure factor in the solid or glassy phases are subtle, and must be considered. For weak uncorrelated disorder the corrections in the solid phases are quite different than in the liquid. This is due to the strong relevance of periodicity in the coupling of the vortex density with disorder where the ". . . " denote rapidly oscillating terms that do not contribute to the hydrodynamic density modes we are interested in. The hydrodynamic three-dimensional structure factor is where u L (q, q z ) is the component of the displacement field in the direction parallel to q. This expression is rather general, see Ref. The structure factor of the lattice is thus essentially the same as for the liquid, S 3d sol (q, q z ) ≈ n 0 k B T q 2 q 2 c 11 (q, q z ) + q 2 z c 44 (q, q z ) ≈ S 3d liq (q, q z ), ( as already discussed in the previous section. Weak disorder destroys the perfect long-range positional order, but not the topological order, and a particular quasi-long range order emerges. In this Bragg glass phase with d = 3 the space dimension and ζ a characteristic exponent. Note that we have used the same c 44 and c 11 as for the clean case, assuming no disorder-induced renormalization. In presence of thermal noise we have ζ = 1 -d/2, thus reducing to Eq.( with R the observation scale or system linear size in the x-y plane. For ζ = 0 the lattice is logarithmically rough u 2 L ∼ log R, while for ζ < 0 has a macroscopically flat displacement field. By integrating over q z and assuming consistently that the elastic constants c 11 and c 44 tend to finite values at small q z , we obtain the constant-z cross section two-dimensional structure factor of the pinned solid, S pin-sol (q) ∼ q 3-d-2ζ [c 44 c d+2ζ-1 11 ] -1/2 and thus, for d = 3 Therefore, under these assumptions, the elastic system is hyperuniform only if ζ < 0 (displacement field macroscopically flat) while for ζ = 0 is marginally hyperuniform, i.e. α = 0. This is particularly important for the Bragg glass and for systems with quasi-long-range order (such as two-dimensional crystals with short-range interactions), since ζ → 0 asymptotically. This so-called random-periodic regime (RP) of the Bragg glass phase exists for qR a 1, where R a is the scale at which the displacement field has fluctuations of order a 0 . For R c < R < R a , where R c is the Larkin radius on the x -y plane, there is a crossover to the so-called randommanifold regime (RM) where ζ ≡ ζ RM ≈ 0.2. For scales shorter than R c , the system crossovers to the Larkin regime, where ζ ≡ ζ L = (4 -d)/2 = 1/2. In none of these regimes the Bragg glass phase presents suppressed density fluctuations. Summarizing, any arbitrarily weak disorder kills the class-II hyperuniformity of the Abrikosov lattice, and the Bragg glass phase is expected to be marginally hyperuniform at constant-z cross sections. Rather surprisingly, from the given arguments, the Bragg glass is expected to jump from marginal to a class-II hyperuniformity at melting, adding a new signature to this first-order phase transition The case of the correlated disorder generated by randomly-distributed CD, such that V D (r, z)V D (r , z ) = ∆ 1 δ(r -r), is special since the long-range correlation along z favors the localization of vortex lines into CD. A Bose glass transition is expected by lowering the temperature from the liquid phase where c11 and c44 are the compression and tilt modulii in the presence of correlated CD disorder, and ∆ 1 measures the strength of the columnar disorder. Integrating over q z we obtain the two dimensional structure factor This expression yields a crossover wave-vector such that for scales q < q CD , the density fluctuations in the liquid are dominated by the pinning introduced by CD (second term in Eq. 27), while for q > q CD they are similar to those found in the liquid phase without correlated CD disorder (first term in Eq. 27). On approaching the Bose glass transition on cooling, c44 increases rapidly and diverges at the transition, con-comitantly with q CD → ∞. We hence expect in the Bose Glass phase where the localized vortex lines repel each other with short-range interactions. The compression modulus remains finite at the transition Summarizing, correlated disorder generated by CD destroys hyperuniformity at constant-z cross sections, both in the Bose glass and in the liquid phases. However, since on increasing temperature q CD vanishes, a crossover to a nearly class-II hyperuniform liquid can occur within the liquid phase. This crossover can also occur on decreasing the magnitude and/or density of correlated disorder ∆ 1 . In the previous subsections, we assumed infinite samples and showed that the ideal clean liquid and solid phases, as well as the liquid phase with weak disorder, are class-II hyperuniform systems. In samples with thickness L, finite effects in the z-direction will affect hyperuniform behavior inducing a crossover at a characteristic q F S (L). Indeed, by a simple dimensional analysis of the threedimensional structure factors in these hyperuniform cases (Eqs. 12 and 15), we get Physically, q F S is the characteristic wave-vector at which the correlation length of vortices in the z-direction becomes of order L with ξ (q) = q -1 c 44 (q, 2π/L)/c 11 (q, 2π/L). Therefore, Eq. 30 is equivalent to the physical condition ξ (q F S ) = L. For q < q F S the three-dimensional system essentially behaves as a two-dimensional system of rigid lines with the structure factor obtained by setting z 1 = z 2 , and ξ = L, Provided L > λ ab at the crossover, rigid vortices repel with a short-range interaction yielding with 0 = (Φ 0 /4πλ ab ) 2 the line tension. Therefore, since the length-scale in the x -y plane probed is q -1 λ ab , we have S(q) → const as q → 0. In other words, finitesize effects kill the class-II hyperuniformity of the threedimensional vortex liquid or solid phases in clean samples at thermal equilibrium. Although this result was obtained for a particular case, this finite-size effect is expected to be present in all vortex phases, even with disorder. Indeed, the existence of q F S (L) comes from first, a dimensional analysis of the competition between tilting and compression elastic responses, and second, from the non-dispersive behavior of the three-dimensional elastic constants. It is interesting to discuss Eq. 33 in the limit of very thin superconductors such that L λ ab . In this limit the effective penetration length becomes Λ = 2λ 2 ab /L. If the observation length-scale in the x -y plane is qΛ > 1, two different power-law behaviors can be expected. At very small length-scales, qΛ 1, interactions are logarithmic and in Eq. 33, so the system at equilibrium is class-I hyperuniform with α = 2, S(q) → q 2 (36) for log(1/x) interactions. Recent simulations with this type of interaction show that the value α = 2 is robust under the presence of quenched uncorrelated disorder. yielding, at equilibrium, a class-II hyperuniform vortex pattern with α = 1 and thus S(q) → q (38) for 1/x interactions. Interestingly, this is the constant-z cross section behavior predicted for the three-dimensional line array. In other words, the effective two-dimensional interaction at a constant-z cross section, mediated by the short-range three-dimensional interaction between vortex lines, mimics Coulomb interactions (as in Wigner crystals). This is analogous to the long-range elasticity of the triple contact line of a liquid meniscus, so called "fringe elasticity of the line of contact", reflecting the energetics of deformations of the liquid/gas interface Although we are assuming clean systems, since for the two-dimensional elastic lattice in the presence of weak disorder c 11 is not renormalized In Table The hydrodynamic predictions presented in the previous sections are based on a coarse-grained continuous model and the assumption of thermal equilibrium. In order to test these analytical predictions, and to match two different levels of description of the problem, we have performed molecular dynamic simulations of a simple microscopic model. This helps us to understand finite-size and discretization effects in the z-direction, as well as the effect of the particular shape of the vortex-vortex interaction potential, without relying in the approximated elastic modulii of the continuum description. We model vortices as elastic lines discretized in the z-direction, such that r i (z) ≡ (x i (z), y i (z)) describe their two-dimensional coordinates at the layer z, with z = 0, ..., N z -1 and N z the total number of layers. Periodic boundary conditions are considered in all directions. The total energy of the elastic lines array is E[{r i (z)}] = E 1 + E int such that each line has an elastic tension energy given by Hook coupling with strength k, and the repulsive interaction energy between vortex-lines is modeled as with K 0 (x) the zero-order modified Bessel function of the second kind. Eq. 40 is derived from the London model, while Eq. 39 with k ∝ 0 is a harmonic local approximation for the single-vortex elastic tension. In layered superconductors as the one experimentally study here, the elastic tension energy arises from the attractive electromagnetic and Josephson couplings between pancakes of different superconducting layers. We consider an overdamped Langevin dynamics at a temperature T η∂ t r i (z) = -δE δr i (z) + ξ(r i (z), t) (41) where η is the Bardeen-Stephen friction. At long enough times this system equilibrates in the canonical ensemble at temperature T . In order to approach experimental conditions we have simulated a range of a 0 close to the typically accessed in magnetic decorations. Figure The inserts of Fig. in the z-direction. There are clear finite size effects, i.e. N z dependence, in the z-direction, and they are amplified when a 0 increases. We find that these size effects can be quantified by appropriately normalizing the inset curves into a master curve: we consider a characteristic finite-size crossover scale q F S such that S(q)/S(q F S ) ∼ G(q/q F S ), with G(x) ∼ 1 for x 1 and a unique G(x) for x 1. For the range of a 0 analyzed, we find a good collapse in the low-q region using the crossover wavevector q F S = a 0 /N z , and S(q F S ) ∝ T a 2 0 /L, both for the liquid and solid phases. Therefore, the saturation of S(q) for q < q F S is actually a finite-size effect, and it should disappear in the thermodynamic N z → ∞ limit. The dependence of q F S with N z ∝ L confirms the size effects predicted in Sec. II B 5. In addittion, the shape of the master curve for q > q F S , G(x) ∼ x, confirms an α ≈ 1 typical of class-II hyperuniformity (see Eq 13). The evolution of q F S with a 0 is less universal than the dependence with N z since relies on the precise functionality of the elastic modulii c 44 and c 11 that depend on the type of inter-vortex interaction and the field regime explored in the simulations. However, if we use the rigid vortex compression modulus of Eq. 34, c 11 (q, q z = 0) ∝ B 2 /(1 + q 2 λ 2 ab ), the single-vortex tilt modulus c 44 ∝ 0 ∼ B 2 a 2 0 (a constant in this particular model), Both phases display the same finitesize crossover at qF S . For q < qF S the system effectively becomes a non-hyperuniform two-dimensional system, while for q > qF S it shows a fair S(q) ∼ q hyperuniform behaviour at low q. Upward corrections at large wave-vectors, qλ ab 1, can be explained by the dispersivity of the compression modulus emerging from the particular interaction potential. Lines are a guide to the eye for S(q) ∼ q α with α = 2 (dashed line) and α = 1 (dashed-dotted line). The insert shows nonnormalized data. and approximate Eq. ( For q > q F S the master curve presents deviations from S(q) ∼ q for q q F S , crossing over to a more rapid increase of S(q) with q. This behavior can be also qualitatively explained in terms of the hydrodynamic prediction of Eq. 13 if we consider that S(q) ∝ q/ c 44 c 11 (q, 0) ∼ q 1 + λ 2 ab q 2 ≈ q(1 + q 2 λ 2 ab /2 + . . . ). Therefore, this microscopic model confirms the existence of finite-size ef-fects, and the class-II hyperuniformity of the liquid and solid vortex-line phases in ideal clean samples. We also explain the upward deviations from the α = 1 behavior observed at q > q F S controlled by the dispersive behavior of c 11 , emerging when qλ ab ∼ 1. As discussed later, dispersive effects may be important for the range of parameters given by the magnetic decoration experiments in the layered superconductor Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ . The study presented in this section bridges the hydrodynamic scale with the molecular dynamics scale, using a simple elastic-line array model. In order to test the previous theoretical predictions we have performed magnetic decorations in various superconducting samples giving us direct access to twodimensional point patterns at the top surface. This layer is the particular z = L cross section where surface interactions may play an important role. However, it has been argued that the structure at the surface is representative of that at the bulk of the sample for the typical in-plane length-scales probed by decorations ∼ a 0 The choice of the extremely layered Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ system is based in the easiness to obtain freshly cleaved surfaces to perform several decoration experiments in the same crystal, and on the availability of samples with different types of disorder (pinning potentials). We studied vortex lattices nucleated on a large set of singlecrystals with the natural disorder coming from crystalline defects (pristine samples), and with additional disorder introduced by irradiation with electron and heavy ions. Electron-irradiated samples present a dense pointlike disorder whereas heavy ion-irradiated ones present a Poisson-like distribution of CD, columns of crystallographic defects aligned along the z-direction. Electron irradiation was performed with 2.3 MeV accelerated electrons in a van de Graaff accelerator coupled to a closedcycle hydrogen liquifier at the École Polytechnique of Palaiseau, France Figure The structural properties of the vortex matter nucleated in samples with CD are qualitatively different than for the case of point disorder: small misaligned crystallites with less than 20 vortices are observed at densities up to 100 Gauss, see Fig. The decorated structures were frozen, at length scales of order a 0 , at temperatures at which the pinning generated by disorder sets in The images of Fig. x + q 2 y that we can access to calculate the two-dimensional structure factor at the top surface. Figure ture factors S(q x , q y ) for the examples of vortex structures shown in Fig. We would like to point out some important technical difficulties that are quite specific to the study of the lowq density modes. On one hand, the borders and shape of our field-of-view hinders the study of the structure factor in the relevant low-q range due to the annoying window-ing effect. In rectangular fields-of-view the artifact shows up as an excess in S(q x , q y ) localized in a "+"-shaped region centered at q x = q y = 0. This artifact, associated to the Fourier transform of the field-of-view, is oriented along the principal directions of the rectangle and has an oscillatory decay on increasing q. This border effect is avoided in simulations with in-plane periodic boundary conditions. To get rid of this spurious effect, for the smallest q we perform a partial average over Ψ-values outside the '+"-shaped region, instead of averaging over all Ψ. This is possible due to the high angular localization of the artifact. Nevertheless, since the cross has a finite width, at the end we are forced to consider a safety minimal wave-vector q min > 2π/W f ov , with W f ov a characteristic linear size of the field-of-view. On the other hand, as we do not have an ensemble of many magneticallydecorated vortex configurations at exactly the same position of the samples to average over, inevitably, the lower the q, the bigger the statistical fluctuations in S(q). Henceforth, in practice, although our images span distances as large as W f ov ∼ 50a 0 , we end up analyzing density fluctuations with q > q min q 0 /6 = 1/6(2π/a 0 ). Typical results for S(q) are shown in Fig. In order to perform a comprehensive study of the occurrence of hyperuniformity in vortex matter with different types of disorder and for different vortex densities, we have systematically fitted S(q) ∼ q α eff for all a our studied samples and vortex densities (magnetic field). The effective power-law exponent α eff is obtained by fitting in the range q/q 0 ∈ [1/2, 1/6]. The effective exponents as a function of field for every type of disorder are shown in the three panels of Fig. A strict hyperuniformity analysis requires data in an asymptotic regime which is rather difficult to reach and assure experimentally. Nevertheless, our experimental results in an extensive data-set display a clear suppression of the amplitude of the density fluctuations with S(q) ∼ 10 -2 for the lowest q accessed (to be compared with S(q) = 1 for the Poisson or ideal gas particle distribution). Hence, the vortex structures frozen during the decoration field-cooling protocol are nearly hyperuniform two-dimensional point patterns at the superconductor surface. Furthermore, these structures display S(q) ∼ q α eff with α eff ≈ 1 ± 0.3 in the low-q range accessed in our experiments. This agrees with the equilibrium hydrodynamic predictions for the large-scale fluctuations of the liquid phase with weak uncorrelated disorder, as well as for the solid and liquid vortex phases in the ideal clean case. However, this exponent contrasts with the predictions for the Bragg glass phase (α = 0) and for the liquid and Bose glass phases with CD (S(q) → const as q → 0). We will argue that these discrepancies can be explained by considering the unavoidable relevance of memory effects during the decoration field-cooling protocol that affect the observed vortex structures at different length-scales. These non equilibrium effects are ignored in the hydrodynamic description of Sec. II. We will also argue that dispersion effects and finite-size effects are experimentally relevant for a systematic study of density fluctuations in vortex matter. The two-dimensional point pattern obtained at the surface of the sample after a field-cooling magnetic decoration down to 4.2 K corresponds to an out-of-equilibrium structure. This is due to the strong dependence of the relaxation rate of the vortex structure with the wavelength of the density modes. In field-cooling experiments with a fixed cooling rate, large length-scale density fluctuations have a slower relaxation rate than smalllength-scale ones, and then the former fall out of equilibrium at larger temperatures. This out-of-equilibrium effect is expected to be enhanced by disorder that dramatically slows down the thermally-activated dynamics. In other words, a magnetic decoration image of the vortex structure at low temperatures is not just a snapshot but also a photograph with memory of its field cooling history. Then, the freezing temperature of the vortex structure is not a unique magnitude but rather depends on the length-scale of the density fluctuations, T freez = T freez (q). In a field-cooling experiment, at T ∼ T freez (q) the density fluctuations of mode q have a relaxation rate of the order of the experimental cooling rate. Namely, at T < T freez (q) all modes with wavelength ≤ 1/q are out of equilibrium. In particular, the local ordering at the scale a 0 , observed in samples with weak uncorrelated disorder indicates that T freez (q ∼ a -1 0 ) ≤ T m , with T m the melting temperature of the Bragg glass phase. Density fluctuations associated to larger wavelengths are then expected to fall out of equilibrium at much higher temperatures, T freez (q a -1 0 ) > T m . These slow modes with q → 0 retain memory of the liquid phase. This can explain our experimental observation of a near class-II hyperuniform vortex structure in pristine and electron-irradiated samples (predicted in the equilibrium hydrodynamic approximation for the liquid phase with weak disorder). This argument can be further justified in the framework of disordered elastic systems without topological defects. Indeed, even a simple elastic string relaxing in a random medium after a temperature quench displays a logarithmically growing correlation length The above out-of-equilibrium qualitative explanation is more subtle to apply for the samples with CDs correlated disorder since in this case the line-liquid as well as the Bose glass are expected to be non-hyperuniform at equilibrium in an hydrodynamic approximation. How is then possible to obtain α eff ≈ 1 from the memory of a liquid with correlated disorder? A possible answer can come from the crossover of density fluctuations at q CD from a class-II hyperuniform liquid to a non-hyperuniform liquid on decreasing q. Observing the equilibrium structure at q → 0 implies measuring at very large length scales ∼ 1/q CD that might be hard to access experimentally in finite fields-of-view. To evaluate this hypothesis we need to compute where we have used in Eq. 28 that ∆ is the disorder correlator strength for CD with radius b 0 and mean separation d b 0 . It is difficult to make a quantitative assessment of q CD due to the many microscopic parameters involved. However, correlated disorder by CD is expected to slow down the dynamics with respect to the weak disorder case, and then to increase T freez (q) for all q. Since q CD ∝ 1/T freez (q CD ), then q CD can become too small to be experimentally accessed for our typical fields-of-view. Thus, the observed structures effectively display a class-II hyperuniformity due to the memory of the liquid phase, with the first term of Eq. 27 dominating for q > q CD at very high temperatures. A systematic study is desirable to check this hypothesis, for instance comparing different densities of CD. In particular, increasing ∆ 1 will produce an enhancement of q CD , and then the predicted saturation of S(q) due to the dominance of the correlated disorder term might be observable in the same field-of-view. FIG. Another effect that we have so far not considered in the discussion is the anisotropy-enhanced dispersivity of the elastic constants for the lowest wave-vectors accessed in our fields-of-view. This is particularly important in layered materials as Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ since dispersivity can induce, as discussed, a crossover from class-II hyperuniformity to a different behavior on increasing q. Since we access scales q • λ ab 1, in-plane dispersivity is not important. However, dispersion in the z-direction is important when q•λ c = Γq•λ ab ∼ 1. The anisotropy parameter of our samples is Γ ≈ 170, and then the condition q •λ c ∼ 1 can easily be reached in our experimental fieldsof-view since λ c (T freez ) = Γλ ab (T freez ) ≈ 70 μm. For an anisotropic superconductor the compression modulus is with c 44 (q z ) the isolated-vortex contribution. This last term, important at low fields, is dispersive in q z for small wave-length fluctuations only, such that q z λ ab ∼ 1. This dispersivity is due to the electromagnetic coupling between pancake vortices If we assume L → ∞ and integrate Eq. 12 over q z using the expressions of Eqs. 44 and 45, we obtain the twodimensional structure factor S(q) including dispersion effects. The result for our Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ samples is shown in Fig. In the case of an infinite sample, S(q) presents a crossover, from S(q) ∼ q to S(q) ∼ q 2 at larger q • λ ab . This large-q deviation from the asymptotic hyperuniform class-II behavior for clean samples is due to the dispersivity in the elastic constants. The q-location of the crossover decreases on increasing field. In particular, in the limit of high fields, where the isolated vortex contribution c 44 can be neglected, the crossover scale tends to λ c (T freez ), see top panel of Fig. In addition, this fit can neither be performed in the low-q limit where finite size effects due to the finite sample thickness L destroy hyperuniformity. The bottom panel of Fig. Going back to the relevance of dispersivity effects for our hyperuniformity analysis, the departure from the S(q) ∼ q behavior for our typical experimental situation, see black curve in Fig. In order to study up to what point our obtained α eff values are overestimated due to out-of-equilibrium and/or dispersivity effects, further experiments should be performed. First, out-of-equilibrium effects could be quantified by altering the field-cooling process, either by significantly slowing down the cooling rate, or by adding an in-plane dithering field allowing the vortex system to more efficiently relax towards the free energy minimum In summary, we have shown that a directed threedimensional elastic line array with short-ranged interactions in all directions can generate, at equilibrium, a twodimensional hyperuniform point pattern at their cross sections. This behavior can be explained by the threedimensional bulk energetics involved in the compression of a single layer, and ultimately in the continuity of lines. We have shown that disorder can play an important role on modifying in several interesting ways such hyperuniform behavior. In order to test the above physical picture we have chosen the case-study system of vortex structures in type-II superconductors, a paradigmatic experimental realization of the three-dimensional elastic line array. We have studied this issue both, theoretically via analytic calculations and numerical simulations, and experimentally in the anisotropic vortex matter nucleated in Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ samples with correlated and uncorrelated disorder. By magnetically decorating the frozen two-dimensional vortex point pattern at the top surface of different superconducting samples we find a systematic suppression of vortex-density fluctuations at long wavelengths. We have argued that this is roughly consistent with the phenomenological hydrodynamic predictions if we assume that the density modes of the observed configurations keep memory of the liquid-state at the largest length-scales probed by the structure factor. We have also discussed the effect of non-asymptotic behaviors, such as the ones arising from the dispersivity of elastic constants and non-equilibrium effects, and finite-size effects. The kind of study we have done may offer a different viewpoint to analyze vortex phases, their transitions, and also to characterize the somewhat unavoidable nonequilibrium relaxation effects in disordered systems. This includes not only static vortex phases as the ones we have analyzed in this work, but also dynamical vortex phases such as current-driven lattices We acknowledge illuminating discussions with C. Olson-Reichhardt, P. Le Doussal, T. Giamarchi and H. Suderow.