describe the fabrication and characterization of planar pn-junction solar cells based on leadhalide perovskites. The doping densities measured using Hall effect measurements vary from N D = 1├Ś10 12 cm -3 to 8├Ś10 12 cm -3 for the solution-processed n-type layer and N A = 8├Ś10 9 cm -3 for the evaporated p-type layer. While these devices outperform their counterparts, that are supposedly un-doped, the results raise three important questions: (i) Are the reported doping densities high enough to change the electrostatic potential distribution in the device from that for the un-doped ones, (ii) are the doping densities high enough for the pn-junction to remain intact under typical photovoltaic operation conditions and (iii) is a pn-junction beneficial for photovoltaic performance given the typical properties of lead-halide perovskites. The first two questions can be answered quite easily by considering basic semiconductor device physics. The first criterion that the doping densities of the two layers of a pn-junction have to satisfy is to ensure that the depletion width A/D bi r 0 2 qN V w ’üź ’üź ’ĆĮ caused by the doping is substantially smaller than the total absorber layer thickness d. Thus, the doping densities have to fulfill , which yields a minimum doping concentration of ~10 16 cm -3 when using typical values for the built-in voltage V bi Ōēł 1 V, a relative permittivity ’üź r Ōēł 30 , where n i is the intrinsic carrier concentration, V mpp is the voltage at the maximum power point and kT/q is the thermal voltage. The Ōēź sign is necessary because the quasi-Fermi level splitting inside the device is always slightly higher than the externally measured voltage due to finite quasi-Fermi level gradients, needed to drive current. To sum up our observations, Figure While the process used to obtain the purported pn-junction in ref. (see supplementary table 4 in ref. A challenging question is the third one posed above, namely whether a pn-junction in lead-halide perovskite solar cells is a target worth pursuing. This question has no generic answer, because the ideal band diagram for a solar cell depends heavily on the material properties. If the diffusion length is long enough and charge collection is efficient as is the case in high efficiency lead-halide perovskite solar cells, the key question for maximizing the voltage per extracted carrier is how high the recombination rate is for a given defect density and capture cross section and how high the ideality factor is. The former would reduce the open-circuit voltage, while ideality factors > 1 would reduce the fill factor. This last point may well be key as a pn-junction is not a thermodynamically stable situation; rather it is a kinetically stabilized one. 