Note: in this version the excitation densities were computed using measured laser profiles instead The lead based organic-inorganic hybrid perovskite, such as MAPbI3, has exhibited the fastest improvement in solar cell efficiency among all the known materials, since The hybrid perovskites were often compared against the organic semiconducting materials. Since all the other high-performance PV materials are inorganic, it would be more meaningful to compare the perovskites with those inorganic materials, which can better reveal advantages and disadvantages of the two groups, and help to improve both. After all, besides the similarity in the achieved record efficiencies, being a crystalline material, the hybrid perovskite resembles more a typical inorganic semiconductor than an organic material. Despite the existence of the large amount of literature on the perovskites, a detailed comparative study of the perovskite and conventional semiconductors under the same conditions is rare, besides cosmetic comparison of metrics. Therefore, the primary goal of this work is to offer an objective and direct comparison under the same conditions between the hybrid perovskites and two representative inorganic materials of the above-mentioned set, namely, GaAs and CdTe, in terms of a few key material properties, such as PL efficiency, PL lineshape, carrier diffusion length, and surface passivation. PL efficiency, in particular under low excitation density close to the solar illumination, has been shown to have a positive correlation with PV efficiency However, even for a material like GaAs that has been studied for decades, PL efficiency can vary greatly between samples with subtle variations in their growth conditions. It is of great interest to compare perovskite samples prepared by different methods and conditions with GaAs and CdTe samples prepared under close to optimal growth conditions. Furthermore, it is important to compare the impact of the surface recombination to PL efficiency between the perovskite and inorganic materials. It is well-known that appropriate surface passivation is critical for achieving high device efficiency for the inorganic materials Nevertheless, the fact that high PL and device efficiencies have been achieved for the perovskites with relatively small effort seems to suggest the surface recombination in the perovskites are possibly less detrimental or easier to be passivated. It is a common belief that long carrier diffusion length is important for superior PV performance for the perovskites or desirable in general. Although carrier diffusion lengths over 10 m In this work, we make side-by-side comparison of PL efficiencies, over a wide range of excitation density (from around 0.01 Sun to over 4,000 Sun), for poly-and single crystalline MAPbI3 samples with and without surface treatment and/or prepared by different methods, CdTe double and single heterostructures (with either top or bottom passivation layer) grown by MBE, and GaAs double heterostructures grown by MBE and MOCVD. The results are analyzed by a theoretical model to extract the internal quantum efficiency and pertinent material parameters that describe radiative and nonradiative recombination processes. A PL imaging technique with diffraction limited local excitation is used to directly probe and compare the carrier diffusion for the three materials without the complication of any intentionally introduced "quencher". Furthermore, thermal distributions of photo-generated carriers are compared between the three materials. We find that the polycrystalline perovskite can readily achieve a higher PL efficiency at the low excitation density (1 Sun or below) than CdTe and GaAs, despite that the latter two typically exhibit much larger diffusion lengths. The comparison in PL efficiency, diffusion, and PL lineshape between the three materials indicates existence of significant structural disordering and band structure distortion in the perovskite. The disordering plays an important role in suppressing nonradiative recombination, which, together with the low defect density, contributes to the high performance of perovskite solar cells. MAPbI3 samples from three different sources are used in this study: The CdTe samples were provided by Arizona State University (ASU), all with 1 μm thick CdTe epilayer grown by MBE on InSb substrates with an InSb buffer layer. A set of three samples grown under the same conditions: one ("CdTe-DH-A1561") is a double heterostructure (DH) with 30 nm Mg0.18Cd0.82Te top and bottom barriers, the other two have either only the top ("CdTe-Top") or bottom ("CdTe-Bottom") barrier. The first and second samples also have a 10 nm thick CdTe capping layer. These samples are used to exam the surface passivation on the inorganic semiconductors. Another CdTe DH sample ("CdTe-DH-A1671") is included with slight variations in the structure (with 15 nm Mg0.5Cd0.5Te barriers, 30 nm CdTe cap), where a higher Mg composition is used to improve carrier confinement. Details in the material growth and device demonstration can be found elsewhere Two GaAs double heterojunction samples are used in this study. One is Al0.4Ga0.6As/GaAs/Al0.4Ga0.6As with 1 μm GaAs and 30 nm Al0.4Ga0.6As barriers grown by MBE by the ASU group ("GaAs-DH-B2206") Details of the growth method can be found elsewhere The measurements were conducted with a Horiba LabRAM HR800 confocal Raman microscope with a 1200 g/mm grating. A 532 nm laser was used as the excitation source. Data were taken using a 4× (NA = 0.1) or 10× (NA = 0.25) microscope lens. The excitation density is estimated as D = P/A, where A is the area determined by the full width at half maximum of the measured laser profile. The spot sizes are 15.5 and 6.0 μm, respectively, for the 4× and 10× lens. The low NA lens was used to reduce the impact of carrier diffusion on the internal quantum efficiency (IQE), because the diffusion effect is equivalent to nonradiative recombination for the radiative recombination at the excitation site under the confocal mode To obtain the actual laser power absorbed by the sample, surface reflection loss has been corrected by using a white light source and a UV enhanced aluminum mirror of known reflectance. The calibration was performed with a 100× (NA = 0.9) lens to collect the light of both specular and most diffuse reflection Firstly, we examine the influence of the surface passivation/barrier layer on the set of CdTe samples: CdTe-DH-A1561, CdTe-Top, CdTe-Bottom. The 10× lens was used for these measurements. The passivation/barrier layer serves two purposes: to passivate the surface defect states and confine the photo-generated carriers inside the active layer. CdTe-DH-A1561 exhibits the highest PL intensity among all the three samples, whereas the "CdTe Top" is in between, indicating that the passivation/barrier layers are crucial and effective. For instance, at 76 W/cm 2 , PL intensity of "CdTe Bottom" is ~1/700 and ~1/15,000 of the CdTe-Top and CdTe-DH-A1561, respectively. The results also indicate that relatively speaking, the top surface passivation is more important than the bottom surface. Clearly, the PL signal of "CdTe Bottom" is always the weakest among the three under the same excitation density. It is interesting to note that when the power density is reduced to ~0.4 W/cm 2 and below, the PL intensities of the DH and top-barrier-only samples show very little difference, which suggests that at the low excitation density, the bulk Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) dominate. However, with increasing laser density, the contrast between CdTe-DH-A1561 and CdTe-Top becomes apparent. At the excitation wavelength of 532 nm, CdTe absorption length is about 110 nm. Qualitatively, the change could be explained as that increasing excitation density leads to partial saturation of the SRH recombination loss and an increase in carrier diffusion length In contrast, the surface recombination appears to be much less detrimental in the perovskite samples. At the 1 Sun level, the difference between the control and TOPO capped sample was found to be about a factor of 25 difference However, there is still a significant amount of excitonic contribution in room-temperature PL in CdTe In contrast, the PL and absorption spectra of the perovskite samples are rather different from those of the conventional semiconductors in key aspects such as: (1) The PL peak position varies substantially from sample to sample (2) The PL lineshapes appear to be much more symmetric with respect to the peak energy, as noted earlier In contrast, for a conventional semiconductor, ideally the higher energy side should reflect carrier thermalization. The log(IPL) vs. 1/kT plot of the higher energy side is customarily used for estimating the electronic temperature (or lattice temperature at low excitation density) by assuming that the thermal distribution of the carriers follows Boltzmann-like distribution I(E)  (E-Eg) 1/2 exp[-(E-Eg)/kT], where E is the emission energy and Eg is band gap Since PL efficiency for a given type of material can vary greatly with changing growth conditions and surface passivation, it is not straightforward to make meaningful comparison of the PL efficiencies between different materials. By studying perovskite samples from a few groups synthesized with diverse methods Among the four types of perovskite samples, the polycrystalline film with oxysalt cap (UNCpassivated) shows the strongest PL signal, especially in the low power density region. The difference between two CdTe DH or two GaAs DH are also most apparent in the low excitation density region, reflecting the strong sample dependence of the SRH recombination loss, which is pertinent to the solar cell efficiency under one Sun. It is interesting to note that for GaAs, the MBE sample (B2206) is more efficient than the MOCVD sample (WA540) at the low excitation densities, likely due to less SRH recombination loss, but less efficient at high excitation density, possibly due to less effective surface passivation. Ultimately, we are interested in comparing IQE rather than EQE. Referring IQE from EQE might be affected by the variation in light extraction efficiency between different type of samples Besides the comparison in PL intensity, the slope of the PL intensity vs. excitation density in the double-log plot can provide very useful information about the recombination mechanism Under the commonly adopted assumption that EQE is directly proportional to IQE, a linear excitation density dependence of PL intensity implies 100% IQE. This assumption could be invalid when photon-recycling is significant In short, from either direct comparison of the PL intensity or examining the excitation density dependence, we conclude that in general the hybrid materials are more immune from the SRH recombination loss or more defect tolerant compared to the inorganic counterparts. Conceptually, a straightforward approach to investigate the diffusion of photo-generated carriers is using a tightly focused laser beam to generate carriers locally, then imaging the spatial distribution of the PL signal in the vicinity of the illumination site. This approach can be performed in either a CW Therefore, we adopt the CW mode and use a chromatically corrected 50× microscope lens with NA = 0.95 that produces a spot size of ~1.0 m. Other details about the measurement set-up can be found in a previous publication Figure The 1/e points yield Lexp = 0.7, 1.1, 2.5, and 3.4 m, respectively, for the same data of Figure To examine the potential excitation density dependence, we compare for the perovskite samples between 119 W/cm 2 and 2 W/cm 2 , and find that the variations are relatively small, as shown in Figure For the inorganic samples, despite exhibiting much larger diffusion lengths than the perovskite samples for instance at 119 W/cm 2 , their PL intensities are much weaker. Thus, for the inorganic samples, the diffusion lengths are still limited by the SRH defects even in such a moderately high excitation. In contrast, for the perovskite samples, the diffusion lengths are instead largely limited by the disordering due to both microscopic domain structures Because the absorber layer thickness in a typical perovskite solar cell is around 0.5 m, a 1-2 m diffusion length is more than adequate for carrier collection along the vertical direction, and longer diffusion lengths would in fact increase the lateral diffusion loss through SRH recombination. In this context, the carrier diffusion lengths for the direct bandgap inorganic materials like CdTe and GaAs are probably longer than what are preferred for the optimal PV performance. If the diffusion length could be moderately reduced but without introducing additional defects, the PV performance of the inorganic materials might even be improved. The PL imaging method implicitly assumes that photon-recycling does not contribute appreciably to the emission away from the excitation site, which is valid in most realistic situations. Photon-recycling effect can be significant only in the case of close to unity IQE. Even in that case, it typically takes a few tens of cycles, corresponding to a distance greater than the carrier diffusion length, for a re-emitted photon to escape from the front surface. Our data for the perovskite samples apparently do not yield much emission beyond the excitation site, which indicates both short diffusion length and negligible photon-recycling. To analyze the power dependent PL intensity in Figure where n is the conduction band electron density, N the defect state electron density, Nt the total defect state density, f = N/Nt the fraction of the occupied defect states, G the generation rate, which is proportional to laser power density P, Wr the radiative recombination rate, t the defect capture coefficient with ct = tNt the maximum capture rate, et the re-emission rate from the defect states to conduction band, Wt the defect recombination rate. Similar rate equation approaches have been used to analyze the CW PL excitation density dependence Steady state solutions of n and N leads to the following formula for η and f: where α=Wr(Wt+et)/t and β=NtWt. β represents the maximum recombination rate of the defect states, and α describes coupling and competition between the radiative recombination and nonradiative recombination of the defect states through the capture process. This result implies in a general case a nonlinear relationship between PL efficiency and the excitation density, and it is inappropriate to write the total recombination rate as a sum of the radiative and non-radiative recombination rates, unless f << 1. To describe the relative EQE, EQE = IPL/P, where IPL is PL intensity (in count/s), and P is the excitation power density (in W/cm 2 ), we rewrite Eq. ( where G is replaced by ξP, ξ is a constant, α and β by α =α/ξ and β= β/ξ, and 1/2 by C/2 with C being a scaling constant that depends on the PL collection efficiency. By fitting experimental data of IPL/P vs. P, one can obtain IQE vs. P through IQE = EQE/C. For instance, if IQE = 100% (when  = 0), those terms inside parentheses (...) add to 2. Alternatively, as P is sufficiently large such that the defect states are saturated, (...) also approaches 2. Thus, Eq. ( where u is defined to be α0/β0  Wr0/ct, assuming Wt >> et. Note that when writing Eq. ( The PL intensity data in Figure To be specific, as it can be seen from Table However, the difference could be either in the background doping level (in Wr0) or the defect density (in ct). At the same time, u value of GaAs-DH-WA540 is much smaller than that of GaAs-DH-B2206, which results in the lower PL efficiency of the former in the low power density region (1-20 W/cm 2 ). The comparison suggests that the defects in the MBE and MOCVD samples could be rather different. When comparing between the inorganic samples with the hybrid perovskite samples, in most cases, u and 0 values of the inorganic ones are smaller and larger, respectively, than those of the perovskites, with only one exception of the single crystalline perovskite sample. Thus, we have reached an important conclusion that the inorganic material, even with good surface passivation, tends to have a much higher defect capture rate in the bulk, relative to the radiative emission rate, than the poly-crystalline perovskite sample even without surface passivation. If further assuming the parameter B and t do not vary strongly between these materials, we could claim that the most important differences between them are the effective SRH type defect density, which tends to be much lower in the high quality hybrid perovskites. We suggest that the lower carrier mobility, manifested as the smaller carrier diffusion length, plays an important role in suppressing the defect capture rate in the poly-crystalline perovskite sample, thus, contributes to the high PL, possibly also PV efficiency. Above analyses were carried out under the assumption that EQE is linearly proportional to IQE, as commonly assumed. However, if the photon recycling effect is significant, a nonlinear relationship is expected However, there the normalized EQE under 1 Sun equivalent was ~35% We present an objective, side-by-side, comparison on the optical properties of three representative high performance PV materials, including hybrid perovskite MAPbI3, CdTe, and GaAs. It is relatively easy for the poly-crystalline perovskite samples to exhibit higher PL efficiency than the inorganic counterparts, in particular under low excitation density, despite the inorganic materials tend to have longer carrier diffusion lengths. Relatively speaking, the perovskites are more immune to the surface recombination than the inorganic materials, and exhibit less effective SRH type nonradiative recombination, which together helps to achieve high PV efficiency. Comparison in PL spectrum, including relative PL peak position to the excitonic transition energy, linewidth, and spectral shape, between the three materials suggests the existence of significant intrinsic (i.e., random orientation of the molecules) and extrinsic (micro-grains) disordering effect in the hybrid perovskite. We point out that moderate disordering is actually beneficial for low non-radiative carrier recombination in achieving high luminescence and solar cell efficiency. This study provides new insights towards comprehensive understanding of halide perovskite materials and improving device performance for both hybrid and inorganic materials. We have pointed out in the main text that the photo-recycling effect unlikely plays a significant role in the measured EQE. However, we do wish to examine what if the photorecycling were important the impact would be to the extracted IQE. We use "UNC-passivated" as an example to compare the results of the two assumptions. Internal quantum efficiency ηIQE can be written as below: Eq. (S2) adopts the relationship between IQE and absolute EQE proposed in Ref. 