In this paper, we present an analytical modeling technique for circularly symmetric piezoelectric transducers, also called as Fresnel Lens. We also present the design of a flat/piston transducer that can generate unique acoustic wave patterns, having both converging and vortexing effects. The converging effect is generated by designing the transducer electrodes in the shapes of circular rings using Fresnel formula and exciting it with an RF signal of resonant frequency. The vortexing effect is achieved by cutting the rings to different sector angles: 90 • , 120 • , 180 • and 270 • . We use the analytical model to simulate the performance of these transducers. Ultrasonics based microfluid processing systems are gaining popularity in biomedical, pharmaceutical and drug discovery applications because they provide faster, controlled and non-contact fluid-processing ability at low volumes (nL to hundreds of μL) This manuscript is an extension of an earlier work mm. The focal length in this case is dependent only on the diameter of the electrode (the electrodes are kept circular shape due to their circularly symmetric acoustic field). To decrease the focal length, we need to reduce the size of transducer, which is not always desirable because smaller size transducer has lesser absolute sound intensity than a large size transducer. In this paper, we present an analytical model for piezoelectric tFresnel Lens ransducers using the acoustic potential The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section II, we present the simulation model to compute acoustic potential and particle displacement due to circularly-symmetric piezoelectric transducers. In section III, we present the design and analysis of circular concentric-ring transducer; we also discuss the limitations of such transducer. In section IV, we present the design of sectored annular transducers and compare the acoustic field due to transducers of different sectorangles. In this section, we also discuss the advantages of using 90 • transducers over other sector angles. Finally, we conclude the paper in section V. For a circular transducer, as shown in figure Where, α is the acoustic attenuation constant of the medium, k is the wave number (= 2π/λ) and R is the distance between point P and the elemental area dA. It can be shown that R = Once the acoustic potential is known at point P, the relative particle displacement (in radial, vertical, and circumferential directions) can be calculated by differentiating the acoustic potential at that point. That is: (2) Hence, the different components of relative particle displacement, radial (u r ), circumferential (u ψ ), and vertical (u z ) can be derived as following: The radial, circumferential and vertical components of particle displacement for a circular transducer (radius = 4mm) at different z-heights are given in figure To better control the focal length of an ultrasonic transducer, while allowing the transducer to be of any size, the electrodes on the transducer could be designed in the shape of rings. Such an ultrasonic transducer is equivalent to a Fresnel focusing lens in optics. Depending on the design of inner most ring, there are two types of Fresnel lens, positive source and negative source. When the inner radius of first ring is zero, the transducer is termed as negative source Fresnel lens and when the inner radius of the first ring is non-zero, the transducer is called as positive source. In other words, the electrodearea for a positive-source transducer is the non-electrode area for a negative-source transducer and vice-versa. The ring-radii for such a transducer is calculated using the below formula Where, n is an integer (0,1,...) representing inner/outer radii rings, λ is the wavelength of ultrasound wave in medium and F is the focal length. For ring-shaped transducer also, the particle displacements at different point in space are computed using equations (3)-( By comparing the plots of figure-2 and 3, we confirm that the ring-shaped electrode has higher radial and vertical component of particle displacement than that due to the circular transducer even though the total active area is higher in a circular transducer. The maximum radial particle displacement is 0.39 (a.u.) in circular transducer case, while it is 1.1 (a.u.) in the case of 360degree ring shaped transducer built in the same footprintarea. Similarly, the maximum vertical component of particle displacement due to circular and ring-shaped transducers are 1.9 (a.u.) and 3.9 (a.u.) respectively. The circumferential component due to both circular and ringshaped transducer is negligible. Next, we present some transducer designs which have higher rotational component of acoustic particle displacement as well as better radial and vertical component of particle displacement per unit electrode area. Since both circular disc and 360 • ring transducers have circular symmetry, the rotational component of acoustic field is zero. We design non-360 • annular transducers to increase the circumferential (responsible for vortexing) component of particle displacement in fluid due to acoustic potential. We present simulation results for four sector-angles other than 360 • angle: 90 • , 120 • , 180 • , and 270 • ; these transducers are shown in figure We computed the particle displacements (u r , u ψ and u z ) due to 90 • , 120 • ,, 180 • , and 270 • transducers. In all cases, the transducers are designed for focal length of 13mm at 3.85MHz and the maximum tile size of the transducer is limited to 8mm by 8mm; with these design parameters, the transducer can have only two-rings. It is worth emphasizing that the design parameters could The radial component of particle displacements due to 90 • , 120 • , 180 • , and 270 • sectored transducers are shown in figure-5 (e), (f), (g), and (h). As expected, the peak of u r for a 90 • transducer, placed in the first quadrant, lies in the third quadrant because there is no active transducer element in the third quadrant to equalize the acoustic field generated towards third quadrant. Further, the u r due to 120 • has its maxima located mainly in first quadrant, but it is more distributed as compared to the 90 • one. Similarly, the u r due to 180 • has its maxima located in the two quadrants where the transducer is not having any active source of ultrasonic waves. As we increase the sector angle to more than 180 • , the radial displacement have increased circular symmetry and therefore, u r of a 270 • transducer has its maximum intensity spread in three quadrants (I, III and IV in figure-5 (h)). The circumferential component of particle displacement (u ψ ) due to sectored transducers has a unique characteristic. The maximum rotational component of a sectored transducer is always in the plane perpendicular to the orientation of the rings of the transducer. For example, the 90 • transducer placed in first quadrant has an orientation of 45 • and its u ψ has maximum intensity in 135 • and 315 • direction, as shown in figure-5 (i). Similarly, u ψ due to 120 • , 180 • and 270 • transducers has peaks in the (150 • , 360 • ), (0 • , 180 • ) and (45 • , 225 • ) directions respectively. More importantly, all sectored transducers have higher rotational acoustic field than a full ring transducer. The maximum acoustic particle displacements (u r , u ψ , and u z ) normalized to electrode area is plotted in figure-6 and it is clear that the 90 • transducer has higher normalized field than 180 • , 270 • , and 360 • transducers. We also observe that the transducer with low sectorangle has higher normalized acoustic field; we select 90 • sector angle because we can build a 180 • , 270 • , 360 • transducer by arranging more than one 90 • transducers in an array. For the same reasons, we did not choose the 120 • transducer as the basic transducer, as we could build only two sectored transducer from this-120 • and 240 • . it could Also, we wanted to keep the number of transducers in an array to a low number to keep the requirement of number of separate RF signal low for the phased-excitation. V. CONCLUSION Efficient Design techniques for complex systems require accurate and efficient modeling for the components constituting the system. In this paper, we present an analytical modeling technique for piezoelectric transducers, which are major components in ultrasonic microfluid processing systems. We use this modeling approach for the design of a piston transducer which has both converging and vortexing properties. Namely, the proposed transducer electrodes are designed in the shapes of rings cut into 90 • , 120 • , 180 • and 270 • sector angles.