Electro-optic signal modulation provides a key functionality in modern technology and information networks. Photonic integration has enabled not only miniaturizing photonic components, but also provided performance improvements due to co-design addressing both electrical and optical device rules. However, the millimeter-to-centimeter large footprint of many foundry-ready photonic electro-optic modulators significantly limits on-chip scaling density. To address these limitations, here we experimentally demonstrate a coupling-enhanced electroabsorption modulator by heterogeneously integrating a novel dual-gated indium-tin-oxide (ITO) phase-shifting tunable absorber placed at a silicon directional coupler region. Our experimental modulator shows a 2 dB extinction ratio for a just 4 μm short device at 4 volt bias. Since no material nor optical resonances are deployed, this device shows spectrally broadband operation as demonstrated here across the entire C-band. In conclusion we demonstrate a modulator utilizing strong index-change from both real and imaginary part of active material enabling compact and high-performing modulators using semiconductor foundry-near materials. Integrated electro-optic (EO) modulators perform key applications in tele-and data communication The performance metrics for modulators A variety of EO-functional materials, such as graphene With the exceptional refractive index modulation, ITO has been heterogeneously integrated with photonic waveguide to build next generation EO modulators. If using solely the imaginary part index tuning, with optimization of optical mode and material processing condition, despite the material already gated to the ENZ point, photonic electro-absorption (EA) ITO modulator has been reported to have only 0.15 dB/μm extinction ratio (ER) Here, we experimentally demonstrate a compact coupling-enhanced dual-layer ITO modulator that uses both the real and imaginary parts of ITO's tunable index synergistically to increase EO modulation while not relying on optical or material resonances thus allowing for truly broadband performance. In brief, in the absorptive stage (light OFF) of the modulator, an additional waveguide section ('coupling island') in close proximity to the bus waveguide enables a higher extinction ratio compared to the traditional absorption-only case without sacrificing device footprint by realizing light power diversion (through coupling) away the bus to the island. While the light-ON stage the coupling is minimized and the optical losses are minimal due to the photonic (non-plasmonic) mode and dielectric-like dual-gated ITO/oxide/ITO stack atop both waveguides (bus and island) to change the both the EAM loss and the mode coupling. We experimentally achieve more than 2 dB of ER from a 4 μm short device (0.5 dB/μm), benefiting from both the loss and coupling modulation of the system, and low energy consumption of 0.77 pJ/bit. The nature of the directional coupling and free-carrier absorption from ITO enables a spectrally broadband response, which can be seamlessly integrated with wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) technology for higher link-level data rates. Also, the dual stack ITO configuration eliminates the high serial resistance from Silicon, thus enables a potentially short RC delay. For directional coupler (DC) devices, the study of a ITO based directional switch was first introduced in 2015 In contrast in this work, we explore a different and, thus far unexplored, modulation scheme by stacking ITO/oxide/ITO layer across both the bus and the coupling-island to alter both the absorption and beating length of such a coupled system (Fig. Our dual-gated ITO modulator consists of a Silicon photonic bus waveguide, and a short (2-8 μm long) coupling-island waveguide separated 200 nm away from the bus. SOI waveguides: width = 500 nm, height = 220 nm is patterned via negative E-beam photoresist (HSQ) followed by dry etching using SF6 and C4F8, and the dual-gated Al2O3/ITO/Al2O3/ITO stack is deposited on top of the coupling region, where the lower oxide serves as electrical isolation. Note, that the short island waveguide is slightly curved away from the bus waveguide to minimize the abrupt effective index change for the propagation, thus minimizing the insertion losses from the SOI waveguide into the device section. Both ITO layers extend beyond the coupling region to facilitate electrical connection via two Ti/Au contact pads, (Fig. The optical permittivity of ITO, for near-infrared (NIR) wavelength, can be described using Drude model as , . /0,1 (1) where ω is the angular frequency of light, ε * is the high frequency permittivity of ITO, Γ the damping frequency for the electron collisions inside ITO. And ω 3 = 4 5 6 7 . 8 9 : * is the plasma frequency, depends on the carrier concentration N = , and effective mass of electrons inside ITO film m * . Thus, by changing the carrier concentration N = in ITO electrically, the optical permittivity is tuned. It has been reported that for ITO deposition, depending on the processing and post-processing conditions, such as the gas mixture, temperature during sputter and postannealing, the intrinsic carrier concentration could span from 1 × 10 BC cm FG to 1 × 10 HB cm FG , which greatly affects the optical index for the as-deposited ITO film Given the slight curvature of the coupling-island relative to the waveguide bus, the effective coupling length is shorter than the physical (ITO/oxide/ITO) stack; for instance, for the 4 μm long active device region this effective coupler length is actually 3.4 μm after normalization to a straight coupler with 200 nm gap size. Without bias both ITO layers exhibit dielectric material property with low loss. Performing a 2D eigenmode analysis, we find the effective index difference (phase mismatch) between the first order and second order mode to be 0.099, with a low linear absorption of α = 21.89 cm FB (see supplementary information iv). The DC coupler's beating length in this case can be estimated by where the λ = 1.55 μm is the operating wavelength, yielding an insertion loss of 2.1 dB for this 4 μm long device at on state. With applied bias of 4 V (i.e. inner ITO layer biased to accumulation), the stronger free-carrier absorption from ITO increases the linear absorption of the supermode to be α = 146 cm FB . Meanwhile, the near-unity index reduction of ITO's real part reduces the effective optical path between the bus and island waveguide, resulting in an increased phase mismatch between the first and second order mode of 0.117, consecutively corresponds to a shorter beating length of 6.6 μm. Thus, more optical energy transfers from the bus to the island waveguide while the increased absorption further simultaneously decreases the transmission of the bus waveguide compared to the ON-state. Thus the increased coupling coefficient from real index modulation and higher free-carrier absorption accompanying the real index change contribute simultaneously to the intensity modulation on the bus waveguide, resulting in an ER = 2 dB for this 4 μm device. Interestingly, we observe a weaker modulation when the outer ITO layer is in accumulation state, which is due to the optical perturbation theory that the outer ITO is further away from the Silicon waveguide core, resulting a smaller ITO mode overlap (Fig. Providing some estimation to this effect here, for our 4 μm device, the metal contacts are spaced 6 μm away from the active region, thus the serial resistance is 1.8 KΩ using our measured resistivity of deposited ITO thin film of 1.8 × 10 Fg Ω • m from Hall bar measurement, which is even a few times lower than those reported for doped Silicon waveguide as the contact However, with proper optimization such as reducing contact spacing of the device region both the serial resistance and capacitance could be reduced to 525 Ω and 56 fF, respectively, which corresponds to a RC bandwidth of 54 GHz, and modulation energy consumption of 200 fJ/bit, while keeping a minimum distance of half wavelength (750 nm) to avoid generating plasmonic effect. Overall, with 2 dB modulation from a 4 μm device, such a modulation of 0.5dB/μm is rather high compared to other device schemes, and does not even rely on resonances (spectrally broadband). With an IL = 2 dB, the ER/IL-ratio is about unity; while this is not outstanding compared to lithium-niobate In summary, we introduce and experimentally demonstrate a novel coupling-enhanced dualgated ITO modulator heterogeneously integrated at the coupling regime between a silicon waveguide bus and a short coupling island. We show that for our coupling-enhanced electro-absorption modulator, both the real and imaginary index modulation of this ITO/oxide/ITO stack synergistically contribute towards the modulation. This way we achieve a 2 dB extinction ratio, ER, modulation while being 4 μm compact (0.5 dB/μm) with an insertion loss, IL, of 2 dB (ER/IL = 1) for 4 volts of applied bias. We verify a flat spectral response across the C-band frequencies since neither optical nor material resonances are needed in this device configuration. The design features careful process control to enable an ITO material away from the ENZ-point at light ON-state to reduce losses while demonstrating a near unity ITO EO index change under modulation. Taken together, the heterogeneous integration of an emerging electro-optic material, ITO, which is commonly used in the semiconductor industry, offers positive device-synergies demonstrating a compact coupling-enhanced modulator on a Silicon photonic platform.