The improvement of light-emitting diodes (LEDs) is one of the major goals of optoelectronics and photonics research. While emission rate enhancement is certainly one of the targets, in this regard, for LED integration to complex photonic devices, one would require to have, additionally, precise control of the wavefront of the emitted light. Metasurfaces are spatial arrangements of engineered scatters that may enable this light manipulation capability with unprecedented resolution. Most of these devices, however, are only able to function properly under irradiation of light with a large spatial coherence, typically normally incident lasers. LEDs, on the other hand, have angularly broad, Lambertian-like emission patterns characterized by a low spatial coherence, which makes the integration of metasurface devices on LED architectures extremely challenging. A novel concept for metasurface integration on LED is proposed, using a cavity to increase the LED spatial coherence through an angular collimation. Due to the resonant character of the cavity, extending the spatial coherence of the emitted light does not come at the price of any reduction in the total emitted power. The experimental demonstration of the proposed concept is implemented on a GaP LED architecture including a hybrid metallic-Bragg cavity. By integrating a silicon metasurface on top we demonstrate two different functionalities of these compact devices: directional LED emission at a desired angle and LED emission of a vortex beam with an orbital angular momentum. The presented concept is general, being applicable to other incoherent light sources and enabling metasurfaces designed for plane waves to work with incoherent light emitters. Since their discovery in the early years of the 20 th century, light-emitting diodes (LEDs) have found numerous applications as efficient, low-cost and compact light sources. Looking forward, achieving directional emission from the LED is insufficient for more complex applications and further device integration. These, in general, require precise control of the wavefront of emitted light. Recently, a mean to achieve this degree of control has emerged by introducing abrupt discontinuities in the phase of the incident wave using arrangements of engineered scatterers In most of these applications, however, the designed metasurfaces require a spatially coherent illumination, most of them working under plane wave excitation (with very few exception in which metasurfaces are designed for point-like sources with well-defined positions In this work, we propose a new method for direct integration of metasurface devices on top of an LED. The method relies on a collimating element, in particular, a resonant cavity. Both the metasurface and the cavity LED can be designed separately and, thus, the method allows integration of any functional metasurface designed to work under normally incident plane wave illumination, provided that it works in the transmission regime. Moreover, due to its resonant character, the presence of the cavity enhances the emission of the device. We demonstrate experimentally the proposed concept realizing an efficient beam deflection device with a predesigned emission angle, which closely matches the theoretical predictions. Furthermore, to demonstrate the full power of this approach, which enables total wavefront control, we demonstrate generation of LED light with orbital angular momentum by integrating a metasurface designed to generate a vortex beam. The proposed method is schematically depicted in Figure Finally, the metasurface performing the desired functionality is integrated at the output of the cavity to realize the compact device. For the theoretical analysis of the integrated device, we performed full numerical simulations based on the reciprocity principle, When illuminated by a normally incident plane wave at a wavelength of 620 nm, this metasurface is able to deflect it at an angle of 30° with a 94% relative efficiency and around 50% overall transmission for two orthogonal polarizations (see supporting information Figure show that the Lambertian emission pattern of the bare LED remains almost unaltered (plotted in Supplementary Figure In order to transform the Lambertian LED emission into the one having a narrower angular distribution, which can be manipulated by the metasurface, we use a hybrid Bragg-gold resonant FP cavity as a collimating element (see inset in Figure The thickness of the GaP is then optimized to be 415 nm to support a Fabry-Perot resonance at the central wavelength of the LED emission (around 620 nm). The MQW layer thickness and location remains the same as before. The resulting emission diagram of this system, generically known as the resonant cavity LED (RCLED), As a last step, the beam deflecting silicon metasurface described above is now placed on top of the RCLED. A thin SiO2 spacer (210 nm) is added between them to decouple the metasurface from the near-fields of the cavity and to serve as a low index substrate for the metasurface. The emission pattern from this device, depicted in Fig. For the sake of completeness, we show in supporting information Figures These results are presented in Figure We attribute this to the non-negligible absorption of amorphous Si at the operating wavelength as well as to the small reflection from the metasurface (which was designed independently of the cavity). Nevertheless, the results still show that the total emitted power of the hybrid RCLED with the metasurface is almost twice higher than that of the bare LED and one order of magnitude higher than that of the configuration based on the gold FP cavity. Overall, both configurations -with gold or Bragg top reflector in the FP cavity -have their own advantages in terms of efficiency, design, fabrication simplicity and suitability for electrical pumping and, therefore, we believe that both architectures can find applications depending on the device requirements. For the experimental demonstration of the proposed concept, we focus on the hybrid Bragg-gold cavity configuration. To realize the device, we start with a commercially available GaP p-i-n junction with multiple quantum wells with a total thickness of approximately 430 nm transferred to a gold-coated silicon substrate. The sample exhibits a photoluminescence band centered at 628 nm with a full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of around 20 nm. To achieve the precise thickness of GaP, corresponding to the Fabry-Perot resonance, we use dry reactive ion etching (see Experimental Section for details). Next, two pairs of TiO2/SiO2 layers (63 nm /107 nm) are deposited on top using ion-assisted deposition, followed by a SiO2 spacer layer (210 nm). The Si gradient metasurface is then fabricated on top of the device using electron beam lithography, as explained in details in Experimental Section. As described in the previous section, the metasurface supercell consists of four cylindrical elements and is designed to deflect the incoming wavefront at an angle of 30° with respect to the normal. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the metasurface fabricated on top of the RCLED is given in Figure The optical characterization of the fabricated structures is performed using a spectrally-resolved back focal plane imaging setup, After characterizing the reflectivity of the device to corroborate the presence of the Fabry-Perot resonance at the desired working wavelength, we measure the photoluminescence (PL) signal by optically pumping the system with a continuous wave (CW) laser at 488 nm wavelength. We pump from the GaP side for the uncovered sample and from the Bragg reflector side for the RCLED. Figures When the beam deflection metasurface is incorporated on top of the RCLED, a very clear shift of the emission maximum towards the designed 30° angle is observed (Figure We finalize the characterization of the fabricated devices by estimating their relative emission efficiencies. This can be done by integrating the emission power in Figures These values are still lower than those predicted by the simulations (shown in Figure As a last step, we illustrate how the proposed concept allows to realize full wavefront control, and thus possible functionalities, which are not limited to the beam deflection. To do so, we fabricated and integrated on top of the same hybrid gold-Bragg RCLED another metasurface designed to generate a beam with an orbital angular momentum and topological charge of +1. Note that this functionality cannot be achieved unless full control of the wavefront is realized. The design of this metasurface follows the same approach of phase mapping, gradually varying the radius of the cylinders to achieve 0-2π phase variation along a full round of the azimuthal angle, thus imprinting the desired topological charge. The SEM image of this vortex beam generating metasurface fabricated on top of the RCLED is shown in supporting information Figure In summary, we proposed a solution for integration of metasurfaces on top of LED to endow these devices with on-demand functionalities. The proposed solution is based on a collimating element, which can be realized, e.g., using a resonant cavity. This resonant cavity transforms the Lambertian-like emission from the bare LED into a directional one, thus having a large spatial coherence that can then be manipulated using any transmissive metasurface designed for a plane wave excitation. Both the cavity and the metasurface can, thus, be designed separately, as long as the reflection of the metasurface is low. Otherwise, the concept can still be used, provided that the system is optimized as a whole. Due to the resonant character of the cavity, the angular narrowing of the emission pattern does not come at the expense of a weaker emission, which can even be enhanced. We experimentally demonstrated the proposed concept using a GaP-based LED combined with a hybrid gold-Bragg cavity and a silicon metasurface. We show two different functionalities, namely, a beam deflection and a vortex beam generation. However, the suggested method is general and can be applied to realize other, more complex functionalities such as LED beam focusing or hologram generation. Although demonstrated here using optical pumping, the concept can be readily adapted to obtain electrically pumped devices, either employing a fully metallic RCLED architecture, such as the one proposed based on gold layers, which corresponds to the flip-chip LED configuration, or substituting the bottom dielectric layer of the Bragg stack by some transparent conducting layer (e.g. ITO). Finally, we note that this concept can be applied to other random emitting media such as fluorescent molecules and quantum dots. The proposed solution represents a step forward towards multipurpose, efficient, integrated optical devices, opening venues for compact integration of metasurfaces, which enable unprecedented control of light, with random sources. This can enable integration of LED sources instead of lasers into optoelectronic devices finding broad applications in optical communications, Li-Fi, displays, solid-state lighting, and many more. Numerical simulations: The Si metasurfaces on glass substrate were numerically simulated using the phase mapping approach with a plane wave excitation in commercially available Lumerical FDTD software. The unit cell boundary conditions for phase calculation were set to periodic and PMLs (Perfectly Matched Layers). The material data for the simulations was taken from the experimental ellipsometric measurements. The metasurfaces were designed separately from the LED. The radiation pattern and extracted power were calculated using the reciprocity principle 51 using the commercially available COMSOL Multiphysics software. The proposed LED designs were inversely excited with a plane wave at different device emission angles. For each angle such backward propagating plane waves form a spatial power density distribution within the LED. The integral of this power density over the active region of the LED (MQW) is proportional to the direct power emission of the LED quantum wells at that specific angle. FP cavity fabrication: GaP LEDs on gold substrates were purchased from Yangzhou Changelight Co. The stack of multiple quantum wells of around 100 nm in thickness is sandwiched in the GaP p-n junction. The whole LED stack thickness is around 430 nm. The thickness of the gold substrate is around 1 μm. The quantum wells emission is centered at 628 nm full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) of around 20 nm. Although the thickness of the GaP layers can be precisely controlled during the growth, in case of a very thin LED layer the lattice mismatch with the substrate material deteriorates the quality of the film and affects the efficiency. This issue was solved by growing thicker structures and subsequently thinning them down by inductively coupled plasma-reactive ion etching (ICP-RIE, Oxford Plasmalab 100). We did that to obtain, with a high precision, the desired slab thickness corresponding to the low order Fabry-Perot resonance at the emission wavelength. We combined the dry etch based on Ar and Cl chemistry with reflection spectra measurements to adjust the thickness to approximately 416 nm. In those cases in which the GaP layer was slightly overetched, a thin layer of amorphous Si was deposited to precisely meet the Fabry-Perot condition. For that we used a plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD, Oxford Plasmalab 100). The Bragg stack consisting of two alternating TiO2/SiO2 layer pairs (63 nm /107 nm each) was deposited using ion-assisted deposition (IAD Oxford Optofab 3000) with SiO2 and TiO2 targets. The 210 nm SiO2 spacer layer was also deposited on top of the Bragg stack using IAD. Metasurface fabrication For the metasurface fabrication we started with a deposition of an amorphous silicon film using the PECVD (Oxford Plasmalab 100) process. We subsequently spin-coated hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ, Dow Corning XR-1541) as a resist for the following electron beam lithography (EBL) process as well as a layer of Espacer 300AX01 (Showa Denko) as a charge dissipation layer. We then proceeded to expose the sample using an electron beam lithography system (EBL, Elionix ELS-7000, 100kV) to define the metasurface structure. Next, the sample was developed using a 25% solution of tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH). Finally, the sample was etched using the same ICP-RIE tool with Cl2 gas. The remaining HSQ resist on top of the etched structures was not removed, as the hydrofluoric acid (HF) solution commonly used for its removal might damage the SiO2 substrate and the FP cavity stack. The angle-resolved reflection and photoluminescence measurements were performed in an inverted optical microscopy setup (Nikon Ti-U). A high power halogen light source (for reflection measurement) or continuous wave (CW) 488 nm laser (for photoluminescence measurement) irradiates the sample surface through the high NA objective (i.e., Nikon 100×, 0.95 NA). The reflection or emission signal is then collected by the same objective and routed to a high sensitivity, thermoelectrically cooled, charge coupled detector (Andor Newton EMCCD). Instead of an imaging plane, the back focal plane of the sample surface is projected onto a slit entrance (100 μm width) of the spectrometer (Andor SR-303i) with a 150 gr/mm grating (800 nm blading). This measurement technique gives both angular and spectral information along the slit axis of the response signal from the sample. For back focal plane image (without spectral information) the slit width is set at 2500 μm and the grating is set at the zero order (no diffraction). The maximum detection angle is determined by the NA of the objective, in this case approximately 72°. The amorphous Si metasurface was designed using the common phase mapping approach (see Ref. 29 in the main text) and simulated using a plane wave excitation. The resulting transmission, reflection and absorption spectra averaged over the two orthogonal incident polarizations are given in Figure Using the reciprocity principle we simulated the emission pattern of the plain LED with the Si metasurface on top (Figure The shape of the emission is reminiscent of the Lambertian with slight deformations and clearly does not correspond to the designed beam deflection functionality. When we place the GaP LED inside a gold cavity (Figure The Si gradient metasurface placed on top of the gold RCLED deflects the emission at the designed 30° angle with respect to the normal as shown in Figure 