Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDC's) usually exhibit layered polytypic structures due to the weak interlayer coupling. 2H-NbSe2 is one of the most widely studied in the pristine TMDC family due to its high superconducting transition temperature (Tc = 7.3K) and the occurrence of a charge-density wave (CDW) order below 33 K. The coexistence of CDW with superconductivity poses an intriguing open question about the relationship between Fermi surface nesting and Cooper pairing. Past studies of this issue have mostly been focused on doping 2H-NbSe2 by 3d transition metals without significantly changing its crystal structure. Here we replaced the Se by Te in 2H-NbSe2 in order to design a new 1T polytype layered TMDC NbSeTe, which adopts a trigonal structure with space group P3 ̅ m1. We successfully grew large size and high-quality single crystals of 1T-NbSeTe via the vapor transport method using I2 as the transport agent. Temperature-dependent resistivity and specific heat data revealed a bulk Tc at 1.3 K, which is the first observation of superconductivity in pure 1T-NbSeTe phase. This compound enlarged the family of superconducting TMDC's and provides an opportunity to study the interplay between CDW and superconductivity in the trigonal structure. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) have been widely investigated due to their diverse structural and electronic properties such as large thermoelectric effect, anomalous magnetoresistance, charge-density-wave (CDW), spin-charge-orbital density waves (SDW), and superconductivity The layered TMDCs usually have 6R, 4Ha, 4Hb, 3R, 2H, 1T phases TMDCs with 2H (trigonal prismatically coordinated) and 1T (octahedrally coordinated) structures have been extensively studied for several years due to the correlation between their charge density wave (CDW) state and superconducting property. 2H-NbSe2 is a famous TMDCs material, which possess a superconducting state with Tc ∼ 7.3 K and quasi-two-dimensional incommensurate CDW state with TICDW ∼ 33 K simultaneously. As we all know that the physical properties and electronic structures of TMDCs are highly dependent on the crystal structures. One significant property of layered TMDCs is its highly polymorphic and polytypism character. By far, although many efforts have been focusing on 2H-polytype NbSe2, no sufficient research attention has been paid to the 1T form. In this article, we first report the synthesis, structure determination, and superconducting characterization of 1T-NbSeTe. Single crystals of 1T-NbSeTe have been successfully synthesized via chemical vapor transport method. The structure was confirmed by single crystal and powder X-ray diffraction measurements, which reveal that the obtained 1T-NbSeTe sample crystallized in the trigonal structure with space group P-3 ̅ m1. The resistivity and heat capacity measurements were performed to characterize 1T-NbSeTe samples systematically, which reveal that 1T-NbSeTe is a type-II superconductor and has a Tc ≈ 1.3 K. An obvious sharp peak at Tc in the heat capacity shows that the normalized specific-heat jump ∆C/γTc ≈ 1.36, which was very approximate to the predicted value by weak-coupling BCS theory (1.43). This compound enlarged the family of superconducting TMDCs and opens an opportunity to study the interplay between polytypism and superconducting property of the transition metal dichalcogenides. The polycrystalline specimens of 1T-NbSeTe were obtained via a solid-state method. Firstly, we weigh the reactants of Te (99.9%), Se (99.999%), and Nb (99.999%) in stoichiometric ratios and ground well in the agate mortar. Then the mixture was transferred in sealed vacuum silica glass tubes. The polycrystalline samples were got after heating the tubes at 850 o C for 120 hours. In order to ensure sample uniformity, we reground, re-pelletized, and sintered as-prepared polycrystalline samples at 850 o C for 48 hours. The single crystals of 1T-NbSeTe were grown via the chemical vapor transport (CVT) method, using I2 as a transport agent. The as-prepared 1T-NbSeTe powders were mixed with I2 at quality ratio 20:1, then heated in sealed vacuum silica tubes for 7 days in a two-zone furnace, where the source and growth zones temperatures were 800 °C and 700 °C, respectively. Single crystal diffraction data of 1T-NbSeTe was collected by using SuperNova X-ray Source, Mo Kα/Cu radiation at 293 K. The data sets and absorption were corrected with the Lorentz and polarization factors and Multiscan method respectively. We also adopted the powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD, Bruker D8 focus, Cu Kα radiation, graphite diffracted beam monochromator) to characterize the samples structurally. The unit cell parameters were determined by profile fitting the powder diffraction data with FULLPROF diffraction suite with Thompson-Cox-Hastings pseudo-Voigt peak shapes. No materials' air-sensitivity was found during the measurements. Tc was determined from the midpoint of the resistivity ρ(T) transitions, for the specific heat data, we employed equal area construction method to obtain the critical temperature. The composition and microscopic morphology of 1T-NbSeTe samples were investigated by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDXS) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Quanta 400F, Oxford), respectively. And high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, FEI Tecnai G2 F20 operated on 200 kV) was also used to study the phase structure of 1T-NbSeTe. For the sake of getting more abundant information of the electronic and superconducting properties of 1T-NbSeTe polycrystalline sample, we took the heat capacity measurements for the polycrystalline sample under 0 T and 1 T applied magnetic field. The obtained Tc from heat capacity measurements matched the Tc obtained via temperature dependence electrical resistivity, which provides convincing evidence that a bulk superconducting state is achieved in 1T-NbSeTe. By fitting the normal state data of specific heats at high temperature under 1 T magnetic fields, it is found to obey the formula Cp =γT + βT )-1.04 The electron density of states at the Fermi level (N(EF)) was obtained from the γ with the λep and γ. Then we got the value N(EF) = 1.56 states/eV f.u. for 1T-NbSeTe (Table Finally, we compared the superconducting transition temperatures (Tcs) of the common 1T-polytype superconducting TMDCs in Fig. The results of this research fully indicates that substitution into polytype TMDCs not only expand the family of superconducting TMDCs, but also provide the opportunity to study the interplay between polytypism and superconductivity in the TMDCs. A novel stoichiometric compound, 1T-NbSeTe, was synthesized, and its crystal structure and superconducting property were characterized. 1T-NbSeTe crystallizes in a trigonal space group of P3 ̅ m1 with unit cell parameters of a = b = 3.5707(12) Å, c = 6.524(4)) Å. 1T-NbSeTe shows two-dimensional layered structure composed of distorted Nb(Se/Te)6 octahedra chains which are connected via Se/Te atoms. Resistivity measurements suggest that 1T-NbSeTe is a superconductor with transition temperature Tc ≈ 1.3 K. The heat capacity measurements confirm this property as well. Ueq is defined as one-third of the trace of the orthogonalized Uij tensor (Å 2 ). The numbers in parentheses are the standard error of the refined parameters. a R1