Low-cost and robust platforms are key for the development of next-generation 3D micro-and nanodevices. To fabricate such platforms, nanocrystalline diamond (NCD) is a highly appealing material due to its biocompatibility, robustness, and mechanical, electrical, electrochemical, and optical properties, while glass substrates with through vias are ideal interposers for 3D integration due to the excellent properties of glass. However, developing devices that are comprised of NCD films and through glass vias (TGVs) has rarely been attempted due to a lack of effective process strategies. In this work, a low-cost process -free of photolithography and transfer-printing -for fabricating arrays of TGVs that are sealed with suspended portions of an ultra-thin NCD film on one side is presented. These highly transparent structures may serve as a platform for the development of microwells for single-cell culture and analysis, 3D integrated devices such as microelectrodes, and quantum technologies. The process is demonstrated by fabricating TGVs that are sealed with an NCD film of thickness 175 nm and diameter 60 μm. The technology described can be extended by replacing NCD with silicon nitride or silicon carbide, allowing for the development of complex heterogenous structures on the small scale. Nanocrystalline diamond (NCD) is a highly appealing material for a variety of applications due to its biocompatibility, robustness, and mechanical, electrical, electrochemical, and optical properties. At odds with the general misconception that diamond is expensive, diamond films can be grown at low cost with microwave plasma assisted chemical vapor deposition (MWPACVD) For the fabrication of 3D structures in microdevices, interposing glass layers with through holes that serve as conduits for fluids or electrical connections to thin films are indispensable To yield 10 × 10 × 0.2 mm 3 substrates, a 200 μm thick plate of Corning Lotus NXT glass, which is an alkaline earth boro-aluminosilicate, was diced with a Disco DAD322. The plate was purchased from the company Kuramoto. After dicing the plate, the substrates were cleaned for 20 min in acetone with an ultrasonicator. The remaining acetone was rinsed from the substrates with deionized water. The properties of Lotus NXT glass are listed in Table Isotropic etching of silicon dioxide-based glass is typically done with HF. The overall chemical reaction for etching silicon dioxide glass with HF is SiO This, however, represents a simplification of what occurs during the etching steps of our process. Moreover, no clear mechanism for glass etching is provided in literature Blind holes were made with a LightFab system designed for selective laser-induced etching of fused silica During the chemical vapor deposition of an NCD film, temperature T s of the substrate during growth typically ranges from 500 • C to 900 • C Preceding NCD growth, the substrate was cleaned using the first, third, and fourth steps of the RCA method. After cleaning, the surface on the growth side was seeded The seeded substrate was placed in the reactor of an SDS6500X MWPACVD system on a molybdenum substrate holder of 58 mm diameter and 5.5 mm thickness. Subsequently, the gasses in the reactor were evacuated by a Kashiyama SDE90X dry pump to base pressure 8.5 Pa. Hydrogen gas and methane gas were next introduced into the reactor at respective flow rates of 294 sccm and 6 sccm. After reaching a stable operation pressure P = 2 kPa, the gasses were ignited into a plasma with 1.5 kW of 2.45 GHz microwaves. At these conditions, T s remained relatively far below the annealing point of Corning Lotus NXT glass, which is 722 • C, and the growth rate r was on the order of 1 nm min -1 . This value of r typically occurs at relatively low values of T s and P . The thicknesses of the NCD films were measured during growth with a home-built interferometer. During growth, a light gray film, consisting likely of hydrogenated carbon, was unintentionally deposited on the etching side of the substrate. Within a minute, this film was removed in the reactor of a Yamato PR200 system. All photographic images were taken with a Canon EOS 5D camera and a Canon MP-E 65 mm lens. Surface profile features with lengths greater than 1 mm were taken with a DektakXT stylus profilometer and surface profile features with lengths less than 1 mm were taken with a Keyence VK-X150 laser microscope. From surface profiles that were taken with this microscope, the arithmetic average surface roughness R a was deduced. The VK-X150 was also used to measure the thicknesses of the glass substrates, taking into account the refractive index, 1.53, of the glass substrate. The VK-X150 was also used as a reflected light microscope and a Meiji MT9930L was used to perform dark-field microscopy. The thicknesses of the NCD films were measured with higher resolution than during growth using a Hamamatsu C13027 optical nano gauge. A FEI Quanta 250 FEG and a JEOL JSM-7900F SEM were used to examine the blind holes, the NCD films, and the TGVs. Grazing incidence X-ray diffraction measurements were carried out on the NCD films with a Bruker D8 Discover diffractometer, using Cu K α X-rays of 0.15418 nm average wavelength. The angle of incidence β of the X-ray beam with the samples was 0.5 • , which is slightly above the critical angle β c = 0.27 • of total external reflection for an diamond-air interface. Raman spectra were measured on a Tokyo Instruments Nanofinder 30 system. Specifically, a 5 mW 532 nm laser was focused by an objective lens on the sample to a spot of a few micrometers in diameter, which magnifies 100 times and has a numerical aperture of 0.95. Pressure was applied to the platform as described in previous work We performed systematic studies to determine the etching times for steps 1 and 4. The results for 48 m% and 11 m% HF are presented in Figs. d have respective errors of approximately 10 s and 3 μm. Fig. with where c g , k, and D respectively denote the product of a stoichiometric constant and the concentration of species in glass that react with HF, the reaction constant, and a diffusion coefficient. Since most of these parameters are unknown, we fit the data in Figs. 2.a-b with Eq. 2. Results are provided in the caption of Fig. This dimensionless quantity relates the reaction rate to the diffusion rate as follows: for Da 1, the etching process is diffusion limited; for Da 1, the etching process is reaction limited. From Eq. 4, we find that the glass etching process is reaction limited for relatively small values of t but becomes diffusion limited for relatively large values of t. We also infer that, consistent with our observations, diffusion limited behavior is achieved more rapidly for higher initial concentrations of HF. The effect of HF etching on the surface roughness R a of a glass substrate was also investigated. This was done because rough surfaces scatter light, adversely affecting transparency. Prior to etching, the value of R a for a glass substrate was approximately 4 nm or less. During etching in step 1, R a increased up to 6 nm in the vicinity where d was measured. Moreover, during etching in step 4, R a increased to approximately 13 nm. This cumulative increase in R a is evident in Figs. 2.d-f, which depict the surface profile of the glass substrate before step 1, between steps 1 and 2, and after step 4, respectively. It is remarkable that R a increased strongly after step 4, during which only approximately 25 μm was etched. To provide additional proof that etching Lotus NXT glass with 11 m% HF induced more surface roughness than with 48 m% HF, we present in Figs. 2.g-i the surface profiles of glass substrates etched with 11 m% HF to depths of approximately 13 μm, 18 μm, and 30 μm. More surface profiles of etched glass substrates can be found as supplementary material. The mechanism underlying this observation is not yet understood. Assuming that masking of insoluble fluorides, which are sedimented at the HF-glass interface, causes roughening during etching, we hypothesize that for etching with 48 m% HF, the velocity of the HF-glass interface is larger than the sedimentation rate of fluorides. Since step 4 required shallow etching with 11 m% HF, the surface roughness of the glass substrate after etching was relatively low. During the process of optimizing the parameters for laser ablation, we observed that crack formation becomes more apparent with increasing laser pulse frequency and P . To create blind holes at the lowest value of P possible and thereby avoid crack formation, we performed a study in which the depth of a blind hole was measured as a function of P for various choices of depth f . Results from this study are shown in Table Table P In step 3 of our process, an NCD film was grown on the surface of a glass substrate with blind holes on the growth side. During growth, the etching side was not in direct contact with the cooled substrate holder of the CVD system. An X-ray crystallography study, from which the results are shown in Fig. To explain variations in the thickness of the NCD film, which is depicted in Fig. where A, E a , and k B respectively denote a pre-exponential factor, the activation energy, and the Boltzmann constant, we propose that the growth rate of the NCD film is spatially nonuniform. Since the growth time at all locations is the same, a nonuniform film thickness is expected. By growing the NCD film before etching, variations in film thickness can be avoided. However, it is known that NCD can be transformed into CO 2 at temperatures above 550 ± 50 • C In step 4 of our process, the glass substrate is further etched by HF to form through glass vias (TGVs) that are sealed with suspended portions of an NCD film of approximate diameter 60 μm. Fig. During preliminary experiments, we found that NCD films, grown on fused silica substrates during step 3 of our process, completely delaminated during step 4. We suspect that this is caused by tensile stress, which is to be expected since the coefficient of thermal expansion of fused silica is less than that of diamond over the entire range of operating temperatures used during our preliminary experiments We present a low-cost and robust nanocrystalline diamond-glass platform for single-cell culture and analysis, ondemand drug delivery systems, the modeling of vascular systems, microelectrodes, quantum technologies, and hightemperature MEMS. Our platform is comprised of a glass substrate with through glass vias (TGVs) that are sealed on one side with suspended portions of an ultra-thin nanocrystalline diamond (NCD) film. Our fabrication process is free of photolithography and transfer printing and is delineated in detail sufficient to allow easy replication by others. In this process, hydrofluoric acid (HF) is used to first etch one side of a 10 × 10 × 0.2 mm 3 Lotus NXT glass substrate to a thickness of approximately 50 μm. On the same side that is etched, blind holes of approximate diameter 40 μm and approximate depth 40 μm are subsequently formed by laser ablation. After growing an NCD film of approximate thickness 175 nm on the surface opposite to the etched side, the etched side of the substrate is further etched by HF to approximately 25 μm to produce the NCD sealed TGVs. Our resulting platform is highly transparent and can handle applied pressures of at least 300 kPa. The profiles are formed after reaching various etch depths d as indicated and, for each profile, the surface roughness R a is given. We conclude that 11 m% HF roughens the surface of Lotus NXT glass substrates more than 48 m% HF does. 3 Blind holes Supplementary Figure 