We numerically and experimentally investigate evaporation of a sessile droplet on a heated substrate. We develop a finite element (FE) model in two-dimensional axisymmetric coordinates to solve coupled transport of heat in the droplet and substrate, and of the mass of liquid vapor in surrounding ambient while assuming diffusion-limited, quasi-steady evaporation of the droplet. The two-way coupling is implemented using an iterative scheme and under-relaxation is used to ensure numerical stability. The FE model is validated against the published spatial profile of the evaporation mass flux and temperature of the liquid-gas interface. We discuss cases in which the two-way coupling is significantly accurate than the one-way coupling. In experiments, we visualized side view of an evaporating microliter water droplet using a high-speed camera at different substrate temperatures and recorded temperature of the liquid-gas interface from the top using an infrared camera. We examine the dependency of inversion of the temperature profile across the liquid-gas interface on the ratio of the substrate thickness to the wetted radius, the ratio of the thermal conductivity of the substrate to that of the droplet and contact angle. A regime map is plotted to demarcate the inversion of the temperature profile for a wide range of these variables. A comparison of measured evaporation mass rate with the computed values at different substrate temperature show that the evaporation mass rate increases non-linearly with respect to the substrate temperature, and FE model predicts these values close to the experimental data. Comparisons of time-averaged evaporation mass rate obtained by the previous and present models against the measurements suggest that the evaporative cooling at the interface and variation of diffusion coefficient with temperature should be taken into account in the model in order to accurately capture the measurements. We compare the measurements of time-varying droplet dimensions and of temperature profile across the liquid-gas interface with the numerical results and found good agreements. We quantify increase in the evaporation mass flux and evaporation mas rate by the substrate heating and present the combined effect of substrate heating, the ratio of the substrate thickness to the wetted radius, substrate-droplet thermal conductivity ratio and the contact angle on the evaporation mass rate. In the last decade, evaporation of a sessile, pure liquid droplet on a solid surface is a much-studied problem, owing to several technical applications such as evaporative spray cooling and inkjet printing, etc. The physics involved during the evaporation is briefly described as follows. In the absence of any external convection, the evaporation occurs by diffusion of liquid vapor in surrounding gas. The evaporation mass flux (j) [kg/m 2 -s] on the liquid-gas interface is nonuniform, and the largest evaporation near the contact line generates evaporative-driven radially outward flow inside the droplet In the context of theoretical studies for heated substrates, Sobac and Brutin Maatar et al. They showed that the transient effects are important to consider in the model for a thicker substrate with lower thermal diffusivity. Xu and Ma In the context of recent experimental studies, David et al. Several recent studies have reported the measurement of liquid-gas interface temperature using infrared thermography. Brutin et al. Most of the previous models of evaporating sessile droplet on non-heated or heated substrates were based on the following assumptions: heat transfer is only in the axial direction Finally, the measurements are compared with the model predictions in order to investigate the fidelity of the model and understand the coupled physics. We extend the models reported in previous studies We consider diffusion-limited, quasi-steady evaporation of a sessile droplet with a pinned contact line on a heated hydrophilic substrate. The wetted diameter of the droplet is taken lesser than capillary length so that the droplet maintains a spherical cap shape throughout the evaporation. The validity of the quasi-steady evaporation is examined by considering the ratio of heat equilibrium time in a droplet (th) and its total evaporation time (tF), as discussed by Larson where D, αd hd, R, csat and d are diffusion coefficient of liquid vapor in the air, the thermal diffusivity of the droplet, height of the droplet, the wetted radius of the droplet, saturation vapor concentration and density of droplet, respectively. We plot th/tF for several liquids with respect to temperature in Figure We neglect thermocapillary or thermal convection inside the droplet and this is justified for low Péclet number (Pe). We estimate Pe based on the Marangoni flow velocity (VMa) for cases of the microliter water droplets on heated substrate considered in this study. VMa is calculated using the analytical expression suggested in Refs. With above assumptions, the energy equation in the droplet (i = d) and the substrate (i = s) for the temperature field simplifies to, A perfect thermal contact between the drop and the substrate is assumed. The computational domain and boundary conditions for eq. ( where j, L, k, and n are evaporative flux [kg/m 2 -s] at the liquid-gas interface of the droplet, latent heat of the evaporation [J/kg], the thermal conductivity of the liquid [W/m-K] and unit normal vector, respectively. In absence of external convection, the diffusion of liquid vapor in surrounding gas concentration (c) is governing by the following Laplace equation, The boundary conditions for eq. ( where diffusion coefficient of liquid vapor in gas (D) is a function of temperature (T), We consider evaporating water droplet in the air on a heated glass substrate and the thermophysical properties of water and glass used in the model are listed in We employ Galerkin finite-element method to solve coupled eq. ( Ref. (2) using j thus obtained. In the present work, we implement two-way coupling between the eq. ( 1) Solve energy equation (eq. ( 2) Solve vapor concentration equation (eq. ( 3) Calculate evaporation mass flux ji using eq. ( 4) Underrelax ji obtained in step 3 to obtain ji, revised. 5) Repeat steps 1 to 4 until the following convergence criterion is met: L2-norm of the temperature field is lesser than 3 10  . In order to achieve grid-size convergence, we test five grids and number of nodes in the computational domain of droplet-substrate and ambient are listed in Table with respect to the most refined respective grid and is expressed as follows: where N is number of nodes in the grid, Nmax is number of nodes in the most refined grid (Grid 5 in Table In order to validate the present model, we compare computed the spatial variation of evaporation mass flux and temperature at the liquid-gas interface with previously reported results. First, we compare the variation of non-dimensional temperature at the liquid-gas interface ( LG ref s ref ) with non-dimensional radial distance, ˆ/ r r R  with published results. ^ denotes the non-dimensional value and Ts is substrate temperature. Tref is reference temperature and is taken as 0 o C. Figure Third, we compare the variation of computed non-dimensional evaporation mass flux ( ĵ ) with non-dimensional radial distance, ˆ/ r r R  , with the corresponding variation of analytical expression reported by Hu and Larson where D∞ and c∞ are diffusion coefficient and saturation vapor concentration at ambient temperature, respectively. H is relative humidity of the ambient. The expression of evaporative flux on the liquid-gas interface (j) is expressed as a function of non-dimensional radial distance is given by [2]: where  is wetting angle and λ(θ) = 0.5-θ/π. of Wang et al. In order to examine the fidelity of the two coupling schemes, we perform simulations using these closely with two-way coupling with a difference of 4.5% with respect to two-way coupling at r/R = 0, however, at higher contact angle, θ = 90 o , it does not match and overpredicts it with a difference of 32.5% with respect to two-way coupling at r/R = 0. Therefore, at higher contact angle, thermal resistance for heat flow from the substrate to the liquid-gas interface of the droplet is larger, which reduced available thermal energy from the substrate, resulting in significant evaporation cooling. In one-way coupling, this effect is not captured and hence, it overpredicts ĵ because the calculation of ĵ assumes TLG = TS. ΔT in one-way coupling is 26.6% lower as compared to two-way coupling. This is explained by the fact that one-way coupling overpredicts ĵ based on TS (Figure We note similar characteristics in case of TS = 90 o C. We also plot ĵ and TLG at TS = 90 o C in Figure Therefore, the two-way coupling is more accurate for larger θ, that corresponds to significant evaporative cooling at liquid-gas interface. Similarly, this coupling scheme is also accurate for a substrate with smaller thermal conductivity and larger thickness because these conditions correspond to large cooling at the interface. Since the substrate heating amplifies the error in the one-way coupling for a given set of parameters, the two-way coupling is more accurate for a heated substrate. The time-varying droplet volume is calculated using the same method proposed by Hu and Larson where evaporation mass flux j(r) is integrated over the liquid-gas interface of area A. D∞ and c∞ are the diffusion coefficient and saturation vapor concentration at ambient temperature, respectively. The time-averaged, non-dimensional evaporation mass rate is defined by Sobac and Brutin A schematic of the experimental setup used in the present study is shown in Figure As shown in Figure We used a high-speed infrared camera (A6703sc, FLIR Systems Inc.) with 25 mm (f/2.5) IR lens and close focusing extender ring to record transient temperature of the liquid-gas interface. The infrared camera was mounted to capture the top view of the droplet. The working distance, image resolution, and pixel resolution are 10.6 cm, 300 × 256 and 14 pixels/mm, respectively. The frame rate is same as mentioned above for the high-speed camera. The emissivity of water and glass are taken as 0.95. The measured temperature is close to liquid-gas interface temperature because water is opaque to the infrared radiation. The calibration of the infrared camera was reported our previous study All the experiments were performed in a controlled environment at 24±2°C and 35±4% relative humidity. (3 ) / 6, 2 tan ( / ) where R is the wetted radius (R = d/2). The initial wetted radius and initial equilibrium contact angle of the droplet measured at different temperatures of the heated glass are listed in Table The uncertainty in contact angle and wetted radius measurements are ±2° and ±0.05 mm, respectively. First, numerical results on a non-heated (or isothermal) substrate are presented (section 4.1). Second, we present the comparisons between numerical and experimental results (section 4.2). Finally, we present the numerical results of evaporation mass flux and evaporation mass rate on a heated substrate (section 4.3). It has been well-established that the ratio of thermal conductivity of the substrate to that of the droplet (kS/kd) controls the temperature gradient across the liquid-gas interface To examine the combined effect of hS/R, kS/kd and θ on the sign of T  , we performed Xu et al. Interestingly, Figure The trend of the present model is physically valid since, at larger hS/R, a larger thermal energy is available and thereby, the threshold value of kS/kd for the inversion of the sign of T  is lower. We present comparisons of measured non-dimensional time-averaged evaporation mass rate ( ˆavg m , eq. ( In Figure The following models are tested for the comparison with the measurements mentioned above. The first model is reported by SB, which was built on the model of Hu and Larson In Figure In Figure where θi and sat c are the initial contact angle and vapor concentration at substrate temperature, respectively. While calculating tF by eq. ( shows a linear decrease of the volume with time in Figure The maximum percentage error in the total evaporation time given by present model as well as the model of Popov Figure ) for different cases of substrate temperature (TS) at contact angle (θ) of 30 o and 90 o, respectively. In Figure In order to quantify the effect of substrate temperature (TS), the thickness of the substrate (hS), substrate conductivity (kS) and contact angle (θ) on non-dimensional evaporation mass rate ( m , eq. ( The first row of Figure The first column of Figure A combined numerical and experimental study is performed to study the effect of substrate heating on the evaporation of a sessile water droplet. We have developed a two-way coupled model for diffusion-limited, quasi-steady evaporation. The energy equation in the droplet and substrate and liquid-vapor diffusion equation in ambient surrounding the droplet were solved using the finiteelement method in two-dimensional axisymmetric coordinates. Both equations were coupled by an iterative approach and under-relaxation is used to ensure numerical stability. The two-coupling is specifically important in case of larger contact angle, larger substrate temperature, lower thermally conductive substrate and a thicker substrate. The developed solver shows second-order accuracy and we have carried out validations of the evaporation mass flux and the temperature of the liquid-gas interface, reported in previous works. Our numerical model correctly predicts the inversion of the temperature gradient (ΔT) across liquid-gas interface temperature, as a function of contact angle, substrate-droplet thermal conductivity ratio and substrate thickness-wetted radius ratio. The regimes of ΔT < 0 and ΔT > 0 were accurately predicted by the model as compared to previously reported one-dimensional model. We have employed high-speed visualization from the side and infrared thermography from the top of the evaporating droplet to measure timevarying droplet shapes and the temperature of the liquid-gas interface, respectively. The experiments were performed with water droplets on a heated glass substrate. Computed nondimensional time-averaged evaporation mass rates ( ˆavg m ) at different substrate temperatures (TS) were compared with the model and measurements of Sobac and Brutin However, the evaporation mass rate inversely scales with the thickness in case of a lower thermally conductive substrate. In closure, the present paper provides insights on the relative importance of coupled transport phenomena as a function of associated parameters and these insights will be helpful to design engineering applications such as spray cooling and inkjet printing. 