New plans should be used to improve quality and to increase productivity and durability of conventional pavements. In this investigation, it has been attempted to promote technical characteristics of bitumen using carbon nanotubes as an additive. Wet and dry process methods are most practical ways of mixing CNF in AC. It was decided that the best method to adopt for this investigation was the dry process. In this study thermal and ductility properties of modified bitumen by 0.1, 0.5, and 1% carbon nano-tube content in bitumen were evaluated considering bitumen penetration, softening point, and ductility tests, then the results were compared to those of unmodified bitumen. It was found that adding carbon nano-tubes effects on thermal properties of bitumen by increasing the softening point and decreasing the bitumen penetration. It was also shown that bitumen ductility decreases by carbon nano-tubes modification process. Nanotechnology is a relatively new field in science dealing with structures that are on the nanoscale. To illustrate how miniscule the nano-scale is, the following comparison could be made: if a human hair has a diameter of a football field, a nano-sized particle would have the diameter of a pencil. In 1985, Kroto and Smalley first discovered buckminsterfullerene and since then this technology has evolved rapidly Materials used in the experimental investigation included a neat bitumen 60/70-penetration grade from Tehran mineral oil refinery with the physical properties listed in Table Three different percentages of CNT were chosen to produce bitumen-CNT blends (0.1%, 0.5% To determine the optimum content of carbon nanotubes (CNTs), empirical rheological tests carried out on conventional and modified bitumen with different CNTs content. In this study, the penetration degree test was done for Control sample and samples containing different percentages of carbon nanotubes. The empirical tests were performed according to the standard test procedures. The penetration test is an empirical test which measures the consistency (hardness) of asphalt at a specified test condition according to ASTMD5 standard. Also, for determination the softening point of bitumen, the ASTM-D36 was used. Ductility test according to the Standard Methods (IP. 32/55) was done and the sample at 25°C and with a speed of 5 cm/min is drawn. Figure With the addition of carbon nanotubes to bitumen, penetration degree of bitumen reduces. This reduction is due to the high surface density and high stability and tensile stability of carbon nanotubes. It is obvious that with increasing the amount of nanotubes, penetration degree will further be reduced. Finally, the produced bitumen can be used in warmer climates or areas with more traffic. Figure Figure ductility of modified-samples by different percentages of CNT, was higher than the minimum of 50 cm. Bitumen which has acceptable ductility is more resistant to thermal cracking in low temperatures and shows good adherence so, could perfectly coat aggregates. The initial cost of both samples is higher than the control sample but for total cost, the amount and type of work should be investigated. When using modified bitumen in asphalt, due to its developed rheological properties, the asphalt layer thickness will be less than the usual and then the amount of total costs will decrease. A bitumen with minimal mechanical changes in its characteristics Fig.1: Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) image