We present the first group of acoustic delay lines (ADLs) at 5 GHz, using the first-order antisymmetric (A1) mode in Z-cut lithium niobate thin films. The demonstrated ADLs significantly surpass the operation frequencies of the prior art with similar feature sizes, because of their simultaneously fast phase velocity, large coupling coefficient, and low-loss. In this work, the propagation characteristics of the A1 mode in lithium niobate are analytically modeled and validated with finite element analysis. The design space of A1 ADLs is then investigated, including both the fundamental design parameters and those introduced from the practical implementation. The implemented ADLs at 5 GHz show a minimum insertion loss of 7.9 dB, an average IL of 9.1 dB, and a fractional bandwidth around 4%, with group delays ranging between 15 ns and 109 ns and the center frequencies between 4.5 GHz and 5.25 GHz. The propagation characteristics of A1 mode acoustic waves have also been extracted for the first time. The A1 ADL platform can potentially enable wide-band high-frequency passive signal processing functions for future 5G applications in the sub-6 GHz spectrum bands. HE NEXT GENERATION radio access technology, namely the fifth-generation (5G) New Radio (NR), requires unprecedented signal processing capabilities Among various types of acoustic devices, acoustic delay lines (ADLs) have been demonstrated with diverse applications ranging from transversal filters Recently, ADLs have been demonstrated with low loss and wide bandwidth using the fundamental shear horizontal (SH0) mode To this end, acoustic devices using the first-order antisymmetric (A1) mode in Z-cut LiNbO3 have been reported with high k 2 and low loss above 4 GHz To overcome these outstanding hurdles, we aim to provide a comprehensive framework in this paper for analyzing the key parameters and propagation characteristics of A1 waves in LiNbO3 thin films and subsequently implement wideband and high-frequency A1 ADLs. The fabricated ADLs show a minimum IL of 7.9 dB, an average IL of 9.1 dB, and a fractional bandwidth around 4%, delays ranging between 15 ns and 109 ns, and the center frequencies between 4.5 GHz and 5.25 GHz. This paper is organized as follows. Section II provides a general discussion on the design of the A1 ADLs, focusing on A1 propagation characteristics and key parameters of A1 ADLs. Section III introduces the practical considerations essential for A1 ADLs, including electrode configurations and device orientations. Section IV presents the fabricated 5-GHz A1 ADLs. Section V presents the measured results of ADLs. A1 propagation characteristics, including the propagation loss (PL), vg and vp, are also experimentally extracted. Finally, the conclusion is stated in Section VI. The schematic of a typical A1 ADL is shown in Fig. Considering a piece of Z-cut LiNbO3 waveguide (XZ plane) with infinite length in the Y direction, the wave propagation problem becomes two-dimensional (2D). Because of the planar geometry, the transverse resonance method (2) where ktl and kts are the transverse wavenumbers for the longitudinal and shear modes. b is the film thickness, β is the lateral wavenumber, and ω is the angular frequency. vl and vs are the velocities of the longitudinal and shear modes. In equation (1), the "+" and "-" are used to denote Lamb wave solutions of symmetrical and antisymmetric modes, respectively. Note that equations ( Although solutions for Lamb waves in isotropic media can be solved using equations ( where c11 E and c44 E are stiffness constants related to the longitudinal and shear waves respectively, following the Voigt notation where i, j, k, l, p, q are the indices of the Cartesian coordinate system, n is the unit vector, and e, ε S are the piezoelectric and dielectric constants, respectively. Equation where f is the frequency, λ is the wavelength, and vl_short and vl_open are the longitudinal wave velocities of respective cases. For a 490 nm Z-cut LiNbO3 thin film, fc_short is 3.64 GHz, vl_short is 6572 m/s, fc_open is 4.59 GHz, and vl_open is 6795 m/s From equations ( To validate the simplified model and obtain more accurate properties of A1, eigenmode FEA is set up in COMSOL for a 490 nm Z-cut LiNbO3 thin film section with a width (the +X direction) of λ. Periodic boundary conditions are applied to the XZ and YZ planes in both the electrical and mechanical domains. The top and bottom surfaces (XY planes) are set to be mechanically free. The electrical boundary conditions are set to be electrically open and short, respectively The obtained values are plotted in Fig. where vf and vm are the phase velocities of the electrically open and short cases. The dispersion curve of k 2 is plotted in Fig. The discrepancies between the simulated and the calculated k 2 are due to the assumption in the simplified model, which induces overestimation in the frequency difference between vf and vm, and thus causes a larger calculated k 2 . With the critical characteristics of A1 studied, it is apparent that A1 ADLs are promising for 5G applications for several reasons. First, a high vp enables high-frequency devices without resorting to narrow electrodes or thin films The typical response of an A1 ADL will be first studied using 2D FEA. The 2D FEA assumes that the acoustic waves are plane waves propagating along the X-axis (the longitudinal direction in Fig. An A1 ADL prototype (cell length Λ = 2.4 μm, gap length Lg = 40 μm, and cell number N = 4) is simulated to showcase its typical frequency domain response (Fig. Different from S0 and SH0 ADLs, the A1 ADL features a non-symmetric passband, which is apparent from the sidelobes. The non-symmetry is caused by the cut-off of A1 (cut-off frequency of the LiNbO3 thin film with electrically open surfaces, fc_open labeled in Fig. In this subsection, the dependence of the three main ADL specifications, namely the group delay (δ), center frequency (fcenter), and FBW, on the device dimensions will be investigated. The impact of Lg on the obtained δ is first studied. FEA simulated IL, RL, and δ of ADLs with Lg of 20, 40, and 80 μm are shown in Fig. The effects of Λ on the center frequency fcenter are then investigated. fcenter is the frequency at which most RF energy is converted into the EM domain. FEA simulated IL, RL, and δ of ADLs with different Λ of 2.4, 3.2, and 4.0 μm are shown in Fig. where Lopen and Lshort are the lengths of the parts without and with electrodes in a cell. vf and vm are the phase velocities in that area with electrodes (electrically short) and without electrodes (electrically open) respectively, which can be related to fcenter by a variation of equation ( Based on fc and vl calculated in Section II-B, fcenter for a 50% duty-cycled transducer with Λ between 1.5 and 4.0 μm is shown in Fig. Finally, the effects of N on FBW are studied. FEA results of ADLs with different N values of 2, 4, and 8 are shown in Fig. To sum up, we have discussed the principles and critical parameters (Λ, Lg, and N) of A1 ADLs. The discussions focus on ideal A1 ADLs without considering the mass loading of the electrodes. Furthermore, the actual aperture width and possible skewed propagation of A1 in a 3D structure are not captured by the adopted 2D simulations. The electrical loading in transducers is also ignored. All these practical considerations will be covered in Section III. In this subsection, we will show the simulated results of ADLs using electrodes of different thicknesses and different metals. Different devices studied herein have the same cell length Λ of 2.4 μm, gap length Lg of 40 μm, and cell number N of 4. As seen in Fig. To better design electrodes for A1 ADLs, the lower fcenter caused by the mass loading is first discussed. As presented in equations ( First, fc_short of different film stacks can be obtained analytically by solving the stress distribution (Txz) in the film stack [Fig. Second, the vl_short of different film stacks are solved through FEA. Although analytically solving a composite structure is possible through simplifications With the dependence of fc_short and vl_short on the electrode thickness studied, the impact of the mass loading on fcenter is calculated using the model in equations ( Because both parameters decrease with thicker or heavier metal (e.g., Au), fcenter decreases, compared to the massless case. As a result, the passband distorts as it shifts to lower frequencies and gets truncated by the cut-off (Figs. 9-10). To build A1 ADLs at similar frequencies using thicker or heavy electrodes, one has to implement transducers with a smaller Λ, which requires a smaller feature size. Therefore, thin electrodes with fast wave velocities are preferred for achieving well-defined passbands without decreasing the feature size of IDTs. Another effect from more severe mass loading is the larger ripples in IL and group delay. These are caused by more significant internal reflections at the edge of the electrodes To sum up, thinner electrodes with faster phase velocities are preferred in maintaining high-frequency and wide-band performance. However, if the electrodes are too thin, the series resistance would load the performance electrically (Section III-C). In our work, 30 nm Al is chosen as a calculated trade-off. The previous analysis assumes A1 ADLs placed along +X (Fig. A1 characteristics at different in-plane orientations in a Z-cut LiNbO3 thin film are first investigated. 3D FEA is used to identify the eigenfrequencies of A1 at different orientations, using a 2.4 μm by 50 μm by 0.49 μm Z-cut LiNbO3 plate. Periodic boundary conditions are applied to the lateral edges. Mechanically free boundary conditions are applied to the top and bottom surfaces. The phase velocities for both electrically open case (vf) and short case (vm) are obtained, respectively. As seen in Fig. Second, the propagation characteristics of A1 are studied. So far, the analysis assumes that the wavefront propagates in alignment with the energy transportation direction Third, other modes at different angles are studied. vf and k 2 of the major modes in the 2.4 μm by 50 μm by 0.49 μm Z-cut LiNbO3 plate are simulated using the same method as that for A1. The results are plotted along with the displacement mode shapes in Fig. Based on the above analysis of A1 transduction, propagation, and its wideband performance, it can be concluded that the inplane orientation does not affect the performance significantly. Consequently, we will choose the X-axis as the longitudinal direction for device implementation in this work. The series resistance in the IDTs can cause significant performance degradation in a wide device aperture R s = 2R ele /N The devices were fabricated in-house with the process presented in The key design parameters, namely Λ, Lg, and N are labeled, and their typical values are presented in Table Five groups of A1 ADLs are designed for the implementation of 5-GHz broadband delays (Table The fabricated ADLs were first measured with a vector network analyzer (VNA) at the -10 dBm power level in air, and then conjugately matched using ADS. ADLs in Group A (N = 4, Λ = 2.4 μm, Lg = 20-320 μm) are designed for showcasing A1 ADL operation and demonstrating long delays. The measured IL and RL are shown in Fig. ADLs in Group B (Λ = 3.2 μm), Group C (Λ = 2.8 μm), and Group D (Λ = 2.0 μm) are designed for investigating the impact of the cell length on the center frequency. In each group, devices with gap length between 20 and 320 μm are implemented. Devices are measured at -10 dBm in air and conjugately matched. For devices in Group B, a minimum IL of 8.71 dB, an average IL of 10.4 dB, and an FBW around 5.7%, and a center frequency of 4.6 GHz are obtained (Fig. ADLs in Group E (N = 2, Λ = 2.4 μm, Lg = 20-320 μm) are designed for investigating the impact of cell numbers on the bandwidth via comparison with Group A. The passband is not symmetrical with larger IL shown below fc_open due to the cutoff. For devices in Group E, a minimum IL of 7.9 dB, an average IL of 10.7 dB, and an FBW around 19.7%, and a center frequency of 5.0 GHz are obtained (Fig. The extracted propagation parameters of different ADLs are presented in Table Finally, to identify the major loss contributors, the measured performance is compared to the simulated values discussed in Sections II and III. Without loss of generality, the IL of ADLs in Group A with Lg of 20, 80, and 320 μm (under conjugate matching conditions) are analyzed in Fig. To sum up, we have demonstrated A1 ADLs at 5 GHz in LiNbO3 thin films for the first time, significantly surpassing the operation frequencies of the previous reports (Table In this work, we have demonstrated A1 ADLs at 5 GHz in LiNbO3 thin films for the first time. Thanks to the fast phase velocity, significant coupling coefficient, and low-loss of A1, the demonstrated ADLs significantly surpass the state of the art with similar feature sizes in center frequency. The propagation characteristics of A1 in LiNbO3 are analyzed and modeled with FEA before the designs of A1 ADLs are studied and composed. The implemented ADLs at 5 GHz show a minimum IL of 7.9 dB, an average IL of 9.1 dB, and a 3 dB FBW around 4%. The design variations show delays ranging between 15 ns and 109 ns and the center frequencies between 4.5 GHz and 5.25 GHz. From these measured devices, the propagation characteristics of A1 are extracted for the first time and shown to match our analysis. Upon further optimization, the A1 ADLs can lead to wide-band and high-frequency signal processing functions for 5G applications.