We study the transport properties of a voltage biased contact between two spin-split superconductors separated by an insulating barrier of arbitrary transparency. At low transparency, the contribution of multiple Andreev reflections leads to a subharmonic gap structure that crucially depends on the amplitude and relative angle of the spin-splitting fields of each superconductor. For non-collinear fields, we find an interesting even-odd effect on the bound states within the gap, where the odd order multiple Andreev reflections split, but the even order ones remain at their expected positions. By computing the current-voltage characteristics, we determine the transparency required for the emergence of a subharmonic gap structure and show that the splitting of the odd bound states is associated with different threshold energies of spin-polarized Andreev processes. Our findings provide a tool to experimentally determine the amplitude and orientation of Zeeman fields in spin-split superconductors. Introduction.-Hybrid structures between superconductors and magnetic materials reveal many interesting phenomena originated from the coexistence and interplay between ferromagnetism and superconductivity. As a result, the new field of superconducting spintronics has emerged The transport properties of hybrid junctions involving SSc has thus become a topic of fundamental interest in superconducting spintronics. For example, the phase difference in Josephson junctions between SSc has been used as a source to manipulate the spin-polarized supercurrents When two superconductors are in electric contact, MAR In this paper, we study the transport properties in the MAR regime of a junction between two SSc, as depicted in Fig. Model. -The system we study consists of two semiinfinite superconductors in a point contact geometry. Spin-splitting fields are induced on both sides via proximity effect to a FM region. The phenomenological Hamiltonian of the system is written as Ĥ = ĤL + ĤR + ĤT (t). ĤL and ĤR describe the bulk SSc on the left and right side: where T is the spinor in Nambu-spin space. The noninteracting Hamiltonian is We assume that the orientation of the Zeeman fields lie in the x -z plane and parametrize the moments as M L = M e z and M R = M [sin αe x + cos αe z ], with g, μ B and M L,R the effective Landé g-factor, Bohr magneton, and induced magnetic fields, respectively. Other spin orientations can be accounted for by an appropriate rotation without affecting our results. The gap matrix in Eq. ( with Tkk (t) = t kk τz e iχ(t)τz/2 and τx,y,z the Pauli matrices in particle-hole space. In the presence of a voltage bias V , the superconducting phase difference χ(t) = 2ω J t is time-dependent, with ω J = 2eV the Josephson frequency. The resulting time-dependent current follows the Josephson relation ∆ → ∆e i2eV t with ζ σ=↑,↓ = ±1 and Û = e -iσyα/2 τ0 . The magnitude of the proximity-induced spin-splitting fields is h = gμ B M and W is a band parameter Following the transfer-matrix approach and double Fourier transformation with ν (0) the density of states at the Fermi level in the normal state. The components I m are defined as with Ĝr,a,K j,n = Ĝr,a,K j (ω + nω J /2). The dc component of the current corresponds to the m = 0 harmonic in Eq. ( Υr/a ±n N ,0 are assumed to vanish. We normalize the current in units of σ N ∆/e, where σ N is the conductance when both electrodes are in non-superconducting states without magnetic elements. Josephson dc current -We now compute the currentvoltage characteristics of a dc-biased contact between two SSc. As explained before, we set the gap of both superconductors to be the same, ∆, and the spin-splitting field also equal, h. We show in Fig. From this result, we conclude that the odd SGS are very sensitive to the configuration of the two spin-split fields. Thus, the I -V characteristics could provide a way to measure the amplitude and relative orientation of the spin-splitting fields. To clearly show these dependence on the spin-split fields, we plot the normalized differential conductance for a junction with average transmission T = 0.6 in Fig. Conclusions -We have theoretically analyzed the SGS in a Josephson junction between two spin-split superconductors with arbitrary amplitude and orientation of their Zeeman fields. Our results show an interesting even-odd effect of the bound states within the gap. The SGS induced by odd MAR are split by the Zeeman fields and they are strongly influenced by their relative angle. The SGS from even MAR, instead, are independent of the spin-splitting fields. The analysis of the SGS is thus a useful tool to determine with great precision the magnitude and relative orientation of the Zeeman fields in experiments. We remark that, although we consider a simplified single-channel superconducting weak link model, the splitting of odd-order MAR resonances is also present in common setups between spin-split superconductors, such as in a two-dimensional planar junction. 22