A fast silicon-graphene hybrid plasmonic waveguide photodetectors beyond 1.55 μm is proposed and realized by introducing an ultra-thin wide silicon-on-insulator ridge core region with a narrow metal cap. With this novel design, the light absorption in graphene is enhanced while the metal absorption loss is reduced simultaneously, which helps greatly improve the responsivity as well as shorten the absorption region for achieving fast responses. Furthermore, metal-graphenemetal sandwiched electrodes are introduced to reduce the metal-graphene contact resistance, which is also helpful for improving the response speed. When the photodetector operates at 2 μm, the measured 3dB-bandwidth is >20 GHz (which is limited by the experimental setup) while the 3dB-bandwith calculated from the equivalent circuit with the parameters extracted from the measured S 11 is as high as ~100 GHz. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first time to report the waveguide photodetector at 2 μm with a 3dB-bandwidth over 20 GHz. Besides, the present photodetectors also work very well at 1.55 μm. The measured responsivity is about 0.4 A/W under a bias voltage of -0.3 V for an optical power of 0.16 mW, while the measured 3dB-bandwidth is over 40 GHz (limited by the test setup) and the 3 dB-bandwidth estimated from the equivalent circuit is also as high as ~100 GHz, which is one of the best results reported for silicon-graphene photodetectors at 1.55 μm. Silicon photonics has been recognized as a very promising technology for many applications because of the unique advantages In order to realize photodetectors beyond 1.55 μm, GeSn was introduced by using the epitaxy growth process In contrast, two-dimensional materials provide a new and promising option for enabling active photonic devices on silicon For example, silicon-graphene waveguide photodetectors operating at 1.55 μm were realized with a bandwidth of >76 GHz successfully in a 6-inch wafer process line GHz Alternatively, another monolayer-graphene photodetector utilizing the bolometric (BOL) effect was reported with a high responsivity of 500 mA/W when operating with a bias voltage of -0.4 V and an input power of 0.08 mW. However, the responsivity is reduced to 200 mA/W for a high input power e.g. >0.6 mW However, in this case the responsivity is low because the light absorption is quite limited, as it is well known. In recent years, a few silicon-graphene waveguide photodetectors were realized In this paper, we propose and demonstrate ultrafast silicon-graphene hybrid plasmonic waveguide photodetectors beyond 1.55 μm. The present hybrid plasmonic waveguide consists of an ultra-thin wide silicon-on-insulator (SOI) ridge core region with a narrow metal cap, between which there is an ultra-thin Al 2 O 3 insulator layer. With such a hybrid plasmonic waveguide, the light absorption in graphene is enhanced while the metal absorption loss is reduced simultaneously, which helps greatly improve the responsivity. When operating at 2 μm, the present silicon-graphene hybrid plasmonic waveguide photodetector has a responsivity of ~70 mA/W for an optical power of 0.28 mW. Here, the metal-graphene-metal sandwiched electrodes Figures Fortunately, the light absorption can be enhanced greatly by reducing the silicon core height h Si , as shown in Fig. For the designed silicon-graphene hybrid plasmonic waveguide with the following parameters: w m =200 nm, h m = 50 nm, w si = 3μm, and h si = 100 nm, the calculated electric field distribution ⃗ + ⃗ of the quasi-TE mode is shown in Fig. V/m for 1 mW optical power, which helps enhance the light absorption in graphene. For the present design, we calculate the total graphene absorption η(L) as the propagation distance L varies from 0 to 50 μm, as shown in Fig. The designed waveguide photodetectors were fabricated with a series of steps (see Method), including the processes of electron-beam lithography, ICP etching, Al 2 O 3 atom-layer deposition, graphene transfer, metal deposition, etc. For the fabricated devices, the I-V characteristics were characterized by varying the gate voltage (see Supplementary Section 2.1). The contact resistance and the graphene properties were obtained from the data fitting of the measured resistances with a simple capacity model For Device A, the Dirac voltage V Dirac is around 3.2 V (see the measurement in Supplementary Section 2.1). It can be seen that the photocurrent map has a 4-fold pattern, which is similar to the measured results for the device reported in ref. 30, even though the structural designs of the devices are different. From this figure, it can be seen that the photocurrent strongly depends on the gate voltages V G as well as the bias voltages V b . In order to see more details, the dependence of the photocurrent at the zero bias on the gate voltage V G are shown in Fig. In order to better understand the mechanisms of the photodetectors, we also give theoretical calculations for the Fermi level E f , the Dirac-point energy Φ, and the chemical potential μ c along the graphene channel between the signal-electrode and the right ground-electrode (see the details in Supplementary Section 4), as shown in Fig. (3.2, -0.3) V, the graphene sheet is lightly doped. As a result, the bolometric coefficient β becomes small In summary, when the bias voltage |V b | increases from 0 to 0.3 V, the dominant mechanism for the photoresponse changes from the PTE effect to the BOL effect or the PC effect, depending on the applied gate voltage. Meanwhile, the responsivity increases significantly if the gate voltage is controlled well. Fig. V when choosing V G = ~1.9 V (the BOL effect), and ~3.2 V (the PC effect), respectively. It can be seen that the responsivities for the BOL and PC modes are 35.0 mA/W, and 25.5 mA/W, respectively, when the input optical power P in is ~2.2 mW. When the input optical power P in decreases to 0.28 mW, the responsivities increase to about 52.1 mA/W and 30.0 mA/W for the BOL mode (V G = ~1.9 V) and the PC mode (V G = ~3.2 V), respectively. The frequency responses of the devices were measured by using a setup combining a commercial 10 GHz optical modulator and a vector network analyzer (VNA, 40 GHz bandwidth), as shown in Fig. Here we give a comprehensive comparion for the performces of the reported silicon-graphene photodetectors beyond 1.55 μm, as shown in Table Table GHz are included. It can be seen that a number of results for the realization of high bandwidths of > 40 GHz were reported GHz and the 100 Gbps data-receiving. Similarly, the present silicon-graphene hybrid waveguide photodetectors also demonstrate a high 3 dB-bandwidth of >40 GHz (which is setup-limited) and the estimated bandwidth from the equivalent circuit is around 100 GHz. On the other hand, most of the reported graphene photodetectors have a responsivity of less than 100 mA/W In this paper, we have proposed and demonstrated a novel silicon-graphene hybrid plasmonic waveguide photodetectors beyond 1.55 μm, which was realized by introducing an ultra-thin wide SOI ridge core region with a narrow metal cap at the top. With this design, the light absorption in graphene is enhanced while the metal absorption loss is reduced simultaneously. This greatly helps achieve effective optical absorption of graphene within a short length. The metal-graphene-metal sandwiched electrodes were also introduced to reduce the metal-graphene contact resistance, and thus helps improve the response speed. For the fabricated photodetectors, the mechanism has been revealed from the IV characteristics operating at different gate voltages. It has been shown that the dominant mechanism for the present photodetectors is the PTE effect at zero bias voltage, and becomes the BOL or PC effect at non-zero bias voltages, which helps achieve high-speed responses. For the fabricated photodetector operates at 2 μm, the measured 3 dB-bandwidth is >20 GHz (which is limited by the experimental setup), and the 3dB-bandwith estimated from the established equivalent circuit is as high as ~100 GHz, while the responsivity is ~70 mA/W for P in =0.28 mW when operating at V b =-0.3V. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first demonstration for 2 μm waveguide photodetectors with a 3dB-bandwidth of >20 GHz. In order to verify the ability for ultrafast photodetection, we have also measured the frequency responses for the present waveguide photodetector operating at 1.55 μm. It is shown that the measured 3 dB-bandwidth is >40 GHz (which is still limited by the setup) and the 3 dB-bandwith estimated from the equivalent circuit is as high as ~100 GHz. Meanwhile, the measured responsivity is about 0.4 A/W for an optical power of 0.16 mW when V b = -0.3 V. As a summary, the present silicon-graphene photodetector is one of the best devices reported until now. The present work paves the way for achieving high-responsivity and high-speed near/mid-infrared waveguide photodetectors on silicon, which play an important role for various applications, including optical communications, nonlinear photonics, Lidar, on-chip spectroscopy, etc. Device Fabrication. The ultrathin silicon core layer was obtained from a standard 220 nm-thick SOI wafer. A thermal oxidation process was used to obtain ~100 nm-thick silicon top-layer from standard 220 nm-thick lightly p-doped SOI wafer. Twice processes of EBL and ICP were used for the fabrication of the silicon ridge waveguide with a silicon thickness h Si = ~100 nm, an etching depth h et = ~50 nm, and a ridge width w Si = 3 μm. A 90 nm-thick Aluminum gate-electrode (with the ohmic contact) was fabricated by utilizing the lift-off processes. A 10 nm-thick Al 2 O 3 layer was deposited on the SOI ridge waveguide by using an atomic-layer deposition (ALD) process. The bottom-layer of the side ground-electrodes is made of 15/50 nm-thick Ti/Au hybrid thin films. Then a single-layer graphene sheet was transferred onto the chip, and patterned by the processes of the EBL and the ICP etching. Finally, a 50 nm-thick Au layer was deposited and patterned to form the narrow signal electrode and the top-layer of the side ground electrodes. Transfer process of graphene. A 300 nm-thick film of PMMA was spin-coated on the CVD-graphene sheet grown on a copper thin film at 4000 rpm. The PMMA/graphene/copper film was floated on aqueous ammonium persulfate (60 mg/mL) to remove copper and rinsed in deionized water. Then it was transferred onto the chip. The graphene-covered chip was dried, baked, and soaked in acetone and rinsed with isopropanol. Device measurement. The responsivities of the photodetectors were characterized by using the low frequency measurements. The continuous-wave light from the fiber laser was modulated with a frequency of 0.2 kHz by a chopper and then coupled to the optical waveguide by using an on-chip grating coupler. The photocurrent was then amplified and recorded by using a pre-amplifier and a lock-in amplifier [see Fig. waveguide operating at 1.55 μm. The electric field component ⃗ + ⃗ along the graphene layer at the metal corners reach up to 1.22×10 7 V/m for 1 mW input power. As shown in Fig. 2.1. Characterization of the silicon-graphene waveguide photodetectors. For the fabricated devices, the I-V characteristics were characterized under varied gate voltages and a fixed low bias voltage supplied by two sourcemeters (Keithley 2401) in the dark case (i.e., the input optical power P in =0). From the measured I-V curves, the total resistance R tot can be achieved easily. As it is well known, the total resistance for the photodetector based on a metal-graphene-metal structure is given by = + 0.5 , where R c is the total contact resistance, W g and L g are respectively the width and the length of the graphene channel between the signal-and ground-electrodes, σ is the graphene conductivity. The graphene conductivity is given as , where σ min is the minimal conductivity, μ is the graphene mobility, V Dirac is the Dirac gate voltage, C G is the gate capacitance given by . Therefore, the contact resistance R c and the graphene properties (σ min , μ, and V Dirac ) can be obtained by fitting the measured data for the total resistances R tot . For example, for Device A with L g =50 μm and W g =2.8 μm, the measured total resistance R tot is shown in Fig. (2) About the total capacitance C tot . The total capacitance C tot consists of two parts. One is the capacitance 2•C g for the graphene areas and the other one is the 2•C pad for the metal pads/connectors. Here two-dimensional numerical simulations (using COMSOL Electrostatics (3) About the silicon resistance R si . The resistance R si depends on the device dimensions and the electrode layout. Even though Device C is shorter than Devices A and B, the resistances R si for these three devices are similar. One of the reasons is that Device C has narrower electrode-spacing than Devices A and B. Furthermore, the area of the signal-electrode sitting on the silicon layer for Device C is larger than that for Devices A and B, as shown in Fig. ( On the other hand, the length of the ground-electrodes for Device C is shorter than that for Devices A and B. As a result, these devices have similar capacitances C ox while Device C is the smallest one, as shown in Table close