We demonstrate field and current controlled magnetodynamics in nanocontact spin-torque nano-oscillators (STNOs) based on orthogonal magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs). We systematically analyze the microwave properties (frequency f , linewidth ∆f , power P , and frequency tunability df /dI) with their physical originsperpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA), damping-like and field-like spin transfer torque (STT), and voltage-controlled magnetic anisotropy (VCMA). These devices present several advantageous characteristics: high emission frequencies (f > 20 GHz), high frequency tunability (df /dI = 0.25 GHz/mA), and zero-field operation (f ∼ 4 GHz). Furthermore, a detailed investigation of f (H, I) reveals that df /dI is mostly governed by the large VCMA (287 fJ/(V•m)), while STT plays a negligible role. Magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs) The nanopillar approach gives a lower threshold current and higher emission power, The in-plane (IP) hysteresis loop and the magnetoresistance curve are presented in where γ/2π = 31 GHz/T is the gyromagnetic ratio, μ 0 is the permeability of free space, H res is the resonance field (i.e. the applied field), and the effective magnetization, μ 0 M eff = μ 0 (M s -H k ) = -0.12 T, has been chosen to give good agreement between the experimental results and the calculated resonance fields. H k is the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy field; the negative value of M eff indicates that the free layer has an OOP easy axis. The IP measurements in Fig. where not only are the free layer oscillations detected, but a high-frequency peak from the reference layer The frequency f , linewidth ∆f , and power P are three key properties of microwave generators. The current dependent PSD of the auto-oscillations is presented in Fig. where α is the intrinsic damping constant, M s is the saturation magnetization of the free layer, H eff = H + H k -M s is the effective field, M is the magnetization vector of the free layer, and P is the polarization vector of the spin current (related to the reference layer's proportional to the dc current density j. The generated integrated power (P ) was calculated from Lorentz fitting of the spectra after correcting for the impedance mismatce; P is plotted in Figs. The frequency (f ) is well fitted by a second-order polynomial, f = AI 2 + BI + C, which is plotted as the red lines in Figs. The asymmetric term (BI) can in principle be ascribed to both spin torque and VCMA. The FMR frequency depends on the current density as df /dj dc ∝ -2αa j /j + b j /j, Both terms are proportional to j, making the frequency change proportional to I. The anisotropy is tuned with applied voltage (U ), The different contributions to f (I) can be further elucidated by analyzing the field de-pendence of the coefficients. of μ 0 M eff are also predicted to differ from the true value that governs the FMR, due to the inherent nonlinearity of STNOs. Furthermore, we identify three points of importance for applications: i) these STNOs can generate a frequency at 4 GHz even at H = 0 T, which is essential for the development of field-free microwave generators; ii) the VCMA, which plays a key role in the linear tunability,