We report the discovery of superconductivity in binary alloy Sn1-xSbx with x in the range of 0.43 to 0.6, which possesses a modulated rhombohedral structure due to the incommensurate ordering of Sn and Sb layers along the c-axis. The specific heat measurements indicate a weakly coupled, fully gapped superconducting state in this homogeneity range with a maximum bulk Tc of 1.58 K at x = 0.46, though the electronic specific heat and Hall coefficients remain nearly x-independent. The nonmonotonic dependence of the bulk Tc is discussed in relation to the effects of Sb-layer intercalation between the [Sn4Sb3] seven-layer lamellae that are the essential building block for superconductivity. On the other hand, a zero-resistivity transition is found to take place well above the bulk superconducting transition, and the corresponding Tc increases monotonically with x from 2.06 K to 3.29 K. This contrast, together with the uniform elements distribution revealed by energy dispersive x-ray mapping, implies that the resistive transition is due to the strain effect at the grain boundary rather than the compositional inhomogeneity. The first-principles calculations on the representative composition Sn4Sb3 (x = 0.43) indicate that it is topologically nontrivial similar to Sb, but with different Z2 invariants (0;111). Our results not only identify a new superconducting region in the Sn-Sb phase diagram, but also provide a viable platform to study the interplay between structural modulation, nontrivial band topology and superconductivity. for TSC with wide compositional tunability. The binary Sn-Sb system appears to be attractive for this study. Its phase diagram has been studied extensively over the past few decades In this paper, we report on the observation of SC over the whole homogeneity range of IM-Sn 1-x Sb x (0.43 ≤ x ≤ 0.6) by means of resistivity, magnetic susceptibility and thermodynamic measurements on high quality polycrystalline samples with good homogeneity. The resultant superconducting phase diagram shows that the bulk and resistive T c evolve quite differently. The former exhibits a maximum of 1.58 K at x = 0.46, though the electronic specific heat and low temperature Hall coefficients are nearly x independent. Furthermore, the analysis of the specific heat jump points to a weak coupling SC with nearly the same full gap structure for these samples. By contrast, a monotonic increase with x is observed for the resistive T c , which is likely due to the strain effect developed at the grain boundaries. In addition, first-principles calculations show that the most Sn-rich composition x = 0.43, whose structure consists solely of the [Sb 4 Sn 3 ] septuple layers, belongs to the (0;111) Z 2 class and can be viewed as a weak TI with bent bands, suggesting that it may host Majorana fermions along the dislocation lines. The implication of this result on the band topology of other compositions is also discussed. Polycrystalline samples of IM-Sn 1-x Sb x were synthesized by the two-step method as described previously High-purity shots of Sn (99.99%) and Sb (99.999%) were mixed according to the stoichiometries of x = 0.43, 0.46, 0.49, 0.53, 0.57, 0.6 in an argon-filled glove box, sealed in evacuated quartz tubes, and melted at 900 • C for 2 days with intermittent shaking to ensure homogeneity, followed by direct quenching into cold water. The solidified ingots were then annealed without breaking the vacuum at 280-320 • C for another 2 days and quenched again into cold water. The crystal structure of the resulting samples was checked by powder x-ray diffraction (XRD) by using a PANalytical x-ray diffractometer with a monochromatic Cu-K α1 radiation at room temperature. The data were collected with a step-scan mode in the 2θ range from 10 • to 100 • . The Rietveld refinements of the XRD patterns were performed using the programm JANA2006 For the sake of consistency, all the physical property measurements were carried out on samples obtained from the same ingot for each x. The resistivity was measured on bar-shaped samples by the standard four-probe method. The Hall coefficient was measured by sweeping the magnetic field from -9 T to 9 T. Resistivity and Hall coefficient measurements were performed in a Quantum Design physical property measurement system (PPMS-9 Dynacool) . Specific heat measurements were done in a PPMS-9 Dynacool down to 1.8 K and in a PPMS-9 Evercool II down to 0.5 K. The two sets of data are consistent within 5% in the overlapped temperature range. The measurements of dc magnetization down to 0.4 K were done on crushed powders in a Quantum Design magnetic property measurement system (MPMS3). First principles calculations were carried out under the Density Functional Formalism as implemented in Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) The XRD patterns together with structural refinement profiles for the series of IM-Sn 1-x Sb x samples are shown in Fig. Figure Figure To further characterize the IM-Sn 1-x Sb x samples, we have performed specific heat (C p ) measurements in the temperature range between 0.5 and 300 K. The low temperature data are plotted as C p /T versus T 2 in Fig. where μ * is the Coulomb repulsion pseudopotential. Taking μ * = 0.13, λ ep values of 0.5-0.52 are obtained. This suggests that these IM-Sn 1-x Sb x samples are weakly coupled superconductors, in line with the magnitude of C el /γT jumps. Figure From the above results, one can see that the properties of IM-Sn 1-x Sb x are a combination of those of its constituent elements: it adopts the same structure as Sb, and shows SC in analogy to Sn. Given that Sb is topologically nontrivial There are two immediate implications of this result. Firstly, these 1D helical modes may support topological SC due to the proximity effect from the bulk. As a consequence, Majorana fermions confined to the dislocation lines could be detected by tunneling experiments In summary, we have presented a combined experimental and theoretical study of Sn 1-x Sb x alloy with 0.43 ≤ x ≤ 0.6, which exhibits an incommensurate structural modulation due to the formation of a natural superlattice of [Sn 4 Sb 3 ] and Sb layers. BCS-like SC is observed for the whole x range, although a zero resistivity transition takes place well above the bulk superconducting transition. The established phase diagram shows that the bulk T c has a maximum of 1.58 K at x = 0.46, though the Hall and electronic specific coefficients remain nearly constant with varying x. This nonmonotonic dependence of bulk T c is tentatively attributed to the competing effects induced by the insertion of Sb layers between the [Sn 4 Sb 3 ] lamellae, which are the essential building blocks for SC. On the other hand, the resistive T c increases monotonically with x from 2.06 K to 3.29 K. This, along with an uniform distribution of Sn and Sb in these alloys found by EDX elemental mapping, suggests that the resistive transition results from the strain effect that develops at the grain boundaries rather than compositional inhomogeneity. First-principles calculations on the band structure of the most Sn-rich composition and representative composition Sn 4 Sb 3 shows that it is topologically nontrivial with Z 2 invariants of (0;111). Consequently, Majorana fermions may exist along its dislocation lines due to the superconducting proximity effect from the bulk. Our results not only identify a new superconducting region in the Sn-Sb phase diagram, but also supply the first alloy system that combines structural modulation, nontrivial band topology and SC, which opens the door to study the interplay between these properties.