Developing low-weight, frugal and sustainable power sources for resource-limited settings appears to be a challenging proposition for the advancement of next-generation sensing devices and beyond. Here, we report the use of centimeter-sized simple wet fabric pieces for electrical power generation, by deploying the interplay of a spontaneously induced ionic motion across fabric channels due to capillary action and simultaneous water evaporation by drawing thermal energy from the ambient. Unlike other reported devices with similar functionalities, our arrangement does not necessitate any input mechanical energy or complex topographical structures to be embedded in the substrate. A single device is capable of generating a sustainable open circuit potential up to ~700 mV. This suffices establishing an inherent capability of functionalizing self-power electronic devices, and also to be potentially harnessed for enhanced power generation with feasible upscaling. In the milieu of global warming and energy crisis, frugal yet sustainable and renewable energy resources are critical to the advancement of human civilization By introducing fabrication of simply-designed channels on textile pieces for achieving guided transportation of saline water and drawing analogies of the later with evaporative transport across the parts of a living plant, here we demonstrate an extremely frugal, simple and viable approach of harvesting electrical power using cellulose-based fiber cloth. In sharp contrast to other reported devices deploying specially-structured and delicately-fabricated substrates towards achieving this feat A single prototype fabric channel (FC) harvester (with stem width of 4 cm, stem length of 3 cm and leaf area of 7 cm by 7 cm) shows the ability to generate a maximum open circuit potential of ~700 mV. Featuring these functionalities, the device can be exploited to electrically functionalize paper-or fabric-based rapid kits for on-spot diagnostics of diseases in resource-limited settings. Sodium chloride, NaCl (>99% purity) was purchased from Merk Life Science Pvt. Ltd. Fabric cloth (white color) of ~95% cotton was purchased from local garment shop. Copper sheet of ~300 μm thickness (>98%), plastic straw was purchased from local market. All the electrolyte solutions are prepared by dissolving the particular analyte at various concentrations in DI water (Millipore India, 18.2MΩ-cm). FCs are prepared from a piece of commercial wearable fiber cloth, where those are cut to the required channel design using scissors. FC has three segments such as root, stem and leaf (Fig. The surface morphology of fabric cloth, structures of the fiber, pore size and distributions are characterized by Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope, FESEM (JEOL, Model: JSM-7800 F). The electrical impedance of FC in the presence of 1 mM NaCl solution is measured using Potentiostat (GAMRY, Reference 600). Zeta-potential is measured using Electrokinetic analyzer for solid surface (Anton Paar GmbH, Model: SurPASS 3). As the liquid imbibes through the porous and tortuous network of the cellulose fibers, an electrical potential is induced between two copper electrodes which gradually rises, and thereafter reaches a maximum value followed by a steady state upon absolute saturation of leaf area, L A . The ions (such as Na + , Cl -, H + and OH -) in the electrolyte solution (1 mM NaCl) creates an interfacial charge layer (also known as electrical double layer; EDL) upon interaction with negatively charged free surface groups (such as -COOH, -OH) of cellulose fabrics We have performed sets of comprehensive experiments in order to understand the effect of FC dimensions V is the capacitor charging voltage and c t is the capacitor charging time. We observed that output P for all these three sets decreases with increase in s L (Supplementary Fig. respectively. The bigger leaf area corresponds to a larger transpiration surface which essentially promotes the evaporation rate of water, resulting in a faster ion migration, and thereby induces a higher output power. of ~580-700 mV (Fig. In order to analyze the role of temperature and associated evaporative flux on device performance, we perform a day-night cyclic test which consists of an uninterrupted measurement for 3 days (Fig. On the other hand, to appreciate the performance of the device for long-term usages, and hence to determine the robustness of the device, we conduct an experiment (exposed to day-light only) with three different channels, subjected to three different conditions for more than 30 days' (Fig. To summarize, we have shown that water evaporation from a centimeter-sized piece of wet cloth containing frugally-cut fabric channels can generate electrical power. Drawing analogies with evaporative transport in living plants and harnessing the consequent preferential migration of ions towards developing an electrical potential as mediated by capillary action, we have demonstrated that ordinary cellulose-based wet textile, may be capable enough for achieving this remarkable feat. As compared to previously reported methods of energy harvesting from complex resources, the electricity generation occurs in natural ambience, directly converting the abundantly available thermal energy into electrical power. Further, in contrast to classical streaming potential generated by an applied pressure gradient or other external pumping resources, here the intrinsic surface energy of the fabric is used to drive the ionic current. Most our method paves the way of deploying regular fabric pieces as the sources of energy, with no special topographical manipulation of the cloth surface being demanded. Thus, the device does not necessitate any extensive fabrication protocol, unlike some recently reported evaporation driven energy harvesting devices. Finally, in a hot and dry environment, the natural evaporative transport gets spontaneously enhanced, so that the flow-induced electrical potential can be maximized. The device, thus, may turn out to be extremely effective in geographically warm and dry regions of the earth. Our results reveal that a single fabric channel can stably deliver a potential of ~700 mV in ambient conditions. This eventually culminates into a utilitarian paradigm of low-cost power harvesting in extreme rural settings. sat V (Fig.