Here, we propose a method to determine the thickness of the most common transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) placed on the surface of transparent stamps, used for the deterministic placement of two-dimensional materials, by analyzing the red, green and blue channels of transmission-mode optical microscopy images of the samples. In particular, the blue channel transmittance shows a large and monotonic thickness dependence, making it a very convenient probe of the flake thickness. The method proved to be robust given the small flake-to-flake variation and the insensitivity to doping changes of MoS2. We also tested the method for MoSe2, WS2 and WSe2. These results provide a reference guide to identify the number of layers of this family of materials on transparent substrates only using optical microscopy. Since the isolation of graphene in 2004 Here, we demonstrate that the quantitative analysis of transmission optical mode images of TMDC flakes on the surface of transparent polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamps is a reliable method to accurately determine their thickness. We compare the results of the quantitative analysis of the transmission mode optical images with results obtained via micro-reflectance spectroscopy Figure MoS2 samples were prepared out of a bulk natural molybdenite crystal (Moly Hill mine, Quebec, Canada). MoSe2 and WSe2 samples were prepared out of bulk synthetic crystals grown by physical vapour transport method (provided by Prof. Rudolf Bratschitsch). WS2 samples were prepared out of a bulk synthetic crystal grown by physical vapour transport method at Tennessee Crystal Center. The Fe-doped, Ni-doped, Nb-doped and Co-doped MoS2 crystals were grown following the protocols described in Refs. The transparent stamp substrate used in this work is a commercially available polydimethylsiloxane-based substrate manufactured by Gel-Pak® (Gel-Film® WF X4 6.0 mil). The TMDC flakes are exfoliated from the bulk crystals and transferred onto the surface of the Gel-Film stamp with a Nitto 224SPV adhesive tape. Optical microscopy images have been acquired with three different upright metallurgical microscopes, an AM Scope, a Motic BA MET310-T and a Nikon Eclipse CI, obtaining identical results. The transmission mode images have been acquired with an achromat condenser lens (N.A. 0.85) that ensures Köhler illumination, yielding to a homogeneous illumination spot of approximately 4 mm 2 on the sample. The light was collected with a 50x magnification plan achromatic objective (NA 0.55). Two different digital cameras were tested during this work, an AM Scope mu1803 camera with 18 megapixels and a Canon EOS 1200D, also providing identical results. The quantitative analysis of the transmittance of the flakes and the rippling wavelength has been carried out using Gwyddion® and ImageJ software. In the main text we focused on the analysis of the transmittance of flakes 1L to 4L thick because we had plenty of statistics in that thickness range and because we used complementary techniques like Raman spectroscopy, photoluminescence and micro-reflectance/transmittance to double-check the assessed number of layers. The uncertainty of the number of layers assessment done by those techniques increases substantially for flakes thicker than 4-5 layers. Figure 