We compute and compare even-and odd-parity superconducting order parameters of strontium ruthenate (Sr2RuO4) in the limit of weak interactions, resulting from a fully microscopic threedimensional model including spin-orbit coupling. We find that odd-parity helical and even-parity dwave order are favored for smaller and larger values of the Hund's coupling parameter J, respectively. Both orders are found compatible with specific heat data and the recently-reported nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) Knight shift drop [A. Pustogow et al. Nature 574, 72 (2019)]. The chiral p-wave order, numerically very competitive with helical order, sharply conflicts with the NMR experiment. Superconductivity was discovered in the layered perovskite strontium ruthenate, Sr 2 RuO 4 (SRO), about 25 years ago 1 . Muon spin relaxation and Kerr effect experiments indicated time-reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB) in the superconducting phase 2,3 . The accompanied absence of a drop in the spin susceptibility However, a series of key experiments conflict with the above interpretation. The linear temperature dependence of specific heat Most studies so far have used a two-dimensional (2D) model, taking advantage of the quasi-2D nature of the dispersion relation of the relevant bands. However, the small corrugation of the cylindrical Fermi surfaces is deceptive, and actually hides a non-trivial k z dependence of the orbital content of the bands due to SOC, whose effect was shown to be three-dimensional (3D) We propose an effective three-band three-dimensional model with on-site interaction, and we calculate the superconducting order parameter in the weak-coupling limit. As a function of the ratio of the Hund's coupling J to the Hubbard interaction strength U we find a transition at J/U ≈ 0.15 from an odd-parity helical phase with accidental (near-)nodes to an even-parity phase with symmetry-imposed vertical line nodes, both of which are compatible with several key experiments, but are not compatible with the observation of TRSB. This will be commented on in the Conclusions. The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we describe the effective three-dimensional tight-binding model considered in this work. In Section III we outline the weak-coupling approach used to numerically determine the superconducting order parameter. The main results are presented in Section IV, where we provide detailed calculations of -and compare results with -two key experimental probes: the specific heat (Section IV B) and the NMR Knight shift (Section IV C). We conclude and discuss future prospects in Section V. In SRO, three bands cross the Fermi energy and form quasi-two-dimensional Fermi surfaces, commonly denoted α, β, and γ (2) and ψ s (k) = [c As (k), c Bs (k), c C s(k)] T . We here used the shorthand notation A = xz, B = yz, C = xy, s = -s, and s denotes spin (s = +1 is understood as ↑ and s = -1 means ↓). The annihilation operator for an electron with wavevector k and spin s on Ru orbital 4d a is denoted by c as (k). The matrix elements ε ab (k) account for intraand inter-orbital hopping, both in-and out-of-plane, and η sets the SOC amplitude. A priori we retain terms up to three sites apart in-plane and leading order terms, including inter-orbital terms, out-of-plane: To relate the above terms to Eq. (2) we set All terms in this model respect the crystal symmetries; they preserve inversion and time-reversal symmetry A. Band structure fit with Monte Carlo sampling Within the 19-dimensional parameter space we seek the set {t} that globally minimizes the quantity where μ = α, β, γ is the band index, ξ μ (u μ C ) is the band energy (orbital content C = xy, as given by the eigenvector components of H s=+1 ) of the model in Eq. (2). Similarly, ξμ (ũ μ C ) is the band energy (orbital content) of the model of Ref. 26, which is based on a tight-binding fit from spin-resolved angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) data. Finally, w k ( wk ) are chosen energy (orbital) weights. For the q μ 's we choose the three in-plane directions θ = 0, π/6, π/4 for the three k z cuts 0, π, 2π. The hopping amplitudes were obtained by fitting the dispersion and orbital content of the 17-band model of Ref. 26 using Monte Carlo (MC) sampling, see Fig. The orbital weights wq were fixed to be comparatively smaller than the energy weights w k . The optimal tight-binding parameters are summarized in Tables The projection of the Coulomb interaction on the onsite t 2g orbitals is given by where i is the lattice site, a is the orbital index, and n ias = c † ias c ias is the density operator. We assume that the phenomenological parameters satisfy U = U -2J and J = J 37 . Since we will consider the weak-coupling limit in the following, this leaves the single parameter J/U characterizing the interaction. We base our analysis on the weak-coupling scheme for repulsive Hubbard models, introduced and developed in Refs. 36, 38-50. We first diagonalize H 0 and index the eigenstates by a band index μ = α, β, γ and a pseudospin index, which we mostly keep implicit below. In this basis, the linearized gap equation reads where S ν is the Fermi surface of band ν, with |S ν | the corresponding Fermi surface area, and g the dimensionless matrix Here, Γ is the two-particle interaction vertex (see Ref. 36 for details) at leading (second) order, is the density of states, and v-1 μ = Sμ dk |Sμ| v μ (k) -1 . Approaching the weak-coupling limit U/t → 0 asymptotically, an eigenfunction φ of the Eq. 11 corresponding to a negative eigenvalue λ yields the superconducting gap below the critical temperature T c ∼ W e -1/|λ| , where W is the bare bandwidth. Since we have chosen a pseudo-spin basis which is consistent with the tetragonal point group, each eigenvector φ belongs to one of its ten irreducible representations D 4h where s and s are pseudo-spin indices. Only the oddparity E u and even-parity E g representations are twodimensional and permit TRSB order without the need of fine tuning model parameters. The Pauli principle assures that odd-parity (respectively, even parity) solutions correspond to pseudo-spin . Even-parity representations (subscript g) are described by a scalar (d0) order parameter, while odd-parity (subscript u) order parameters are described by a vector (d); see Eq. ( Order parameter triplets (respectively, singlets). One should, however, keep in mind that a Zeeman field, as considered in Sec. IV C, couples to the physical spin, and not the pseudo-spin, which means that the behavior of the magnetic susceptibility cannot be deduced from the parity of the order parameter alone, and always requires a numerical calculation. The method outlined above is valid in the limit of weak interactions. One might reasonably object that this limit is not strictly satisfied in the case of SRO (and possibly other real materials) controlled approximation, provides helpful guidance for future studies. For a repulsive interaction, there is no superconducting instability at first order 58 . At second order, which we limit ourselves to in the calculation presented in the main text, the vertex we calculate is described in depth in Refs. 36, 46, and 48. The leading eigenvalues in each irreducible representation are displayed as a function of J/U in Fig. The results presented here were obtained by discretization of the Fermi surfaces, using 3318 k-points for each of the three Fermi sheets shown in Figs. We focus first on the odd-parity helical phase realized for J/U < 0.15. The magnitude of the helical order parameter is displayed in Figs. 4 (a) -4 (c). Deep vertical minima, as first predicted in two dimensions In three dimensions, the possibility of an E g order parameter with a horizontal line node at k z = 0 emerges The eigenvector calculated at weak coupling, φ μ (k), is related to the order parameter via Eq. ( where γ ≈ 0.5772 is Euler's constant, and where we introduced the average For a uniform gap, the average in Eq. ( where , and where the average here is evaluated as In Fig. Since both leading order parameters exhibit nodal behavior in practice, we turn to a different probe of the superconducting order: the spin susceptibility, as measured by the NMR Knight shift We consider the normal state Hamiltonian with Zeeman terms when an external magnetic field is applied, where H 0 is here the normal state Hamiltonian in the absence of a magnetic field (Eq. ( Here, ε ab (k) are the single-particle orbital terms, σ a is the a'th Pauli matrix, μ B is the Bohr magneton (the vacuum permeability was fixed to μ 0 = 1), abc is the Levi-Civita symbol, and a, b, c run over orbitals xz, yz, xy (A, B, C, respectively). The matrix U (k) is defined to diagonalize the matrix H 0 (k) + H S + H L , where The (six) Fermi surfaces are defined by ξ μσ (k) = 0 for μ = α, β, γ and σ = +, -. In the absence of a magnetic field the two energies ξ μ± (k) become degenerate due to restored time-reversal symmetry. The matrix U (k) and the energies ξ μσ (k) contain all information needed to calculate the magnetization in the normal state, as defined below. The transformation between orbitals/spins (a, s) and bands/pseudo-spins (μ, σ) is given by the components of U (k): We define the magnetization (with the magnetic field and the measured response along direction i = x, y, z) as Using Eq. ( In the superconducting phase we add superconducting terms at orbital level The electron operators in orbital and spin basis are now expressed as linear combinations of their particle (u's) and hole (v's) constituents, In turn, this leads to the magnetization matrix elements Note that due to particle-hole symmetry the two terms of Eq. ( where ∆ μ σ1σ2 (k) is the order parameter in band and pseudospin basis, and where u μσ as (k) are eigenvector components of H 0 (k) (i.e. in the absence of a magnetic field, crucially with the same gauge choice as in the weakcoupling calculation). We use the spin susceptibility normalized by its normal value as a proxy for the Knight shift in the superconducting state, where the subscripts refer to the normal state value, ∆ indicates a small increment in the external magnetic field in the linear response regime, and χ ii is a diagonal element of the magnetic susceptibility tensor. In the numerical evaluation of the momentum integral of Eq. ( Recently, the experimental results of Ref. 20 were reproduced by Ref. 66, where the temperature dependence of the Knight shift was also measured. Values of K x (T ) and K z (T ) for representative order parameters are presented in Fig. Both the d-wave and helical orders found in this calculation have vertical (near-)nodes, and seem compati-ble with specific heat data and recent Knight shift measurements An important outstanding aspect requiring further assessment, both theoretically and experimentally, is how to unify evidence of TRSB with either helical or evenparity order 