Analysis of microscope images is a tedious work which requires patience and time, usually done manually by the microscopist after data collection. The results obtained in such a way might be biased by the human who performed the analysis. Here we introduce an approach of automatic image analysis, which is based on locally applied Fourier Transform and Machine Learning methods. In this approach, a whole image is scanned by a local moving window with defined size and the 2D Fourier Transform is calculated for each window. Then, all the Local Fourier Transforms are fed into Machine Learning processing. Firstly, a number of components in the data is estimated from Principal Component Analysis (PCA) Scree Plot performed on the data. Secondly, the data are decomposed blindly by Non-Negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) into interpretable spatial maps (loadings) and corresponding Fourier Transforms (factors). As a result, the microscopic image is analyzed and the features on the image are automatically discovered, based on the local changes in Fourier Transform, without human bias. The user selects only a size and movement of the scanning local window which defines the final analysis resolution. This automatic approach was successfully applied to analysis of various microscopic images with and without local periodicity i.e. atomically resolved High Angle Annular Dark Field (HAADF) Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy (STEM) image of Au nanoisland of fcc and Au hcp phases, Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM) image of Au-induced reconstruction on Ge(001) surface, Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) image of metallic nanoclusters grown on GaSb surface, and Fluorescence microscopy image of HeLa cell line of cervical cancer. The proposed approach could be used to automatically analyze the local structure of microscopic images within a time of about a minute for a single image on a modern desktop/notebook computer and it is freely available as a Python analysis notebook and Python program for batch processing. Nowadays, due to digital data acquisition and storage, a huge amount of data is collected during microscopic imaging in the form of digital images from a single sample. These images are later analyzed by the microscopist to extract the information about a local structure of the measured samples. The analysis requires practice and patience and it is usually tedious work for microscopist which requires a lot of time. The results of the analysis might be biased by the human who performs the analysis by introducing hardly controllable systematic effects in the final results. So far, other approaches were developed to automate the analysis of local structures on microscopic images and usually they are specialized in a particular image type. For identification of local periodic structures in biological samples plug-ins for ImageJ/FIJI They can be used for analysis of preferred orientation and isotropy properties of structures present on an image. The High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy (HRTEM) images could be analyzed by Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) to determine a local displacement and strain fields Here, we present a method based on a local moving window Fourier Transform and Machine Learning blind decomposition of the data via Non-Negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) The idea of the presented method is graphically shown in Fig. 1 First, the microscopic image in form of gray scale tiff file or color png, jpg, or bmp file is read by the program as the Numpy array The computed ROIs are multiplied by the Hanning windows function. Thus, after this step, the data consist of two spatial dimensions X, Y in real space, as defined by the image, and corresponding two dimensions in reciprocal space K X , K Y , as defined by 2D Power Spectrum for each local window. The output of this step is presented in Fig. Here we used the implementation from Scikit-Learn library From the PCA Scree Plot (portion of variance vs. component number) by identifying the inflection point (a point at which a change in curvature occurs) the number of components in the data is found, i.e., the components which exhibit significantly higher variance, see Fig. realize dimensionality reduction and unmixing of the 4D data The proposed approach was successfully applied to various types of microscopic images with well known and defined local features. It was tested on images with a local periodicity present, like atomic columns in HAADF STEM, or reconstruction domains in STM. This approach is also relevant to analyzes of images without a local periodicity present, like surface features in SEM or fibers like structure in Fluorescence microscopy. As the first example of application of the presented method, an analyses of atomically resolved HAADF STEM image of Au nanoisland grown on reconstructed Ge(001) surface will be shown (see Fig. The next studied example is a Scanning Tunneling Microscopy image of the Au-induced c(8 × 2) reconstructed Ge(001) surface. A cleaning procedure for the Ge(001) surface, which proceeds in UHV conditions by ion-beam sputtering and annealing, results in atomically flat terraces of isotropic c(4 × 2) reconstruction. On this substrate surface, after annealing of deposited thin Au layer, domain-like c(8 × 2) reconstruction appears in a form of atomic Au-induced chains. These 1D chains assembled on adjacent terraces are rotated by 90 deg. with respect to each other due to the reconstruction of the initial substrate surface Another example is Scanning Electron Microscopy image of Au-rich morphology resulted from the temperature induced self-assembly process of 2 ML of Au deposited on clean GaSb(001) surface. The cleaning procedure of GaSb(001) surface consist of cycles of ion-sputtering and annealing performed in the UHV conditions. In the case of compound samples, here GaSb, this cleaning procedure influences the surface stoichiometry due to preferential sputtering of Sb and leads to enrichment of the clean surface in gallium The last example is a Multi-photon fluorescence microscopy image of cultured HeLa cell line Here, once more, the features on the image and their properties as derived from FFT NMF factors (orientation, characteristic spacing) are automatically discovered without any external input within a time of about a minute. The presented analysis approach could be also successfully applied to other than microscopic images like photography or a painting, to analyze local features on them. For examples see Appendix A Supporting Information page 4-9. For all above analysis we used default program parameters with elemensize = 128 pixels (moving window size), the choice of elemensize defines not only the resolution but also the sensitivity scale of the To understand this lets consider example of the atomically resolved image, which consists of atomic structure of some crystalline material. The atomic structure consists of building blocks i.e. unit cells, which by translation form crystalline material. If one selects here the elementsize in the order of the unit cell size, then our local eye will see the crystalline structure when moved over the image. But when we select the elementsize smaller than the unit cell size, then our local eye which moves over the image will never see the crystalline structure. The same happens when elementsize is very big, then our local eye will no longer see the local unit cell variations from one place to another only a global view. The selection of elementsize defines the local sensitivity scale of the performed analysis and is the major source of the analysis error, since wrong selection of it will result in the analysis which will lack some image local feature detection. To address this problem the user is advised to check how the size of elementsize influences the number of PCA components. Example of such check is presented in Fig. We have presented approach of an automatic analysis of microscopic images based on moving local window FFT. This approach is sensitive to the local features of the image like symmetry, orientation, characteristic spacing. The generated 4D data set of local FFT's is later decomposed blindly using Machine Learning approach Non-Negative Matrix Factorization (NMF), where number of decomposition components is obtained by the user from previously applied PCA Scree Plot analysis. Our method successfully analyzed different microscopic images with and without periodicity present. As it was shown it was successfully applied to the atomically resolved HAADF STEM image, STM image, SEM image and Fluorescence image. All the features on the analyzed images were automatically discovered and later characterized by their Fourier Transform. Additionally, the automatic features discovery by our method has an advantage that the obtained results are not biased by the microscopist which performs the analysis. The program treats each image in the same way i.e. same bias. We showed that the approach could be also applied to other than microscopic images like photography or a painting. It is also worth to notice, that the analysis of each image with a typical size of ∼2000 × 2000 pixels with default parameters takes about a minute on a standard desktop or notebook computer. This gives a possibility to analyze big amount of image data, obtained during measurement sessions on the microscopes, fully automatically within a reasonable time and computing resources, saving precious microscopist time. Our approach is freely available as a Python analysis notebook and Python program for batch processing. The authors declare no competing financial interests. Fig. file report with images and two tiff files which store original loadings and factors data. The files can be read and further analyze by free software ImageJ/FIJI (via import Bio-Formats) B.R.Jany, et al. Micron 130 (2020) 102800