A novel class of photonic integrated circuits employs large-scale integration of combined beam splitters and waveguides loaded with phase actuators to provide complex linear processing functionalities that can be reconfigured dynamically. Here, we propose and experimentally demonstrate a thermally-actuated Dual-Drive Directional Coupler (DD-DC) design, integrated in a silicon nitride platform, functioning both as a standalone optical component providing arbitrary optical beam splitting and common phase as well as for its use in waveguide mesh arrangements. We analyze the experimental demonstration of the first integration of a triangular waveguide mesh arrangement, and the first DD-DC based arrangement along with an extended analysis of its performance and scalability. Microelectronics has become one of the pillars of digital economics in the early 21 st century. Current and emerging applications demand information processing at a faster speed and bandwidth, exposing a potential physical limitation of electronic systems. The cooperative use of electronics and photonics is being studied and applied as an appealing solution to overcome future performance limits, leveraging on the best of two worlds for both digital and analog processing. Integrated photonics is the science and technology that enables the integration of a large number of waveguide elements and specific devices or performance blocks in order to enable optical signal processing on a chip. Traditionally, both industry and academia have mainly focused on the design and optimization of Application Specific Photonic Integrated Circuits (ASPICs) whereby all the stages involved in the development of a PIC are tailored to optimize the chip performance, power budget, electrical power consumption, and footprint Most of circuit designs for linear processing applications employ combinations of waveguide interconnections, beamsplitters, like directional couplers (DC), and phase actuators. The performance of each DC is highly dependent on its wavelength of operation, the waveguide geometry and the refractive indices of the materials In parallel, a paradigm shift in PIC design explores the development of a multifunctional programmable circuit, where a common integrated optical hardware configuration is programmed to implement a variety of functionalities that can be elaborated for basic or complex operations in many application fields The directional coupler is one of the most frequently employed basic building blocks present in any PIC. Usually, it is designed to operate as a beam splitter characterised by a desired fixed optical power splitting ratio K at a certain wavelength. The signal in one waveguide is completely transferred to a parallel waveguide after each periodic length Lc by a factor referred to as coupling constant к, which depends on the wavelength of operation, the waveguide geometry and the refractive indices of the materials The integration of a phase tuning mechanism in one of the arms enables the tuning of the effective index difference between the two waveguides, and therefore the resulting coupling coefficient. This capability can be used to provide a tunable splitting coefficient to the designed circuit as well as to compensate for fabrication variations. Standalone Tunable Directional Couplers (TDC) have been demonstrated in polymer materials In order to increase the capabilities of TDCs, the integration of a second phase shifter in the other waveguide provides a symmetric design in terms of the possible loss in each arm, as well as both, an independent beam splitting capability and an additional phase shifting capability by inducing a differential and common phase shift, respectively, at each arm For the characterization of the DD-DC, we designed a chip layout based on a deep-etched waveguide cross section of 1 μm width (w) and 300nm height to satisfy the single-mode propagation condition. This geometry has been widely employed in previous Multi-Project Wafer Runs The chip layout incorporates three layers: the optical waveguide, the metal layer and the thermal/optical isolation trench layer. It is to be noted that the isolation layer involves etching up to the bottom cladding layer, i.e. up to a depth of 1800 μm from the top cladding. The design incorporates the presence of DD-DCs as standalone couplers and tunable couplers in optical ring resonators (ORR) and in a triangular waveguide mesh arrangement of five TBU Even considering that only one phase shifter is actuated, some tuning effects can produce a strong spread effect which can lead to an induced and unwanted effective refractive index change in the neighbouring waveguide. In the case of thermal actuators, the heat can flow to the adjacent waveguide and modify its propagation conditions. This effect can be modelled by a thermal crosstalk coefficient (CT). Then, the difference between the phase alteration in an actuated waveguide with phase, ∆Φ1, and a passive waveguide with phase, ∆Φ2, can be expressed as: where, CT is in the range of 0 and 1. In this case, the proximity of the waveguides means that the value of CT is very large. Hence, in order to obtain a large phase difference between the waveguides, an even larger ∆T•L product is required. Increasing ∆T is limited by the properties of the metal layer used to fabricate the micro-heaters over the waveguides. This comes from the fact that increasing the electrical power fed to the resistive heater-element can lead to an irreversible change in the material and even result in its melting and breakdown The first group of three components are TDC1, TDC2 and TDC3. They are standalone DD-DCs with all ports accessible via edge-couplers. In order to compensate from fabrication variations and test the design tolerances, we have parametrized each coupler length to be: TDC1: Lco -30 μm, TDC2: Lco, TDC3: Lco +30 μm, all of them having separations of 1.7 μm between waveguides and 2.5 μm between micro-heaters. Using this combination of gap and coupling length, theoretically, we achieve a 1% uniformity of the coupling coefficient, across 18 nm. Fig. Once fabricated, we characterized the components with both a conventional scheme involving a tunable laser and a synchronized optical spectrum analyser (OSA) as well as with a broadband amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) light source. The optical coupling was implemented using both lensed objectives and lensed fibers. In both schemes, we measured edge coupling losses to be within a range of 3 dB/facet with a variability of ±1 dB. In regard to the electrical driving of the thermal actuators we probed the DC pads of each heater and employed a high precision Keithley current source. Until and unless specified, the measurements are single drive, i.e. only one heater is activated at a time. In Fig. From the measurements, we can see that some of the DD-DC shown a non-ideal behaviour with CTopt below 15 dB in either cross or bar. We can see that this behaviour is present in more than the 50% of the measured TDCs, independently of the coupling length. This results from low fabrication tolerance of the DCs. In addition, all the CTbar(dB) could be increased if we do not limit the maximum applicable current to 40 mA. However, there was a high-risk of achieving a breaking point when driving the heater with larger electrical currents. The DD-DC can be integrated in a wide variety of PICs requiring both, an arbitrary beam-splitting and a phase adjustment. For example, their integration in an optical ring resonator enables the possibility of modifying the notch position and the extinction ratio independently. In these designs, we have employed the same waveguide separation of 1.7 μm, distance between heaters of 2.5 μm and a coupling length of Lco + ∆L with length variations (∆L) equal to: -100, -50, 0, 50 μm. These values have been chosen in order to account for the coupling length variation with changes in the waveguide geometry. For these lengths we created a replica with a larger distance between heaters of 3μm, resulting in a total of 8 optical ring resonators. Coupling length has been estimated to vary between ± 100 μm for waveguides with width variations of ± 20 nm. Figure Fig. Experiments, as a whole, determine that once fixed to a targeted ER by driving one of the phase shifters, we can drive both heaters with an additional common power in both actuators to set the notch position without seriously compromising the set ER value. For these measurements, we employed a tunable laser and a synchronized OSA featuring a 1 pm resolution. We measured 10 structures obtaining similar trends and behaviours. Additionally, we have explored the effects of including a thermal isolation in the form of an air trench between the two adjacent waveguides. For this purpose, we designed an additional set of ORRs with length variations of: 1000, 1200, 1400 and 1600 μm. Figure A novel class of programmable photonic ICs employs a massive interconnection of beamsplitters and phase shifter elements to produce multiport interferometric patterns. These arrangements have been proposed based on the replication of Tunable Basic Units (TBU) and their interconnection in a feedforward topology Figure In this simple structure we can program each TBU to build up delay lines (by setting the TBU to cross or bar) and beam splitters of any arbitrary splitting ratio. In addition, a common phase term can be locally added to the outputs of each TBU, as we demonstrated in the previous section. With all these functions, one can discretize conventional PICs into TBU primitives. First, we characterize all the TBU responses by using the mesh characterization protocol recently proposed Figure The experimental work performed in this paper confirms the behavior of the DD-DC as a 2x2 optical component that enables a tunable splitting ratio and a common phase shift at the outputs. In the experimental results covered in the paper, we measured an unexpected non-symmetrical behaviour between the actuation of the phase shifters. Going deeper into the theoretical framework, directional couplers have been modelled by using coupledmode equations. These analyses on passive designs have been extended to account for single-drive and for differential modulation schemes and the possibility of altering the propagation conditions of each arm in a differential way However, the propagation coefficient modification of each waveguide has a direct impact on the coupling factor between the two waveguides (κ10, κ01 ) The proposed architecture can find applications in any PIC requiring reconfigurable beamsplitting and phase shifting. Fig. The very-large integration density required in future field-programmable photonic integrated circuits demands the need for optimization of the basic programmable units. Here, we have proposed a new component based on adding two extra phase actuators to the conventional directional coupler. Taking advantage of the thermo-optic effect, we experimentally demonstrate that it is possible to set, independently, the coupling ratio and an overall phase increment that can find applications in programming conventional photonic integrated circuits and in waveguide mesh arrangements. In the case of the latter, they are proposed as a possible option to overcome insertion losses and reduce internal reflections. Future work is required to increase the fabrication tolerances.