This paper describes a new kind of acoustic metasurface with multiply resonant units, which have previously been used to induce multiple resonances and effectively produce negative mass density and bulk/shear moduli. The proposed acoustic metasurface can be constructed using real materials and does not rely on an ideal rigid material. Therefore, it can work well in a water background. The thickness of the acoustic metasurface is about two orders of magnitude smaller than the acoustic wavelength in water. The design of a unit group is proposed to avoid the phase discretization becoming too fine in such a long-wavelength condition. We demonstrate that the proposed acoustic metasurface achieves good performance in anomalous reflection, focusing, and carpet cloaking. Acoustic metasurfaces (AMs) The multiple resonators In this paper, the multiply resonant unit we use are the same as that introduced in Ref. 6. The resonator contains a multi-mass resonant unit and can induce quadrupolar resonance, as well as monopolar and dipolar resonance. The multiply resonant units induce a large bandgap for dipolar resonance and two negative bands (inside the bandgap), which are caused by double-negative metamaterials We consider the unit cell shown in Fig. A design for a planar AM lens As shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have proposed a new kind of AM with multiply resonant units. The AM is constructed from real materials and does not rely on an ideal rigid material. Hence, the proposed AM works well in a water background. Although rigid barriers are set between the units, these are not strictly necessary and are only used to simplify the design. In real applications, removing the rigid barriers would not affect the performance of the AM, although the phase design would be more complicated. The thickness of the AM is about two orders of magnitude smaller than the wavelength in water. In the case of such long wavelength conditions, the AM can be homogenized. This would bring novel research perspectives. We have designed the unit groups so as to avoid the phase discretization becoming too fine. Finally, anomalous reflection, focusing, and carpet cloaking were demonstrated through numerical simulations. 