The Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) technique is a way of making supra-molecular assembly in ultrathin films with a controlled layered structure and crystal parameter, which have many envisioned technological applications for optical and molecular electronic devices as well as signal processing and transformation. Probably LB technique is the best method to manipulate materials at molecular level and provides a scope to realize the molecular electronics in reality. Thin films with carefully designed structures and properties have attracted a great deal of interest in recent years In this paper an overview of the LB technique and its application potential have been reviewed. The Langmuir -Blodgett (LB) technique offers the possibility to obtain highly ordered well defined and controlled mono / multilayers and realizes the construction of ultimate molecular architectures which allow the study of physical phenomenon on a molecular level. Typically LB compatible materials are amphiphilic molecules having two distinct regions, which are a hydrophilic head group (water loving) and a hydrophobic tail group (water hating) as shown in figure Initially minute amount (few drops) of dilute solution of amphiphilic materials dissolved in water immiscible solvent such as chloroform are spread onto the air-water interface on the trough of the LB instrument. The molecules rapidly spread all over the available surface area. After solvent evaporation almost one molecule thick layer of the amphiphile remained at the interface, with the head groups immersed in the water and the tail group lying outside (figure Idea about the surface behaviour as well as stability of the floating monolayer has been estimated by recording surface tension. Presence of molecules at air -water interface affects the liquid surface tension. In the gaseous state, the monolayer has relatively little effect on the surface tension. As the available surface area of the monolayer is reduced by a computer controlled barrier minutely, the intermolecular distance decreases and the surface tension decrease further. The amphiphilic molecules start to interact with each other. The force exerted by the film per unit length corresponds to a two dimensional analogue of a pressure, called surface pressure (π). Typically, this surface pressure (π) is equal to the decrease in surface tension of air -water interface due to the presence of monomolecular film and can be expressed as: where 0  is the surface tension of the empty air -water interface and  the surface tension of the same in the presence of a monolayer. During the compression of the monolayer, self organization of the molecules occur and the monolayer undergoes several phase changes analogous to the three dimensional gaseous, liquid and solid states. In solid state the molecules finally form a compact and well ordered two dimensional monolayer at air -water interface (figure It must be mention this context that the shape of the isotherm greatly depends on subphase temperature, pH, hydrocarbon chain length and the head group. Depending on these factors different transition phases can be observed The subphase composition:  pH of the subphase  Temperature of the subphase  Type / nature of materials A mono or multilayer film of the floating monolayer can be deposited onto solid support (often called substrate) at a desired constant surface pressure. There exists a number of different ways in which the interfacial monolayer can be transferred. In Langmuir-Blodgett technique For further details, the reader can refer to different related books and review papers. Of late Molecular electronics has been emerged as an important technology for the 21st century The interesting effects of oil on water were known to the ancients. However, the first attempt to place the subject on a scientific basis was made by Benjamin Franklin, in the eighteenth century However, the first detailed description of sequential monolayer transfer was given several years later by K. Blodgett The biomineral calcium oxalate monohydrate (COM) is a major component of urinary stones. An understanding of the processes that lead to COM precipitation in the urinary tract can lead to the prevention or treatment of urinary stone disease. LB technique has been used to prepare LB films of phospholipids to model domains in biological membranes for studies of COM precipitation and adhesion. From the studies in formation about how the chemical and organizational properties of the model membrane affect the formation of COM crystals at the membrane interface can be explored The most common application of LB films as the passive layers in several areas of commercial interest includes lithographic photoresist The most significant passive application of LB films could however be for the alignment of liquid crystals. The dipole energy of the underlying substrate mainly governs the alignment of liquid crystals. By tailoring the structure of LB it is possible to control the dipole energy and hence the orientation of liquid crystal. It has been shown that some liquid crystal molecule align spontaneously when sandwiched between two glass plates covered with a single layer of a polymer LB film  and depend on the thermal expansion coefficient of the substrate, indicating that there is a significant secondary contribution to the measured pyroelectric response Rectifying junctions are the basic elements of many electronic components. Rectifying junctions such as polymer p-n junction and schottky junction based on Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) films have been studied widely Experimental and theoretical confirmation of anion-induced dipole reversal in cationic dyes due to molecular rectification have been demonstrated 105 . There is a good review article by R. M. Metzger on the application of Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) films as unimolecular rectifier 106-107 . Another interesting application of the LB technique is the fabrication of thin films of copper phthalocyanine derivatves as field effect transistor (FET). It is well known that pthalocyanine derivatives are very promising organic semiconductor materials due to their chemical and thermal stability. Among phthalocyanine, copper phthalocyanine derivatives have been utilized as organic field effect transistors (OFETs). The FET performances of the LB films of has been demonstrated 112 . Organic field-effect transistors based on LB films of an extended porphyrin analogue -Cyclo [6]pyrrole and neutral long-chain TCNQ derivatives have also been reported Mobility (cm 2 V -1 s -1 ) Table Rare Earth Complexes have also been studied 119 . Solution processed Langmuir-Schäfer and cast thin films of poly (2,5-dioctyloxy-1,4-phenylene-alt-2,5-thienylene) were also investigated as transistor active layers 120 . The study of their field-effect properties evidences that no transistor behavior can be seen with a cast film channel material. This was not surprising considering the twisted conformation of the polymer backbone predicted by various theoretical studies. Strikingly, the Langmuir-Schäfer (LS) thin films exhibit a field-effect mobility of 5  10 -4 cm 2 /V.s, the highest attained so far with an alkoxy-substituted conjugated polymer. Extensive optical, morphological, and structural thin film characterizations support the attribution of the effect to the longer conjugation length achieved in the Langmuir-Schäfer (LS) deposited film, likely due to an improved backbone planarity. This study shows that a technologically appealing deposition procedure, such as the LS one, can be exploited to significantly improve the inherently poor field-effect properties of twisted conjugated backbones. This achievement could promote the exploitation for electronic, and possibly sensing, applications of the wealth of opportunities offered by the alkoxy substitution on the phenylene units for convenient tailoring of the phenylene-thienylene backbone with molecules of chemical and biological interest. Dielectric polymer, polyvenylphenol, was applied as the insulator to the device. Composite electrodes for supercapacitors were prepared via chemical polymerization 135 of pyrrole on the surface of a porous graphite fiber matrix 135 . Sensor is a device, which provides direct information about the chemical composition of its Therefore it is clear that LB technique already showed enormous potential towards both fundamental research and device application. However, main challenges are the development of new sensors and in the production of cheap, reproducible and reliable devices with adequate sensitivities and selectivity. Langmuir-Blodgett deposition technique is very simple but very powerful tool towards formation of nano dimensional ultrathin films with desired properties / architectures. Here each film is built from multiple monolayers. Accordingly the thickness and molecular arrangement is controllable at the molecular level. Using LB technique, it is possible to create complex yet precise artificial molecular arrays with predesigned physical and chemical properties. Already the potential of this versatile technique has been tested towards realization of optoelectronic devices. However, LB films have yet to be utilized in today's commercial products. The technique is still expected to be a vital part of future fabrication methods in molecular electronics. Therefore, when molecular electronic and bio-electronic devices will become available, LB films will definitely play a vital role in their realization. Hence, development of LB films for practical / commercial applications is a challenge, requiring an interdisciplinary outlook which neither balks at the physics involved in understanding assemblies of partially disordered and highly anisotropic molecules, nor at the cookery involved in making them. Although LB films cannot be adapted to all purposes, there are signs that with sufficient understanding, their behavior can be optimized for specific technological applications. Therefore it is highly appropriate to make a great stride in these important and promising areas of research, which can provide a conceptual understanding with wide opportunity of technological applications. Molecule orientation, lipid domain morphology, grain boundaries, microcollapsed region (lateral resolution of 0.1 μm). the world. The first international conference on Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) films was held in 1979 and since then the use of this technique is increasing among the scientists throughout the world working on various different field of research. Extensive studies on LB films are now being going on. Various review articles has been published time to time since the revival of the interest in research related to different aspects of LB films. Readers may go through the list of review article given in the following table for further information.