The strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC) and numerous crystal phases in few-layer transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) MX 2 (M=W, Mo, and X=Te, Se, S) has led to a variety of novel physics, such as Ising superconductivity and quantum spin Hall effect realized in monolayer 2H-and T d -MX 2 , respectively. Consecutive tailoring of the MX 2 structure from 2H to T d phase may realize the long-sought topological superconductivity in one material system by incorporating superconductivity and quantum spin Hall effect together. In this work, by combing Raman spectrum, X-ray photoelectron spectrum (XPS), scanning transmission electron microscopy imaging (STEM) as well as electrical transport measurements, we demonstrate that a consecutively structural phase transitions from T d to 1T' to 2H polytype can be realized as the Se-substitution concentration increases. More importantly, the Se-substitution has been found to notably enhance the superconductivity of the MoTe 2 thin film, which is interpreted as the introduction of the two-band superconductivity. The chemical constituent induced phase transition offers a new strategy to study the s +-superconductivity and the possible topological superconductivity as well as to develop phase-sensitive devices based on MX 2 materials. * 1 If the sample is a superconductor, R 0 is the normal state resistance right above T c , otherwise R 0 is the resistance at T=1.6 K. * 2 Mo, Se, Te represent the normalized peak area (I/S) in XPS data for calculating the element stoichiometry. The XPS atomic sensitivity factors (S) of Mo-3d, Se-3d and Te-3d 5/2 are 3.321, 0.853, and 5.705, respectively. Two-dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) have attracted extensive interests in the fields of condensed matter physics and material sciences in recent years To date, much effort has been devoted to realizing the 2H-to-1T' phase transition in MX 2 . The methods involve heating In this paper, we demonstrate a controlled strategy to fabricate specific phase in Se-substituted MoTe 2 thin films. We show that a series of MoSe x Te 2-x (with 0≤x≤1.3) samples with fully tunable chemical compositions and electrical properties can be synthesized by a facile CVD method. The structural characterizations including Raman spectrum, STEM, XPS and electrical transport measurements demonstrate that a transition from T d to 1T' phase occurs around x~0.8, and 1T' to 2H phase around x~1.1. More importantly, we find that the Se substitution has a significant enhancement effect on the superconductivity. With the Se content increased from x=0 to x=1.0, the superconducting transition temperature (T c ) shifts from 2.1 K to 3.6 K; and for x >1.0, the superconductivity is completely suppressed due to the structural phase transition from the metallic 1T' phase to the semiconducting 2H polytype. Growth of MoSe x Te 2-x thin films. Se-substituted MoTe 2 samples with nominal composition MoSe x Te 2-x (0≤x≤1.5) are synthesized by the molten-salt assisted chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method Aberration corrected annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy imaging (ADF-STEM) is applied to characterize the phase evolution of the as-grown MoSe x Te 2-x . We investigate representative MoSe x Te 2-x monolayers with triangular and rectangular shapes from Se-rich and Te-rich growth conditions, respectively. Figure Se-rich condition. The image shows hexagonal lattice pattern with discrete intensity distribution, similar to other ternary monolayer alloy in the 2H phase due to the prismatic trigonal lattice structure To assess the precise stoichiometry and the phase information, the as-synthesized MoSe x Te 2-x are further analyzed via X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Figure Furthermore, no appreciable thermal hysteresis was observed in the temperature-dependent sheet resistance R s (T) curves (Supplementary Figure where d is the dimensionality of a system and T 0 is a characteristic temperature. As shown in Supplementary Figure VRH transport in disordered MoSe x Te 2-x semiconductors. Furthermore, when all the Te atoms are replaced by Se (x=2), as displayed in Fig. increases almost 5 orders of magnitude from 63 Ω to 2.6 MΩ (Table More importantly, we find that the superconductivity can be substantially enhanced when partial Te is substituted by Se in MoTe 2 . Figure Superconductivity enhancement has been observed in Te-deficient where 0 is the residual resistivity and A is a constant. From Fig. where μ * is the repulsive screened Coulomb potential and is assigned a typical value of 0.1. , in Se-substituted MoTe 2 thin films has increased more than two-fold, which can qualitatively explain the enhancement of T c . However, it can not explain the Se content dependence of T c . On the other hand, the enhancement of T c has been recently observed in pressure-induced twoband superconductivity with the s +-pairing symmetry in bulk MoTe 2 In summary, we have shown an efficient strategy to tailor specific phase and tune the electrical properties of Se-substituted MoTe 2 thin film by CVD method. The Raman, XPS, STEM and transport measurements demonstrate that a sequence of phase evolution from T d to 1T' to 2H phase can be realized by tuning the Se concentration. More importantly, it is found that Se substitution can notably enhance the superconductivity from T c =0.1 K in bulk pristine MoTe 2 to 3.6 K in MoSeTe, which is probably due to the introduction of s +-superconducting order parameter. The Se substitution strategy provides a convenient and powerful way to tailor the structural and physical properties in MX 2 , paving the way for future phase-sensitive devices applications. Raman Characterization. Raman measurements with an excitation laser of 532 nm were performed using a WITEC alpha 300R Confocal Raman system. Before the characterization, the system was calibrated with the Raman peak of Si at 520 cm -1 . The laser power is less than 1 mW to avoid overheating of the samples. in Fig. 3, which arise from the Mo 3d 5/2 and Mo 3d 3/2 orbitals of the T d -MoTe 2 , consistent with previous reports , defined as the field where the resistivity drops to 0.5R ns , where R ns is the normal-state sheet resistance. From Fig.