Graphical probabilistic circuit models of stochastic computing are more powerful than the predominant deep learning models, but also have more demanding requirements. For example, they require "programmable stochasticity", e.g. generating two random binary bit streams with tunable amount of correlation between the corresponding bits in the two streams. Electronic implementation of such a system would call for several components leaving a large footprint on a chip and dissipating excessive amount of energy. Here, we show an elegant implementation with just two dipole-coupled magneto-tunneling junctions (MTJ), with magnetostrictive soft layers, fabricated on a piezoelectric film. The resistance states of the two MTJs (high or low) encode the bits in the two streams. The first MTJ is driven to a random resistance state via a current or voltage generating spin transfer torque and/or voltage controlled magnetic anisotropy, while the second MTJ's resistance state is determined solely by dipole coupling with the first. The effect of dipole coupling can be varied with local strain applied to the second MTJ with a local voltage (~ 0.2 V) and that varies the correlation between the resistance states of the two MTJs and hence between the bits in the two streams (from 0% to 100%). This paradigm can be extended to arbitrary number of bit streams. wo or more random binary bit streams with tunable amount of correlation between them are needed for many models of stochastic computing, graphical circuit models, computer vision and image processing applications Fig. The two binary bits (Bit A and Bit B) are encoded in the resistance states of the two MTJs -high resistance is bit 1 and low resistance bit 0. To generate a random Bit A, we apply a voltage across MTJ A which generates both voltage controlled magnetic anisotropy (VCMA) and also drives a spin polarized current through it, thereby generating spin transfer torque (STT). Depending on the magnitude of the applied voltage, we can generate different probability of switching the resistance of MTJ A as shown in ref. To generate the random Bit B that is controllably correlated with Bit A, we do not apply any voltage or current to MTJ B. Instead, we rely on the dipole coupling between the soft layers of MTJ A and MTJ B to set the resistance state of MTJ B, and hence the value of the Bit B, depending on the value of Bit A, thereby generating the conditional probability P(B|A). One would expect that dipole coupling would always make the magnetization of the soft layer of MTJ B become antiparallel to the magnetization of the soft layer of MTJ A, resulting in perfect (anti-) correlation between bits A and B, but this does not happen in practice. There is a shape anisotropy energy barrier within the soft layer of MTJ B, which will have to be overcome by dipole coupling to make its magnetization rotate from its initial orientation (if it was not initially antiparallel) to become antiparallel to that of the soft layer of MTJ A. If the energy barrier cannot be overcome, then bit B will remain in its previous state and not be anti-correlated with bit A. We elucidate this in Fig. Suppose the magnetization of the soft layer of MTJ B was initially at  = 0 0 (see Fig. In Fig. We have simulated the magneto-dynamics within the soft layers of both MTJ A and MTJ B in the presence of thermal noise by solving coupled stochastic Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (s-LLG) equations for the two soft layers. Both soft layers are made of Terfenol-D and have major axis = 100 nm, minor axis = 90 nm and thickness = 15 nm. The shape anisotropy energy barrier within each soft layer is 378 kT at room temperature. In the case of MTJ A, the bit state is determined primarily by the spin polarized current that flows through the MTJ when the voltage is applied across it, and not by voltage controlled magnetic anisotropy (VCMA). Hence, we have ignored VCMA effects in our simulation and accounted only for the spin polarized current injection. The s-LLG equation is where  is the Gilbert damping factor of Terfenol-D ( = 0.1), r is the center-to-center separation between the soft layers, We ignore magnetocrystalline anisotropy, assuming that the soft layers are amorphous. Since it is difficult to incorporate biaxial strain in the s-LLG equation, we approximate it as a uniaxial stress directed along the major axis of the elliptical soft layer (z-axis; see Fig. The voltage applied across MTJ A injects/extracts spin polarized carriers into its soft layer with their spins polarized in the z  direction and  is the spin polarization of the current, which we choose as 30%. In Equation ( where A is the value of bit A (either +1 or -1) and B is the value of bit B (also either +1 or -1). We use -1 instead of 0 to represent the logic complement of the binary bit 1. The angular brackets denote ensemble average. The ensemble averaging is carried out over 1000 switching trajectories generated in our simulator. In each switching trajectory, Bit A assumes one value (+1 or -1) and B also assumes one value (+1 or -1). If the two bits are anti-correlated, their product is -1, whereas if they are uncorrelated, the product is +1. Thus, the ensemble average C (correlation parameter) is a measure of the degree of correlation between bits A and B. C= -1 indicates perfect (100%) anticorrelation and C = +1 indicates no (0%) correlation. Any intermediate value indicates partial correlation. The switching trajectories are generated in the following manner. For MTJ A, we assume that the magnetization of its soft layer is initially pointing in the +z-direction. We then aply a voltage of appropriate polarity that results in passing a spin polarized current, with spin polarization in the -z-direction and magnitude varying between 30 and 40 mA (above the critical current for switching) and simulate the magneto-dynamics of the soft layer of MTJ A which yields its magnetization as a  over the 1000 switching trajectories to calculate the correlation parameter defined in Equation ( In Fig. There are also other interesting features in Fig. Another very interesting feature clearly observed at higher inter-MTJ separations (bottom panels in Fig. where d 31 is the piezoelectric coefficient of PMN-PT and Y is the Young's modulus of Terfenol-D. We will assume that all of the strain generated in the piezoelectric is transferred to the Terfenol-D soft layers. Using the values available in the literature for PMN-PT and Terfenol-D, d 31 = 1200 pm/V In this work, we have shown how to vary the correlation between corresponding bits in two random binary bit streams controllably, resulting in a tunable probability correlator. The correlation can be varied between 0% (no correlation) to 100% (perfect anti-correlation) by strain-engineering the effect of dipole coupling on the soft layer of the second MTJ with a voltage of only ~0.2 V, resulting in an energy dissipation of ~260 aJ. This is an energy-efficient paradigm. The effect of dipole coupling could also have been varied with a local magnetic field applied selectively on the second MTJ, or by driving a controlled amount of spin polarized current through the second MTJ, but these approaches are much more energy-inefficient than applying strain. It is also very difficult to generate a localized magnetic field that is confined to the second MTJ and does not infringe on the first. That is why strain is the preferred modality. A natural question to ask at this point is why the resistance state of the MTJ A is also not set by strain since it is more energy efficient than other modalities. If we apply super-critical stress to the soft layer of the MTJ A, then that will align its magnetization along its minor axis (see Fig. Note that the paradigm works for MTJ spacing spanning a fairly large range from 150 nm to 250 nm. Hence, extreme lithographic precision is not required since there is a relatively large tolerance. MTJs with spacing in this range are not difficult to fabricate. Bit streams with controlled amount of correlation between corresponding bits have applications in various areas of stochastic computing. While their traditional electronic implementation would require several components, here we have shown how they can be realized with just two dipole coupled magneto-tunneling junctions with magnetostrictive soft layers, fabricated on a piezoelectric film. This approach, which leverages coupled magneto-dynamics in two MTJs with strain-engineered dipole coupling effect in one of them, reduces device footprint, energy dissipation and cost.