This report investigates design enhancements of Fiber Optic Surface Plasmon Resonance (FO-SPR) biosensors with Gold and Silver metallic films. The effect of adding a Graphene coating on the sensitivity and detection accuracy of FO-SPR biosensors is studied. We also compare the results for the addition of five layers of Graphene on both Gold-based and Silver-based FO-SPR biosensors in order to determine the optimum sensor design. Our results indicate that the sensitivity of the biosensor increases when a Graphene coating is added, while the detection accuracy decreases. Results also demonstrate that the sensitivity due to adding Graphene sheets increases more for Silver-based biosensor when compared to Gold-based biosensors. This report is concerned with Fiber Optic Surface Plasmon Resonance (FO-SPR) biosensors which are label-free optical biosensors used to measure the concentration of a desired analyte in a sample. These biosensors have surged in popularity in recent years due to their high sensitivity, nano-size, light weight, simplistic design, adaptation to harsh environments, possibility of remote sensing, impossibility of electrocution, immunity to electromagnetic interference, resistance to corrosion, and need for minute sample quantities and conservation of the sample integrity and minimal invasiveness which are essential requirements in medical applications Silver-based FO-SPR sensors. Finally, conclusions are outlined in Section IV. The DA is the measure of the ability of the sensor to pinpoint the exact λres by calculating the depth of the dip in the power at the λres with respect to the width of the dip We follow the 4-layer model presented in Our investigations have shown that adding Graphene coating to a FO-SPR biosensor increases sensor sensitivity significantly but with the trade-off of decreasing the sensor's detection accuracy. These parameters predominantly improve for FO-SPR sensors based on Silver when compared to Gold. The work in this project is a continuation of the several previous contributions, which have been reported in the literature in various relevant technologies, systems, and their associated applications 