A type I superconductor expels a magnetic field from its interior to a surface layer of thickness λL, the London penetration depth. λL is a function of temperature, becoming smaller as the temperature decreases. Here we analyze the process of cooling (or heating) a type I superconductor in a magnetic field, with the system remaining always in the superconducting state. The conventional theory predicts that Joule heat is generated in this process, the amount of which depends on the rate at which the temperature changes. Assuming the final state of the superconductor is independent of history, as the conventional theory assumes, we show that this process violates the first and second laws of thermodynamics. We conclude that the conventional theory of superconductivity is internally inconsistent. Instead, we suggest that the alternative theory of hole superconductivity may be able to resolve this problem. After the discovery of the Meissner effect, it was concluded that the superconducting state of a simply connected body in the presence of a magnetic field lower than the critical field is a thermodynamic state of matter and not a metastable non-equilibrium state that depends on history, as was previously believed Figure We consider a long cylinder of radius R and height h, with R << h, in an applied uniform magnetic field H 0 parallel to its axis. Assume the cylinder is in the superconducting state, hence the magnetic field in the deep interior is zero. An azimuthal current circulates near its surface. From Ampere's law we have where j s is the current density and I is the total current. Taking one side of the contour in the deep interior and the other one outside the cylinder we obtain Critical magnetic field versus temperature for a type I superconductor. We will consider the process where a system evolves from point 1 to point 2 along the direction of the arrow. Assuming the current circulates within a layer of thickness λ L of the surface, with current density j s , the total current and current density are related by hence the current density is The London penetration depth varies with temperature, becoming smaller as the temperature decreases. From Eq. ( The current density is related to the superfluid density n s and the superfluid velocity v s by j s = n s e v s where A is the magnetic vector potential. For simplicity we ignore any difference between bare mass m e and effective mass so that with B = ∇ × A. From Ampere's law in differential form taking the curl on both sides and using Eq. ( so that the magnetic field and the supercurrent decay to zero exponentially in the interior over distance λ L , given in Eq. As the temperature is lowered, n s increases and λ L decreases keeping the product in Eq. ( ) 4 ) so the superfluid velocity decreases as the temperature is lowered and λ L decreases. The magnitude of the current density in terms of the magnetic field is given by We will also be interested in the mechanical angular momentum carried by the electrons in the supercurrent. The mechanical momentum density of electrons at position r is where j s ( r) is the current density at position r. Assuming the supercurrent circulates on the surface layer of thickness λ L and using Eqs. ( We consider the process shown in Fig. During this process, magnetic field is expelled, since initially it penetrates up to radius r 1 ∼ Rλ 1 and at the end only to radius r 2 ∼ Rλ 2 , as shown schematically in Fig. If the process occurs over a time t 0 Eq. ( The Faraday field acts on the superfluid electrons as and integrating both sides of Eq. ( which is precisely what Eq. ( The reason is, as the temperature is lowered and λ L decreases the number of superfluid electrons n s (T ) will increase, according to Eq. The theory of superconductivity has to explain the physical mechanisms by which these changes in momenta happen in the process of normal electrons condensing into the superconducting state. To the best of our knowledge this has never been discussed in the superconductivity literature. In refs Furthermore, we have to remember that at any given temperature there are both superfluid and normal electrons, of density n s and n n , with n s + n n = n constant in time, in a two-fluid description. Similarly within BCS theory there is the superfluid and Bogoliubov quasiparticles at finite temperature, we will call the latter 'normal electrons'. The Faraday electric field will impart clockwise momentum to these normal electrons, and this momentum will decay to zero through scattering with impurities or phonons. These are irreversible processes, that generate Joule heat and entropy. However, it should be possible to cool a thermodynamic system in a reversible way, without entropy generation. In the following sections we analyze the dynamics and the thermodynamics of these processes in detail and conclude that they cannot be understood within the conventional theory of superconductivity, and for that reason the conventional theory is incompatible with the laws of physics. We recall briefly the exact solution of the equilibrium electrodynamic equations for an infinite cylinder assuming cylindrical symmetry. From Eq. ( With boundary condition B(R) = H 0 the solution is where J 0 and J 1 are Bessel functions, related by J 1 (x) = -(∂/∂x)J 0 (x). They are given by the series expansions and for large imaginary argument by In the following we assume R >> λ L and consider all quantities derived from these equations to lowest order in (λ L /R) only, for simplicity. We don't think this affects our reasoning and conclusions. In any event, it is straightforward to extend the treatment to avoid this approximation. We consider a process where the temperature changes gradually so the system is always in equilibrium, between an initial time t = 0 and a final time t = t 0 . The London penetration depth is given by λ L (t), with λ L (0) = λ 1 , λ L (t 0 ) = λ 2 . The magnetic field is given by B(r, t) = H 0 e (r-R)/λL(t) ẑ (26) the magnetic vector potential by the Faraday electric field by the current density by the superfluid velocity by and the London penetration depth and superfluid density satisfy Note that, from Eqs. (28) and (30) in other words, the Faraday electric field causes the superfluid velocity to change (slow down) according to Newton's law, as one would expect. The total electronic angular momentum at time t due to superfluid electrons only is given by (we omit time dependence for brevity) (33) and we know from Eq. ( The second term in Eq. (34) then has positive sign, it increases the electronic angular momentum. It is given by (to lowest order in λ L /R) dL The term in square brackets is the volume of the surface layer of thickness λ L . What Eq. (36) says is that as electrons that are near the surface condense from the normal into the superconducting state, they 'spontaneously' acquire the speed v s (r) and the electronic angular momentum changes accordingly. Of course electrons in the interior also condense, but because they don't carry current they don't contribute to the change in angular momentum. Associated with these electronic angular momentum changes there are also corresponding changes in the angular momentum of the ions, i.e. the body as a whole, The first one, Eq. (38a), is easily understood. Just like the Faraday electric field transfers clockwise momentum to the electrons, it transfers equal in magnitude and opposite in direction (i.e. counterclockwise) momentum to the positive ions. The second one, Eq. (38b), is clockwise momentum transferred to the body when normal electrons near the surface condense into the superconducting state. The theoretical explanation of these processes has to explain the physical mechanism(s) that cause(s) normal electrons to change their angular momentum when they condense into the superconducting state, Eq. (36), and at the same time cause(s) the body to acquire the same angular momentum in opposite direction. These questions have not yet been discussed in the literature on conventional superconductivity. We hope this will be done soon. We don't believe it is possible to understand these processes within the conventional theory Within London theory we can think of the superconductor as a two-fluid model, a mixture of normal fluid and superfluid, with proportions that vary with temperature. The same is true within BCS theory, where the normal fluid is composed of Bogoliubov quasiparticles. The normal fluid will be subject to normal scattering processes. In the presence of an electric field, a normal current will be generated, and dissipation will occur. This is clearly illustrated by the behavior of superconductors with ac currents, as discussed e.g. in ref. The normal current flowing in counterclockwise direction induced by the electric field is given by with σ n the normal conductivity, which we can write as where τ is the Drude scattering time and where the normal electron density is given by with n s (t) given by Eq. (31), and n the superfluid density at zero temperature, given by The power dissipated per unit volume is with the electric field given by Eq. (28). Integrating Eq. (43) over the volume of the cylinder we find for the Joule heat dissipated per unit time We can write the normal state conductivity in the form Note that the total Joule heat dissipated, i.e. the time integral of Eq. (46), will depend on the speed of the process. For example, if we assume that ∂λ L /∂t is timeindependent, we have so the total Joule heat generated is proportional to the rate of change of the London penetration depth with time. Near the critical temperature, the London penetration depth varies extremely rapidly with temperature and it is clear that Eq. ( so we can write, in terms of T = T (t), and Eq. ( Equation ( where H c is the zero temperature critical field, and T 1 is a temperature close to T c : with δ 1 small. For the system at temperature T below T 1 , given by we have for Eq. ( which becomes arbitrarily large for sufficiently small values of δ 1 , δ 2 . The reader may argue that the divergence that we are pointing out is not really a problem. First, because of the smallness of τ , for any realistic values of ∂T /∂t Eq. (54) will be extremely small unless we are extremely close to T c . The reader may argue that in that unrealistic regime some other physics may come in, involving fluctuations, that invalidates our simple treatment. However, we argue that the Joule-heat dissipation pointed out here brings other fundamental problems beyond the quantitative divergence pointed out above. Superconductors are supposed to be governed by conventional thermodynamics, and it should be possible to describe reversible cooling and heating in the superconducting state. The generation of normal current due to the Faraday field and associated dissipation makes this impossible. In the next sections we show explicitly that thermodynamics is violated. There is in fact another contribution to the normal current besides the one given by Eq. (39) according to the conventional theory. As the temperature decreases the superfluid density increases, by additional normal electrons joining the superfluid. Condensing normal electrons 'spontaneously' acquire the velocity of electrons in the supercurrent, thus increasing the electronic momentum in counterclockwise direction according to Eq. (36). Conservation of momentum requires that the ions acquire equal momentum in opposite direction, i.e. clockwise, Eq. (38b). How does that happen? According to the conventional theory, as normal electrons condense a clockwise momentum imbalance is created in the normal region Quantitatively, the change in superfluid density for a given change in penetration depth is, from Eq. ( and the change in normal electron density is ∆n n = -∆n s . In a time interval τ , the normal collision time, the normal electron density then changes by The change in normal electron momentum density in that time interval is since each condensing normal electron aquired velocity v s , and the resulting normal current density is where we used Eq. (30) for v s . The Joule heat dissipated per unit time due to this current in the presence of the electric field E(r, t), Eq. ( and yields and added to Eq. ( where ∂W/∂t was calculated in the previous section. So this new term is larger than the one calculated in the previous section at low temperatures, and smaller at high temperatures. In the two-fluid model, the crossover point is at T = 0.904T c . So we conclude that over most of the temperature range below T c , the Joule heat due to the normal current generated in the condensation process dominates over the one due to the normal current induced by the Faraday field. Irrespective of how the normal current originated, we argue that its presence and the resulting Joule heat is in contradiction with thermodynamics. Consider the situation shown in Fig. We put it in thermal contact with a heat reservoir at temperature T 2 < T 1 through a thermal conductor with thermal conductivity κ. Heat will flow and eventually the system will reach temperature T 2 and be in thermal equilibrium with the heat reservoir. We assume the entire assembly is thermally and mechanically insulated from its environment. The magnetic field originates in external permanent magnets, no work is performed on those magnets during the process. We also assume the process is sufficiently slow that no electromagnetic radiation is generated. Given the initial and final states, we can compute various thermodynamic quantities. The total heat Q transferred from the system to the reservoir during the process is where C(T ) is the heat capacity of our system. The change in entropy of the system in this process is and is of course negative since T 2 < T 1 . The change in entropy of the universe in this process is and is of course positive since we are dealing with an irreversible process, heat conduction between systems at different temperatures. The Joule heat generated in this process can be calculated from time integration of Eq. ( In addition, the Joule heat will generate entropy, given by It is clear that the magnitudes of Q J and S J will depend on how fast the system is evolving from the initial to the final state, being larger for larger ∂λ L /∂t, which in turn will depend on the thermal conductivity of the heat conductor, κ, that connects the system with the heat reservoir. If κ is extremely low, essentially no Joule heat will be generated nor Joule entropy. If κ is not extremely low, these quantities will not be negligible. However, this does not make sense. Our system and the heat reservoir constitute our universe, their energy and entropy are functions of state, and the initial and final states in our process for both the system and the reservoir are uniquely defined. Therefore the heat transferred Q and the change in entropy of the universe ∆S univ are uniquely defined by Eqs. ( It is important to emphasize that this argument does not depend on the reservoir being infinite so that its temperature T 2 is unchanged, as assumed above for simplicity. For a finite 'reservoir', it and the system will reach an equilibrium temperature T 3 , with T 2 < T 3 < T 1 . If for a different cooling rate and different Joule heat generated the final equilibrium temperature were to be T 4 = T 3 , it would imply that either the system or the 'reservoir' have negative heat capacity which is of course impossible. Because the system and the 'reservoir' constitute our 'universe', their final equilibrium temperature and their final states are uniquely defined, and the considerations given above apply. To resolve this inconsistency without violating well established laws of electromagnetism and thermodynamics, we would have to conclude that the process happens infinitely slowly in nature, independent of the experimental conditions, e.g. the value of κ in Fig. In this section we consider a somewhat related problem, concerning the thermodynamics of the normalsuperconductor transition. We have considered some aspects of it already in previous work, ref. Let us denote by H c (T ) the critical field at temperature T where normal and superconducting phases can coexist. Consider the three possible states shown in Fig. We consider the two possible routes for the transition shown in Fig. The transition proceeds infinitely slowly, since the system is on the coexistence curve (state 1 to state 2 in Fig. to first order in ∆T . We ignore the small change in C s , the heat capacity in the superconducting state, as the temperature changes between T + ∆T and T , because it is a second order contribution. The latent heat is transferred between the system at temperature T + ∆T and the reservoir at temperature T . The change in the entropy of the universe in this process FIG. is then The heat transfer during the process of temperature equalization generates no entropy to this order. Route B is slightly more complicated. The system is cooled to temperature T while still in the normal state, it is supercooled. Then it becomes superconducting by expelling the applied magnetic field H c (1 -p), which is smaller than the coexistence field H c = H c (T ) (p > 0). takes a finite amount of time and generates Joule heat, because the changing magnetic flux in the normal region generates a Faraday field and a normal current. The total heat transferred to the heat reservoir here is where Q J is the Joule heat. The change in entropy of the universe in this process is In this equation, the first term corresponds to cooling in the normal state, which gives a second order contribution to the entropy; the second term is the change in the entropy of the universe when the latent heat and the Joule heat are transferred between the system and the environment at the same temperature T , hence it is zero. The third term, entropy generated by the production of Joule heat, accounts for the entire entropy generation to lowest order in ∆T in this process. Now the initial and final states are the same in both routes. Therefore we must have: Is that so? For Eq. (71a) to be valid, we need, from Eqs. ( and for Eq. (71b) to be valid we need, from Eqs. ( Assuming Eq. ( Now the Clausius-Clapeyron equation for a system with thermodynamic variables T , V , P (V =volume, P =pressure) undergoing a first order phase transformation is well known: where L is the latent heat and ∆V the volume change. The analogous equation for a superconductor is where M n = 0 is the magnetization in the normal state and M s = -H c /(4π) is the magnetization in the superconducting state, from which it follows that Replacing Eq. (77) in Eq. ( which is a well known relation, it follows from the formula for the entropy difference, and C a = T (∂S a /∂T ) with a = s or n. At T c , the second term on the right-hand side of Eq. ( From hence from Eqs. ( in agreement with Eq. ( The two routes that we have considered here, A and B, correspond to having the situations in Fig. In both Sect. VIII and Sect. IX we have considered processes where a magnetic field is expelled from the interior of a superconductor, which according to Maxwell's electromagnetism generates a Faraday electric field. In both Sects. VIII and IX we have made the usual assumption that normal electrons respond to an electric field by generating a normal current, that undergoes normal scattering processes and generates Joule heat. Yet we have reached very different conclusions, namely that Sect. IX satisfies thermodynamics and Sect. VIII violates it. Let us compare the two situations. An important difference is that in Sect. IX there is a natural mechanism that determines the speed at which the transition occurs in route B, first elucidated by Pippard In contrast, there is no similar mechanism in Sect. VIII to limit the speed of the transition. First, we can assume that the entire process occurs at temperatures T << T (H 0 ), with H 0 = H c (T ), in other words, far from the coexistence curve (see Fig. The essential difference between the situations in Sects. VIII and IX is that in Sect. IX the normal current was induced in the normal region, and in Sect. VIII it was induced in the superconducting region. As a matter of fact, we showed in ref. It is interesting to analyze the allocation of electromagnetic energy in the process we are considering. According to Poynting's theorem (also used in Appendix A), where the left side is the change in electromagnetic energy density, the first term on the right side is minus the work done by the electromagnetic field on charges, and the second is minus the outflow of electromagnetic energy. Let us first assume there is no normal current. So Eq. ( with B, E and j s given by eqs. ( and the terms on the right side, and and it is easily seen by substitution that Eq. ( Assume now there is also normal current. At first sight it may seem that Poynting's theorem will be violated if we substitute j s by j s + j n in Eq. ( with the same B and E as before. So Poynting's theorem continues to hold, but now there are two terms in Eq. ( The faster the process goes, i.e. the larger the thermal conductivity κ of the heat conductor in Fig. As the superconductor cools, electrons condense into the superfluid and thereby lower their energy. Part of that energy difference is heat transferred to the reservoir, and part is transferred to the electromagnetic field via the first term on the right in Eq. ( (90) Both ∆E and ∆Q are determined by the initial and final temperatures, T to T -∆T . In particular, ∆Q = T (∂S/∂T )∆T . So ∆E em , the energy transferred to the electromagnetic field, is fixed. It is given by the space and time integral of the second term in Eq. ( (91) and is independent of how fast or slow the cooling is. Therefore, there is no extra energy to create j ′ s , therefore it is not possible that j n exists either. We have argued that generation of Joule heat in a process where the temperature of the superconductor changes, always below T c , leads to violation of both the first and second law of thermodynamics. In this section we consider the possibility that through some unknown mechanism conservation of energy can be maintained, and show that even in that case the second law would be violated. Consider an intermediate step in the process, where the system changes its temperature from T to T -∆T . Consider two different ways to do this step: (a) Infinitely slowly (b) In a finite amount of time, ∆t. According to the previous discussion, for (b) finite Joule heat will be generated in the system. The total amount of heat transferred from the system to the reservoir has to be the same for (a) and (b), since the initial and final states of both the system and the electromagnetic field are the same, and hence also those of the reservoir. Let's call that heat ∆Q. For process (a), we have where C(T ) is the equilibrium heat capacity of the system. No Joule heat is generated. For process (b), assume Joule heat ∆Q J is generated. One could imagine that the heat capacity of the system is different than the equilibrium one when the process occurs at a finite rate and involves Joule heat, let's call it C r (T ) < C(T ). We will then have for process (b) ∆Q = C r (T )∆T + ∆Q J (93) transferred from the system to the reservoir, the same as in process (a), respecting the first law. Both terms in Eq. (93) would depend on the speed of the process, the faster the process the smaller the first term and the larger the second term. However, consider the change in entropy of the universe. The change in entropy of the reservoir in both processes is and the change in entropy of the system in both processes is (to lowest order in ∆T ) In process (a) that is all there is, so the change in entropy of the universe is which is of course larger than zero since T > T 2 . In process (b), in addition to these, we need to take into account that generation of Joule heat generates entropy: Therefore, the change in entropy of the universe in process (b) is However, entropy is a function of state. Therefore, the second law of thermodynamics is violated by Eq. (98). Finally, to try to get around this problem let us consider the possibility that the system lowers its entropy by a larger amount than Eq. (95) in the process of transferring heat to the reservoir in process (b). This would happen if the system is at a slightly lower temperature. Indeed one can argue that to generate the normal current the system has to supply energy, and that would lower its temperature from T to T -δT , where δT is determined by the equation The change in entropy of the system would then be, rather than Eq. ( or, using Eqs. ( so that the change in entropy of the universe in process (b) would be ∆S and the violation of the second law of thermodynamics is not resolved. To understand the problems encountered with thermodynamics better we will consider an analogy here. Figure Imagine now that we place a small normal metal cylinder on top of our superconducting cylinder, as shown in Fig. Namely, in case (A) the presence of the normal cylinder will not have any effect, and the final state will be the same as depicted in Fig. Instead, in case (B), the initial field lines will be f rozen in the normal metal cylinder. When the superconductor is cooled it will expel the magnetic field lines to a penetration depth λ 2 < λ 1 but it will have a harder time doing so, because of the boundary condition that magnetic field lines in the normal metal cannot move. As a consequence, the final state in Fig. More generally, if the normal metal cylinder has a finite electrical conductivity and the cooling process occurs at a finite rate, Joule heat will be dissipated in an amount that depends on the conductivity and the rate. For each different case, with different Joule heat dissipated, the final state of the superconductor will be different. If we imagine this system in the setup of figure I argue that in a sense what Fig. XIV. FURTHER ARGUMENTS Some readers may think that the situation considered here is not very different from other situations where Joule heat is generated in an amount that depends on the speed of the process, hence that the arguments given here would imply inconsistencies in other situations, hence these arguments cannot be right. That is not so. Let us analyze a couple of simple examples and how they differ from the situation considered here. Consider a situation where we approach a permanent magnet by hand to a normal metal. Eddy currents are generated and Joule heat is dissipated, in different amounts depending on the speed of the process and the conductivity of the material. In particular, if we approach the magnet faster the Faraday field is larger and more Joule heat is dissipated. Why is thermodynamics not violated? The answer is of course that if we approach the magnet faster the eddy currents generate a larger magnetic field that generates a larger force that opposes the motion of the magnet, hence our hand has to do more work to approach the magnet to the metal at a faster speed, and the extra work supplied by us supplies the extra Joule heat generated. Similarly if the conductivity of the material is larger the Joule heat generated is larger, but so are the eddy currents generated and the opposing force. Instead, for the case of the superconductor considered in this paper there is no external "hand" that can supply variable amounts of work depending on the speed of the process. As discussed, initial and final states of the metal and the reservoir, and hence their energies, are fixed by the initial and final temperatures and are independent of the speed of the process, but the speed of the process is not fixed (it depends on κ) and neither is the amount of generated Joule heat according to the conventional theory. Let us consider a circuit with an inductor L in series with a resistor R connected to a battery, through which a current circulates. A magnetic field will exist in the inductor, and the magnetic energy stored is with I 0 the initial current circulating. If we now disconnect the battery and short the circuit, the current will decay with time constant t 0 = L/R, given by I(t) = I 0 e -t/t0 (104) generating power If R is large the Joule heat generated per unit time is large, if R is small it is small, why is energy conservation not violated? The answer is of course that the integrated power, that gives the total Joule heat generated as the current decays to zero, is independent of R and yields of course Eq. ( Instead, for the case of the superconductor discussed here, the origin of the energy dissipated in Joule heat is not accounted for, the speed of the process is not determined by the conductivity of the normal electrons, nor does the magnetic field and its time variation depend solely on the normal current since there is also supercurrent. For those reasons the total Joule heat generated is not the same independent of the speed of the process, and is not the same independent of the normal resistivity, and in particular goes to zero if the temperature change proceeds infinitely slowly and/or if the normal state resistivity goes to infinity, and is not zero if it proceeds at a finite rate and the normal state resistivity is finite, leading to the conflict with thermodynamics discussed earlier in the paper. In this section we propose a qualitative solution to the conundrum discussed in the previous sections. We don't want to give up on the principle that superconductivity is a thermodynamic state of matter, including the situation where an external magnetic field is present. Nor do we want to give up on the laws of thermodynamics, electromagnetism or mechanics. We propose that there is only one way to resolve this conundrum. Consider the situation in fig. Therefore, if a perfectly conducting fluid residing in the interior of the superconductor moves outward together with the field lines when the system is cooled, no Joule heat will be generated and the system will be able to reach a unique final state independent of the rate at which the field lines move out. For this to be a possibility this fluid has to be both charge neutral and mass neutral, so that neither charge nor mass accumulation near the surface will occur. This is possible if there is an outward flow of both electrons and holes. Because holes are not real physical particles, the outward motion of holes is associated with inward rather than outward flow of mass, and it can compensate the outflow of mass due to electrons. The electrons and holes flowing out can drag the magnetic field lines with them, as in a perfectly conducting plasma In previous work, we have explained the dynamics of the Meissner effect within the theory of hole superconductivity as follows We believe the same physics is at play here, as the system is cooled and normal electrons condense into the superfluid, and can explain the contradictions encountered within the conventional theory. In particular, normal holes moving out are subject to a clockwise Lorentz force which can exactly compensate for the counterclockwise force exerted by the Faraday field on them, so that no azimuthal current and no Joule dissipation results. The details of the process will be discussed elsewhere. In this paper we have analyzed the process where a type I superconductor in a magnetic field is cooled while always in the superconducting state. We have encountered several problems in trying to understand this process within the conventional theory of superconductivity, and we have suggested that the alternative theory of hole superconductivity [15] may be able to resolve these problems. The same problems would have been encountered if we had considered a process of heating rather than cooling. The first problem we pointed out is that there has to be a physical mechanism for electrons that go from normal to superconducting in the process of cooling to spontaneously acquire angular momentum, and at the same time for the body to acquire equal and opposite angular momentum. The physical mechanisms by which this happens have not been explained in the literature on conventional superconductivity. We believe the conventional theory cannot explain these processes. In fact, the same question arises in the normal-superconductor phase transition in a magnetic field, or its reverse The next problems relate to the action of the Faraday electric field that is necessarily induced when the temperature changes. It will generate a normal current and cause dissipation of Joule heat. We showed that this Joule heat will become arbitrarily large sufficiently close to the phase transition point, and that it will become arbitrarily large if the rate of temperature change is large. . We have shown that in fact there is normal current originating from two different sources. On the one hand, the Faraday electric field gives rise to a normal current proportional to the density of normal electrons, just like in a normal metal. On the other hand, within the conventional theory the process of condensation leaves behind a momentum imbalance in the normal electron distribution Note also that the amount of Joule heat Q J generated depends both on the speed of the process and on the normal conductivity σ n , two variables that are not tied to each other, contrary to what happens in the phase transition (see Sect. IX and Refs. We have found that the generation of any Joule heat in the process considered in this paper is inconsistent with thermodynamics. The only way to make it consistent with thermodynamics within the conventional theory would be to assume that the system reaches different final states depending on the speed of the process, which is itself inconsistent with the conventional theory. By contrast, we showed in this paper that the generation of Joule heat during the normal-superconductor transition is consistent with thermodynamics, assuming Joule heat is dissipated only in the normal region and assuming that the process of normal/superfluid conversion is able to transfer momentum to the body without dissipation In the situation discussed in this paper, the electric field arises in a process where the superfluid density is changing. Therein lies the essential difference with the situations considered in ref. [8] within the conventional theory, where the electric field is due to an electromagnetic wave or an ac current, and is not directly associated with changes in the superfluid density. In that case, it is well established experimentally and theoretically that the action of the electric field on normal electrons gives rise to dissipation. Within the conventional theory of superconductivity the response of normal electrons in those situations and in the situation considered here will be the same. This is necessarily so within the conventional theory in order to satisfy momentum conservation. But it leads to the conundrum discussed in this paper. Within the conventional theory these normal currents and the resulting Joule heat are unavoidable for a simple reason. There is no mechanism that can transfer momentum between electrons and the body as a whole in the conventional theory that does not involve scattering of normal electrons through the same processes that give rise to resistivity in the normal state. Transferring momentum between electrons and the body is necessary to conserve momentum. As we have seen, the total momentum of the body does not change in the process, but the Faraday field imparts the positive ions momentum in the counterclockwise direction that needs to be compensated by 'somebody' giving the body clockwise momentum. In addition, the condensation process involves normal electrons acquiring counterclockwise momentum, which needs to be compensated by the body acquiring more clockwise momentum. Both those processes necessitate transfer of momentum from normal electrons to ions through normal scattering processes in the conventional theory, that give rise to Joule heating as discussed in Sects. VI and VII and leads to the conflict with thermodynamics. Instead, within the theory of hole superconductivity there is a mechanism to transfer momentum between electrons and the body that does not involve normal scattering processes and associated Joule heating. It requires that the normal charge carriers are holes We have pointed out that the theory of hole superconductivity [15] has physical elements not contained in the conventional theory that may provide a way to resolve this conundrum. Within this theory the response of the superconductor to ac fields would be similar to the conventional theory 