We use density functional theory to calculate the structure, band-gap and magnetic properties of oxygen-deficient SrTi1-x-yFexCoyO 3-δ with x = y = 0.125 and δ = {0, 0.125, 0.25}. The valence and the high or low spin-states of the Co and Fe ions, as well as the lattice distortion and the band-gap, depend on the oxygen deficiency, the locations of the vacancies, and on the direction of the Fe-Co axis. A charge redistribution that resembles a self-regulatory response lies behind the valence spin-state changes. Ferromagnetism dominates, and both the magnetization and the band gap are greatest at δ = 0.125. This qualitatively mimics the previously reported magnetization measured for SrTiFeO 3-δ , which was maximum at an intermediate deposition pressure of oxygen. Multiferroic materials provide a basis for a range of new devices proposed for information storage and processing, as well as offering a fertile ground for fundamental physics and materials science discoveries. In a multiferroic, two ferroic orders coexist, such as ferromagnetism and ferroelectricity, and coupling between them offers the opportunity for electrical control of magnetism, ideally at and above room temperature for device applications Here we focus on a theoretical study of oxygendeficient STO in which Fe and Co are substituted for Ti to yield SrTi 1-x-y Fe x Co y O 3-δ (STFC). Recent experimental and theoretical results for SrTi 1-x Fe x O 3-δ (STF) and SrTi 1-y Co y O 3-δ (STC) show that their magnetic properties depend on both cation composition and O deficiency. For STC and STF, the magnetic moments increase with the Co or Fe content and with the O deficiency, though for STF the moment decreased again at the lowest growth pressures All density functional theory (DFT) calculations in this work were performed using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP 5.4) Spin-polarized calculations were performed using a plane-wave energy cutoff of 500 eV and a Monkhorst-Pack 2 × 2 × 2 k-point grid on 2 × 2 × 2 perovskite supercells (40 atoms for δ = 0). One and two oxygen vacancies were introduced to obtain δ = 0.125 and 0.25 compositions, respectively, and x = y = 0.125. All symmetrically distinct vacancy/transition metal orderings within the supercell were calculated. Though larger supercells are useful in clarifying the role of lower symmetry arrangements, the high computational cost and the number of distinct structures make such calculations unreasonable to accomplish using the expensive HSE functional. Projector-augmented wave (PAW) PBE pseudopotentials were used with 3s 2 4p 6 5s 2 , 3d 3 4s 1 , 3d 7 4s 1 , 3d 8 4s 1 , and 2s 2 2p 4 valence configurations for Sr, Ti, Fe, Co, and O respectively. All total forces were converged to within 0.05 eV Å-1 . Most calculations were performed with neutral supercells for Lower panels: small "single crystals" having the respective δ 1c , δ 1b , δ 1a vacancies displayed in the upper panels. In all panels, (Fe, Co, Ti, O) = (brown, blue, light blue, red), and Sr is omitted for clarity. both stoichiometric and oxygen-deficient compositions. However, in order to test the main magnetic features of specific configurations, we have also considered charged one-vacancy supercells with a neutralizing background charge Figure We start by analyzing the system with no vacancies, i.e. δ = 0. For SrTi 0.75 Fe 0.125 Co 0.125 O 3 , the 2 × 2 × 2 supercell contains one Co and one Fe ion which can be adjacent along [001], For δ = 0, Co is in a strongly hybridized t 5 2g e 0 g 4+ low-spin state, and Fe is in what seems to be a t 4 2g e 2 g 2+ high-spin state, similar to the ground states in δ = 0 STC The first intriguing result is that for δ = 0, STFC is a ferromagnetic (FM) semiconductor with a large The band-gap widening in the inset of Figure IV. OXYGEN DEFICIENT δ = 0.125 SYSTEMS Now we consider the effects of oxygen deficiency. Previous studies in STF and STC have shown that the local spin magnitude tends to increase when a vacancy is immediately adjacent to the Fe or Co substituents In Table (vacancy δ 1a ). The [001] gs shows an enhanced band-gap compared to δ = 0 as well as higher magnetic moments for both Fe and Co, maximizing the μ B /u.c.. This behavior is also observed in the second lowest energy state ([001] δ 1c ) which is higher than the gs by ≈ 40 meV, with a band gap that is 30% smaller as depicted in Figure The densities of states (DOS) for both the [001] gs (δ 1b ) and next lowest energy state (δ 1c ) are shown in Figure These results may be compared with the case of two Co and one V O in the supercell, x = 0, y = 0.25 (STC), where the two Co present two different valence spin states because one is adjacent to the vacancy and the other is not Our first-principles calculations in O-deficient STC (not shown here) predict the existence of electric polarization in which the non-centrosymmetric redistribution of the charge was accompanied by complex lattice distortions beyond rigid O 6 rotations. Similar distortions are predicted for STFC as shown in the insets of Figure The d-orbital hybridization processes that are adopted by the system to promote heteropolar bonding can be seen intuitively from Figure Figure In the sixth configuration at ∼188 meV above the lowest-energy state, the same mechanism takes place but with Fe taking the role of Co although, because of the lower Fe electronegativity, the charge difference between Fe and Co is smaller than the previous cases except the ground state to which such difference is comparable. As seen in Table On the other hand, for gs in Table III the first states in the conduction band at ∼ +0.8 eV in Figure Figure From the structural viewpoint, the inset in Figure The tendencies of the properties in Figure The magnetic properties of a charged one-vacancy supercell were analyzed and summarized in Table Given that charged-defect states associated with oxygen vacancies are not uncommon By using hybrid first-principles calculations (HSE), several representative configurations of STFC at different levels of oxygen-deficiency δ were studied. Electronic properties, stabilized structures, band-gaps and the valence spin-states of the transition metal ions as well as the spin ordering were determined within a DFT t 2g e g orbital occupation framework and discussed focusing on the magnetic behavior, which is compared to experimental evidence and theoretical predictions for STFC. Out of all the possible Fe-Co arrangements, the [001] configuration seems to be preferred regardless of the level of oxygen deficiency considered here. A connection between the Fe-Co cation distance and the band gap was found, suggesting that an engineered crystal deposition that could promote tetragonal distortions along the cation axis would promote semiconductor behavior of STFC. We found that for δ = 0, the system is composed of mixed valence states of Fe 2+ and Co 4+ , in high and low spin states respectively. The accommodation of a single oxygen vacancy in the cell, in coordination with either Fe, Co or both, triggers a charge redistribution that is manifested in a Fe/Co d-suborbital repopulation. This promotes an increase in the local magnetic moments, turning them into Fe 3+ and Co 2+ high spins, and therefore effectively raising the saturation magnetization, as well as widening the band-gap, which goes from 50 meV in the δ = 0 gs to 1.8 eV for the δ = 0.125 gs. On the other hand, doubling the vacancy concentration of the cell reduces the band-gap and valence states to high spin Fe 2+ and low spin Co 2+ , diminishing the overall magnetization. The changes of the valence spin state are accompanied by a charge reorganization that resembles the self-regulatory response Therefore, STFC behaves as a ferromagnetic semiconductor for which the O-deficiency as well as the Fe-Co arrangement in the unit cell could be used to modulate the magnetism, band gap and structural properties. Among configurations containing the same kinds of vacancies the magnetism and band gap vary within a small range, suggesting that technological developments based on the control of the specific cation distribution and Ovacancies location should be possible. For instance, the larger band gaps found at intermediate δ, together with the B-site shifting, folding of the O 5 and the charge redistribution observed, are most likely indicators of the appearance of a ferroelectric order parameter in oxygendeficient STFC. FIG. 7: (a) DOS for gs-vacancies for arrangement in q μB/Fe μB/Co μB/u.c. E bg (eV)