Nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers feature outstanding properties like a spin coherence time of up to one second as well as a level structure offering the possibility to initialize, coherently manipulate and optically read-out the spin degree of freedom of the ground state. However, only about three percent of their photon emission are channeled into the zero phonon line (ZPL), limiting both the rate of indistinguishable single photons and the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of coherent spin-photon interfaces. We here report on the enhancement of the SNR of the optical spin read-out achieved by tuning the mode of a two-dimensional photonic crystal (PhC) cavity into resonance with the NV-ZPL. PhC cavities are fabricated by focused ion beam (FIB) milling in thin reactive ion (RIE) etched ultrapure single crystal diamond membranes featuring modes with Q-factors of up to 8250 at mode volumes below one cubic wavelength. NV centers are produced in the cavities in a controlled fashion by a high resolution atomic force microscope (AFM) implantation technique. On cavity resonance we observe a lifetime shortening from 9.0 ns to 8.0 ns as well as an enhancement of the ZPL emission by almost one order of magnitude. Although on resonance the collection efficiency of ZPL photons and the spin-dependent fluorescence contrast are reduced, the SNR of the optical spin read-out is almost tripled for the cavity-coupled NV centers. The nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center, a point defect in diamond consisting of a lattice vacancy and an adjacent nitrogen substitution, has attracted a lot of interest during the past years owing to its outstanding optical and spin properties. Here N 0 (N 1 ) is the expectation value for the detected photon count rate when preparing the NV center in the spin projection m s = 0 (m s = ±1). Due to the Poisson-distribution of the photon count rate we expect that the random variables N 0 and N 1 are also Poisson-distributed, As visible from equation ( The photon detection rate is usually limited by a non-perfect photon collection. Consequently, several approaches to enhance the collection efficiency have been followed by modifying the directivity of emission such as using an optimal crystal orientation, The Purcell-factor F, quantifying the lifetime reduction achieved by the emitter-cavity-coupling is directly proportional to the ratio of quality factor Q and modal volume V of a PhC cavity mode. The Q-factor is strongly dependent on the precision of fabrication and deviations from the design parameters. In order to produce PhC cavities with modes featuring a high Q-factor and a spectral position close to the NV-ZPL, diamond membranes with a precise thickness are required. However, due to polishing wedges as well as local deviations in the etching rate during RIE-thinning the thickness typically varies over the diamond film by several hundred nanometers. The sample system is depicted in Fig. The membranes are subsequently characterized by laserscanning microscopy, cross-section measurements, and quantitative dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. The combination of these methods allows us to map the thickness of the diamond films as well as the surface structure with high resolution, enabling the selection of defect-free spots featuring a suitable thickness for the fabrication of PhC cavities. M0-cavities generated by a shift of two adjacent holes (Fig. This section summarizes how we generate NV centers located at the field maximum of the PhC cavity. As we used ultrapure diamond as starting material, at first nitrogen has to be implanted. In the past few years several high resolution implantation techniques were developed, most of them masking the sample surface by spin-coated photoresist films, Whereas the lateral resolution of a nitrogen FIB implantation is about 100 nm at a typical acceleration voltage of 30 kV, nitrogen may be implanted through an AFM-tip with a lateral resolution of up to 20 nm at a typical implantation energy of 5 keV. The home built AFM-setup combines a conventional lowenergy ion source for generation and acceleration of nitrogen ions with an AFM-unit. A small hole is FIB-milled close to the apex of the pyramidal AFM-tip which is positioned over the implantation spot (Fig. In addition, the emission lines might be shifted by local strain and strongly broadened by spectral diffusion due to nearby charges. In the past few years several techniques have been developed for the deterministic tuning of cavity modes into resonance with the ZPL of color centers. A well-established but irreversible method is the oxidation of diamond in an air or oxy-gen atmosphere. The PL spectra depicted in Fig. The recorded lifetime traces (Fig. To analyze the NV-ZPL in detail despite the existing resonance with the cavity mode, a photoluminescence excitation (PLE) spectrum was recorded for wavelengths between 636.2 nm and 638.5 nm. In the spectrum depicted in Fig. To estimate the SNR enhancement due to the emitter-cavitycoupling we at first have to consider the change in the photon count rate N 0 . For this, we have to take into account the shortening of the emitter's lifetime as well as the change in collection efficiency. Furthermore, for the SNR the change in spin-dependent fluorescence contrast C has to be considered. To this end, a reliable methodology is required to compare the contrast before and after tuning the cavity mode in resonance with the NV-ZPL. We simulate the emission of the cavity-coupled NV centers using a finite element software (FDTD solutions, Lumerical) by modeling the emission of an electric dipole point source positioned in the mode field maximum. The simulated photonic nanostructure features the same number of holes as the produced M0-cavity where the holes have a conical shape with an inclination angle of 4 • (see section II). We calculate the emission fractions in the two half-spaces above and below the PhC as well as the collection efficiency for a microscope objective (NA = 0.8) positioned vertically above the diamond membrane. Each simulation is performed for a E z dipole oriented vertically to the diamond film as well as for the in-plane dipoles E x and E y . These dipoles are oriented such that the cavity mode is fed by the E y dipole whereas the E x dipole has orthogonal polarization. The orthogonality of the dipoles also allows us to calculate the emission for arbitrary dipole orientations as discussed below. As an example we show in Fig. The NV emission dipoles are oriented in the (111)-plane of the diamond lattice. For the small NV ensemble in our experiment we average over all possible dipole orientations within the (111)-plane. As the used diamond material features a (001)-orientation, the 111 -axis exhibits an angle of 35.3 • to the xy-plane (membrane plane). The projection of the averaged NV dipoles onto the x or y-axis amounts to 24 % and 52 % onto the z-axis. To calculate the resulting collection efficiency for our NV ensemble, also the Purcell-factors for the three dipole orientations have to be considered. The emission directivity of photons emitted into the cavity mode is only determined by the mode emission directivity. Further, the emission directivity of off-resonant photons is defined by the photonic nanostructure. Considering this, we first calculated the spontaneous emission rates γi of the projections of the averaged NV dipoles onto the x, y and z-axis considering the corresponding Purcell-factors F i as follows: with the free-space spontaneous emission rate γ, k i = 0.24 for i = x, y and k i = 0.52 for i = z. Subsequently, the fraction of emission produced by the averaged NV dipole projected to the x, y or z-axis may be calculated by normalizing the spontaneous emission rates γi to the sum over all these rates. To finally calculate the collection efficiency at the given dipole orientation, the simulated collection efficiencies for a dipole oriented in x, y or z-direction are weighted with the respective fraction of emission and the resulting values summed up. For the optical read-out of the NV electron spin we can distinguish between two fundamental cases. In the first case only ZPL photons are considered. This is for instance the case, if indistinguishable photons are required. On the other hand, for projective spin read-out generally all the emitted photons are used, e. g. if NV centers are used as magnetic field sensors on the nanoscale. We apply a protocol composed of three succeeding measurements for the reliable and reproducible determination of the time-resolved, spin-dependent fluorescence contrast of the cavity-coupled NV centers. For the considered offresonant spectral mode position at 634 nm at first a ODMRmeasurement under continuous laser and microwave excitation is performed. An external magnetic field of 2 mT is applied to split the two ground state sublevels m s = -1 and m s = +1. Hence, in the ODMR-spectrum in Fig. In Fig. To analyze the measured spin-dependent fluorescence contrast we set up a rate equation model following Wolf et al. . B G,0 and B G,1 are the populations of the ground states m s = 0 and m s = ±1, B E,0 and B E,1 the populations of the corresponding excited states and B S the population of the singlet state. K e and K f are the spin-preserving excitation and emission rates, K s the transition rate from the excited m s = ±1-state to the singlet state, K 0 the transition rate from the singlet state to the m s = 0 ground state and K m the rate of the radiative spinmixing induced by the off-axis magnetic field. As the measurements are performed in the PL saturation regime, the relation K e = K f holds in the following. According to the measured off-resonant lifetime value of 9.0 ns, a decay rate of K f = 111 MHz is set in the model. With the parameters K e and K f fixed, the rate equations are solved and the simulated time-resolved fluorescence is fitted to the measured curves by varying the free parameters K 0 , K s and K m (Fig. We now discuss the modification of the spin measurement SNR induced by the modified photon collection and modified spin-dependent fluorescence contrast due to the cavity coupling. With equation (1) as well as the appropriate assumption of small contrasts, we arrive at: where variables with (without) a star indicate the on-(off-) resonant case. Based on the presented measurements as well as the theoretical modeling we assume in the following a reduction of the spin-dependent fluorescence contrast by 4.1 %, i. e. C * /C = 0.959. Due to the lifetime reduction the number of emitted photons is increased by a factor of 1.13, when the mode is tuned into resonance with the NV-ZPL. If we, in a first scenario, consider only ZPL photons for spin read-out, the collection efficiency is reduced by a factor of 0.87 (see section IV A). Furthermore, the fraction of photons emitted into the ZPL is modified from 2.1 % off resonance to 18.3 % on resonance (see Fig. In summary, we reported on the SNR enhancement of the optical spin read-out achieved by tuning the mode of a twodimensional PhC cavity into resonance with the NV-ZPL. To achieve this, ultrapure (001)-oriented CVD-grown diamond films were used as starting material for the RIE fabrication of thin, air-suspended membranes. An extended characterization allowed us to select defect-free spots featuring a suitable thickness for the subsequent fabrication of PhC cavities by FIB milling. The analyzed cavity modes showed Qfactors of up to 8250 at mode volumes of less than one cubic wavelength. The application of a high-resolution implantation technique using a pierced AFM-tip allowed the subsequent generation of NV centers in the cavities. The combination of two spectral tuning methods, an oxidation technique for the blue shift and a gas adsorption technique for the red shift, facilitated the reliable and precise tuning of a cavity mode. For the considered cavity-coupled NV centers the SNR was almost tripled. A theoretical model, taking into account the measured shortening of the emitter's lifetime, the measured and theoretically predicted change in fluorescence contrast as well as the simulated modification of the collection efficiency reproduces the experimental findings very well. Whereas the reported SNR enhancement is on par with simpler methods for photon collection enhancement, 