We use a scanning nanometer-scale superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) to image individual vortices in amorphous superconducting MoSi thin films. Spatially resolved measurements of the magnetic field generated by both vortices and Meissner screening satisfy the Pearl model for vortices in thin films and yield values for the Pearl length and bulk penetration depth at 4.2 K. Flux pinning is observed and quantified through measurements of vortex motion driven by both applied currents and thermal activation. The effects of pinning are also observed in metastable vortex configurations, which form as the applied magnetic field is reduced and magnetic flux is expelled from the film. Understanding and controlling vortex dynamics in amorphous thin films is crucial for optimizing devices such as superconducting nanowire single photon detectors (SNSPDs), the most efficient of which are made from MoSi, WSi, and MoGe. The dynamics of quantized vortices play a crucial role in determining the electronic properties of devices made from type-II superconductors. The dissipative motion of vortices, driven by flowing electrical current, destroys the material's ability to carry current with zero resistance. By controlling the pinning of vortices, they can be immobilized, thereby restoring the superconducting state. Optimized pinning Here, we image individual superconducting vortices in thin-film MoSi using a scanning nanometer-scale superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID). Spatial maps of the magnetic field above patterned MoSi wires are collected as a function of applied field and reveal the presence of individual vortices and their pinning sites. Measured field profiles fit well to the Pearl model and yield the bulk London penetration depth λλ LL = 510 ± 10 nm at 4.2 K, which agrees with previous transport measurements of similar films We investigate a 65 ± 5-nm-thick film of amorphous Mo0.76Si0. We use a scanning SQUID-on-tip (SOT) sensor Before imaging BB zz (xx, yy) generated by the film, we nucleate the vortices by cooling the sample through its measured TT cc = 7.2 K down to 4.2 K in an externally applied field BB aa . This field-cooling process causes flux penetrating the film above TT cc to concentrate in form of quantized vortices, which are trapped within the sample as it cools. The trapping potential is the result of the geometrical barrier produced by extended Meissner screening currents flowing near the sample edges In Fig. By field-cooling with different values of BB aa , we initialize different vortex densities in the MoSi film, as shown in Fig. To confirm that transitions from the 'inflated' state to the final state are not induced by interactions with our scanning tip The observation of a metastable 'inflated' state, which lasts on the order of a hundred of seconds before flux expulsion and relaxation to the equilibrium configuration, points to the presence of pinning sites and thermally activated vortex hopping. The presence of vortices near the edges in the metastable state cannot be accounted for by the trapping potential provided by Meissner currents: this potential only traps vortices in the middle of the wire, with its barrier occupying the region near the edges. The vortices near the edges can only be immobilized by pinning sites. These potential wells, however, are not deep enough to completely freeze the vortex motion at 4.2 K and, due to thermally activated vortex hopping, the edgevortices are eventually expelled as the sample relaxes to its equilibrium configuration. The presence of thermally activated vortex hopping at 4.2 K is evident from repeated imaging of BB zz (xx, yy) at equilibrium. As shown in Fig. Although many pinning sites exhibit thermally activated vortex hopping, some sites do not, pointing to deeper trapping potentials. We further investigate these sites, by driving vortex motion using an AC current II AAAA applied along the yy-direction (long direction of the wire). This current results in an AC Lorentz force FF AAAA = II AAAA ww Φ 0 on each vortex along xx-direction. FF AAAA drives oscillations of the vortices around their equilibrium positions. The resulting motion can be measured using the scanning SOT as either a blurred vortex image in BB zz (xx, yy), as shown in the left panel of Fig. Vortices at different pinning sites respond differently to FF AAAA , indicating the varying strength of the pinning potentials throughout the sample. At BB aa = 0.9 mT, weak pinning sites (30%), showing thermally activated hopping, are induced to jump from site to site by FF AAAA with amplitudes in the 100 fN range. Strong pinning sites (50%) show no measureable response to this FF AAAA . Intermediate pinning potentials show oscillatory responses to the FF AAAA . From the strength of FF AAAA , we extract effective pinning spring constants of around 0.6 μN/m. Compared to similar measurements in Pb films, these potentials are 100 times shallower (less curvature) indicating their larger spatial extent and weaker strength. By increasing Lorentz force up to a maximum value FF AAAA,mmaamm at which these vortices escape from their pinning sites, we can integrate and estimate the depth of the potential well, typically obtaining EE pppppp ∼ 60 meV. Together, our results point to a range of EE pppppp from a few meV up to at least tens of meV, excluding the pinning sites that do not respond to thermal or Lorentz perturbations. As expected, these values are a fraction of the estimated condensation energy of the vortex core in this sample of If we exclude the weak thermally activated pinning sites, we also find that the vortices are always driven in phase with FF AAAA and along the direction of the drive (xx-direction). This behavior points to isotropic conservative trapping potentials, which are sparsely distributed, i.e. large pinning centers that do not overlap. These large and well-separated pinning centers contrast the observations made by Embon et al. in similar experiments on Pb thin films The vortex pinning potentials observed in our MoSi films are likely the result of either crystalline precipitates within the amorphous alloy or structural and surface defects. The latter cause appears the most probable, given the presence of visible inclusions and roughness of varying size in SEMs of our sample (see supplementary material). Precipitates are typically a limiting factor in much thicker films, which require long sputtering times Our scanning SOT experiments, because of the sensors combination of high spatial resolution and high magnetic field sensitivity, reveal images of individual superconducting Pearl vortices in amorphous MoSi thin films. In addition to providing a measure of the penetration depth of the film, we directly observe their thermally activated hopping at 4.2 K. Since the vortices are not completely frozen onto their pinning sites, we are able to estimate the depth of the weakest pinning potentials and observe metastable vortex configurations present for tens of seconds before the system reaches equilibrium. The dynamic nature of the vortex configurations in MoSi at 4.2 K may have implications for SNSPDs and other devices fabricated from such films. The thermally activated vortex hopping observed here may be a source of residual dark counts in SNSPDs. Our experiments also make plain the necessity of further reducing the density of unintentional pinning sites by improving sample quality. In order to aid in the optimization of MoSi-based superconducting devices, future scanning SQUID studies should aim to study different MoSi films grown under different conditions. MoSi sample fabrication. The 65 ± 5-nm-thick Mo0.76Si0.24 film is deposited onto an SiO2 substrate by cosputtering with a DC and RF bias on Mo and Si targets, respectively. The thickness is determined using atomic force microscopy (AFM) and SEM, while the concentration of Mo and Si are measured by energydispersive x-ray (EDX) spectroscopy (see supplementary material). The film is patterned into a series of meandering wires over a 500 × 500-μm 2 area (see supplementary material) by a combination of electronbeam lithography and reactive ion etching. The SOT is fabricated by evaporating Pb on the apex of a pulled quartz capillary according to a self-aligned method pioneered by Finkler et al. Scanning SOT experiments. The SOT and the MoSi sample are mounted in a custom-built scanning probe microscope operating under vacuum in a 4 He cryostat The effective diameter of this SQUID loop can be determined from the quantum interfence pattern measured at T = 4.2 K using the circuit shown in shown in Fig. It is interesting to observe that the SQUID interference pattern of this particular device is not symmetric respect to Ba = 0 T. This shift of the pattern is due to the asymmetry of the two Dayem bridge junctions. In our case, this asymmetry was produced intentionally by modifying the fabrication recipe, so that we could investiate the vortex state of the MoSi sample even for very small Ba. The model used to fit the spatial dependence of Bz measured above the superconducting MoSi wire takes into account the wire's expulsion of flux due to the Meissner effect and the field produced by a superconducting vortex in the Pearl limit. By summing the resulting field profiles, we model the 1D profile shown in Figs. The model for the field produced by Meissner screening follows Brisbois et al. The model for the field produced by the superconducting vortex is based on Pearl's model, because the wire thickness is much less than the penetration depth (t<<λ L ) where f(k, z) = cc 1 ee -kkzz above the film, i.e. for z > 0, where 0 is the surface of the film. cc 1 depends on the film thickness tt: For a clearer visualization, a series of supplementary movies of the vortex motion shown in Fig. 