Few-layer molybdenum disulfide (FL-MoS2) films have been integrated into amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) pin-photodetectors. To achieve this, vertical a-Si:H photodiodes were grown by plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PE-CVD) on top of large-scale synthesized and transferred homogeneous FL-MoS2. This novel detector array exhibits long-term stability (more than six month) and outperforms conventional silicon-based pin-photodetectors in the infrared range (IR, l = 2120 nm) in terms of sensitivities by up to ~50 mAW -1 . Photodetectivities of up to ~2•10 10 Jones and external quantum efficiencies of ~3 % are achieved. The detectors further feature the additional functionality of bias-dependent responsivity switching between the different spectral ranges. The realization of such scalable detector arrays is an essential step towards pixelated and wavelength-selective sensors operating in the IR spectral range. Photodetectors play significant roles in fields of optical communication 1 , imaging 2 , night vision 3 , safety and security 4 , environmental-/agricultural sensing 5 , industrial process monitoring 6 , in the food industry 7 and, exceptionally, in fields of research 8 . Established photodetectors for the visible (VIS) regime predominantly consist of crystalline or amorphous silicon (c-Si, a-Si:H) as the absorber due to the maturity and availability of silicon technology. Near-infrared (NIR) (1-2 μm) and mid-IR (2-5 μm) photodetectors are typically based on group IV (Ge) or III-IV semiconductors (e.g., InGaAs, InAsSb, etc.) 9 , which necessitate demanding and thus more cost-/energy intensive thin-film fabrication techniques, typically Metal-Organic Chemical Vapor Deposition. Mercury cadmium telluride (HgCdTe) is photosensitive at wavelengths above 2 μm when operated at cryogenic temperatures 10 . Disadvantageous, the noise level of narrow bandgap detectors, like HgCdTe (< 0.1 eV 11 ), increases drastically with temperature due to the thermal excitation of charge carriers. Aside from the novel photodetector architecture presented in this work, quantum dot (e.g. colloidal 12 or type-II superlattices) or transition metal oxide based photodetectors, (e.g. VO2/V2O5 heterostructures 13 ) might allow reasonable (N)IR detection at higher operating temperatures in the future due to 3D quantum confinement effects. As applications advance, photoresponse in a combined optical range, here shown from VIS to mid-IR wavelengths, with the capabilities for panchromatic or selective detection (voltage-dependent sensitivity) are desired Although optoelectronic devices based on exfoliated mono-or multilayer MoS2 flakes have been demonstrated to show good photodetection capabilities The MoS2 was grown on an oxidized silicon wafer (300 nm SiO2 on Si) by TAC of pre-deposited Mo. The resulting MoS2 had a thickness of approximately 4 nm, which should theoretically result in an electronic band gap of Eg = 1.45 eV The layers were subsequently transferred by a conventional wet method using spin-coated polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) as a support for the MoS2. The 2D film was separated from the growth substrate by etching the Si/SiO2 in potassium hydroxide. The supported MoS2 was transferred onto deionized water for cleaning and fished out with the target substrate, n-doped a-Si:H (n-a-Si:H) on a gold-plated Si/SiO2 wafer (cf. Figure1b). The PMMA was thoroughly removed by a multistep process using ultraclean solvents. Next, an intrinsic a-Si:H (i-a-Si:H) absorber and a p-doped a-Si:H (p-a-Si:H) were grown onto the MoS2 in a conventional plasma-enhanced CVD (PE-CVD) process in a multi-chamber vacuum system. The Supporting Information and Ref. After the MoS2 transfer onto the substrate and prior to further PE-CVD deposition of a-Si:H, Raman analyses were conducted to examine the MoS2 quality and to confirm its thickness. The spectra were recorded using a confocal WITec Alpha 300R Raman microscope equipped with a 532 nm laser. The signal was collected through a 100× objective and dispersed using an 1800 g/mm grating. A Peltier cooled charge-coupled device (Andor DU401 BV) was used for the spectrum detection. During the Raman measurements, the laser power was kept constant at 0.5 mW. The process integration, i.e. the quality and homogeneity of the thin film stacks, the roughness of the embedded MoS2 and the wetting and growth of the a-Si:H on the FL-MoS2, was investigated by scanning and transmission electron microscopy (SEM, TEM) in conjunction with focused ion-beam (FIB) cross-sectioning. An FEI Strata dualbeam FIB/SEM was utilized for SEM and site-specific TEM sample preparation by regular FIB lift-out. Highresolution TEM (HRTEM), scanning TEM (STEM) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) at 200 kV were carried out using a FEI Talos F200A with a large-area ChemiSTEM TM EDS detector. Electrical characterization comprised current-voltage measurements (I-V) with and without standardized AM1.5 illumination and was performed using a Suss microprobe station connected to a Keithley 4200-SCS parameter analyzer. For spectrally resolved photoresponse measurements, a monochromator (Acton Research, tungstenhalogen lamp) was utilized to sample narrow wavelength bands of 10 nm in the range of 400 nm to 2120 nm. The photocurrent signals were converted using a FEMTO DLCPA-200 I-V converter and amplifier and acquired via lock-in technique (Princeton 5210). The optical setup was calibrated using a reference c-Si photodetector (S1337-33BQ, Hamamatsu) for wavelengths below 1100 nm and an InGaAs photodetector (12182-030k, Hamamatsu) for wavelengths up to 2120 nm (cutoff wavelength) to extract absolute spectral responsivity values. All electrical and optical measurements were performed under ambient conditions. Figure1a and c demonstrate the successful integration of large-area FL-MoS2 into periodic arrays of a-Si:H pindiode photodetectors. The targeted MoS2 thickness of ~4 nm as well as the interlayer spacing were verified by HR(S)TEM (cf. Figure1d) and coincide with the expected thickness increase of the initial metallic Mo by a factor of three J-V curves of an MoS2-based photodiode and a reference a-Si:H pin-diode are presented in Figure . 3456 7 of ≥100 dB at low bias voltages. In the low reverse bias regime, the dynamic of the MoS2/a-Si:H diodes likewise reach ≥ 80 dB which is comparable to the performance of common a-Si:H based mono-or multicolor photodetectors Figure The absolute photoresponsivities Rλ of a MoS2/a-Si:H heterostructure and a typical a-Si:H reference pinphotodiode are shown in Figure A key parameter to evaluate the photon-to-charge conversion for specific wavelengths is the detectivity D * = : ; <=•>•. 3456 An interesting feature of our MoS2/a-Si:H detectors is their capability to be easily switched between a limited optical response in the visible regime and an extended response comprising the visible and IR (cf. Figure By applying a specific external voltage to the MoS2/a-Si:H heterojunction (cf. Figure Table This work demonstrates the systematic, reproducible, and scalable integration of large-area TAC MoS2 as a 2D layered semiconductor into the mature a-Si:H thin-film technology for vertical photodiodes. We show the largescale synthesis and transfer of homogeneous MoS2 as well as the subsequent growth of a-Si:H photodiodes by PE-CVD. The MoS2 extends the detector bandwidth from the optical range far into the mid-IR (minimum up to 2120 nm) with an almost constant responsivity above 800 nm. The new MoS2/a-Si:H photodiodes exhibit good performance (DR = ~60 dB at -6 V, Rl ~50 mAW -1 / D* = ~2•10 10 Jones / EQE ~3 % at 2120 nm under ambient conditions) in conjunction with an excellent long-term stability. The detectors realized in this work combine several advantages: I) they are suited for various applications where a tunable photodetection in the visible regime and beyond is needed, II) they are easily operated under ambient conditions at room temperature combined with long-term stability, and, most importantly, III) they are based on a scalable, mature optoelectronic thin-film platform allowing for large-scale integration in detector arrays and making the integration of additional fabrication steps reliable, easy and economic. Prospectively, such detector arrays in combination with state-of-the-art read-out electronics, pave the way for the realization of pixelated, wavelength-selective sensors with a photoresponse in a wide spectral range. Further responsivity enhancement by bandgap engineering like the defined introduction of defects, the additional implementation of other 2D materials and/or the facile tuning of the a-Si:H composition and thickness might even enable novel a-Si:H multi-spectral photodetectors or high-efficient solar cells covering an even broader spectrum from the ultraviolet (UV)/VIS to the IR. 