A zero-frequency seismic metamaterial (ZFSM) consisting of a three-component seismic metamaterial plate and a half space is proposed to attenuate ultra-low frequency seismic surface waves. The design concept and models are verified firstly by lab-scale experiments on the seismic metamaterial consisting of a two-component seismic metamaterial plate and a half space. Then we calculate the band structures of the one-dimensional and two-dimensional ZFSMs, and evaluate their attenuation ability to Rayleigh waves. A wide band gap and a zero-frequency band gap (ZFBG) can be found as the band structure of the seismic metamaterial is almost equal to the band structure of the seismic metamaterial plate plus the sound cone. It is found that the Rayleigh waves in the ZFSM are deflected and converted into bulk waves. When the number of the unit cells of the ZFSM is sufficient, the transmission distance and deflection angle of the Rayleigh waves in the ZFSM are constant at the same frequency. This discovery is expected to open up the possibility of seismic protection for large nuclear power plants, ancient buildings and metropolitan areas. Millions of earthquakes occur every year on the planet we live in. In this paper, we use Solid Mechanics Module of COMSOL Multiphysics to calculate the band structures and the propagation of Rayleigh waves in the SM. For the one-dimensional periodic SM, the reduced wave vector from 0 to π/a (a is the period of the SM) is used to obtain the eigenvalues. In the experiment, the sample comprising foam-steel composite is zoomed in the upper right corner of Fig. Comparing the two band structures, we can find that when the SMP is placed on the half space, the original band is basically unchanged, but the sound cone (dark gray area in Fig. From the above simulations and lab-scale experiment of the SM consisting of the two-component SMP and half space, it can be seen that the band structure of the SM is almost equal to the band structure of the SMP plus the sound cone. And this SM can effectively attenuate the seismic surface waves to protect the buildings. Next, we will use FEM calculations to discuss the band structure and attenuation effect of the ZFSM consisting of the three-component SMP and a half space on the seismic surface waves. The ZFBG of the ZFSM is discussed under the one-dimensional (1D) and two-dimensional (2D) periodic models. shows a schematic diagram of the system used to calculate the transmission spectrum. Since the ZFBG of the ZFSM is mainly studied and discussed in this paper, and the wavelength of the seismic surface wave is large in the range of ZFBG, the values of the geometric parameters involved here are all large, especially the depth (500a) of the substrate, the distance (340a) from the source (point A in Fig. For a 1D three-component SMP based on local resonance, a band gap can easily occur. As shown in Fig. Even if the unit cells in Fig. Through the transmission spectrum of the ZFSM, we can also see the existence of these two wide band gaps. In the range of the ZFBG, we see that the seismic surface waves are well attenuated in the range of 0.5 -9.0 Hz. However, for the seismic surface waves close to zero frequency, the attenuation effect needs to be improved. Because the number of unit cells in the proposed ZFSM is infinite because of the periodic boundary condition when calculating the band structure, while the number of the unit cells in the ZFSM is finite (1600 unit cells) when calculating the transmission spectrum. Therefore, we hypothesize that the number of the unit cells of the ZFSM and the lower limit of the attenuation zone in the transmission spectrum are closely related. To discover the relationship between the number of the unit cells of the ZFSM and the lower limit of the attenuation zone in the transmission spectrum, we simulate and plot the displacements of surface waves of the system varying with the frequency by calculating the transmission spectrum. As shown in Fig. Therefore, Rayleigh waves will be deflected and converted into bulk waves as shown in Fig. In order to investigate the influence of the material parameters of the substrate on the ZFBG, we consider the effect of the Young's modulus (Fig. The green part is the effective medium of the SMP. Its upper boundary is the free boundary, and the thickness is a = 1.5 m. In the low frequency region (0 -5 Hz) away from local resonance, the effective mass density of the SMP  and 3  are the filling rates of concrete, rubber and steel core, respectively, satisfying 1  and 3  are the mass densities of concrete, rubber and steel core, respectively. mass density e  =4588.36 kg/m 3 , Young's modulus E e = 40 GPa, Poisson's ratio υ e = 0.3. The substrate shown in Fig. For the layered medium shown in Fig. (a) (b) In order to verify that the above the ZFSM still has a ZFBG in the three-dimensional space, we have studied the 2D ZFSM as shown in Fig. In summary, through the lab-scale experiment and numerical simulation of the ZFSM consisting of the two-component SMP and a half space, we demonstrate this new design methodology to create SMs to attenuate seismic surface waves. Then we propose a three-component ZFSM consisting of the three-component SMP and a half space. By investigating the influence of the material parameters of the substrate on the 1D ZFBG, we find that the band structure of the SM composed of the SMP and a half space is almost equal to that of the SMP plus the sound cone. By analyzing the propagation of Rayleigh waves in the 1D and 2D ZFSMs in the frequency range of the ZFBG, we find that Rayleigh waves are deflected at a certain angle and converted into bulk waves. When the number of the unit cells of the ZFSM is sufficient, the transmission distance and deflection angle of the Rayleigh waves in the ZFSM are constant at the same frequency. All the phenomena demonstrate that the ZFSM can attenuate surface waves in the frequency range of its ZFBG to protect the target building. This ZFSM, which is simple and easy to implement, is expected to protect large nuclear power plants, ancient buildings and metropolises from damage by seismic waves. This paper not only demonstrates the application prospects of ZFSM, but also provides design guidance for surface wave researchers.