Dry spinning is characterized by the simultaneous production of multiple thin polymeric fibers in airflows and the evaporation of the solvent contained in these fibers. This involves fiber-air interactions as well as radial diffusion effects over the fiber cross-sections. Recent models for fibers in such production processes assume the fiber curves to be strictly uni-axial. But there are industrial setups showing airflow induced lateral movements of the fibers which creates the need for curved fiber models. In this paper we present a special Cosserat rod model that describes curved fibers in such dry spinning processes. Adapting the efficient simulation framework from the uni-axial fiber setting makes the simulation of industrial setups for multiple curved fibers with two-way coupled airflows possible, for which we present results for the first time in literature. Dry spinning is a production method for polymeric fibers. In dry spinning devices a polymer diluent solution is fed at constant and controllable rate through jet nozzles into a spinning duct, where the spun fibers are dried by a heated airflow. During this drying process solvent evaporates out of the jets and leads to thinning and solidification of the fibers. Starting from uni-axial stationary one-dimensional dry spinning models introduced by Considering industrial dry spinning devices with lateral air inflow into the spinning duct, i.e., the airflow velocity is meanly perpendicular to the fiber direction, the assumption of straight fibers is no longer tenable due to expected lateral deflections. Therefore, we extend the model and simulation framework presented in This paper is structured as follows. In Sec. 2 we present our dry spinning model for curved viscous fibers. The numerical solution framework is explained in Sec. 3. In Sec. 4 we show simulation results for an industrial dry spinning setup. In the special Cosserat rod theory there are two constitutive elements: a curve r : Ω → E 3 specifying the jet position (e.g. midline) and an orthonormal director triad {d 1 , d 2 , d 3 } : Ω → E 3 that is attached to the curve and characterizes the orientation of the cross-sections in the threedimensional Euclidean space E 3 . Considering the stationary one-dimensional fiber domain Ω the fiber length L is an a priori unknown parameter. It is common to represent the rod equations with respect to the director basis and an outer basis. This simplifies the discussion of geometric models and material laws. Besides the director basis {d 1 , d 2 , d 3 } we introduce the fixed (spaceand time-independent) orthonormal outer basis {a 1 , a 2 , a 3 } ⊂ E 3 . The director and outer bases are related by the tensor-valued rotation R, i.e., R = 3 i=1 a i ⊗ d i . For any quantity y ∈ E 3 we use the following coordinate terminology: yi a i with y = (y 1 , y 2 , y 3 ) ∈ R 3 and y = (y 1 , y2 , y3 ) ∈ R 3 . Hence, the coordinate triples fulfill y = R • y with the associated orthogonal matrix R = (d i • a j ) ij ∈ SO(3). Proceeding from a three-dimensional free boundary problem (BVP) the derivation of a Cosserat rod model describing dry spinning of a single curved fiber can be done with the same methods and concepts as presented for an uni-axial fiber model in Let s and r address the scaled arc length and radial parameters. Then, our one-two-dimensional dry spinning Cosserat rod model reads in non-dimensional form System 1 (One-two-dimensional BVP for curved radially symmetric fibers). One-dimensional equations, s ∈ (0, 1): with boundary conditions at inlet s = 0 and fiber end s = 1: Radial equations, (r, s) ∈ (0, 1) 2 : with boundary conditions at inlet s = 0, fiber surface r = 1 and symmetry boundary r = 0: Constitutive laws and geometric relation: Abbreviations: The rod equations (2.1) for the fiber curve ȓ, triad R, scalar speed u, curvature κ, contact force n, and contact couple m describe the tangential fiber behavior parameterized by s. Here, M denotes the fiber mass line density, R the radius, f the body force line density, and μ the dynamic mixture viscosity. The assumption of an ideal mixture leads to the constitutive laws for the mixture density ρ and the mixture specific heat capacity q. Here, ρ 0 p and ρ 0 d are the material densities and h 0 p and h 0 d the enthalpies of pure polymer and diluent, respectively. The temperature derivatives of h 0 p , h 0 d and h are in particular the specific heat capacities q 0 p , q 0 d , and q for constant pressure. The two-dimensional advection-diffusion equations (2.2) for polymer mass fraction c and temperature T describe radial effects due to diluent evaporation (cf. As external forces we consider gravitational and air drag forces f = fg + fair with direction of gravity ȇg , ȇg = 1, and dimensionless drag function F given in Composite reference values used for non-dimensionalization and resulting dimensionless numbers. The following scales are assumed to be given from the specific considered setup M 0 , v 0 , r 0 , d 0 , μ 0 , q 0 , T 0 , α 0 , γ 0 , C 0 , D 0 , ρ ,0 , ν ,0 , p ,0 q ,0 , λ ,0 , D d, ,0 . Furthermore, we employ the models for the heat and mass transfer with the associated dimensionless function N : R 3 → R and the model for the diluent density in the air at the fiber surface given in Note that for the determination of the a priori unknown fiber length L we impose an additional boundary condition: to the 17 equations of (1) for the 17 unknowns (ȓ, R, u, κ, n, m), we set 18 boundary conditions at s = 0 and s = 1. The one-dimensional system (2.1) is the main difference between the curved fiber model (System 1) and its uni-axial counterpart given in Besides the unknown parameter L, the curved fiber model (System 1) has the same structure as the uni-axial one in In this paper we describe the new model-dependent continuation strategy for the solution of the one-dimensional equations (2.1). For a detailed description of the product integration method for the solution of the two-dimensional equations (2.2) and the implementation of the fiber-airflow interactions we refer to A direct solution of the boundary value problem (2.1) with the help of classical solvers such as collocation schemes is in general not possible due to the non-global convergence of the Newton method. Therefore, the system (2.1) is embedded into the family of boundary value problems d ds y = f (y; p), ĝ(y(0), y(1); p) = 0, Here, 1 denotes the n-dimensional tuple of ones. The functions f 0 , g 0 are chosen in such a way that for p = 0 an analytical solution is known. Given this starting solution, we seek for a sequence of parameter tuples 0 = p 0 , p 1 , . . . , p m = 1 such that the solution to the respective predecessor boundary value problem provides a good initial guess for the successor. The solution associated to p = 1 finally belongs to the original system. Each boundary value problem itself is solved by a collocation scheme based on the Lobatto IIIa formula. This is a classical approach provided in the software MATLAB (http://www.mathworks.com) by the routine bvp4c.m. We introduce continuation parameters for the viscous, gravitational and aerodynamic forces as well as for the draw ratio and the effect of heat and mass transfer over the fiber boundary. Additionally, we introduce the further continuation parameter p bc and the modified boundary condition ȓ(0)p bc ȓin -(1p bc ) ȓout -LR T in • e 3 = 0. We choose the starting solution (corresponding to p = 0) Basically the initial solution for the rod curve ȓ is built by the orthogonal projection of (ȓ out -ȓ in ) onto the initial fiber direction R T in • e 3 . In total, the initial solution is a stress-free, unbent, straight fiber with constant polymer mass fraction, speed and temperature being extruded from the modified nozzle position (ȓ out -LR T in • e 3 ). The navigation strategy through the parameter space equals the corresponding procedure for the uni-axial fiber model. Remark 2 (Regularization of rod model). Numerical studies show that the angular momentum equation of the rod model (2.1) is badly scaled with respect to the variable m. In order to accelerate the convergence of the continuation-collocation procedure we introduce the scaled couple m = m/ε 2 , yielding the angular momentum balance Here, the slenderness parameter ε only appears in the term 1/ε 2 n × e 3 . It is considered as regularization parameter (regularization of the associated string model) and therefore fixed at the constant value ε 0 = 10 -1 . The remaining parameters ε in the two-dimensional equations (2.2) are not affected and set as desired. The corresponding material law in (2.1) changes accordingly. As in The physical material parameters for the polymer CA and the diluent acetone are listed in Table In this work we develop a dry spinning model for curved viscous fibers. The model combines onedimensional rod equations with two-dimensional advection-diffusion equations covering the radial effects of mass fraction and temperature. Adopting the efficient numerical framework from the uniaxial case 