Leakage currents through insulators received continuous attention for decades, owing to their importance for a wide range of technologies, and interest in their fundamental mechanisms. This work investigates the leakage currents through atomic layer deposited (ALD) Al 2 O 3 , grown on SrTiO 3 . This combination is not only a key building block of oxide electronics, but also a clean system for studying the leakage mechanisms without interfacial layers that form on most of the conventional bottom electrodes. We show how tiny differences in the deposition process can have a dramatic effect on the leakage behavior. Detailed analysis of the leakage behavior rules out Fowler-Nordheim tunneling (FNT) and thermionic emission, and leaves the trap-related mechanisms of trap-assisted tunneling (TAT) and Poole-Frenkel as the likely mechanisms. After annealing the sample in air, the currents are reduced, which is ascribed to transition from trap-based mechanism to FNT, due to the elimination of the traps. The dramatic role of the assumptions regarding the flat-band voltage used for analysis is critically discussed, and the sensitivity of the extracted parameters on this magnitude is quantitatively described. We show that field effect devices based on structures similar to those described here, should be able to modulate >10 13 cm -2 electrons. These results provide general guidelines for reducing and analyzing leakage currents in insulators, and highlight some of the possible approaches and pitfalls in their analysis. Alumina (Al 2 O 3 ) grown by atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a widespread insulating oxide. The motivation for studying this material ranges from understanding various fundamental physical aspects of Al 2 O 3 More recently, the wide bandgap semiconductor β-Ga 2 O 3 has emerged as a promising candidate for power devices Another potential application of ALD-Al 2 O 3 is in oxide electronics, a field greatly invigorated by the discovery of a 2D electron gas (2DEG) at the interface between some insulating oxides The wide band gap of STO of 3.2 eV 23 makes leakage reduction even more challenging, owing to the relatively low possible barriers with the insulator. We previously addressed this issue spectroscopically, by investigating the band alignment at Al 2 O 3 /STO interfaces, and reported barriers of 2.0 ± 0.3 eV and 1.4 ± 0.2 eV for electrons and holes, respectively One possible explanation to the discrepancy between the large barriers determined by spectroscopy and the high leakage currents is electron traps or states that may exist inside the Al 2 O 3 band gap, that are typically attributed to oxygen vacancies (001) 0.01%(wt) Nb-doped STO (Nb:STO) crystals (CrysTec GmbH) were TiO 2 terminated using the "extended Arkansas" method The Pt/Al 2 O 3 /Nb:STO structures are treated as metal insulator semiconductor (MIS) capacitors, where in the general case, the applied voltage on the gate (V g ) can be expressed by the following 37 where where  Pt is the Pt effective work function that was measured as 5.35 V on Al 2 O 3 where d is the oxide thickness. In the absence of Nb:STO depletion, the Al 2 O 3 permittivity can be extracted directly from the CV plot using the parallel plate capacitor expression C ox /A=ε 0 ε r /t ox , where 0  is the vacuum permittivity, r  is the relative permittivity of Al 2 O 3 and A is the pad area. respectively. At accumulation (+4V), the extracted C s at 5 kHz and R s at 800 kHz before thermal anneal are 0.68 μF/cm 2 and 32 Ω, respectively, while after thermal anneal the extracted C s at 5 kHz and R s at 800 kHz are 0.74 μF/cm 2 and 94 Ω, respectively (slight oxidation of the surface of the Al back contact may account for this small R s increase). Relative permittivity of 7.7 and 8.4 was extracted before and after thermal anneal, respectively, in agreement with previous reports From this point onward all analysis is done on Recipe B samples. Beyond the measurement voltage range, devices were found to be prone to irreversible damage. The relevant region for positive bias leakage was analyzed at varying temperatures. Figure The positive bias of the JV curve (5-5.7 V) was fitted by the abovementioned mechanisms (Figure Where E is electric field in the insulator, q is the electron charge, ), determined to be 3.4 ± 0.5, which is somewhat higher than the extracted value from optical measurements However, The initial use of a value of 1.45 V as the flat-band voltage is an approximation of the effective work functions difference, neglecting all other potential parasitics such as fixed oxide charges that are likely to affect the flat-band voltage Analyzing the PF conduction mechanism with a broader range of flat-band voltages, yields reasonable flat-band range of voltages of -0.3 to -1.3 V, in which PF emission is possible (Figure The relationship between the current density and the electric field in TE model is given by Where  B is energy barrier between the conduction band edges of Nb:STO and Al 2 O 3 and A* is the effective Richardson constant. An average energy barrier of 1.7 ± 0.1 eV was extracted from the intercept of the linear fit of TE (Figure Next, we consider the validity of TAT mechanism, where the relationship between the current density and the electric field, according to Fleischer et. al, where C t is a slowly varying function of electron energy, qC N P P / (P P ) dx where X 1 =(V- t  )/E and P 1 and P 2 are the tunneling probabilities Last, we examine FNT, where the relationship between the current density and the electric field is given by the following expression An FNT linear fit is shown in Figure the presence of oxygen vacancies, For oxide electronics, for example field-effect transistors (FETs) with 2DEG channels, depleting the 2DEG is necessary for closing this "normally-on" device We show that while ALD Al 2 O 3 is a mature, well-established process for gate insulator applications, optimization of small process details can lead to huge benefits in mitigating leakage. The optimized structures can be useful as gate stacks for oxide electronics, owing to their low leakage which enables significant charge modulation of an underlying channel. mathematical agreement to the data, careful consideration of the extracted parameters rules out TE and FNT. Moreover, we show that the effect of the assumed flat-band voltage on the extracted parameters can be huge, necessitating careful handling of this parameter. Altogether, we identify trap-based conduction (TAT or PF) as the most likely leakage mechanism for unannealed samples. These traps can be ascribed to oxygen vacancies in Al 2 O 3 . A moderate anneal reduces the leakage currents and alleviates their temperature dependence. This observation highlights Fowler-Nordheim tunneling (FNT) as the most likely candidate, indicating the possible mitigation of the oxygen vacancies during anneal. Al 2 O 3 growth is the easiest and most widespread ALD process, and it can be robustly performed over wide range of temperatures and other process conditions