We consider the spin response within the five-orbital model for iron-based superconductors and study two cases: equal and unequal gaps in different bands. In the first case, the spin resonance peak in the superconducting state appears below the characteristic energy scale determined by the gap magnitude, 2∆L. In the second case, the energy scale corresponds to the sum of smaller and larger gap magnitudes, ∆L + ∆S. Increasing the values of the Hubbard interaction and the Hund's exchange, we observe a shift of the spin resonance energy to lower frequencies. Origin of the unconventional superconducting state in iron pnictides and chalcogenides is still under debate Since different mechanisms of Cooper pairing result in different gap symmetries and structures One of the specific features of the s ± state is the spin resonance peak in the dynamical spin susceptibility χ(Q, ω). Since Q connects Fermi sheets with dif-ferent signs of s ± gaps, the resonance condition for the interband susceptibility is fulfilled and the spin resonance peak is formed at a frequency ω R below 2∆ with ∆ being the gap size As is known from angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and recent measurements of gaps via Andreev spectroscopy, there are at least two distinct gaps present in 11, 122, and 1111 systems To calculate spin susceptibility in normal and superconducting states, we use random phase approximation (RPA) with the local Coulomb interactions (Hubbard and Hund's exchange). In the multiorbital system, transverse dynamical spin susceptibility χ+-(q, ω) is the matrix in orbital indices. It can be obtained in the RPA from the bare electron-hole matrix bubble χ(0)+-(q, ω) by summing up a series of ladder diagrams, where q is the momentum, ω is the frequency, Ûs and Î are interaction and unit matrices in orbital space, respectively. Here we use the tight-binding model from Ref. where d † lkσ is the annihilation operator of a particle with momentum k, spin σ, and orbital index l ∈ (1, 2, . . . , 5) ) . Later we use numer-ical values of hopping matrix elements t ll (k) and oneelectron energies l from Ref. The general two-particle on-site Coulomb interaction is represented by the Hamiltonian where is the number of particles operator at the site f , U and U are the intra-and interorbital Hubbard repulsion, J is the Hund's exchange, and J is the so-called pair hopping. Green's functions are diagonal in the band basis, Here G μ↑ (p, iω n ) and F μ↑ (p, iω n ) are normal and anomalous (Gor'kov) Green's functions, iΩ is the Matsubara frequency. Components of the physical spin susceptibility, χ +-(q, iΩ) = 1 2 l,m χ ll,mm +-(q, iΩ), are calculated using Eq. ( Since calculation of the Cooper pairing instability is not a topic of the present study, here we assume that the superconductivity is coming from some other theory and study the s ± state with ∆ kμ = ∆ μ cos k x cos k y , where μ is the band index. Two cases are considered below: equal gaps with ∆ μ = ∆ μ and unequal gaps with the smaller gap ∆ β2 = ∆ S on the outer hole FS and larger gaps ∆ α1,2 = ∆ β1 = ∆ L on inner hole and electron FSs. To be consistent with the experimental data, we choose ∆ S = ∆ L /3, see Fig. In Figs. For the s ± state, Q connects FSs with different signs of gaps, sgn∆ kμ = -sgn∆ k+Qν , thus coherence factors are finite and the imaginary part of χ (0) possesses a discontinuous jump at a finite frequency ω c . Due to the Kramers-Kronig relations, the real part exhibits a logarithmic singularity. Within RPA, Eq. ( To see the influence of the interaction parameters, we choose six sets of Hubbard U and Hund's J values. We also used the spin-rotational invariance constraint that minimizes the number of free parameters by setting U = U -2J and J = J. For the first three sets, the value of U is chosen so that the system is near the magnetic instability; slight increase of U results in the divergency of Imχ at the wave vector Q. Such choice is naturally related to the proximity of the system to the antiferromagnetic state at zero doping In Fig. Similar situation is observed for smaller values of interaction parameters, see Fig. FIG. slightly doped iron-based materials are antiferromagnets, the spin susceptibility should diverge at the nesting wave vector Q in the itinerant scenario for the magnetism. Therefore, one should expect the sizeable values of interaction parameters. We studied the spin susceptibility in FeBS in the superconducting state with equal and unequal gaps, ∆ L and ∆ S . Spin resonance appears in the s ± state below the characteristic energy scale determined by the sum of gaps on two different Fermi surface sheets connected by the scattering wave vector Q. We varied the interaction parameters, in particular, Hubbard repulsion U and Hund's exchange J. With increase of interaction, we observe a total increase of the spin response both in normal and superconducting states. At the same time, the spin resonance peak is shifted to lower frequencies staying below the characteristic energy scale. This work was supported in part by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grant 16-02-00098), Presidium of RAS Program for the Fundamental Studies #12, and "BASIS" Foundation for Development of Theoretical Physics and Mathematics. MMK acknowledges support by the Gosbudget program # 0356-2017-0030.