This paper addresses the transition from the normal to the superfluid state in strongly correlated two dimensional fermionic superconductors and Fermi gases. We arrive at the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) temperature TBKT as a function of attractive pairing strength by associating it with the onset of "quasi-condensation" in the normal phase. Our approach builds on a criterion for determining the BKT transition temperature for atomic gases which is based on a well established Quantum Monte Carlo analysis of the phase space density. This latter quantity, when derived from BCS-BEC crossover theory for fermions, leads to non-monotonic behavior for TBKT as a function of the attractive interaction or inverse scattering length. In Fermi gases, this implies a robust superconducting dome followed by a long tail from the flat BEC asymptote, rather similar to what is observed experimentally. For lattice systems we find that TBKT has an absolute maximum of the order of 0.1EF . We discuss how our results compare with those derived from the Nelson Kosterlitz criterion based on the mean field superfluid density and the approach to the transition from below. While there is agreement in the strict mean-field BCS regime at weak coupling, we find that at moderate pairing strength bosonic excitations cause a substantial increase in TBKT followed by an often dramatic decrease before the system enters the BEC regime. Recently there has been a resurgence of interest in superconductivity in (quasi-)2D materials. This has been driven by exciting discoveries of novel superconductors such as magicangle twisted bilayer graphene Arriving at this formalism is the goal of this paper which addresses BKT superconductivity in the presence of strong pairing correlations. Our attention is on the approach and calculation of T BKT from the normal state, following the extensive body of work on BKT in atomic Bose systems We stress here that understanding BKT in fermionic sys-tems is not as straightforward as in their bosonic counterparts. Indeed the experimental realization of the BKT model was established in superfluid helium films There is also a convincing case for the observation of BKT in atomic Bose gases In determining physical variables and consequences, a notable complication is that plots of T BKT as a function of the attractive pairing interaction strength g are non-monotonic, so that knowing T BKT does not uniquely determine other fundamental properties. Indeed, Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) simulations A central result of this paper is that when the instability is approached from the normal state, we, too, find robust domes for the lattice dispersion, and in addition we find they are present as well for the case of a gas dispersion. Importantly, these non-monotonicities appear in the intermediate coupling regime, away from the BEC regime. Here a Fermi surface is still present, as one would expect in any physical 2D superconducting system. The dome arises from a competition between a rising trend of BCS pairing on the BCS side and the strong suppression of T c due to formation of pairs and the concurrent onset of a pseudogap, well before the BEC regime is accessed. The approach in this paper is to combine a pairing fluctuation theory We emphasize that these bosons are a composite made up of fermions and the fundamental bosonic variables n B and M B must depend on the fermionic excitation gap ∆(T ) (which is non-vanishing even at T BKT ). In a true Bose system n B and M B are fixed in temperature. In fermionic superfluids both depend on T and interaction strength. The non-monotonicity we observe depends on a competition between n B (T ), which increases, and 1/M B (T ), which decreases with increasing g. That the effective number of fermion pairs increases as the attraction becomes stronger should be clear There is a large body of work which addresses the BKT transition as approached from below using the Nelson-Kosterlitz Clearly, both theoretical approaches (using either the superfluid density or quasi-condensation) need to be simultaneously pursued by the community if progress is to be made. It should be cautioned, however, that neither of these two schemes explicitly accommodates the important vortexantivortex excitations which presumably affect the size of T BKT , although how much is not precisely known. Importantly, in this paper we discuss the relation between the two, and demonstrate agreement at the weak coupling, BCS level. However, as the attractive coupling constant g is increased in magnitude, bosonic excitations become more significant. Through our comparison we are able to characterize these bosonic contributions; these also turn out to be nonmonotonic, causing an increase in T BKT in the near "unitary" regime and a decrease very close to the onset of the BEC regime. We stress that our approach which is based on the onset of quasi-condensation is more directly connected to those experiments where BKT is most clearly observed as in 2D Bose superfluids Finally, we end this section by noting that other consequences of strong pairing correlations should be a central feature of the normal state. Indeed, the foundation for using phase only (XY) models in 2D systems depends on having a substantial pairing at the transition temperature We now present an outline of the remaining sections of this paper. Section II of the paper presents a brief review of our BCS-BEC crossover theory based on a self-consistent Tmatrix approximation. The goal of this discussion is to show how to obtain the important bosonic quantities n B and M B for general g from their fermionic counterparts. In Section III we discuss the case of 2D superfluids and present an expression for the BKT transition temperature which is widely used in the bosonic literature Reasonable quantitative comparisons with Fermi gas experiments are presented in Section V, along with predictions for the behavior in the lattice case. Comparisons with QMC results on the attractive Hubbard model indicate some deviation (roughly within a factor of 2). We show how to associate the measured transition temperature with other attendant properties such as the size of the pseudogap. Following a discussion in Section VI, our conclusions are presented in Section VII. The incorporation of stronger than BCS pairing attraction is an important component in addressing BKT in superconductors. In 2D the s-wave pairing instability is always accompanied by two-body bound states Our approach is intimately tied to the observation has a greater applicability than had been appreciated at the time of its original proposal. Here u k and v k are the BCS coherence factors. As the strength of the attractive pairing interaction g between fermions is increased, this wavefunction is capable of describing a continuous evolution from BCS-like behavior to a form of Bose-Einstein condensation. The BEC regime sets in when the fermionic chemical potential μ becomes negative and at this point, the underlying Fermi surface disappears. We extend this ground state to finite temperature following an approach to BCS theory proposed by Kadanoff and Martin To do so we can associate the underlying structure of BCS theory with a two particle propagator, called t pg , which is given by (2) where G 0 is the bare fermion Green's function, and the dressed Green's function G assumes the BCS form with the Bogoliubov quasiparticle dispersion A detailed derivation of Eq. ( Then, as a generalization of the usual Thouless condition, we recognize that the statement t -1 pg (0) = 0 effectively leads to the usual BCS temperature dependent gap equation for ∆(T ). We can think of this familiar gap equation as a BEC condition that the pairs associated with t pg (which are necessarily non-condensed) have zero chemical potential μ pair = 0 for all T ≤ T c . For the most part our interest will be on the long wavelength and low frequency limit, where the pair propagator can be approximated as Here a -1 0 characterizes the pair fluctuation strength, γ is the decay rate due to the two-fermion continuum, and M B is the effective pair mass. Both a 0 and M B can be determined via Taylor expansion of t -1 pg (Q) in Ω and q. In particular, Next we focus on these non-condensed pairs in the normal state To obtain n B we note that the self energy associated with the dressed Green's function is more completely given by where in this last step we have assumed that the system is near an instability where t pg (Q) is strongly peaked at Q = 0. Eq. ( Combined with the parametrization in Eq. ( where b(x) is the Bose-Einstein distribution function. Here a 0 and M B depend on the three parameters μ, ∆, T , and can be deduced through Taylor expansions. For a 2D system, these equations can be solved selfconsistently for (∆, μ, μ pair ) at low T and for given interaction strength g. The zero T solution can be taken as the limit of T → 0 so that μ pair remains finite in Eq. ( What should be clear from this analysis is that in BCS-BEC crossover theory the normal state consists effectively of an ad-mixture of fermions (with number n -2n B and chemical potential μ) and bosons (with number n B and chemical potential μ pair ). Equation ( where both n B and M B are temperature dependent and calculated at T c . In a very compact way this equation encapsulates the behavior of BCS-BEC crossover theory, beyond the strict weak coupling limit. It should be viewed as reflecting the condensation temperature of preformed pairs. Importantly, these represent the emergent bosons which are central to a treatment of BCS-BEC crossover. We note that the dependence on n B is similar to what is found in an ideal Bose gas, but it should be stressed here that inter-boson interactions are present, as is reflected in the superfluidity This ratio n B /M B and its 3D analogue determine the shape of the transition curves as a function of g. Indeed, the fractional power n 2/3 B is not very different quantitatively from n B , away from the n B → 0 limit. In this way, we will see that the shape of the curves in 2D BKT are not too dissimilar from their 3D counterparts. To elucidate the physics, it is useful to present in Fig. In the next two sections we discuss two types of criteria which have been used to establish T BKT and follow this with a comparison. It is useful to consider Eq. ( The size of |μ pair |, which measures how close the normal fluid is to a long range-ordered superfluid phase, reflects the bosonic phase-space density: D B (T ) ≡ n B (T )λ 2 B , where λ B ≡ 2π/M B T is the de Broglie thermal wavelength for the pairs. In this notation k B = 1 and = 1. Importantly, in two dimensions, D B determines the pair chemical potential μ pair , so that there is quasi-condensation When approached from the high temperature side where the dimensionless coupling constant g reflects the size of the 3D inter-boson scattering length a B , along with the 2D localization length. The constant C ≈ 380 has been established by QMC Estimates of D crit B for fermionic superfluids are available in the literature Thus, based on the atomic Bose When approached from the low temperature side, the BKT transition To tie the two approaches together, we can, however, extract an inequality This reflects the fact that the total bosonic phase space density must exceed its superfluid counterpart, given in Eq. ( If we use BCS-BEC mean field theory A. Comparison of the Two BKT Criteria Of central importance is to compare these two schemes for the BKT transition temperature obtained when approached from the normal state using Eq. ( Figures where k = k 2 /2m and B = 1/ma 2 2D . We see that the agreement is very good in the strict BCS regime, for small coupling g. This largely derives from the fact that here T BKT is close to the pairing onset temperature T * . Both theories yield the same T * . We can refer to Fig A central difference is that the quasi-condensation approach leads to a higher maximum at intermediate coupling and a more dramatic plummet in T BKT beyond the maximum. A slight kink appears exactly when the fermionic chemical potential reaches zero and one might expect this feature as n B has to have a discontinuity in slope. Here the boson number density is precisely half the fermion density and all fermions are paired. Asymptotically, in the BEC regime, the two curves also coincide as expected Understanding the physical origin of these two principal differences is particularly important for arriving at a more complete physical picture of the BKT transition in a fermionic system. Both of these effects arise from the bosonic contributions to the phase stiffness which are missing in the mean field approximation to ρ s . We refer to the lower panels of Fig. Plotted in these lower panels are the two components in the quasi-condensation picture n B and M B , with a rescaling for better visibility. This rescaling will not affect the deduced ratio plot (except for an overall normalization). The origin of the important non-monotonic effects in the ratio can now be seen. We see that n B and M B rise just beyond the BCS regime where pseudogap effects associated with meta-stable non-condensed pairs begin to emerge. Notably, the pair mass increases more slowly (in the plots) giving rise to the maximum in the ratio, which overshoots the ρ s -based plot We end by summarizing the essential points from this comparison, which apply to both the lattice and gas dispersion cases. The mean field ρ s approach is missing bosonic contributions [57]. In the strict BCS regime these can be neglected and in that regime the two calculations of T BKT are equivalent. (This equivalence is insured by the particular T matrix used here.) The most important consequence of including non-condensed pairs in the gas case is that they lead to a maximum at intermediate coupling. This derives from the extended stabilization of pairs and concomitant reduction in their mass. In the lattice case, for the same general reason, these pairs enhance an existing (weaker) maximum. We end this section by noting that correlation functions have also been addressed We can compare our theoretical framework directly to Fermi gas experiments The left panel of Fig. We emphasize that by presenting this figure we are not claiming absolute agreement with experiment. (Although, perhaps surprisingly, within error bars, our theory curve passes through all but one data point with no adjustable parameters). The experimental figure should be viewed as a relevant benchmark to help the community arrive at an understanding of BKT in fermionic superfluids, which is a rather unique case where there is rather systematic data. Notably, here we are dealing with greater complications than, for example, in a prototypical BKT system such as helium-4. We replot in the right panel of Fig. We now focus exclusively on the lattice case. Figure Panel (b) shows how the above picture can be regarded as driven by a competition between an increase in the density of Cooper pairs n B (which saturates to n/2 above g c ) and an even stronger increase in the mass M B . Here the critical coupling g c is associated with the point where μ changes sign, as depicted in panel (c). For strong coupling g > g c , the normal state essentially consists purely of bosonic pairs without unbound fermions (except at the highest T ). Note that the pair mass scales linearly with g. This gives rise to the expected asymptotic tail in T BKT ∝ t 2 /g. We emphasize here that the dome at intermediate couplings is not determined by the t 2 /g asymptotics seen in strong coupling. For completeness, in Fig. The fact that the fermionic regime is so robust at high densities is intimately connected to the (near-) particle-hole symmetry of the underlying lattice Hamiltonian. In a bipartite lattice at exactly half-filling, the fermionic chemical potential is pinned at μ = 2dt (where d is the dimension), regardless of the interaction strength. As a result a purely bosonic regime can never be achieved. Interestingly, within our approach, we observe re-entrant superconductivity in a narrow range of intermediate electron densities around n = 0.55. Here in addition to the dome for g < g c , there is a strong coupling tail with t 2 /g asymptotic behavior that sets in at a slightly larger g. Similar re-entrant behavior has been observed elsewhere We can compare to earlier QMC data on the attractive Hubbard model at n = 0.7 and may be in part responsible for the differences from the QMC data. Additionally, the absence of particle-hole fluctuations, as in generic T -matrix approaches, may lead to over estimates of the transition temperature and pairing gap We turn to Table Of particular interest are the size of the pseudogap ∆ at the transition in comparison to T BKT and the pairing onset temperature. The lower of the two g values appears most reasonable physically when compared to estimates in TBG This emphasizes that there are two important temperature scales: T * and T BKT . In general, it is the pair of temperatures We have stressed that understanding BKT in fermionic systems is not as straightforward as its bosonic counterpart. Indeed the experimental realization of the BKT model was established in superfluid helium films Here we study the transition when approached from the normal phase, following the methodology introduced for atomic gases An additional motivation for this paper is based on the excitement behind the recent discoveries of novel 2D superconductors which appears to be largely based on the hope that these (often engineered) systems can produce new forms of high temperature superconductivity. Also exciting is the possibility that they will serve to teach us about mechanisms for existing high T c (say, cuprate) systems. Our paper argues for a somewhat more modest perspective. Independent of the specifics of the attractive interaction mechanism, in these 2D systems, there is an absolute maximum to the transition temperature T BKT . It can be rather high, say of the order of 0.1E F as found here, or somewhat lower (0.05E F as found in Monte Carlo 