Graphene oxide (GO) is a nanofilm composed of graphene with various oxygen functional groups attached. GO is of interest due to its unique mechanical-enhancement properties, its tunable electronic properties, and its potential use in the wide-scale production of graphene. Scanning electron microscopes (SEMs) are frequently used to characterize and study GO films. The purpose of this project was to study the effects of SEM-imaging on GO films. Using an SEM, we irradiated GO samples at electron beam-energies of 10, 20, and 30 keV (at a constant emission current of ~40 ± 2 μA) for times ranging from 15 minutes to one hour. Raman D-and G-band intensities were used to examine structural modifications/damage to GO samples as a function of beam energy and exposure time. The results suggest that imaging with a 30 keV electron beam for 30 minutes may lead to the formation of amorphous carbon, while imaging with 10 keV or 20 keV beams for 30 minutes does not have a significant effect on GO samples. Graphene is a single atomic layer of carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal form. Graphene oxide (GO) is a sheet of graphene with various oxygen functional groups covalently attached. GO has attracted substantial interest due to its unique mechanical properties SEMs produce images by scanning samples' surfaces with electron beams with energies typically ranging from 500 eV to 50 keV. Exposure of GO and other nanomaterials to electron beams during SEM-characterization is known to introduce defects Raman spectroscopy is a vibration-based technique that is commonly used to characterize disorder in sp 2 carbon materials For this experiment we used GO samples (Graphenea Inc., Spain) prepared by the filtration of a monolayer GO dispersion. The circular GO samples had thicknesses of 12-15 μm and diameters of 4.5 ± 0.2 mm. The GO films were composed of 49-56 wt% carbon, 41-50 wt% oxygen, 0-2 wt% sulfur, 0-1 wt% nitrogen, and 0-1 wt% hydrogen. Samples were irradiated using a Hitachi S-3000N SEM at emission currents of 40 ± 2 μA and accelerating voltages ranging from 10 kV to 30 kV. While irradiating the GO samples, every effort was made to stabilize the SEM's emission current at 40 μA by continuously monitoring the emission current and adjusting the filament voltage, when necessary. As the emission current was essentially held constant during all irradiations, and as the same aperture and Raman spectra were obtained using a Bruker Optics Senterra dispersive Raman microscope spectrometer, equipped with a 2 mW, 532 nm-wavelength laser. Background contributions were subtracted from the spectra using software developed by Candeloro et al. The ID/IG values for GO films irradiated using 0 keV, 10 keV, 20 keV, and 30 keV electron beams for 30 minutes are shown in Fig. Raman D-to G-band peak-intensity ratios (ID/IG) for GO samples irradiated for 30 minutes using 10 keV, 20 keV, and 30 keV electron beams. The data point at 0 keV corresponds to an as-purchased (unirradiated) GO sample. Wavenumbers at which IG appears in the Raman spectra for GO irradiated with 0, 10, 20, and 30 keV electrons. The ID/IG values for GO films irradiated using a 30 keV electron beam for 0, 15, 30, 45, and 60 minutes are shown in Fig. There is still a need for measurements of ID/IG values at more frequent intervals to better understand the effects of irradiation-time on GO samples. Presently, we do not have enough information to completely understand the effects of long-term electron irradiation-times on GO films. The data presented here suggests that 30 minutes of irradiation-time has little effect on GO for electron beamenergies of 10 keV and 20 keV. However, exposure to a 30 keV electron beam for a duration of 30 minutes led to a partial change from a crystalline to amorphous structure. This change is evident through a decrease in ID/IG values, as well as through a consistent shift in the peak-intensity of the G-band to lower wavenumbers, as the electron beamenergy was increased. In the future, additional experiments should be performed in order to more accurately determine the accelerating voltage at which amorphous carbon begins to form as the result of electron-beam irradiation. For the time being, the results presented here should be taken into consideration by researchers when performing analysis of GO samples subsequent to SEM imaging.