The phenomenon of superconductivity occurs in the phase space of three principal parameters: temperature T, magnetic field B, and current density j. The critical temperature Tc is one of the first parameters that is measured and in a certain way defines the superconductor. From the practical applications point of view, of equal importance is the upper critical magnetic field Bc2 and conventional critical current density jc (above which the system begins to show resistance without entering the normal state). However, a seldom-measured parameter, the depairing current density j d , holds the same fundamental importance as Tc and Bc2, in that it defines a boundary between the superconducting and normal states. A study of j d sheds unique light on other important characteristics of the superconducting state such as the superfluid density and the nature of the normal state below Tc, information that can play a key role in better understanding newly-discovered superconducting materials. From a measurement perspective, the extremely high values of j d make it difficult to measure, which is the reason why it is seldom measured. Here, we will review the fundamentals of current-induced depairing and the fast-pulsed current technique that facilitates its measurement and discuss the results of its application to the topological-insulator/chalcogenide interfacial superconducting system. Attractive interactions between charge carriers cause them to condense by pairs into a coherent macroscopic quantum state below some transition temperature T c . The formation of this state is governed principally by a competition between four energies: condensation, magnetic-field expulsion, thermal, and kinetic. The order parameter ∆, which describes the extent of condensation and the strength of the superconducting state, is reduced as the temperature T , magnetic field B, and electric current density j are increased. In type-II superconductors, there is partial flux entry at B values above the lower critical magnetic field B c1 and complete destruction of superconductivity above the upper critical field B c2 (type-I superconductors can be viewed as a special case where the thermodynamic critical field B c = B c1 = B c2 ). The boundary in the T -B-j phase space that separates the superconducting and normal states is where ∆ vanishes, and the three parameters attain their critical values T c2 (B, j), B c2 (T, j), and j d (T, B). j d sets the intrinsic upper limiting scale for supercurrent transport in any superconductor, and for j > j d , the system attains its normal-state resistivity ρ n . j d should be distinguished from the conventional critical value j c (related to extrinsic characteristics such as the depinning of vortices) above which there is partial resistivity ρ < ρ n . The resistivity ρ in the superconducting state is usually less than its normal-state value ρ n . The reason for the presence of resistance at all in the superconducting state is because of fluctuations, percolation through junctions (in the case of granular superconductors), and the motion of magnetic flux vortices. For singly-connected superconductors not very close to T c , only the last mechanism dominates as the cause of resistance. In the magnetic field region between B c1 and B c2 , a type II superconductor enters a "mixed state" with quantized magnetic flux vortices, each containing an elementary quantum of flux Φ 0 = h/2e. Under the Lorentz driving force of an applied current, j×Φ 0 , vortices move transverse to j, leading to a flux-flow resistivity: in the free-flux-flow (large driving force) limit. Two length scales characterize the superconducting state which is the characteristic length scale for spatial modulations in ∆ (here, v F is the Fermi velocity and τ ∆ is the order-parameter relaxation time). The normal core of a flux vortex has an approximate effective radius of ξ. The destruction of the superconducting state occurs when these normal cores overlap, corresponding to the condition: where ξ is the coherence length perpendicular to B; the single ξ is replaced by the geometric mean √ ξ 1 ξ 2 in cases where the plane perpendicular to B is characterized by two anisotropic values. The other characteristic length scale in a superconductor is the magnetic-field penetration depth λ, whose London value is given by: where m * is the effective electronic mass and n s is the density of superconducting electrons. The theory behind this important quantity and its relationship to j d is described below. Figure For clean metallic superconductors, n s → n as T → 0, where n is the concentration of carriers in the normal state. Non-local effects and other corrections lead to deviations in λ from its London value. Hence, the superfluid density ρ s can be conveniently and more completely defined as: which includes the effective mass and other corrections to the effective n s , rather than the simpler definitions ρ s = n s or ρ s = n s /m * that are sometimes FIG. used in the literature. ρ s , a quantity of central importance in superconductivity, characterizes the phase stiffness of the condensate Traditionally, many common methods for obtaining ρ s do so by directly or indirectly measuring λ through its effect on a superconducting sample's magnetic-field profile and consequent magnetic susceptibility. This category includes methods such as reflection of spin-polarized slow neutrons Another approach to obtaining ρ s is by measuring the inertia of the superfluid (kinetic inductance) during its ballistic acceleration phase A measurement of j d provides an alternative to the above approaches for obtaining ρ s . It requires a minimal amount of material (typically just a microbridge or nanobridge), does not require the complicated meander patterning needed for a kinetic-inductance mea-surement, and is unaffected by a material's normal-state magnetism that affects inductive measurements of ρ s as discussed above. This immunity to material magnetism was used to good advantage for directly obtaining ρ s in the Nd 2-x Ce x CuO 4 superconductor for the first time Another valuable byproduct of measuring j d is that it provides a direct measurement of the normal state resistivity ρ n for temperatures below T c . One of the starting points in developing an understanding of any newlydiscovered superconductor is to understand the underlying normal state: the type of carriers and their concentration, their band-related properties, and the relevant scattering mechanisms and rates. At low applied B and j, ρ(T ) drops precipitously below T c , thereby obscuring how ρ n (T ≪ T c ) would have behaved if the superconductivity had not set in. The most common method for measuring ρ n (T < T c ) utilizes high magnetic fields B > B c2 to drive the system normal below T c ; however, this measurement is subject to magnetoresistance (typically R(B) = const) and may require prohibitively high magnetic fields (B c2 > 100 T for some superconductors). One alternative is to use the core of a magnetic flux vortex as a window to the normal state. From Equation (1), a measurement of ρ f elucidates ρ n Current-induced depairing provides an especially clean method for destroying superconductivity and accessing ρ n (T ≪ T 0 ). Like the method of applying B > B c2 to drive the system normal, applying j > j d is also free of interpretation and modeling, unlike flux-flow dissipation measurements. On the other hand, unlike the potential errors in the B c2 -based measurement due to normal-state magnetoresistance, the j d method is immune to this issue because the normal-state electroresistance is quite negligible (i.e., R(E) ≃ const) under the electric fields that arise at depairing conditions. Thus, besides the investigation of interesting phenomena and regimes in superconductivity related directly to current-induced depairing itself, the study of j d provides information on the important parameters of the superconducting state such as ρ s (T ) and ρ n (T ). In a microscopic theory such as the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory, experimental quantities are calculated from microscopic parameters such as the strength of the effective attractive interaction that leads to Cooper pair formation and the density of states at the Fermi level. Often, these microscopic parameters are not sufficiently well known. In the London and Ginzburg-Landau (GL) phenomenological theories, connections are made between the different observables from constraints based on thermodynamic principles and electrodynamical properties of the superconducting state, leading to an adequate estimation of the depairing current. These phenomenological formulations are described next The London theory An ordinary metal (normal conductor) requires a driving electric field E to maintain a constant current against resistive losses. In the simple Drude picture, this produces Ohm's law behavior, j = σE, with a conductivity given by σ = ne 2 τ /m * . A superconductor can carry a resistanceless current, and so, an electric field is not required for maintaining a persistent current. Instead, E in a perfectly-conducting state causes a ballistic acceleration of charge so that: This is the first London equation, which reflects the dissipationless acceleration of the superfluid. The second property that needs to be accounted for is the expulsion of magnetic flux by a superconductor. The magnetic field is exponentially screened from the interior following a spatial dependence: Together with the Maxwell equation ∇ × B = μ 0 j, this implies the following condition between B and j: This is the second London equation, which describes the property of a superconductor to exclude magnetic flux from its interior. Taken together with the Maxwell equation ∇ × E = -∂B/∂t, Equations ( Besides the London equations themselves, a third ingredient needed for the estimation of j d in this framework is the thermodynamic critical field B c and its relationship to the Helmholtz free energy density f . When flux is expelled, the free energy density is raised by the amount B 2 /2μ 0 . The critical flux expulsion energy (for the ideal case of a type-I superconductor with a nondemagnetizing geometry and dimensions large compared to the penetration depth) corresponds to the condition: where the L.H.S. of the equation represents the condensation energy density, which is the difference in free energy densities f n -f s between the normal and superconducting states. j d represents the condition when the kinetic energy density equals the condensation energy density: , where v s is the superfluid speed. Substituting for λ L (Equation ( The inequality reflects the fact that n s does not remain constant, but diminishes as j approaches j d . There are situations where a system's quantum wavefunction cannot be solved for by usual means because the Hamiltonian is unknown or not easily approximated. The GL formulation The idea is to introduce a complex phenomenological order parameter (pseudo wavefunction) ψ = |ψ|e iφ to represent the superconducting state. |ψ(r)| 2 is assumed to represent the order parameter ∆ introduced earlier, and to approximate the local density of paired superconducting charge carriers (Cooper pairs), which in turn is half the density of superconducting electrons n s . The free energy density f s of the superconducting state is then expressed as a reasonable function of ψ(r) plus other energy terms. A "solution" to ψ(r) is now obtained by the minimization of free energy rather than through quantum mechanics. The unknown parameters of the theory are then solved in terms of measurable physical quantities, thereby providing constraints between the different quantities of the superconducting state. Close to the phase boundary, |ψ| 2 is small, and so, f s can be expanded keeping the lowest two orders of |ψ| 2 . First, let us consider the simplest situation where there are no currents, gradients in |ψ|, or magnetic fields present. Then, we have: where α and β are temperature-dependent coefficients whose values are to be determined in terms of measurable parameters. The coefficients can be determined as follows. First of all, for the solution of |ψ| 2 to be finite at the minimum free energy, β must be positive. Second, for the solution of |ψ| 2 to be non-zero, α must be negative. Since |ψ| 2 vanishes above T c , α must change its sign upon crossing T c . The minimum in f s occurs at: Substituting this back in Equation ( giving one of the connections between α and β and a measurable quantity (B c ). A second connection can be obtained by noting that n s in Equation ( Solving Equations ( Note that e and m * refer to single-carrier values and not pair values. To calculate j d , we include the effect of a current in Equation ( s to it: For zero j and v s , we saw earlier (Equation ( The corresponding supercurrent density is then: The maximum possible value of this expression can now be identified with j d : where the GL-theory parameters were replaced by their expressions in terms of the physical measurables B c and λ through Equation The approximate temperature dependence of j d can be obtained by inserting the generic empirical temperature dependencies 4 ], giving: which close to T c reduces to: where j d (0) is given by Equation ( Since B c is not an easy quantity to measure directly, the relation: can be used along with Equation ( that has the more easily measurable B c2 . Since both B c2 and j d can be obtained from transport measurements, this becomes a convenient way to obtain λ and, hence, ρ s . Various authors have calculated j d (T ) from a microscopic basis Depairing current densities in superconductors is extremely high: on the order of j d (T =0) = 10 11 -10 13 A/m 2 . If the cross-section of the sample is even as narrow as just 1 mm 2 , the current required would reach a value of I = jA ∼ 10 6 A. Such a magnitude of current would be exceedingly difficult to produce and control. There are three steps to overcoming this dilemma: (1) Fabricate samples with very narrow cross-sectional areas. This can be achieved by growing nanowires and nanorods or by depositing very thin films and using lithography to pattern narrow bridges (alternatively, the films can be deposited onto nanowires or carbon nanotubes). ( Thus, the experimental ingredients needed to conduct a j d measurement are: a superconducting sample with a very narrow cross-section; a means to control the temperature, i.e., a cryostat; and a method for sourcing pulsed signals (current or voltage) and detecting the consequent complementary signal (voltage or current). There are numerous methods for sample fabri-cation, which vary widely with the different superconducting materials. Some deposition systems for preparing superconducting films can be bought off the shelf. Cryostats also represent standard equipment that can be bought off the shelf. The principal distinguishing the experimental capabilities of our work center on the pulsed electrical measurements. Therefore, the rest of the experimental section will be devoted to describing this unique measurement setup. Figure Once the current pulse flows through the sample and R std , the corresponding time-varying voltages, V (t) and V std (t), will be developed across them respectively. These must be observed and quantified using an oscilloscope. A digital storage oscilloscope (DSO) allows multiple pulses to be averaged. Since the signal is exactly repetitive, because the DSO is triggered off of the pulse generator's sync signal, the averaging effectively suppresses random uncorrelated noise. As long as the sample condition (T , B, etc.) is stable, a very high number of averages can be taken to improve the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) vastly. Coaxial cables with 50-Ohm characteristic impedance are used between all connection points, including the wiring within the cryostat. Where possible, the originating and/or terminating points at the ends of the cables need to have matching 50-Ohm values to avoid reflections. Multiple ground connections to the circuit must be avoided to prevent ground loops. This means the two channels of the DSO cannot be simultaneously connected to both the sample and R std ; either a differential instrumentation preamplifier (Princeton Applied Research and Stanford Research Systems are two brands that make instrumentation amplifiers) must be used between the DSO channels and the sample and R std , or only one of the two must be measured at a time. FIG. Figure FIG. Figure Figure The measurements represented by Figure The interface between the Bi 2 Te 3 topological insulator and the FeTe chalcogenide provides a fascinating 2D superconducting system, in which neither Bi 2 Te 3 , nor FeTe are superconducting by themselves The Bi 2 Te 3 /FeTe samples consisted of a ZnSe buffer layer (50 nm) deposited on a GaAs (001) semi-insulating substrate, followed by a deposition of 220 nm thick FeTe, which was then capped with a 20 nm-thick Bi 2 Te 3 layer. Uppercritical-field measurements The normal-state resistivity ρ n (T ) and depairing current density j d (T ) in the Bi 2 Te 3 /FeTe samples were extracted over the entire temperature range From the previously-published measurements of He et al. Fast pulsed signals of short duration and low duty cycle make it possible to study transport behavior in superconductors at extreme current densities, power densities, and electric fields. In this article, we focused on the use of this technique in the measurement of one of the fundamental critical parameters of the superconducting state, the depairing current j d . It was shown how through j d , one can obtain information on various other key parameters of the superconducting state, in particular the penetration depth and consequent superfluid density, which cast light on the normal state. As an example and illustration of this procedure, we described a recent study of the superconducting system formed at the interface between a topological insulator and a chalcogenide. We hope that the information provided here will encourage other groups to utilize this approach.