The omnipresent digitalization trend has enabled a number of related malicious activities, ranging from data theft to disruption of businesses, counterfeiting of devices, and identity fraud, among others. Hence, it is essential to implement security schemes and to ensure the reliability and trustworthiness of electronic circuits. Toward this end, the concept of physically unclonable functions (PUFs) has been established at the beginning of the 21st century. However, most PUFs have eventually, at least partially, fallen short of their promises, which are unpredictability, unclonability, uniqueness, reproducibility, and tamper resilience. That is because most PUFs directly utilize the underlying microelectronics, but that intrinsic randomness can be limited and may thus be predicted, especially by machine learning. Optical PUFs, in contrast, are still considered as promising-they can derive strong, hard-to-predict randomness independently from microelectronics, by using some kind of "optical token." Here we propose a novel concept for plasmonics-enhanced optical PUFs, or peo-PUFs in short. For the first time, we leverage two highly nonlinear phenomena in conjunction by construction: (i) light propagation in a silicon disk resonator, and (ii) surface plasmons arising from nanoparticles arranged randomly on top of the resonator. We elaborate on the physical phenomena, provide simulation results, and conduct a security analysis of peo-PUFs for secure key generation and authentication. This study highlights the good potential of peo-PUFs, and our future work is to focus on fabrication and characterization of such PUFs. F OR many decades now, authentication and other security schemes have leveraged the randomized manifestations of selected physical, biological, or other phenomena. For example, biometric identification is based on the unique patterns of fingerprints, retinas, voices, or even walking pace and motion. For electronic circuits, the notion of physically unclonable functions (PUFs) has been established at the beginning of the 21st century In short, the desired properties for a PUF are uniqueness, unclonability, unpredictability, reproducibility, and tamper resilience, while possible applications are device authentication, secure generation of keys, and device-entangled cryptography. The core principle for electronic PUFs is to leverage the process variations inherent to microelectronic fabrication and to boost these variations purposefully using some dedicated circuitry. Prominent types of electronic PUFs are ring oscillators, arbiters, bistable rings, and memory-based PUFs Another interesting option are optical PUFs Given that plasmonic NPs can induce highly nonlinear behavior • For the first time concerning PUFs, we propose to entangle two promising, highly nonlinear physical phenomena by construction: light propagation in a silicon disk resonator, and surface plasmons arising from NPs arranged randomly on top of the resonator. We name this concept as peo-PUFs, short for plasmonics-enhanced optical PUFs (physically unclonable functions). The concept is illustrated in Fig. • We discuss and study the underlying physical phenomena, the latter by means of Lumerical FDTD and COMSOL simulations. Using the same tools, we obtain different data sets for various peo-PUFs under different conditions. • Based on these data sets, we evaluate the randomness, uniqueness, and reproducibility of peo-PUFs, confirming their applicability for secure key generation in principle. We also propose a simple authentication scheme, based on the secure keys and some related helper data. • The concept can be directly integrated into any silicon device, thus it can provide better resilience than prior external PUFs. The manufacturing of silicon disc resonators is a well-known process, and plasmonic NPs can be easily deposited on top of a resonator in a random fashion, e.g., by sputtering. We believe that these two aspects are essential for successful adoption of peo-PUFs. We like to point out that the very first PUF proposal was actually an optical PUF; in 2002, Pappu et al. While these works are promising, there are also some notable limitations. As for the early external optical PUFs It is well-known that silicon is transparent to infrared light and has a very high refractive index. The accordingly strong photonic confinement allows for the design of micrometerscale, yet efficient, silicon-made optical waveguides The light propagation within SDRs in particular and silicon devices in general are subject to various nonlinear effects. These include the Kerr effect, Raman scattering, selfmodulation, two-photon absorption, et cetera Because of the outstanding capability for sub-wavelength confinement of electromagnetic energy, plasmonics has be- come a driving force for progress in the area of nanophotonics The LSPR field enhancement is dictated by various factors. First and foremost, the enhancement depends on the metal properties Besides LSPR field enhancement, when light interacts with a NP, the light can be absorbed and/or scattered. Those processes arise in resonant conditions, i.e., where the absorption efficiency is the highest. The extinction efficiency, that is the sum of absorption and scattering efficiencies, can be engineered via the size, shape, and dielectric environment of the metallic NPs (Fig. The extinction efficiencies illustrated in Fig. Other non-resonant effects are to be considered as well. Most important, for two or more NPs that are close to each other, the longitudinal field component of the SPP can "jump inside the gap" such that the field is particularly enhanced within the gap (Fig. Considering all these effects which we outlined above, it is intuitive that metallic NPs on top of an SDR will significantly impact its photonic mode propagation. This, in turn, will help to induce highly nonlinear behavior for our envisioned PUF concept. As outlined, the disturbances arise primarily through absorption, scattering, and LSPR field enhancement, but with all effects acting at once. Given that the SDR will be made from silicon, a nonlinear material, the field enhancement can also locally impact the SDR's refractive index, thereby further disturbing the mode propagation. As with plasmonic field enhancement, this interference depends on the size of the NPs, their coupling direction, light polarization, material properties, et cetera In this work, for the first time, we entangle the two nonlinear phenomena of silicon photonics and plasmonics. We propose the concept of plasmonics-enhanced optical PUFs (peo-PUFs). Besides the concept in general, we furthermore propose to leverage peo-PUFs, for now, as so-called "weak PUFs" for secure key generation and authentication. There are two important aspects to note here. 1) "Weak PUFs" are not necessarily inferior to "strong" PUFs Next, we outline the design, working principle, and key generation and authentication for peo-PUFs. The simulation setup is given in Section V-A. Recall that silicon disc resonators (SDRs for short) are at the heart peo-PUFs, upon which plasmonic NPs of various shapes, sizes, and metals are placed randomly (Fig. We argue that advances for optoelectronics may allow us to strive for monolithic integration sooner than later. For example, IBM has recently demonstrated an ultra-fast photonic intrachip communication link As indicated, while peo-PUF tokens can support broad ranges of optical inputs in principle, generating these inputs would require, e.g., spectral encoding, frequency sweeping, or power modulation. Therefore, the challenge here would be to manage the complexity of the related optoelectronics, which may render a monolithic integration of peo-PUFs ultimately more difficult. Hence, in the remainder, we assume a simple setup with a fixed laser input pulse for the peo-PUFs. Once an optical pulse enters the SDR token, the nonlinear phenomena of silicon photonics and plasmonics result in a highly complex and chaotic, yet reproducible, optical output. Figure Figure Detrimental effects such as device aging, laser noise, or temperature variations may play a role in practice, but this can only be properly investigated once peo-PUFs are manufactured, which is scope for future work. In any case, error correction scheme to mitigate environmental impact on PUFs has been discussed in detail, e.g., in After applying a fixed input pulse, the output is processed as follows to obtain a key. First, wave shaping/spectral filtering is applied to extract different partitions (or features) across the whole wavelength spectrum of the optical response. Second, analog-to-digital conversion is applied on each feature to obtain the underlying bits. To enable a stable key, the noisy, least significant bits are rejected across all features. Finally, for each feature, their stable bits are bundled, and these bundles are grouped. Without loss of generality, the above steps are taken such that the key is 128 bits long. In general, the number 3 See Fig. For authentication of chips using integrated peo-PUFs, we propose the following simple two-phase scheme, following the literature Besides the actual keys, some key parameters-also known as helper data-are to be recorded as well. For peo-PUFs, that is: (a) the selection of frequency features, and (b) the number of considered bits for each feature. Note that this helper data is essential to verify the keys. Furthermore, we record the fractional Hamming distance (FHD) for the same key obtained under different operating conditions. As for the actual authentication phase, after enrollment, the PUFs are to be queried again, using the same fixed input and a selected configuration for the helper data, and the resulting key is compared with the recorded one. The authentication is considered successful in case the key falls within the FHD expected for the operating conditions and helper data. Simulations for the frequency and time domain are carried out using the Lumerical FDTD software. All simulation data is exported for the subsequent security evaluation. If not specified otherwise, and without loss of generality, we assume a 5μm radius and 180nm height for the SDR, a height of 30nm for the NPs, an optical input pulse of 100fs duration, an ambient temperature of 300K, and a simulation time-frame of 8ps. Note that each simulation took multiple days; more NPs, longer simulation time-frames, etc., will significantly increase runtime. For absorption and scattering phenomena (Fig. For the key-generation and authentication framework, we use Matlab and custom scripts. The security evaluation is based on entropy, NIST randomness tests We consider various peo-PUF setups, mainly for different arrangements of NPs, but also for different SDR tokens and operating conditions (temperature and pulse width). The configurations are labeled and summarized in Table For peo-PUFs acting as weak PUFs, it is essential to quantify the underlying randomness, which also reflects on their unpredictability We report the entropy S for the different peo-PUF configurations in Table Short Description 1) Si5umAu60nm(a) SDR radius 5μm, 1 gold NP radius 60nm 2) Si5umAu60nm(b) As Si5umAu60nm(a), but different location for NP 3) Si5umAu60nm(c) As Si5umAu60nm(a), but different location for NP 4) Si5umAu60nm As Si5umAu60nm(a), but different location for NP 12) Pulse50fs As Pulse100fs, but input pulse width 50fs 13) Pulse200fs As Pulse100fs, but input pulse width 200fs 14) Temp300K As Si5umAu60nm(a), but different location for NP 15) Temp350K As Temp300K, but ambient temperature 350K 16) Si5umTiN60nm As Si5umAu60nm(a), but 1 titanium nitride NP 17) Si5umTiN60nm(5) As Si5umAu60nm(a), but 5 titanium nitride NP 18) Si5umTiN In Table Two further key properties for any PUF are uniqueness and reproducibility Regarding FHD for uniqueness, also known as inter-FHD, the ideal value is 50%; regarding FHD for reproducibility, also known as intra-FHD, the ideal value is 0%. Since the inter-and intra-FHD can vary depending on the applied challenge/helper data, we report Gaussian FHD distributions along with their histograms, mean values μ, and standard deviations σ (as suggested in Next, we investigate peo-PUFs for two critical operation parameters, namely input pulse width and ambient temperature. We contrast the FHD distribution for different pulse widths in Fig. The ambient temperature impacts the reproducibility of most, if not all, types of PUFs observe more noise than it was the case for the reproducibility under input-pulse fluctuations, the intra-FHD distribution still remains separated from another inter-FHD distribution (Si5umAu60nm versus Si5um) which was obtained from different peo-PUFs. Hence, peo-PUFs can tolerate some temperature fluctuations, although further compensation measures may be required in practice, where other noises such as voltage glitches may play some role as well. Regarding uniqueness, besides the configurations already covered in Fig. Ensuring the reliability and trustworthiness of electronic systems has become a pressing concern nowadays. The notion of physically unclonable functions (PUFs) can serve to implement challenge-response-based authentication schemes or "device fingerprinting," i.e., device-specific key generation. While most PUFs have eventually fallen short, especially in terms of unpredictability, optical PUFs are widely considered as promising; such PUFs derive their randomness from optical phenomena, independent of the underlying microelectronics. In this work, for the first time, we explore the use of plasmonic NPs toward enhanced optical PUFs, called peo-PUFs. In general, PUFs have to be unpredictable, unique, and unclonable, yet reproducible. The core principle of peo-PUFs-the random depositioning of various NPs on top of a nonlinear silicon disc resonator-can serve well to achieve all these requirements. That is because the intertwining of silicon photonics and plasmonics by construction enables highly nonlinear behavior, which is unpredictable, unique, and overly difficult to clone/reproduce. We have explored that in a firstof-its-kind, physics-simulation-based study for different peo-PUF configurations and conditions, thereby also confirming reproducibility. We have conducted a security analysis of peo-PUFs in the context of key generation and authentication. Besides, in anticipation of related security concerns, we would like to stress that Atakhodjaev et al. For future work, we plan to manufacture and characterize peo-PUFs. Toward that end, we also call for relatively simple optoelectronics, which may allow for fully monolithic integration of peo-PUFs on silicon chips. Overall, we believe that the vast range of readily available NPs can open up a unique opportunity for constructing highly resilient PUFs.