We synthesized and characterized the colloidal suspensions of FeO•Fe (2-x) Nd x O 3 nanoparticles with x=0.00, 0.02, 0.04, 0.06 and 0.1. The effect of the Fe 3+ ion replacement by Nd 3+ on the crystal structure is in-depth studied, through X-ray diffraction (XRD) and the obtained cation distribution. The magnetic properties of the synthesized FeO•Fe (2-x) Nd x O 3 nanoparticles also were investigated and corroborated by other physical methods. A remarkable saturation magnetization of 105 Am 2 /kg was achieved for x=0.06. There has been an enormous research effort recently in colloidal magnetic nanocrystals, so that hundreds of papers are published per year in this field of scientific research Magnetic nanoparticles are free to move when dispersed in a liquid carrier medium, and different physical event may occur as a function of an applied magnetic field Rare-Earth doping significantly alters the nucleation and growth of nanoferrites, which facilitate magnetic spin orientation Jain and co-workers studied the influence of rare earth ions on structural, magnetic and optical properties of magnetite nanoparticles In the present study we report on the synthesis and characterization of colloidal suspensions of FeO•Fe (2-x) Nd x O 3 nanoparticles with x=0.00, 0.02, 0.04, 0.06 and 0.1. The samples were synthesized by co-precipitation method. The characterization was done by: X-ray diffraction (XRD), Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM), Small Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS), Optical bandgap and Zero-field and Field Cooling magnetization (ZFC-FC). Therefore, the effect of the Fe 3+ ion replacement by Nd 3+ on the crystal structure is in-depth studied, through X-ray diffraction (XRD) and the obtained cation distribution. The magnetic properties of the synthesized FeO•Fe (2- x) Nd x O 3 nanoparticles also were investigated and corroborated by other physical methods. The materials used to obtain the MNPs were: FeCl The magnetic nanoparticles were synthesized by co-precipitation of an aqueous mixture of FeCl 3 (ferric chloride) and FeCl 2 (ferrous chloride) salts and stabilized at pH~12 Briefly, ferric chloride (4.00 mmol) and ferrous chloride (2.00 mmol) in a 2:1 molar ratio and 8 mL of oleic acid are mixed in 25 mL of deionized water. The solution was heated up to 80 °C and magnetically stirred for 30 min. Then, 30 mL of NaOH was added to the solution to precipitate the particles at room conditions, under vigorously stirred for more 30 min. When the pH reaches ~ 11, a severe reaction occurs and the solution becomes dark brownish. Thereafter, the resultant solution was cooled to room temperature. At last, the MNPs were precipitated with a permanent magnet and then washed ten times with deionized water to remove residual unreacted salts. The procedure described above was used to produce magnetite nanoparticles with x=0.00 and that samples was called as FF-REF. The samples FF-ND1, FF-ND2, FF-ND3 and FF-ND5 are labeled according to molar percentage amount of substitution of Fe 3+ ions by Nd 3+ ions. These percentages are 1 ,2, 3 and 5% (x=0.02, 0.04, 0.06 and 0.10), respectively. FF-ND1, FF-ND2, FF-ND3 and FF-ND5 were prepared with an aqueous solution composed of FeCl Hereafter, the doped concentration (x=0.02, 0.04, 0.06 and 0.10) of Nd 3+ in magnetite (x=0.00, Fe 3 O 4 ) will be denoted as FF-ND1, FF-ND2, FF-ND3 and FF-ND5, respectively. All samples were sterically stabilized with a single oleic acid layer, chemisorbed on the particles' surfaces. MNPs are dispersed in kerosene. Powder X-ray Diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained to investigate nanoparticles' crystalline structure. XRD was done in a Brucker-AXS D8 series 2 diffractometer, set to a Bragg Brentano Parafocussing Geometry. A Cu Ka source (λ = 1.5414 Å) generated X-rays at room temperature. The difractometer was operated at 40 kV, 30 mA. The experimental pattern data were registered in continuous scan mode, scattering angle 2θ from 15 to 80o, in steps of 0.02o. The overall form (morphology) and size distribution of the MNPs were examined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). TEM was performed on a JEOL 1010 (Japan) microscope with an acceleration voltage of 80 kV. TEM micrographs were acquired by a Gatan Bioscan 782 CDD camera of 1K x 1K pixels. The colloidal suspension of MNPs were prepared by diluting the original colloidal suspensions 100 times and maintained in an ultrasonic bath for 30 min. A drop of the colloidal suspension was placed on a FormvarTM coated 200 mesh copper grid. The residual excessed fluid was blotted and dried until the time that the grids was examined into microscope. MNPs number-weighted-size distributions were obtained by measuring about ~500 MNPs with the ImageJ freeware where D m and s are fitting parameters. The number-weighted mean diameter, and standard deviation of particle size, , are written as (2) (3) The Small Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS) patterns of the solutions were investigated. The setup used to data acquisition was a Xeuss (Xenocs TM ). The Xeuss is equipped with a microfocus xray source Genix, with radiation of λ = 1.5414 Å (Cu). The system uses two scatterless slits for beam collimation and it reaches the sample with a square cross section of 0.4 x 0.4 mm 2 . The primary and scattered beams remain in a vacuum (10 -2 mbar) chamber to avoid scattering by the air. Each sample were mounted in a cylindrical Mark-tubes of quartz glass capillary (Hilgenberg, 1.5 mm outer diameter) with principal axis in the vertical direction. The measured 2D scattered data were recorded by a Pilatus (Dectris) 300 K 20 Hz 2D detector. The exposition time was 600 s and all measurements were performed at room temperature (~ 22 °C). The 1D scattering intensity versus scattering vector module, I(q) and q, defined by q = (4π sinθ)/λ was obtained by averaging the data over a 20° slice in horizontal and vertical directions. The data treatment, blank subtraction, and data normalization were performed with the software SUPERSAXS (C.L.P. Oliveira and J. S. Pedersen, unpublished). The contribution of blank (kerosene) was independently measured and subtracted from the sample data. To obtain the scattered intensity data in absolute-scale units, cm -1 , water was used as standard. The sampledetector distance was 839 cm, which allows measurements with q in the range 0.01 < q < 0.35 Å -1 The magnetic properties of the MNPs were measured in a homemade Halleffect magnetometer Several physical properties of a crystal can be accessed through the knowledge of the cation distribution. Experimental Techniques such as: X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern ( where and are the experimental and calculated intensities for reflections (hkl), respectively. We used the intensity ratios corresponding to the planes (220), ( ( The determination of the structure is attained by varying the cation distribution in the calculated intensity in such a way that the R factor will be minimized The relative integrated intensity of the XRD lines can be calculated using Eq. ( The structure factor of the spinel ferrite has 24 divalent and trivalent cations and 32 oxygen anions In the present evaluation all possible cation configurations were considered with 0.01 stoichiometric sensitivities that Nd 3+ and Fe 3+ ions can site in both tetrahedral and octahedral sites, according with Eq. ( where and x are the molar stoichiometric amount of replacement of Fe 3+ ions by Nd 3+ . The closest correspondence with the actual sample structure was achieved by varying the cation distribution of the calculated intensity, which will provide a minimum R factor. (Eq. ( The magnetic properties of the particles depend on the exchange interactions between metal ions. The bond angle and inter-ionic bond length between metal ions are the more important in the overall magnitude of the magnetic exchange interaction. The magnitude of the magnetic exchange interactions is proportional to the bond angles and inversely proportional to the inter-ionic bond lengths. The inter-ionic bond lengths i.e., cation-cation distances and cation-anion distances (FIG. S1(ESI)) were calculated using equations Eqs. (S12)-(S25)(ESI). The values obtained for inter-ionic bond lengths were used for the evaluation of bond angles between the metal ions using equation Eqs. (S21)-(S25). The values for bond angles are given in Table where C is a constant, and α is the linear absorption coefficient. The linear absorption coefficient α was calculated from the absorbance measurement A(hυ) as a function of the photon energy using Eq. ( A scatt (hυ) was estimated as having a λ -4 dependence, more details can be found elsewhere The value of n will be given according to the type of the electronic transition responsible for the absorption: for allowed indirect transition is n = 1/2; n = 3/2 for forbidden indirect transition; for allowed direct transition n = 2; n = 3 for forbidden direct transition Here, A(hυ) is the experimental absorbance measured for each sample. The absorbance was measured using the UV-Vis spectrophotometry, and L = 1cm is the width of the cuvette cell. The J. Anghel and co-workers showed that exists a strong correlation between modifications in the lattice parameters and the bandgap energy for Zn (1-x) M x O (M = Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, or Ni) samples In the analysis of the scattered intensity data, it was assumed that I(q) was produced by a system composed of globular nanoparticles. Therefore, I(q) has a contribution from the particles' form-factor and the interaction between them (structure-factor). Assuming a model of polydisperse hard spheres with radius r, the scattered intensity is given by Eq. ( The Gnom software was used to analyze the scattering intensity Is versus the scattering vector q (modulus of q) FeO•Fe (2-x) Nd x O 3 samples, at 6 K and 300 K, respectively. From these curves, the saturation magnetization (Ms), coercivity field (Hc) and remanence magnetization (Mr) are obtained and are given in Table The M(H) curves for magnetic nanoparticles in superparamagnetic (SPM) regime (FIG. In the model expressed by Eq. ( The MNPs are expected to have a nonmagnetic layer around the magnetic core (core-shell model) Å. The Neel's theory for collinear ferro/ferrimagnetism of two sub-lattices model, predicts the net magnetic moment per formula unit (f.u.) according to Eq. ( where M octa and M tetra are the magnetic moments of B (octahedral) and A (tetrahedral) sites in μ B units (Bohr magneton) The Yafet-Kittel angles (αY-K) described by equation Eq. ( To determine the squareness ratio (S), Eq. ( The evaluated values of the magnetocrystalline anisotropy constant (K eff ) and S are given in Table Magnetic fluid based on magnetite were synthesized and XRD patterns of the samples investigated revealed a single-phase cubic spinel structure of Fd3m space group. From the cation distribution, the theoretical lattice parameter (a th ), tetrahedral bond length (d AL ), octahedral bond length (d BL ), tetrahedral edge (d AE ), octahedral edge (d BE ), unshared octahedral edge (d BEU ) increase with the increase in Nd-content. Since the Fe 3+ (0.65Å) is smaller than Nd 3+ (0.98 Å), the replacement of Fe 3+ leads to an increase in rA and rB. Moreover, L A and L B increase with higher Ndcontent. The results showed that Nd 3+ ions are placed in both sites at different concentrations. Therefore, it was possible to observe modifications in structural parameters like bond lengths; shared and unshared edges. The increasing in the bandgap may be interpreted as a result of the higher interatomic separation with the doping. TEM micrographs reveal a polydisperse size and shape distribution of particles, as expected for co-precipitation method, with a broad numberweighted size distribution. The results for volume-weighted average diameter measured by SAXS are consistent with those determined by XRD. From the M-H Loops we found that the SPM regime contributes with 95-97% for all samples, while only 3-5% contribution comes from the PM regime. The saturation magnetization increases in a steady manner upon increasing the Nd 3+ ion molar ratio from 0.00 up to 0.06, reaching the maximum value of 105.8±0.4 Am 2 /Kg at x= 0.06. It's worth to mention that the result for saturation magnetization value are higher than that of the bulk material. In this case, suggesting the existence of a highly ordered spin configuration distributed across the volume of the magnetic nanoparticles. The squareness values for all samples are less than 0. lattice parameter (a exp ), unit cell volume V (Å 3 ), crystallite size (CS), evaluated density ρ XRD (g/cm 3 ) and results of Rietveld analysis for FeO•Fe (2-x) Nd x O 3 nanoparticles. distribution of FeO•Fe (2-x) Nd x O 3 nanoparticles, experimental and calculated ratios between peak intensities. d reaches the maximum value for x=0.06 (FF-ND3) rather than E i that reaches the maximum value for x=0.10. ' mean diameter (D), distribution width (σ) and polydispersity and index (PDI) of the magnetic fluids investigated. ' Mean diameter determined by SAXS and width of the log-normal volume distribution function (σ V =3 σ D ).