We discuss a mechanism of microwave absorption in conventional superconductors which is similar to the Debye absorption mechanism in molecular gases. The contribution of this mechanism to the ac conductivity is proportional to the inelastic quasiparticle relaxation time τin rather than the elastic one τ el and therefore it can be much larger than the conventional one. The Debye contribution to the linear conductivity arises only in the presence of a dc supercurrent in the system and its magnitude depends strongly on the orientation of the microwave field relative to the supercurrent. The Debye contribution to the nonlinear conductivity exists even in the absence of dc supercurrent. Since it is proportional to τin the nonlinear threshold is anomalously low. Microwave absorption measurements may provide direct information about τin in superconductors. In this article we discuss the theory of microwave absorption in superconductors. In linear response to the microwave field E(t) = E ω cos(ωt), and in the limit of low frequencies ω, the current density in a superconductor may be written as Here N s is the superfluid density, e and m are, respectively, the charge and the mass of the electron, and the superfluid momentum is defined by p s = 2 ∇χ -e c A, with χ being the phase of the order parameter, and A the vector potential. The second term in Eq. ( The microwave absorption coefficient is controlled by the conductivity σ. The value of σ is determined by the quasiparticle scattering processes in the superconductor, which are generally characterized by two relaxation times: elastic, τ el , and inelastic, τ in , ones. In a typical situation, which we assume below, τ in τ el . The theory of transport phenomena in conventional superconductors was developed long ago, see for example where σ D is Drude conductivity of a normal metal In this article we discuss another contribution to the conductivity, σ DB , that is proportional to the inelastic relaxation time τ in . As a result it may exceed the conventional contribution by orders of magnitude. This contribution to the linear conductivity exists only in the presence of a dc supercurrent. Furthermore, this contribution is strongly anisotropic and depends on the relative orientation between E ω and the supercurrent. Even in situations where this contribution is small in comparison to the conventional result, it determines the dependence of the conductivity on both the magnitude and direction of the dc supercurrent. This enables determination of τ in from measurements of microwave absorption. A contribution to the nonlinear conductivity which is proportional to τ in exists even at zero dc supercurrent. Consequently, the nonlinear threshold for microwave absorption turns out to be anomalously low. The physical mechanism of this contribution to the conductivity is similar to the Debye mechanism of microwave absorption in gases ( At low frequencies, ω τ -1 el , the quasiparticle distribution function n depends only on the energy . Importantly, the density of states per unit energy, ν( , p s ), depends on the instantaneous value of the superfluid momentum p s . In other words, as the value of p s changes individual quasiparticle levels move in energy space. At finite temperature the quasiparticles occupying these levels travel in energy space as well. This motion creates a non-equilibrium quasiparticle distribution. The relaxation of the latter due to inelastic scattering causes entropy production and energy dissipation. The corresponding contribution to the conductivity is proportional to τ in . The reason why the Debye contribution to the linear conductivity exists only at ps = 0 is the following. The density of states is invariant under time reversal and thus can depend only on the magnitude of the condensate momentum p s = |p s |. As a result, in the linear in E approximation ν( ) changes in time proportionally to δp s (t) • ps . To describe the motion of energy levels we note that the number of levels in the system is conserved. Therefore the density of states ν( , p s (t)) is subject to the continuity equation in energy space ∂ t ν( , p s ) + ∂ [v ν ( )ν( , p s )]=0, where v ν ( , p s ) is the level "velocity" in energy space. Using the condensate acceleration equation (3) we can express the latter in the form v ν ( , p s ) = eE • V ( , p s ), where characterizes the sensitivity of the energy levels to changes of p s . The quasiparticle distribution function n( , t) describes the occupancy of energy levels. In the absence of inelastic scattering its time evolution due to the spectral flow is described by the continuity equation Combining this with the continuity equation for ν( , p s ) and allowing for inelastic collisions we obtain the kinetic equation where I{n} is the collision integral describing inelastic scattering of quasiparticles. The power W of microwave radiation absorbed per unit volume of the superconductor may be obtained by evaluating the rate of work performed by the microwave field on the quasiparticles, which is given by Here . . . denotes time averaging. Below we characterize the absorption power by the dissipative part of the conductivity σ DB defined by Linear regime.-For an equilibrium distribution the integrand in Eq. ( where the inelastic relaxation time τ in (T ) depends only on the temperature T . For an isotropic spectrum, which we assume below for simplicity, the vector V ( , p s ) is parallel to p s . In this case only the longitudinal conductivity, which corresponds to E ω ps , is affected by inelastic relaxation. Solving the linearized kinetic equation in the relaxation time approximation Here ν n is the normal state density of states at the Fermi level, v F is the Fermi velocity, and σ D = e 2 ν n D, with D = v 2 F τ el /3 being the diffusion coefficient. Equation ( Below we focus on s-wave superconductors with an isotropic spectrum and assume v F ps ∆. In this case the density of states is most strongly affected by the supercurrent at energies near the gap ∆. Namely at ps = 0 the peak in the BCS density of states, ν( , 0) → ν n ∆ 2( -∆) at → ∆, is broadened. The width and the shape of the broadening depends on the magnitude of the condensate momentum ps and the strength of disorder. In the ballistic regime, v F ps τ 2 el ∆ 1, (which can be realized only in clean superconductors, ∆τ el 1) the density of states can be found from a simple consideration. In this case one can use the standard expression for the quasiparticle spectrum where k is the quasiparticle momentum, ξ k is the electron energy measured from the Fermi level, and v k = dξ k /dk is the electron velocity. The density of states at | -∆| ∆ is given by ν( , p s ) where z = ( -∆)/v F p s , and θ(z) is the Heavyside stepfunction. The width of the broadening of the BCS peak is δ ∼ v F ps . The shape of the broadening is illustrated in Fig. where I b = 8 45 is a dimensionless integral defined in equation (S.16) of the Supplementary Material The above consideration of the density of states is valid as long the condition of ballistic motion v F ps τ el ( ) 1 is satisfied for most of the quasiparticles in the relevant energy interval | -∆| v F ps . Here τ el ( ) is the energy-dependent quasiparticle mean free time, which for | -∆| ∆ is given by the standard expression (see for example Ref. where the variable x satisfies the quintic equation (S.9a). In the ballistic regime, v F p s τ 2 el ∆ 1, the latter reduces to the biquadratic equation (S.11) whose solution, when substituted into Eq. ( Here , and w = ( -∆)/∆. The solutions of this equation can be written in the scal- , where the explicit form of is given by the Cardano formula, Eq. (S.17). Substituting this form into Eq. ( where I d ≈ 0.0549 is defined in Eq. (S.22) in the Supplementary Material. This expression is consistent with the result obtained in Ref. The exponent of the powerlaw dependence σ DB ∝ p4/3 s in Eq. ( It is worth noting that the diffusive regime can be realized in both clean, ∆τ el 1, and dirty ∆τ el 1, superconductors. Accordingly Eqs. ( Nonlinear regime. Let us now consider the situation in which the dc supercurrent is absent, ps = 0. In the presence of the microwave field the oscillation amplitude of the condensate momentum is given by δp s = eE ω /ω. Since the Debye contribution to the nonlinear conductivity defined by Eq. ( and consider the quasiparticle distribution function not as a function of energy and time t but rather as a function of N and t. The change of variables n( , t) → n(N, t) is equivalent to the transformation from Eulerian to Lagrangian variables in fluid mechanics Note that the electric field enters this equation only via the time-dependence of the quasiparticle energy level (N, t). In the presence of the microwave field the latter undergoes nonlinear oscillations (N, t) = 0 (N ) + δ (N, t) whose form is determined by Eq. τ in δ (N, t-τ ). The absorption power per unit volume in this representation is given by W = ∞ 0 dN n(N, t)∂ t (N, t) . Substituting the solution for n(N, t) into this expression we get Here the level velocity is given by ∂ , with V ( , p s ) defined in Eq. ( while in the diffusive regime we find The functions F b (ωτ in ) and F d (ωτ in ) that describe the frequency dependence of nonlinear microwave conductivity are given Eqs. (S.35) and (S.41) in the Supplementary Material. Although, in contrast to Eqs. ( So far we focused our consideration on the temperature interval near T c . At low temperatures, T ∆, the dimensionless quasiparticle concentration x = (ν n ∆) -1 ∞ 0 d ν( )n F ( ) in s-wave superconductors is exponentially small; x ∼ T ∆ exp(-∆/T ) . Consequently the conventional contribution to the microwave absorption coefficient, which is proportional to τ el , is exponentially small as well. It is interesting that the Debye contribution to the microwave absorption coefficient in this regime does not contain the exponentially small factor and is, roughly speaking, comparable to that near T c . Indeed, at T ∆ there are two quasiparticle inelastic relaxation rates in superconductors. The quasiparticlephonon relaxation processes that conserve the number of quasiparticles are characterized by the rate 1/τ (st) in (T ) (which is of the same order as a electron-phonon relaxation rate in normal metals, see for example in (∆). The Debye contribution to the dissipative kinetic coefficients is proportional to the longest relaxation time in a system (see for example We would like to note that at very low temperatures the microwave absorption in gapped superconductors is controlled by two level systems (see for example Ref. The situation with a spatially uniform supercurrent density that was considered above can only be realized in thin superconducting films. In bulk superconductors in the presence of a magnetic field H < H c1 that is parallel to the surface ps is nonzero only within the London penetration depth λ L near the surface. The mechanism of microwave absorption discussed above will still apply in this geometry and the presented above results still hold up to a numerical factor of order unity. The reason for this is that the quasiparticles that give the main contribution to microwave absorption have energies that lie in a narrow interval near the gap, | -∆| δ , where δ = v F ps in the ballistic regime and δ = ∆D 2 p4 s 1/3 in the diffusive regime. Roughly half of these quasiparticles have energies below ∆ and therefore they are trapped near the surface within a distance of order λ L . The microwave absorption coefficient in thin films of dwave superconductors should be also proportional to τ in . However, its dependence on ps is expected to be different from those in Eqs. ( Finally we would like to note that the considered above mechanism of the microwave absorption is closely related to the mechanism of ac conductivity of SNS junctions discussed in Ref. (S.1) The latter can be expressed as where . . . denotes averaging over the Fermi surface and the disorder-renormalized energy ̃ and order parameter ∆ are given by , (S.3a) where we set = 1. For simplicity we assume the Fermi surface to be spherical. Performing the angular averaging and introducing the dimensionless variables δ = ∆/∆, u = ̃ / ∆ we can write the disorder-renormalization equa-tions for ̃ and ∆ in the following form Here γ = 1/(τ el ∆) characterizes the disorder strength, ζ = v F p s /∆ is a dimensionless measure of the condensate momentum, and we introduced u ± = u ± ζ/δ. The Green's function g( ) in Eqs. (S.1) and (S.2) is expressed in terms of these variables as The system of Eqs. (S.4), (S.5) and (S.1) describes the energy dependence of the density of states in the presence of supercurrent. In the limit ζ → 0 the solution of Eqs. (S.4) is given by u 0 = /∆, and δ 0 = 1 + iγ 2 √ u 2 -1 . When substituted into Eqs. (S.1) and (S.5) this yields the conventional result for the density of states, ν( 1 the density of sates ν( ) is significantly affected by the condensate momentum p s = 0 only for energies near the gap, | -∆| |∆|, see Eq. ( 1. The p s dependence of ν( , p s ) in this interval is nonanalytic, c.f. Eq. ( To circumvent this difficulty we introduce new variables x and y via and rewrite Eqs. (S.4) in the form (S.7b) arXiv:1907.08857v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 20 Jul 2019 Here we have introduced the notation w = ( -∆)/∆. The advantage of writing the disorder renormalization equations in terms of the variables x and y is that the branching points of the radicals in Eqs. (S.4), which are located at u ± = 1 -(x ± y) 2 = 1, are resolved in terms of rational functions of x and y. As a result the expressions in the right hand side in Eqs. (S.7) become amenable to a series expansion in x and y. Although x and y enter Eqs. (S.6) and (S.7) on equal footing we choose y to be odd in ζ so that in the absence of supercurrent y = 0. At small supercurrent, ζ 1, the variable y is also small. In this regime, the density of states in the relevant energy interval near the spectrum edge may be determined by expanding the expressions in the right hand side of Eqs. (S.7) to third order in y: The relevant energy interval, |w| 1, corresponds to |x| 1. In this case Eqs. (S.8) can be simplified to The density of states is obtained by substituting Eqs. (S.6) into (S.5) and expanding in small y then x. Within the accuracy of our approximation ν( , p s ) in the relevant energy interval, |w| 1, is given by and may be determined by solving Eq. (S.9a). The quintic equation (S.9a) for the variable x has five roots. The complex solutions come in pairs of complex conjugate numbers corresponding to retarded and advanced Green's functions. The retarded solutions correspond to x -1 ≥ 0, c.f. Eq. (S.10). The roots of a general quintic equation can be expressed via the Jacobi theta functions, however Eq. (S.9a) simplifies significantly in the limiting regimes ζ/γ 2 = v F ps τ 2 el ∆ 1, and ζ/γ 2 = v F ps τ 2 el ∆ 1, which correspond to, respectively, ballistic and diffusive motion of quasiparticles that participate in microwave absorption. At relatively large supercurrent densities, ζ/γ 2 1, the relevant root of Eq. (S.9a) satisfies the condition |x| γ. In this case we may neglect γ in Eq. (S.9a) to get a quadratic equation for x 2 : which yields the solution (S.12) Substituting this into Eq. (S.10) we obtain Eq. ( . (S.15) Substituting Eq. (S.13) into Eq. ( Using Eqs. (S.22) and (S.19) in Eq. ( ≈ 0.054886. (S.23) In dirty superconductors, when ∆τ el 1, the density of states may be evaluated using the Usadel equation The microwave power absorbed per unit volume of the sample is expressed in Eq. (17) in terms of the timedependence of the energy level (N, t). The latter is determined by (c.f. Eq. ( (S.32) Although the time dependence of the condensate momentum in the presence of the microwave field is very simple, p s (t) = eEω ω sin(ωt), the density of states ν(ε, t), being a nonlinear function of p s (t), is a complicated function of time in the presence of a microwave field. As a result (N, t) given by the solution of Eq. (S.32) has a complicated dependence not only on time but also on the amplitude of the microwave field, E ω . Because of this the absorbed power in Eq. ( For v F eE ω ∆τ 2 el /ω 1 the quasiparticles contributing to the Debye conductivity are in the ballistic regime and the density of states may be described by Eq. (S.13). In this case the time-dependent width of the energy window in which the density of states is affected by microwave radiation is δ (t) ∼ v F p s (t). The characteristic density of quasiparticle levels within the energy window where ν(ε, t) is affected by microwave radiation may be estimated as δN ∼ ν n v F eE ω ∆/ω. Therefore it is conve-nient to introduce a rescaled level density In the high frequency regime ωτ in 1 we find that F b (ωτ in ) ∼ 1 ω 2 τ 2 in , which can most readily be seen by Fourier transforming Eq. (17). At v F eE ω ∆τ 2 el /ω 1 the quasiparticles contributing to the Debye conductivity are in the diffusive regime, and the density of states may be described by Eq. (S.19). In this case the time dependent broadening of the singularity in the quasiparticle density of states is δ (t) ∼ 