The advance in designing arrays of ultrathin two-dimensional optical nano-resonators, known as metasurfaces, is currently enabling a large variety of novel flat optical components. The remarkable control over the electromagnetic fields offered by this technology can be further extended to the active regime in order to manipulate the light characteristics in real-time. In this contribution, we couple the excitonic resonance of atomic thin MoS2 monolayers with gapsurface-plasmon (GSP) metasurfaces, and demonstrate selective enhancement of the excitonplasmon polariton emissions. We further demonstrate tunable emissions by controlling the charge density at interface through electrically gating in MOS structure. Straddling two very active fields of research, this demonstration of electrically tunable light-emitting metasurfaces enables real-time manipulation of light-matter interactions at the extreme subwavelength dimensions. Two-dimensional (2D) materials featuring exceptional optical and optoelectronic properties have attracted increasing interest with significant potential to develop a great number of emerging nano-optoelectronics devices. In this work, gap-surface-plasmon (GSP) metasurfaces are designed and coupled with selected exciton resonance of monolayer MoS2 to enhance exciton-plasmon polariton emissions with controlled polarization. Furthermore, gate-tunable exciton plasmon polariton emissions are realized in MoS2 material under metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) configuration for the first time. The tunability relies on the dynamic tuning\detuning process between the neutral exciton resonance and the trion resonance inside MoS2 material enabled by the manipulation of charge density at interface under applied gate bias. Moreover, this work demonstrates the capability of manipulating light-matter interactions in the active regime at the subwavelength dimensions thought metasurface technologies, opening up important opportunities to develop a wide range of lightweight, ultra-compact and power efficient optical components and optoelectronic devices. Both atomic force microscopy (AFM) and Raman spectroscopy are used to identify the monolayer thickness of the MoS2 material obtained in this work, as shown in Fig. We begin the design of the hybrid MoS2 metasurface by analyzing the light emission properties of the as-grown MoS2 monolayers on the SiO2/Si substrate, based on their photoluminescence (PL) spectra, as shown in Fig. It is worth noticing that the various excitonic emissions from the MoS2 enhanced by Au film open up unique opportunities to explore and develop ultra-compact tunable exciton-plasmon polariton light source by manipulating the coupling between excitonic resonance and SPR inside this structure. To this end, a tunable polaritonic light emitting structure is designed and fabricated considering an ultra-compact hybrid MoS2-gap-mode metasurface by integrating metallic nanostrip-array onto the MoS2 flake, as shown in Fig. Valley-polarized photoluminescence in MoS2 have been already tailored for example using chiral metasurfaces, spin-dependent plasmonic surface or asymmetric gradient plasmonic surfaces. The relatively small shift of the exciton resonance within our bias voltage range is beneficial to achieve significant tunability, which would otherwise comprehend the performance of the modulation mechanism investigated therein. Since the PL emissions of both exciton A and trion exhibit fast decay, typically within ps time scale, the modulation speed of our structure is mainly limited by the RC time constant of the circuit which is in the range of several nanoseconds (see supplementary for details). The operation speed of this structure can be further improved by shrinking the size of the metallic contacts. MoS2 flakes were synthesized on SiO2/Si substrates using MoO2 (molybdenum dioxide) and sulfur powder in a quartz-tube-in-a-furnace vapor-phased deposition system at ambient pressure and then transferred onto the SiO2/Au for metasurface integration (Fig. Gate-tunable exciton-plasmon polariton light emitting metasurface is designed and demonstrated by integrating MoS2 monolayer with gap plasmon mode-metasurfaces. This structure shows extraordinary advantages of controlling the light emitting characteristics such as polarization control, and selective enhancement of emission, benefitting from its unique resonant coupling between the excitonic resonance and the gap plasmon resonance. In particular, strong modulation of the polariton light emission can be realized by applying gate voltage. Interestingly, electrically tunable polaritonic light emitting metasurface could further leverage on the strong sensitivity of the MoS2 d-orbitals participating in the indirect-to-direct The rise time of the structure estimated by its RC time constant (τr=2.2τ=2.2RC) is in the range of several nanoseconds based on the load resistance R and the capacitance of the circuit C=ε0εrA/dox, where ε0 is the vacuum dielectric constant, εr is the SiO2 relative dielectric constant of 3.9, A is the size of the capacitor surface and d is the thickness of SiO2 dielectric layer. Therefore, it can be seen that the operation speed of the structure is mainly limited by its RC constant. Note that the RC time constant of the current structure in this work is mainly limited by the large metallic contacts which are used for wire bonding with respect to the subwavelength size of grating. Thus, the operation speed of this structure can be further improved by shrinking the size of the metallic contacts. 