We propose a theory of nonlinear surface resistance of a dirty superconductor in a strong radiofrequency (RF) field, taking into account magnetic and nonmagnetic impurities, finite quasiparticle lifetimes, and a thin proximity-coupled normal layer characteristic of the oxide surface of many materials. The Usadel equations were solved to obtain the quasiparticle density of states (DOS) and the low-frequency surface resistance Rs as functions of the RF field amplitude H0. It is shown that the interplay of the broadening of the DOS peaks and a decrease of a quasiparticle gap caused by the RF currents produces a minimum in Rs(H0) and an extended rise of the quality factor Q(H0) with the RF field. Paramagnetic impurities shift the minimum in Rs(H0) to lower fields and can reduce Rs(H0) in a wide range of H0. Subgap states in the DOS can give rise to a residual surface resistance while reducing Rs at higher temperatures. A proximity-coupled normal layer at the surface can shift the minimum in Rs(H0) to either low and high fields and can reduce Rs below that of an ideal surface. The theory shows that the behavior of Rs(H0) changes as the temperature and the RF frequency are increased, and the field dependence of Q(H0) can be very sensitive to the materials processing. Our results suggest that the nonlinear RF losses can be minimized by tuning pairbreaking effects at the surface using impurity management or surface nanostructuring. The physics of electromagnetic response of superconductors, and the fundamental limits dissipation in the Meissner state at low temperatures and frequencies has recently attracted much interest. The issue of ultra-lowdissipation is particularly important for microresonators for quantum computing or radio-frequency (rf) superconducting cavities for particle accelerators The behavior of R s (H 0 ) is determined by multiple mechanisms including interplay of temporal oscillations of the density of states (DOS) and the kinetics of nonequilibrium quasiparticles under the strong rf field. The field dependence of R s (T, H 0 ) is also sensitive to the ratios ω/T and T /∆, as well as the electronic structure and compositional inhomogeneities at the surface. It was shown Sparse magnetic impurities in Nb are among realistic materials features where N s is the density of states in the normal state. Numerous STM experiments have shown that the DOS broadening can be significant, particularly in thin films and bilayers Nonlinear dc screening for an ideal surface The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, the geometry of the problem, the Usadel equations, and the boundary conditions are formulated. We obtain formulas for a low-frequency nonlinear surface resistance and evaluate a contribution of nonequilibrium effects. In Sec. III, we calculate R s (H 0 ) for a superconductor with paramagnetic impurities and show that they can produce a significant minimum in R s (H 0 ) as a function of H 0 . In Sec. IV, we investigate the effect of the Dynes parameter Γ on R s and show that a finite Γ results in a residual resistance at T ≪ T c and affects a nonlinear field dependence of R s (H 0 ) in the way similar to that of paramagnetic impurities at intermediate temperatures. In Sec. V, we consider the effect of SIS ′ surface nanostructuring which can shift the minimum in R s (H 0 ) to higher fields. In Sec. VI, we calculate R s (T, H 0 ) for a superconductor covered with a thin, proximity-coupled N layer and investigate the field dependence of R s (H 0 ) and the position of the minimum of R s (H 0 ) as functions of temperature, thickness of the N layer and the contact resistance R B . In Sec. VII, we discuss implications of our results for engineering an optimum DOS at the surface to reduce the rf losses in superconductors under strong electromagnetic fields. Consider the geometry shown in Fig. Here D is the electron diffusivity, the prime denotes differentiation with respect to x, ω n = πT (2n + 1) are the Matsubara frequencies, ωn = ω n + Γ, and Γ accounts for a finite quasiparticle lifetime in the Dynes model. The pairbreaking parameter s = DQ 2 /2 + Γ p contains two contribution: the first term comes from the effect of pairbreaking currents and the second term accounts for spin-flip scattering on magnetic impurities. Here Q = ∇θ + 2πA/φ 0 is the gauge invariant phase gradient, A is the vector potential, φ 0 is the flux quantum, and Γ p is the spin-flip parameter due to magnetic impurities where H c = (N s /μ 0 ) 1/2 ∆ is the thermodynamic critical field, ∆ is the pair potential at T = 0, and Γ p is assumed uniform. Here ∆(x, T, s) satisfies the BCS selfconsistency equation, Here g is the pairing constant in the S region, and the summation over ω n is cut off at the Debye frequency Ω. Eqs. (2)-( Here θ s defines the bulk Green's function satisfying Eq. ( Here θ -≡ θ| x=-0 , θ 0 ≡ θ| x=+0 , R B is the N-S contact resistance, and σ n and σ s are the normal-state conductivities in the N and S regions, respectively. It is convenient to define the dimensionless parameters: where N n and N s are the normal densities of states in N and S regions, and ξ n = D n /2∆ and ξ s = D s /2∆ are the respective coherence lengths. More general boundary conditions for quasiclassical Green's functions are given in Refs. 66 and 67. Yet Eqs. ( where ǫ = ǫ + iΓ. The quasiparticle DOS is given by For a uniform superconductor with s = 0, G R = ǫ/ √ ǫ2 -∆ 2 and Eq. ( where ∆ = 2Ω exp(-1/g). We consider here type-II superconductors (λ ≫ ξ) for which the nonlocal BCS electromagnetic response 6 simplifies to the local relation J ω = σ(ω)E ω between the Fourier components of the current density J ω and the electric field E ω . Here σ(ω) = σ 1 -iσ 2 is a complex conductivity, where σ 2 (ω) = 1/μ 0 ωλ 2 accounts for the Meissner effect, and the quasiparticle conductivity σ 1 (ω) determines the rf dissipation. To express R s in terms of σ 1 , we use E ω (x) = -iωA ω (x) and J ω (x) = -iωσ(x, ω)A ω (x) and calculate the power dissipation per ]dx by integrating the local power density σ 1 E 2 (x). For the case shown in Fig. where d ≪ λ. We used Eq. ( where f (ǫ, t) is a distribution function of quasiparticles and M [ǫ, ω, x, s(x, t)] is a spectral function: For weak or low-frequency rf fields, f (ǫ) tends to the equilibrium Fermi distribution f 0 (ǫ) = (e ǫ/T + 1) -1 , and Eq. ( This formula determines the local nonlinear conductivity in a type-II superconductor where both the magnitude of the rf field and σ 1 (x, H 0 ) vary slowly over ξ. At low fields H 0 ≪ (ω/∆) 3/4 H c and frequencies ω ≪ T , the surface resistance R s = μ 2 0 ω 2 λ 3 σ 1 /2 can be calculated from Eqs. ( -∆ 2 at Γ = 0 and d = 0. This yields where ρ n = 1/σ n , and C ≈ 9/2. The logarithmic factor in Eq. ( Deviation of f (ǫ, x, t) from f 0 (ǫ) is determined by an absorbed rf power and a rate of the power transfer from quasiparticles to phonons. At T ≪ ∆ the power transfer bottleneck is provided by scattering of quasiparticles on phonons which determine an inelastic scattering time τ 3. The nonequilibrium amplitude hǫ calculated from Eq. ( and a recombination time of Cooper pairs τ r , where τ s and τ r depend on T and ǫ 9,68 . For instance, τ r and τ s at ǫ = ∆ in the absence of the rf field are given by 68 where τ 1 and τ 2 are materials constants. For Nb with T c = 9.2 K, ∆ = 1.9T c , τ 1 = 3•10 -12 s, and τ 2 = 8•10 -11 s 68 , Eq. ( where the amplitude h ǫ (x, t) quantifies deviation of f from equilibrium (nonequilibrium effects are negligible if h ǫ ≪ 1). Using Eq. ( where I ph is the electron-phonon collision integral: Here phonons are assumed to be at equilibrium, and the low-energy phonon spectral function μ(ω) = α 2 (ω)F (ω) = bω 2 is used, where the constant b was calculated in Ref. 68 for different materials. We neglect the diffusion term in Eq. ( Here γ ǫ is the rate of electron-phonon inelastic collisions, and F ǫ (t) is a driving term. Because u ǫ (t) and v ǫ (t) depend on s(t), both γ ǫ (t) and F ǫ (t) are functions of time. At low frequencies ω ≪ γ ǫ , the term ∂h/∂t in Eq. ( At high frequencies ω ≫ γ ǫ , the electron-phonon collisions term in Eq. ( The functions h ǫ (t) given by Eqs. ( As follows from Figs. Consider the effect of pairbreaking magnetic impurities on the nonlinear surface resistance at Γ = 0. Here G R = cosh θ and F R = sinh θ in the spectral function M are calculated from a quasi-static Usadel equation (11) for FIG. Separating real and imaginary parts of Eq. ( The density of states n = ReG R = cosh u cos v calculated from Eqs. ( Because of current and paramagnetic pairbreaking effects the quasiparticle gap ǫ g is smaller than ∆, vanishing at s > 0.43∆ s . If Γ p < 0.22 the gap ǫ g remains finite even at the superheating field H sh ≃ 0.84H c , consistent with the previous result obtained for Γ p = 0 15 . We calculate the nonlinear surface resistance R s (H 0 ) using Eqs. ( where τ = ωt. Shown in Fig. The decrease of R s (H 0 ) with H 0 eventually stops at the field H m defined by δǫ(H m ) ∼ T . Hence, At p ∆ 1/3 the surface resistance reaches a minimum which is by the factor ∼ ln(T /∆ 1/3 Γ 2/3 p ) smaller than R s (0). As Γ p increases, the minimum in R s (H m ) gets shallower and shifts to smaller fields. The minimum in R s (H 0 ) disappears above a critical concentration of magnetic impurities defining the threshold pairbreaking parameter Γ p ≃ T 3/2 ∆ -1/2 which decreases with T . This qualitative consideration is consistent with the numerical calculations of R s (H 0 ) done at T /∆ = 0.11 and ω/∆ = 0.004. For this case shown in Fig. The evolution of R s (H 0 ) as temperature increases is shown in Fig. In this section we address the effect of bulk subgap states on the dependencies of the nonlinear surface resistance on the rf field, frequency and temperature. A. Green's functions and density of states Retarded Green's functions are obtained by solving the real-frequency Usadel equation ( The density of states n = cosh u cos v calculated from Eqs. ( where Eq. ( FIG. The surface resistance at Γ > 0 is calculated by generalization of Eq. (34): Here τ = ωt, and the spectral function M is defined by Eq. ( Shown in Fig. Figure In this section we consider a way of tuning the nonlinear surface resistance by a higher -T c or H c superconducting (S ′ ) layer separated by a thin dielectric (I) layer from the bulk superconductor (S) as shown in Fig. The retarded Green's functions and ∆(x) are calculated from the Usadel equations in the S and S ′ regions with the respective pair-breaking parameters s(x) obtained by solving the London equations with the boundary conditions ∂ x A(-d) = μ 0 H(t) and the continuity of A(x) and ∂ x A(s) at the S -S ′ interface at x = 0. Using the solution of the London equation The amplitudes s 0 and s ′ 0 are given by Here the prime corresponds to the respective parameters of the S ′ layer, and the factor C describes the field attenuation by the S ′ layer at the S-S ′ interface. Shown in Fig. The surface resistance of the S ′ -I-S structure is: Here the first term in the brackets describes the contribution of the S region in the same way as in Eq. ( , resulting in a significant increases of R s . Thus, we are interested in optimum thicknesses d < ∼ λ ′ for which the field onset of vortex penetration is greatly increased 47 while the screening field limit is pushed up beyond the superheating fields of both S and S ′ superconductors In this section we consider the effect of a thin N layer on R s (H 0 ), generalizing our approach developed for the calculations of R s at low fields The real-frequency Usadel equation for the functions u and v in the S-region can be written in the form where Here u s and v s are the solutions of the uniform Usadel Eq. ( According to the boundary condition (7), the complex function θ(x) = u(x) + iv(x) has a jump at x = 0 for any nonzero contact resistance R B . Here θ(-0) = u -+ iv - on the N side of the N-S interface is related to θ(x + 0) = u 0 + iv 0 by two coupled equations: where r = D S /D N , and the parameter Ψ in Eq. ( Here ∆(x) is given by Eq. ( Figure The surface resistance is given by Eqs. (47): Here the first term in the brackets comes from the contribution of the N layer. The integral term describes the contribution of the S region, where I(x) defined by Eq. ( As follows from Fig. In this work we address mechanisms of nonlinear RF losses and show that R s (H 0 ) can be reduced by optimizing the DOS using a multitude of pairbreaking mechanisms, including the N-S or S-I-S ′ surface nanostructuring, impurity management or the rf Meissner currents. Here the nonmonotonic field dependence of R s (H 0 ) results from the broadening of the DOS gap peaks by the pair-breaking rf currents These results can explain why the field dependence of the quality factor Q(H 0 ) ∝ 1/R s (H 0 ) can be very sensitive to the materials processing. For instance, magnetic impurities in Nb have been attributed to oxygen vacancies in Nb 2 O 5 , while other impurities can segregate at the surface during chemical polishing and electro polishing A common feature of many superconducting materials is a thin proximity-coupled N layer on the surface, for example, metallic suboxides underneath the dielectric Nb 2 O 5 pentooxide layer on the Nb surface. Chemical or heat treatments change the properties of the N layer, particularly the thickness, impurity concentration, and the interface contact resistance Tuning of R s (H 0 ) can also be done by depositing a S ′ layer with higher-H c and λ ′ > λ on the S surface, which can withstand magnetic fields of the order of the superheating field H ′ s while significantly increasing the field onset of vortex penetration For a superconductor with an ideal surface, the minimum in R s (H 0 ) shown in Figs. 7 and 12 becomes shallower as T decreases. On the other hand, for a weaklycoupled N layer with a large contact resistance (β > ∼ 1), the minimum in R s (H 0 ) becomes more pronounced as the temperature decreases (see Fig. We considered different ways of minimization of R s (H 0 ) by optimizing the DOS at the surface. Yet it should be noted that the optimum parameters actually depend on the rf amplitude. For instance, Fig. The time-averaged nonlinear conductivity σ 1 = σ is defined in terms of the mean dissipated power q = σE 2 0 /2 induced by the ac electric field E = -c -1 ∂ t A = E 0 sin ωt for which A(t) = (cE 0 /ω) cos ωt. Here e i(ǫ-ǫ ′ )(t-t ′ ) P 1 (ǫ, ǫ ′ , t 0 ) + e i(ǫ ′ -ǫ)(t-t ′ ) P 2 (ǫ, ǫ ′ , t 0 ) , (B8) where dt 0 dt 1 (sin ωt 1 + sin 2ωt 0 )• dǫdǫ ′ (2π) 2 e i(ǫ-ǫ ′ )t1 P 1 (ǫ, ǫ ′ , t 0 ) + e i(ǫ ′ -ǫ)t1 P 2 (ǫ, ǫ ′ , t 0 ) (B11) In the dirty limit P 1 (ǫ, ǫ ′ , t 0 ) and P 2 (ǫ, ǫ ′ , t 0 ) are even functions of t 0 , so only sin ωt 1 contributes: π/ω 0 dt dǫ 2π P 1 (ǫ, ǫ + ω, t)-P 1 (ǫ + ω, ǫ, t) + P 2 (ǫ + ω, ǫ, t) -P 2 (ǫ, ǫ + ω, t) . (B12) Using Tr Ĝz Because Re(G, F ) R = -Re(G, F ) A , and Im(G, F ) R = Im(G, F ) A , we can present Eqs. (B12) and (B13) in the form In the parameterization G R,A ǫ = ± cosh u cos v + i sinh u sin v and F R,A ǫ = ± sinh u cos v+i cosh u sin v, Eq. (B14) becomes (B16) At exp(-∆/T ) ≪ 1 the main contribution to this integral comes from a narrow range ǫ -∆ ∼ T ≪ ∆, where one can take z = ǫ -∆ and ǫ 2 -∆ 2 ≈ 2∆z. Then Hence Here a modified Bessel function reduces to K 0 (ω/2T ) ≃ ln(4T /ω) -γ E at ω ≪ 2T , where γ E = 0.577 is the Euler constant. Then Eq. (B18) gives R s = μ 0 ω 2 λ 3 σ 1 /2 which reproduces Eq. ( A thin N layer produces a weak disturbance of the pair potential, Ψ ≪ 1 27 , so Eq. (C5) can be linearized in δθ(x) = θ(x) -θ s , giving δθ ′′ = -k 2 δθ where k is defined by Eq. ( where ǫN = ǫ + iΓ N . In the S region we have: θ ′′ = s sinh θ cosh θ -iǫ S sinh θ + i[∆ s -Ψδ(x)] cosh θ, (C10) where ǫS = ǫ + iΓ S , and Ψ is given by Eq. ( The equation connecting the boundary values θ -and θ 0 readily follows from Eqs. (C3) and (C4): Taking here θ 0 = u 0 + iv 0 and θ -= u -+ iv -and separating real and imaginary parts yields Eqs. ( Separating here real and imaginary parts results in Eqs. ( 