Thermoelectricity refers to the conversion of thermal energy into electrical energy and vice-versa, which relies on three main effects: Seebeck, Peltier and Thomson, all of which are manifestations of heat and electricity flow. In this work we investigate the deposition of nanometric films and the effect of a thermal treatment on their thermoelectric properties. The films are based on BiSbT e ternary alloys, obtained by deposition on a substrate using the DC sputtering technique. We produced sputtering targets with repurposed materials from commercial thermoelectric modules. In this way, we explore an environmentally responsible destination for discarded devices, with in situ preparation and manufacture of film-based thermoelectric modules. Film samples show an improvement trend in thermoelectric efficiency as the annealing temperature is increased in the range 423 -623 K. The experimental data regarding thermal conductivity, electrical resistivity (or electrical conductivity), and the Seebeck coefficient were analyzed with the theory of q-deformed algebra. Applying a q-deformation to our system we can model the effect of the annealing temperature on the thermal and electrical conductivities, as well as the Seebeck coefficient, and argue that the q-factor must be related to structural properties of the films. We believe that our work could pave the way for future developments in the modeling of experimental measurements via the formalism of q-deformation algebra. In general, thermoelectricity refers to the conversion of thermal energy into electrical energy and vice-versa. The conversion relies on three transport effects: the Seebeck effect, the Peltier effect and the Thomson effect, all of which are manifestations of heat and electricity flow. Although any flow constitutes an irreversible process, the thermoelectric effects are thermodynamically reversible. In fact, those effects belong to an interesting class of physical phenomena arising from the junction of two or more irreversible processes. Even though the phenomenological theory of such processes cannot be rigorously described by conventional equilibrium thermodynamics, it can be described by a theory of reversible processes taking into account simultaneous changes of entropy due to reversible and irreversible energy fluxes The performance of a thermoelectric material is characterized by a dimensionless parameter known as the figure of merit, ZT . This parameter brings together electrical and thermal characteristics in the form where α is the Seebeck coefficient, ρ is the electrical resistivity, κ is the thermal conductivity, and T is the absolute temperature. The combination α 2 /ρ is known as the power factor, which is also an indicator of thermoelectric efficiency. High performance thermoelectric materials, suitable for thermoelectric generators or heat pumping systems, present ZT ≥ 1 at room temperature. In the 1960's there was high demand for autonomous sources of electricity due to space exploration, advances in medical physics, and the exploitation of terrestrial resources in inaccessible locations During the last decade new materials such as skutterudites There is a large number of applications for thermoelectric materials in the form of films. For example, films can play the role of thermally active substrates which can be applied in the study of magnetocaloric and magnetogalvanometric effects However, those issues did not prevent the manufacturing and use of thermoelectric micro-modules. It is generally accepted that thermoelectric materials produced by a sintering process present better mechanical properties when compared to those produced by melt growth methods. Materials with smaller grain sizes present more inelastic phonon scattering, leading to a decrease in lattice thermal conductivity and consequently a higher ZT . Several systems have already been successfully produced by sintering such as SiGe 11 , P bT e In this work we investigate the deposition of nanometric films and the effect of a thermal treatment on their thermoelectric properties. The films are based on BiSbT e ternary alloys, obtained by deposition on a substrate using the DC sputtering technique. We produced targets for the sputtering system with repurposed materials from commercial thermoelectric modules. In this way, we explore an environmentally responsible destination for discarded modules, with in situ preparation and manufacture of film-based thermoelectric modules. Film samples show an improvement trend in thermoelectric efficiency as the annealing temperature is increased in the range 423-623 K. The experimental data regarding thermal conductivity, electrical resistivity (or electrical conductivity), and the Seebeck coefficient were analyzed with the theory of q-deformed algebra. Applying a q-deformation to our system we can model the effect of the annealing temperature on the thermal and electrical conductivities, as well as the Seebeck coefficient, and argue that the q-factor must be related to structural properties of the films. The paper is organized as follows. In section II we present the experimental techniques used to produce thermoelectric thin films. In section III we present and discuss the experimental results. In section IV we introduce the q-deformed algebra and model the experimental data. Finally, in section V we present our concluding remarks. Semiconducting alloy films can be produced by thermal evaporation of elemental sources in vacuum. However, it is often difficult to control the deposition rate of different compounds during the deposition process, especially if they have a wide difference in melting points. Thus, it is more common to evaporate from a material which already has a composition close to the final product. Flash Evaporation is a technique which ensures that the deposited film has almost the same chemical composition as the source. Takashiri showed that a Bi 0.4 Sb 1.6 T e 3 film produced by this technique may have a power factor of 3.5 mW m -1 K -2 , which is comparable to 4.0 mW m -1 K -2 presented by the bulk material in a specific direction We produced p-type BiSbT e targets by reusing the semiconducting material from thermoelectric modules, via grinding, sieving, compaction and cold sintering. Ater that we prepared a series of p-type semiconducting films in glass substrates by DC magneton sputtering from the BiSbT e targets. The deposition rate of the films was controlled by adjusting the power of the DC source as well as the Ar pressure. For each film, the deposition rate was determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis at low angles (2 to 5 degrees) at consistent time intervals. The morphological characterization of the films was performed via XRD and X-ray fluorescence. Unless the film substrate is heated, chemical reactions may not occur and annealing should be employed. Annealing is also necessary in order to achieve uniformity and lower the density of structural defects in the films. One of our objectives was to study the effect of heat treatments after deposition on the thermoelectric properties of the films, as well as compare our results to what is available in the literature Meanwhile, Seebeck coefficient, thermal conductivity and electrical resistivity were measured with a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) from Quantum Design in the termal transport option mode (TTO mode). In this operation mode the system performs an electrical resistivity measurement and then promotes a heat pulse generated by a heater coupled at one end of the sample. The heat flow is directed to the other end which is connected to the thermal reservoir. The pulse duration and intensity is determined by a software which extracts the value of the thermal constants by extrapolation and least squares adjustments. The heat pulse originates temperature gradient, and the thermal conductance is obtained from the temperature measurement in the thermometers. Simultaneously, the Seebeck voltage is measured by the same thermometer terminals, in one cycle of the heat pulse. The properties are sensitive to small temperature variations, which is controlled with a 0.01% precision in each cycle. All measurements were performed at room temperature. Finally, the figure of merit is calculated from the measured properties with Eq. (1). Currently, BiSbT e ternary alloys are the compounds which present the highest ZT for thermoelectric applications at room temperature In Fig. Therefore, we can assert that the annealing temperatures chosen are effective in increasing the crystallinity of the films. Measurements of the physical properties for each one of the samples, obtained from the thermal transport module of the PPMS at room temperature, are presented in Tab. I: thermal conductivity κ, Seebeck coefficient α, electrical resistivity ρ and figure of merit ZT . It is important to highlight that measuring ZT with high precision is a real challenge and, in general, uncertainties can be as larger as 20% (1,0,10) no heat treatment (P104). The dependence of α on the annealing temperature appears somewhat more complex. We observe that, although the compound of the target is a ternary compound of p-type bismuth telluride, α presents negative values for the first samples, P104 and P105, without annealing and treated at 423 K. In principle, negative α values are compatible with n-type semiconductors. However, it has been reported in the literature that n -p type transitions can occur in BiSbT e ternary compounds The data in Fig. The decrease in the power factor as we go to an annealing temperature of 623 K could be due to undesired thermal degrading effect in the samples. In what follows, we propose a model to the experimental data obtained for electrical and thermal conductivities, as well as the Seebeck coefficient itself, through a q-deformed algebra applied to a Debye solid. Our model indicates a direct relation between the q-deformation factor and the annealing temperature of the samples. In the literature, several generalized statistical models have been intensively investigated In our model, we begin by defining the quantity know as the basic number 42 , [n], in terms of the creation and annihilation operators (a † and a), as well as the number operator N where q is a deformation parameter which modifies the physical properties of the system. Within the q-deformed algebra, the quantum harmonic oscillator is now described by the Heisenberg equation in the form where a, a † and N satisfy the usual commutation relations Consequently, we have Now we have the following Hamiltonian and the respective energy eigenvalues Taking the definition of the basic number in Eq. ( A. Implementation of the q-deformation The Debye model describes the vibrational modes of a solid in terms of a continuous frequency spectrum up to a cut-off frequency, ω D , such that the total number of normal modes equals that of the solid being described where κ B is the Boltzmann constant, θ Dq is the q-deformed Debye temperature defined as where cosh(φ) is the hyperbolic cosine function. Integrating Eq. ( This predicted low-temperature behavior is due to phonon excitations, and is in agreement with experimental observations. We can relate the q-deformed specific heat to its non-deformed counterpart by where sech(φ) is the hyperbolic secant function. Meanwhile the q-deformed and non-deformed conductivities are related by Finally, we can write Ordinarily, the Seebeck coefficient is given by the entropy to charge ratio. Now, we can take one step further and obtain a q-deformed expression for the Seebeck coefficient, given by where S q is the q-deformed entropy and Q is the charge, which is negative for electrons and positive for holes. From thermodynamics we know that specific heat and entropy variation are related, therefore we can write for the q-deformed quantities which can be integrated to give S q . Finally, from the definition of the q-deformed Seebeck coefficient we obtain where C α is a constant of integration. The previous expression can be condensed in the form or equivalently In what follows, the above expressions will be fitted to the experimental data. B. Direct comparison between measurements and q-deformed model Let us now try to reproduce the experimental data for the conductivities and the Seebeck coefficient with the respective values calculated applying the q-deformation model. The application of the q-deformed algebra to solids had already been demonstrated theoretically, where we suggested a possible experimental interpretation of the q-parameter, relating it to some type of perturbation or disorder in the system where T A is the annealing temperature, T i and A i are adjustable parameters. Now we can rewrite Eqs. ( Naturally, when |T i -T A | = 300 K we recover the undeformed case since for q = 1 we have κ q = κ, σ q = σ, and α q = α. In Fig. In the case of the Seebeck coefficient, shown in Fig. Finally, it is understood that the annealing process increases the crystallinity of the samples, in accordance with our XRD data. Therefore, Eq. ( The BiSbT e films investigated in this work, prepared by the DC sputtering deposition technique, presented results in accordance with current literature We believe it is possible to improve the thermoelectric parameters of the films and, perhaps, produce films for thermally active substrates. For example, our thermoelectric films could be used to study magnetic properties of materials which show signs of galvanometric magneto effects and spin-related thermoelectric effects, since they would allow a localized control of temperature and of the thermal gradient. The application of the q-deformed algebra to solids had been demonstrated previously, where we suggested a connection between the q-parameter and some type of perturbation or disorder in the system 