In this work, we investigate the optoelectronic properties of zinc oxide (ZnO) nanowires, which are good candidates for applications based on integrated optics. Single ZnO nanowire photodetectors were fabricated with ohmic contacts. By taking current transient measurements in different atmospheres (oxygen, air, vacuum and argon), and at various temperatures, we point out the importance of surface effects on the electrical behaviour. Results confirm that oxygen chemisorption is responsible for the existence of a high photoconductive gain in these devices, and for the first time a two step process in the photocurrent rise transient is reported. A maximum gain of G = 7.8 × 10 7 is achieved. However, under certain conditions, the persistence of the photocurrent can last up to several hours and as such may prevent the device from operating at useful rates. From a knowledge of the photocurrent response mechanisms, we establish a method to restore the photodetector to its initial state, with very low dark current, by applying an appropriate gate voltage sequence. This advances the state of the art for these detectors towards commercial applications. Photodetectors are one of the main devices (together with logical gates and waveguides) that are essential for applications in integrated optics. Over the last 20 years, improvements in nanofabrication techniques have enabled the creation of new photodetector devices based on nanobelts, nanowires and nanotubes Our ZnO nanowires were grown on a c-plane sapphire substrate by MOCVD (metalorganic chemical vapour deposition) in a horizontal reactor operating at a reduced pressure of 65 mbar. Oxygen and zinc were supplied by nitrous oxide (8.6 mbar) and diethylzinc (9.1 μbar) respectively, using heloium as a carrier gas. The hexagonal nanowires were grown at a temperature of 875°C, and ended up forming a dense vertical forest of nanowires. In order to create these photodetectors, ZnO nanowires were detached from the substrate by sonification in an ultrasonic bath with ethanol for 5 s. Then, the nanowires in suspension were drop-casted on a silicon substrate (p doped with an SiO 2 insulating layer of 300 nm on top) After nanofabrication, electrical properties were studied. Dark current measurements were performed at room temperature (approximately 300 K and 1 bar) but in a pure O 2 atmosphere (see Figure Photoluminescence (PL) measurements were performed both at room temperature under vacuum and in ambient air. Measurements have been done using a frequency-tripled, mode-locked Ti:Sapphire laser as an excitation source (λ = 266 nm, pulse duration = 150 fs, repetition rate = 76 MHz). The beam was focused on the sample with a 36× reflecting objective (numerical aperture of 0.5), the photoluminescence was then collected through the same objective and directed to an Andor 30 cm Shamrock spectrometer (with a spectral resolution of 0.07 nm) For an excitation at 266 nm (above the bandgap energy of ZnO), one can observe a luminescence maximum at 378 nm. The position of this maximum is in agreement with the results for PL from ZnO The nanowire photocurrent time response has been investigated in various atmospheres in order to investigate the persistence of the photocurrent. The study of photoconduction in O 2 is relevant because it has been shown The nanowire photoresponse was first studied in a pure oxygen atmosphere (see Figure Considering the rise transients, we observed two distinct contributions to the photocurrent, each with its own characteristic time constant and saturation value. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time observation of two distinct photocurrent responses has been reported and discussed. For the sake off analysis, A first fast transient occurs as soon as illumination starts, up to a first rise plateau. The fast rise has a response time of the order of the calculated one (0.3 ms) and is too fast to be resolved using our equipment (limited to a few ms). It contributes almost completely to the value of the photocurrent gain. It is likely that this first and fast photo-response does not involve reactions occurring at the surface of the nanowire. It is mainly due to the time required to reach an equilibrium of the free carrier concentrations, electrons and holes, under illumination. The carrier concentrations are determined by optical generation of photo-carrier pairs (electronhole pairs), photo-carrier recombination, and drift-diffusion of electrons and holes towards the contacts. This first rise time depends on factors such as the optical power, the recombination rates, and the carrier mobilities, and is too short for our measurement setup. This is why only a first plateau is observed, with only a slight dependence on the oxygen pressure. The second rise transient, which we will call secondary photocurrent evolution, is shown in Figures where I 0 is the first (fast) photocurrent plateau, A = I∞ I 0 -1 accounts for the maximum increase of the secondary photocurrent, and τ rise is the characteristic time of the second rise transient. Fitting the secondary rise transient using this expression gives the various constants given in Table The second transient is attributed to the modification of the nanowire surface. In the presence of oxygen molecules and under dark conditions, oxygen can be chemisorbed at the nanowire surface in the form O - 2 D where S O 2 is the surface density of chemisorbed O - 2 molecules and 4 D a coefficient to account for the surface to volume ratio of a nanowire slice. The free electrons are pushed away from the surface due to the negative charge of the O - 2 molecules, which creates a depletion region all around the nanowire surface. The nanowire conductivity is therefore reduced in the presence of chemisorbed O - 2 molecules. The application of a negative gate voltage further reduces the free electron concentration to a point where the dark current becomes lower than the measurement noise, well below 0.1pA. When illuminated, photogenerated holes are attracted to the surface, where they recombine with the excess electrons of the chemisorbed O - 2 molecules, contributing to the oxygen molecule desorption (in a neutral form). The surface depletion disappears and the nanowire conductivity increases, rising the photocurrent. This loss of chemisorbed oxygen can be partly counterbalanced by the chemisorption of new oxygen molecules, if available in the ambient atmosphere. The surface density of adsorbed oxygen molecules will reach an equilibrium due to these two competing processes. The lower the oxygen pressure, the deeper the surface oxygen desorption, the higher the electron density, the higher the conductivity, and the higher the a. The various rise constants are almost independent of the oxygen pressure. Conversely, the fall transient is faster by a factor of 10 when increasing of the oxygen pressure from 5 mbar to 750 mbar. The photocurrent gains have been estimated using Equation (3) as described in the text. secondary photocurrent plateau. The speed of the O - 2 desorption process does not depend on the surrounding oxygen pressure within the experimental range. A high surrounding oxygen pressure helps reaching low dark current conditions, however a low oxygen pressure ensures deeper O - 2 desorption and higher photocurrent gain. An examination of the photocurrent decay after illumination has been turned off reveals a clear dependence of the fall transients on the oxygen pressure: the higher the pressure the faster the photocurrent decay. The transient can be approximated by the following expression: The parameters obtained for the three oxygen pressures are reported in Table From these various experiments the rise and fall transients of the photocurrents can be well understood. Ambient O 2 molecules are physisorbed on the surface of the nanowire, usually because of surface defects such as oxygen vacancies Temperature measurements have been performed to better characterize the photoconduction mechanism. The photocurrent response has been measured at V g = -20 V (in order to reduce dark current) for temperatures ranging from 100 K to 293 K, under low oxygen pressure of 0.5 mbar. As previously we observed two successive increases of the photocurrent (see Figure This activation energy could be a signature of the surface equilibrium reached under dark conditions. The surface depletion at the nanowire surface, due to chemisorbed oxygen molecules, is responsible for the separation of photo-generated electrons and holes. The depletion width reduces the electron-hole recombination rate, and consequently influences the equilibrium concentrations of free electrons and holes. This equilibrium is responsible for the high photocurrent gain of nanowires compared to bulk photoconductors. The detailed analysis of the equilibrium reached in dark conditions, such as the surface depletion width and the chemisorbed oxygen surface density, is complex and beyond the scope of this paper. It would probably require complementary experiments. However the present activation energy determination could help in understanding the surface dynamics of ZnO nanowires. In order to gather more information about the photoconduction in our component, the photoresponse has been studied as a function of the incident optical power density in an oxygen atmosphere. In Figure where q is the elementary charge, η ext is the external quantum efficiency, I ph is the photocurrent, P exc is the incident optical power, and hν is the photon energy. In a first approximation η ext can be estimated considering a rectangular nanowire with a width and a thickness of d nw = 250 nm and a length L = 2.5 μm. Photon absorption in the ZnO nanowire is estimated using the Beer-Lambert equation, with an absorption coefficient α = 3 × 10 3 cm -1 as measured previously From the measured photocurrent I ph , the gain can be calculated. Results are shown in Figure where q is the elementary charge, τ t the electron transit time, τ 0 l is the hole transit time (or the electron lifetime), and F 0 is a constant. The photon absorption rate is directly proportional to the incident optical power: F ∝ P exc . Consequently the photocurrent varies like I ph ∝ P 1-k exc with the incident optical power. This is a counter-intuitive result when k is close to 1, as I ph becomes almost independent of the incident optical beam power. Our device is in this situation: as can be seen Figure The persistence of the photocurrent is detrimental to many applications of the device since it prevents high frequency operation. We discuss now a method to quickly restore the nanowire photodetector to its initial state once illumination has been turned off. As shown Figure Single ZnO nanowire photodetectors have been fabricated, and their electrical properties have been investigated in the dark and under illumination. Experiments were performed under various atmospheres and in a temperature range of 100 K-293 K. For the first time the existence of a two step photocurrent response was measured and discussed. A high photoconductive gain of 7.8 × 10 7 was determined, associated with very low dark currents, well below 0.1 pA, when the device is appropriately biased. These properties demonstrate the potential of nanowires for very high sensitivity photodetection. The oxygen chemisorption process shows an activation energy of E a = 115 meV. Finally, an appropriate gate pulse was demonstrated to shorten the persistence of the photocurrent, and restore the photodetector operating condition. This is an important step towards future application of these high gain photodetectors. Further work is now underway in order to investigate higher rate/high gain photodetection operation.