Usman Ul Muazzam 1 , Prasad chavan 1 Centre for Nano Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, 560012, Bangalore, India We report on the study of optical properties of mist CVD grown α-Ga2O3 with the observation of excitonic absorption in spectral responsivity measurements. 163 nm of Ga2O3 was grown on sapphire using Ga-(acac)3 as the starting solution at a substrate temperature of 450°C. The film was found to be crystalline and of α-phase with an on-axis full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 92 arcsec as confirmed from X-ray diffraction scans. The Tauc's plot extracted from absorption spectroscopy exhibited two transitions in the UV regime at 5.3 eV and 5.6 eV, corresponding to excitonic absorption and direct band-to-band transition respectively. The binding energy of exciton was extracted to be 114 meV from spectral responsivity (S.R) measurements. Further, metalsemiconductor-metal (MSM) photodetectors (PD) with lateral inter-digitated geometry were fabricated on the film. A sharp band edge was observed at 230 nm (~ 5.6 eV) in the spectral response with peak responsivity of ~1 A/W at a bias of 20 V. The UV to visible rejection ratio was found to be ~ 100 while the dark current was measured to be ~ 0.1 nA. The various polymorphs of Ga2O3, with their wide band gap of 4.6-5.3 eV eV The XRD scans were carried out using a Rigaku SmartLab, Cu-Ka radiation X-ray diffraction system. The film grown on sapphire was confirmed to be α-Ga2O3 from θ-2θ scan. Figure1 shows (0006) reflection of α-Ga2O3, and the inset to figure1 shows the symmetric rocking curve with an FWHM of 92.2 arcsec indicative of a low screw dislocation density in the epi-layer. The surface morphology of the as-deposited film was studied using atomic force microscope (Dimension ICON, Bruker) and the rms roughness was found to be 2 nm as shown in Figure Absorption measurement was done using UV-Vis setup (UV-3600, UV-VIS-NIR spectrophotometer, Shimadzu). The Tauc's plot (figure Photodetectors with metal semiconductor metal (MSM) layout in an interdigitated geometry were fabricated on the as-grown α -Ga2O3 sample using standard i-line lithography process. The device schematic is shown in Fig. Raman spectra was recorded in the backscattering geometry using 532 nm laser, the light was then collected using 100x objective in backscattered geometry and analysed using LabRAM HR, Horiba spectrometer. Figure shows Raman spectra of α -Ga2O3. The corundum structure of α-Ga2O3 belongs to -3m (D3d) point group and R-3c (D3d 6 ) space group. According to group theory analysis the irreducible representation of zone-centre optical mode is: In addition, unit cell of α -Ga2O3 is centrosymmetric thus all vibrations that are Raman allowed are infrared forbidden and vice-versa. The A1g and Eg are Raman active, A2u and Eu are infrared active, and A1u and A2g vibrations are neither Raman nor infrared active. The spectrum shows A1g(LO) phonon mode at 216 cm -1 . This mode is attributed to Ga atoms vibrating against each other along c-axis. The high frequency Eg mode at 430 cm - 1 is due to lighter O atom vibrations perpendicular to c-axis In most of the oxide semiconductors, the excitonic binding energy is larger than the Rydberg exciton effective energy which is given by: Here, Ry is the Rydberg energy which has value of 13.6 eV, μ is the reduced mass of exciton, mo is free electron mass, εs the static dielectric constant of Ga2O3 which is 10 17 . Since mh >> me, μ is approximately taken as me which is 0.276mo Using equations ( This value is very close to the value estimated from spectral responsivity. To estimate the dissociation field for exciton, polaron (coupling of LO phonon with electron) radius was calculated using a) Corresponding author email: usmaanm@iisc.ac.in digbijoy@iisc.ac.in where ap is Polaron radius. From equation ( Figure Figure The theoretical value of responsivity at 230 nm, assuming a quantum efficiency of 100%, is 185 mA/W. This is much smaller than the peak responsivity value of 518 mA/W at 5 V (at 230 nm) measured in this work, even at a relatively low bias of 5 V, implying that there is gain in the devices In conclusion, we have reported on the study of growth and photo-response properties of mist CVD grown α-Ga2O3 on c-plane sapphire. Solar blind deep-UV photodetectors realized on these samples exhibited high responsivity of 0.5 A/W at 5 V bias with a sharp peak at 5.5 eV, low dark current of ~ pA and UV-to-visible rejection ratio exceeding two orders of magnitude. We reported the first observation of excitonic peak in spectral responsivity with an excitonic binding energy of 114 meV. This work is expected to aid further in the understanding of optical properties of α-Ga2O3 Towards realizing high-performance deep-UV optoelectronics based on gallium oxide. 