Similar to the enhanced low-dose-rate sensitivity (ELDRS) effect of ionization damage, an enhanced low-flux senstivity (ELFS) effect has been reported in ions/neutron irradiation on n-type silicon or PNP transistors. However, the existing mechanism and simulation dominated by the diffusion dynamics give much higher transition flux than the experimental obseverations. In this work, we develop a new model based on the annealing of defect clusters for the ELFS effect. Simulations considering Si-interstitial-mediated inter-cluster interactions during their annealing processes successfully reproduce the ELFS effect. The ratio of Si interstitials captured by defect clusters to those dissipating off on the sample edges or re-merging into the bulk is found as the key parameter dominating the enhancement factor (EF) of the ELFS effect. We also establish a compact parametric model based on the mechanism, which is found to provide a good quantitative description of the experimental results. The model predicts the existence of nonsensitive regions at sufficiently low and high fluxes as well as a non-trivial fluence and temperature dependence of the enhancement factor. Displacement damage (DD) in irradiated Si bipolar devices causes the degradation of electronic properties of the systems. In most operational amplifiers and comparators, the degradation of the input bias current (I iB ) is usually the most sensitive parameters. The most sensitive components with respect to the degradation of I iB are the input-stage bipolar junction transistors (BJTs) Neutron induces the highest NIEL/IEL ratio among the particles, where NIEL and IEL stand for non-ionizing energy loss and ionization energy loss, respectively. However, the study of the flux dependence of neutron-induced DD is rarely seen. There are suspicions of the presence of the flux effect of neutron iradiations, based on considerations as follows. 1) Different from the heavy ions a) Electronic mail: liuyang@mtrc.ac.cn b) Electronic mail: songyu@mtrc.ac.cn with MeV energies, the neutron impacts normally do not generate a prominent long trace of defects; Instead, the damage clusters are smaller and more localized in space. 2) The average distance between the adjacent impacts for neutron irradiation is huge, which is larger than 1μm even at a total fluence of 1 × 10 12 cm -2 . The experimental observations show that there is rarely defect clusters with radius larger than 5 nm To clarify the influence of the flux on the neutron induced DD in silicon bipolar devices, very recently, we did low equivalent fluence (1 × 10 10 cm -2 ) and various flux (5 × 10 5 -5 × 10 6 cm -2 s -1 ) neutron irradiation experiments on bipolar analogy circuits and BJTs In this work, we investigate the reasons and propose a defect clusters' self-annealing limited model and a parametric model for the ELFS effect of neutron-induced DD. The proposed model considers the cluster nature of the neutron-induced displacement defects and suggest the reactions of inter clusters are limited by the reordering processes of each cluster. To test the mechanisms, numerical simulations are performed. The charged states of defects and the mobility enhancement effect of mobile particles promoted by exchanging charge carriers with the environment are also considered The paper is organized as following. In Sec. II, the experimental results are simply shown. In Sec. III, the conventional model The increase of the input bias current (∆I (i)B ) versus neutron flux for LM324N, LM124 and GLPNP. All samples are exposed to the same total fluence of 10 10 cm -2 . The detailed characteristics of the experimental results have been analysed in details in one of our previous papers Two kinds of operational amplifier, LM324N and LM124 produced by Texas Instruments, and a kind of gate lateral PNP (GLPNP) BJTs are used as the research objects. In LM324N and LM124, the input bias currents are most sensitive to the base currents of their input-stage PNP BJTs. The configuration of the GLPNP BJT is illustrated in Fig. The increased I iB of LM324N and LM124 circuits are shown as the red and blue curves in Fig. To investigate the mechanism and characteristics of the effects, numerical simulations of defects generation have been developed. Typical deep-level transient spectroscopy (DLTS) measurement have suggested main (electrically active) defects in silicon induced in DD; they are vacancy, V , divacancy, V 2 , vacancy-oxygen complex, V O, vacancyimpurity complex, V P and their charged states To capture the main characteristics of the damage, we did one dimensional (1D) simulation of the evolution of the defects. The simulation method is similar to the one used by Hallén et al where the subscript I indicates an interstitial particle. The concentration of a particular defect or carrier is determined by where [X] is the density of the ingredient X, D X is the diffusion coefficients, U X and G X are the consumption and generation rate of species X, respectively. The transitions among charged states of the above defects are described through the capture and excitation of the charge carriers The length of the simulated region is defined through a comparison with the experimental configurations. In our experiments, the total fluence is 1 × 10 10 cm -2 , which results in an average distance of the order of 1um between collision cascades. (The generation of a single defect cluster and the results of several impacts are illustrated in Fig. Simulated results for silicon is shown in Fig. However, in our experiments, the neutron flux is between 5 × 10 5 and 5 × 10 6 cm -2 s -1 . Hence, there is a big discrepancy of transition flux between the experiments and the simulations. Even for the extreme cases, i.e., the income particles is not neutron but heavy ions whose energy depositions are more efficient (assuming that every incoming ion can collide with lattice atoms), the value of Φ t is no less than 10 9 -10 11 cm -2 s -1 . This value is still much larger than the fluxes observed in the experiments. This contrast might be one of the reasons that, as claimed in the previous paper The conflicts between the simulation and experiments stem from the simplifications in the previous models. In the previous models, the generation processes of defects are treated as reactions among discrete vacancies, interstitials and impurities in crystalline structures. However, inside the core of each collision cascade the initial defects have high concentrations and the amorphous nature of the regions should not be avoided. In other words, beside discrete defects, more complicated structures containing several interstitial and/or vacancy-related defects are generated. As mentioned in Ref. The impact of the incoming particle on Si can create isolated and clustered defects, and the ratio of the clusters to isolated defects depends on the energies of the primary knock-on atoms (PKAs) The annealing of these defects are different from the annealing of the isolated interstitials and vacancies of high mobilities. The reasons are as follows. 1) The properties of the isolated defects derived in crystalline solid are no more valid in the core of the damage cascades; 2) the annealing processes are dominated by the internal reordering mechanisms of the defect complexes. An evidence is the extraordinary different annealing time of Si samples bombarded with 1.4 MeV electrons and fission neutrons Based on the above analyses and the explanations in the last chapter, a modified model is proposed. In this model, the collision cascade from an incoming neutron is considered to result in complicated defect complexes. The annealing of the damage is dominated by the reordering of these defect clusters. The interactions among the clusters are mediated through the particles emitted during the reordering processes. To explore the primary features of the mechanisms, numerical simulations of the basic components and reactions have been constructed. In the calculations, the defect clusters are defined as a region containing spatially overlapped immovable interstitial and vacancy-related defects, I cls and V cls . The results of each collision cascade of incoming neutron are simulated by a defect cluster spanning 50 Å in width containing 1 × 10 18 cm -3 interstitial and vacancy-related defects. The reordering processes are simulated through the spontaneous decomposition of the interstitial-related components I cls (emission of Si interstitials) and the following recombinations of the mobile Si interstitials (I) and vacancy-related components (V cls ). The decomposition rate is determined by Arrhenius equation listed below: where m is a counting number. Results of the simulations are shown in Fig. In Fig. The way how the flux rate effects stem from the interactions between defect clusters is illustrated in Fig. The mechanism is further extracted to construct a simplified model illustrated in Fig. 1. Each isolated defect cluster can anneal to a ratio, 1 -α of its initial size. The reordering process has an average characteristic time τ . 2. The primary mobile elements are Si interstitials, which lose a part of their amount each time when they encounter another defect cluster. As the concentration of defects increases, the capturing processes tend to saturate. For each given system, a parameter n s can be specified to characterize the change of efficiency of the capturing processes. The reduced interstitials through the capture processes contribute to the increased number of the annealed defects. 3. The mobile particles, once reach the edges, will be absorbed and no more be rejected back. The flux rate, which determines the average intervals ∆t between successive collision cascades, determines the number of the defect clusters that can be encountered by the Si interstitials emitted from the previously created defect clusters before disappearing. The model gives an analytical solution of the dependence of the enhancement factors (EF) on irradiation flux. The remnant number of defects n rem (in measure of a defect cluster of standard size, e.g. n rem = 0.5 if a cluster annealed to half of the size of a standard defect cluster), after a given fluence of irradiation Φ, is given by the following equation (Eq.4). The detailed derivative is given in Appendix D. In the equations, the meanings of n s and α have been indicated above. n r,ef f calculates the effective number of collision cascades involved in capturing escaped particles from one damage cascade. where γ is the flux of the irradiation and τ is the characteristic time of self annealing of a single damage cascade. The total amount of collisions is measured by n tot , where κ measures the probability of the collisions taking place for a unit fluence of incoming particles, which has the unit of cm 2 . The DD is given by where k is a constant connecting the number of defects with the parametric change of the devices. Following the discussions in the previous chapters (Chap. III B, IV A & Appendix B), the experimental results suggest the annealing time of neutrons bombardment is of magnitude of 10 3 s and the probability of the collisions is approximately 1 -10 times per 10 9 cm -2 fluence. Thus the reasonable values of the parameters would be τ ∼ 10 3 s and κ -1 ∼ 10 8 -10 9 cm -2 . The comparison show good agreements with the experimental results. In the simulation, we noticed that the damage (represented by ∆I B ) has an evident flux dependence in the range of 5 × 10 5 -5 × 10 6 cm -2 s -1 . When the flux is much higher than 5×10 6 cm -2 s -1 or much lower than 5×10 5 cm -2 s -1 , the flux sensitivity becomes trivial. The reasons can be explained as follows. At very low flux, the post-directional interactions among defect clusters become very weak. In this limit, further decreasing of the flux rates will not reduce the recombinations effectively. At very high flux, on the contrary, the postdirectional interactions are very efficient to the extent of nearly saturation. In this limit, further increasing of the flux rates will not enhance the recombinations effectively. Therefore, in both extremes, the damage show little sensitivities to the flux rates. Similar calculations have also been made for LM124 and GLPNP. The results are shown in Fig. In the above section, we have demonstrated the matches between the results of the parametric model and the experimental results. Moreover, besides the flux rate dependence of the EF, the model also predicts a nontrivial dependence on the fluence. The results are illustrated in Fig. The temperature is generally recognized to influence the annealing rate of defects. In the parametric model, the influences of the temperatures are treated as the changes of the characteristic time τ which measures the annealing rates of defects In the continuous model simulations, though the results show qualitative agreements with the experiment results, there are some discrepancies of the amplitudes between the simulated results and the experimental observations. Two concerns may influence the accuracy of the results. 1. The inconsistence between the continuous modeling used in simulations and the discrete nature of the real dynamics of the defects. The validity of the continuous approach of the molecular dynamics of a discrete system requires that the mean free path (MFP) of the molecular is much smaller than the characteristic scale of the system. In our systems, a defect cluster has a very narrow radius (∼ 10nm). The length may be comparable with the MFP of mobile defects. In the space among the clusters, the concentrations of the defects are low and the MFP of mobile defects may be comparable with the size of the whole system. Therefore, the continuous modeling may not be the best simulation method in mimicking the dynamics of the defects evolution and its accuracy is degraded. 2. In the numerical simulations, the approaches of the reordering mechanisms within defect clusters are too simple. When describing the interactions between interstitial and vacancy-related defects inside and outside the defect clusters, the modeling uses the same diffusion coefficient of mobile particles and rate of reactions. The approaches require the validity of Langevin dynamics inside defect clusters which may not be exact in practice. If non-Lagevin dynamics dominate inside defect clusters, the defect clusters would behave like black bodies which absorb incoming particles with little reflections. Particles leave the clusters through emission mechanisms. New parameters are then required to characterize the recombination processes. An analogy is given in Ref. For the parametric model, though it has reproduced many key features of the experimental results, there are still improvements could be considered in future work. One simplification used in the derivation of the model equations is that, we have neglected the weakening of post-directional annealing for the last few incoming particles. (This is because there is no incoming particles after the irradiation stops, thus the number of damage cascades involved in post-directional annealing are overestimated for the last few incoming particles.) This approximation may cause degraded accuracy of the calculated fluence dependence of EF. In the modeling, we have attribute the delayed annealing of defects to the construction of the metastable complex. The exact types of these complex are remain to be investigated. Besides interstitial clusters, boron-interstitial clusters are also possible candidates. The research of transient enhanced diffusion (TED) effects pointed out that B cluster precursors, such as B m I n (n is large) are formed when Si interstitial supersaturation is high. In the annealing process followed, the cluster emit Si interstitials and nucleate into electrically inactive stable complex, such as B m I. The experimentally observed enhanced low-flux sensitivity (ELFS) effects of neutron-induced displacement damage in bipolar devices have been explained and simulated in details. The ELFS effects are attributed to the suppression of Si-interstitials mediated inter-cascade interactions at low flux. At low flux, the Si interstitials emitted from one cascade have sufficient time to dissipate before the subsequent cascades take place. However, at high flux, many subsequent cascades have established and enhance the probability of capturing the interstitials. The conflicts between the rapid annealing results of previously assumed diffusion dynamics limited model (t anneal < 10 0 s) and the slow annealing speeds observed in our experiments (t anneal ∼ 10 3 s) implies that the cluster's nature of the defects has remarkable influence on the annealing processes. The accordance of the characteristic time of ELFS effects and the damage annealing experiments implies that the inter-defect mechanisms take actions through the annealing processes, and the sensitive range of flux is limited by the rates of the annealing processes of defect clusters. Based on these viewpoints, modified numerical simulations not only reproduced the flux dependence of the defects formation, but also gave a transition flux which matches the experimental configurations. By summarizing the mechanisms, a parametric model is established. The model has compact analytic form containing only a few parameters characterizing the systems. The calculated results not only reproduce the flux dependence of the EF, but also predict the fluence and temperature dependence of EF. The results show that the flux dependence is remarkably suppressed for sufficient high fluence. The reasons are the saturation of recombinations through pre-directional annealing processes which overwhelm the post-directional annealing processes. The results can explain the reason why ELFS effects have rarely been observed in previous experiments. Our work should be helpful in analyzing the displacement damage of the irradiation vulnerable systems. It shows that, when estimating the damage, not only the total fluence, but also the flux and temperature should be considered as well. The observations may also provide some knowledge of controlling the defect concentrations through ion implantations by tuning temperatures and flux rates. Using our experimental setting as an example, the neutron flux is between 5 × 10 5 and 5 × 10 6 cm -2 s -1 which results in an average time intervals between incoming particles varying between 10 1 and 10 3 s (for 1μm 2 area). In silicon, the 1 MeV neutron has a collision probability approximated to 0.18 per cm thickness which enlarges ∆t between collisions of incoming neutrons with the lattice atoms to 10 5 ∼ 10 7 s (for 1μm 3 volume). The mean distance among defect trajectories (as shown in Fig. The simulated results show ELFS effects when ∆t is in range of ∼ 10 -5 -10 -2 s (Fig. The spectrum of knock-on atoms (PKAs) for 1MeV neutrons' impacts on silicon are calculated by GENT4. In the simulations, a total fluence of 10 12 cm -2 is choosen to obtain sufficient times of impacts for statistics. The resulted density of frequency of PKAs' energy are plotted in Fig. To measure the ratios of the defects introduced by a single impact which contribute to the pure increase of the whole defects in system, we define a dimensionless parameter χ. χ has the following expression: χ = (1 -α) + αe -(na+n r,ef f )/ns , (D1) where n a is the number of existing defects, n r,ef f is the effective number of defects involved from subsequent damage cascades. n s defines the characteristic number of defects to induce prominent recombinations. The first term in Eq. D1 represents the portion of Si interstitials not involved in recombinations (not emitted through annealing). The second term calculates the number of Si interstitials survived from both the pre-and postdirectional recombinations. The efficiency of the recombinations is assumed to be exponentially proportional to n a and n r,ef f scaled by n s : 1 -e -(na+n r,ef f )/ns . where t is the intervals between the first generated defects and the defects introduced from the subsequent irradiations. γ(t)κdt calculates the number of defects introduced within the interval dt at time t. As the annealing of a cluster proceeds, with the increased time intervals between the formations of itself and the later generated defects, the total number of its emitted interstitials that can encounter the later generated defects decrease. G r (t ) measures the efficiency of the newly generated defects at time t with respect to the defects generated previously at t = 0, which has the form: G r (t ) = e -t /τ . (D3) Substituting Eq. D3 into Eq. D2, it can be obtained: n r,ef f = γκτ e -t min /τ -e -t max /τ . (D4) For simplicity, we define the upper limit of the integral t max equals to infinity. The value of the lower limit t min depends on the rates (or time intervals) of the impacts from incoming particles, hence is a function of the flux of the radiation. t min is determined through the function: Combining Eqs. D4 and D5, n r,ef f is obtained: n r,ef f = γκτ e -1/(γκτ ) . (D6) 3. Defects survived from recombinations after irradiation n rem The number of the defects survived from the recombinations satisfies the following differential equation: Using Eq. D1, D6 and the approximation n rem ≈ n a , Eq. D7 is solved: n remnant = n s ln 1 -1 + α e -n r,ef f /n s α + e -n tot (-1+α)/n s -1 + α -e -n r,ef f /n s α , where the boundary condition n a (t = 0) = 0 is used. Eq. D8 is exact Eq. 4 in the main text.