Artificial bilayer lipid membranes (BLMs), along with patch-clamped membranes, are frequently used for functional analyses of membrane proteins. In both methods, the electric properties of membranes are characterized by only one parameter, namely, transmembrane potential. Here the construction of a novel BLM system was reported, in which membrane voltages can be controlled in a lateral direction in addition to conventional transmembrane direction. A microaperture was fabricated in a Teflon film and Ti electrodes were evaporated around the aperture. BLMs were reproducibly formed in the aperture without being affected by the presence of the electrodes. The application of a lateral voltage induced no significant changes in the electric properties of the BLMs, such as baseline current, transmembrane resistance, and transmembrane capacitance. In contrast, lateral voltages clearly affected the activities of biological ion channels, suggesting that the lateral voltage might be a useful parameter for analyzing channel activities. The present Teflon-based system in which multidirectional voltages can be applied to BLMs represent a promising platform for the analysis of underlying functional properties of membrane proteins. The biological cell membrane that separates the cell from its external environment is composed of a bilayer lipid membrane (BLM) and membrane proteins. The BLM is a selfassembled structure comprised of phospholipid molecules that stabilize the membrane through hydrophilic and hydrophobic interactions. It provides an environment that permits membrane proteins to express their functions. There are two common methods for the electric functional analysis of membrane proteins, especially ion channels; the patch clamp technique for proteins that are in cell membranes Since early BLM studies, Teflon films have been used as a septum for suspending BLMs Although numerous crack-like lines were formed on the Teflon-based chips after the deposition of the SiO2 layers, the Teflon-based chip showed a resistance of ~2 TΩwhen immersed in a buffer solution, confirming that the Teflon-based chip had a high insulating property (Figure We next applied lateral voltages to BLMs through the Ti electrodes and investigated the effects of the lateral voltages on transmembrane currents. Figure To demonstrate the utility of the present BLM system as a novel platform for the functional analysis of membrane proteins, we incorporated biological ion channel proteins into the BLMs, and the effect of lateral voltages on channel activities were then investigated. For this purpose, proteoliposomes were prepared from HEK293T cells that expressed a cardiac voltage-dependent sodium channel (Nav1.5) and added to the cis side compartment in order to incorporate the channels into the BLMs that were formed in the Teflon-based chips. Figure and no channel activities were subsequently detected for the following 60 sweeps (Figure reported conductance (17 pS) Switching off the lateral voltage resulted in the disappearance of the channel activities (Figure In conclusion, we report on the development of a novel BLM system in which the membrane potential can be controlled in the lateral direction to BLMs in addition to the conventional transmembrane direction. By utilizing artificial BLM systems, it was possible to position electrodes inside lipid bilayer structures through the deposition of metal electrodes on a Teflon film to which the BLMs were suspended. The above findings suggest that ion channel activities are reversibly regulated by a lateral voltage. Although it remains to be elucidated how the lateral voltage is related to channel openings, the application of the lateral voltage has the potential to open the inactivated ion channels. This would be useful for the analysis of fast-inactivating ion channels that were difficult to be evaluated based on the application of conventional transmembrane voltages. Considering that inserting electrodes between very thin lipid monolayers of living cell membranes is not easy in the patch-clamp method, the present BLM system represents a promising tool for use in functional analyses of membrane proteins, including ion channels. Teflon films with thicknesses in the range of 12 to 15 μm (YSI Inc. High Sensitivity Membrane Kit) were cut into rectangular sheets with a size of 32 × 40 mm 2 . Small, circular apertures (70~180 μm) across which BLMs were formed were produced in the Teflon sheet by passing an electrical spark generated by an automobile ignition coil. Preparation of Proteoliposomes: HEK293T cells were maintained in DMEM (1×) + GlutaMAX TM -I (gibco) supplemented with 10 % FBS (gibco) under 5% CO2 at 37°C. HEK293T cells at a 70-80% confluency were transfected with Nav1.5 DNA subcloned in a pCMV6-XL4 vector [Nav1.5(SCN5A) (NM_198056) Human Untagged Clone, ORIGENE] by using PEI MAX (Polysciences, Inc.). More than 24 hours after the transfection, the Nav1.5 channels were extracted from the transfected HEK293T cells as membrane fractions according to procedures described in the previous report The Teflon-based chips were washed with chloroform, ethanol, and toluene, and then immersed in a 2% (v/v) solution of ( -dimethylchlorosilane (PFDS) in super dehydrated toluene at room temperature for 6 hours in a nitrogen-filled glovebox. The BLMs were formed across the aperture in the silanized Teflon-based chip by the folding method, as described in a previous report 