Motivated by the recent development of terahertz pump-probe experiments, we investigate the short-time dynamics in superconductors with multiple attractive pairing channels. Studying a single-band square lattice model with spin-spin interaction as an example, we find the signatures of collective excitations of the pairing symmetries (known as Bardasis-Schrieffer modes) as well as the order parameter amplitude (Higgs mode) in the short-time dynamics of the spectral gap and quasiparticle distribution after an excitation by a pump pulse. We show that the polarization and intensity of the pulse can be used to control the symmetry of the non-equilibrium state as well as frequencies and relative intensities of the contributions of different collective modes. We find particularly strong signatures of the Bardasis-Schrieffer mode in the dynamics of the quasiparticle distribution function. Our work shows the potential of modern ultrafast experiments to address the collective excitations in unconventional superconductors and highlights the importance of sub-dominant interactions for the nonequilibrium dynamics in these systems. Ultrafast pump-probe techniques became recently a powerful tool to probe the temporal evolution of symmetry broken states and relaxation in conventional and unconventional superconductors. Our starting point is a model of fermions interacting via a spin-spin interaction where c i,σ are fermionic annihilation (creation) operators on site i and spin σ, t is the hopping integral between nearest neighbors and S α i = 1 2 s,s c † is σ α ss c is are the spin-1/2 operators. This model was considered before in the context of cuprates, pnictides and heavy fermion systems. where γ k,d x 2 -y 2 = (cos(k x ) -cos(k y ))/2 form factors, respectively. The remnant components are repulsive odd-parity spintriplet coupling constants V px = V py = J/2 with the p x -and p y -wave form factors γ k,p x(y) = sin(k x(y) ). As we show below, the light pulse we consider does not couple the odd-and even-parity channels. As we focus on the regime, where the ground state has even parity, the odd and even parity solutions cannot mix both in-and out of equilibrium. In the mean-field approximation the Hamiltonian reduces to where l = s, d x 2 -y 2 and the ∆ l = -V l k γ k,l c -k↓ c k↑ are the sand d x 2 -y 2 -wave component of the total superconducting order parameter In what follows, we work at T = 0. Minimizing the energy, we obtain the equilibrium values of the superconducting order parameters ∆ s , ∆ d x 2 -y 2 as a function of n, shown in Fig. To simplify further calculations, we introduce the Anderson pseudospin notation 34 where σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) T are the Pauli-matrices. Using this vector, one can recast the Hamiltonian H = k B k • s k , which has the form of a set of (pseudo-)spins s k coupled to a (pseudo-)magnetic field T , with the notation ∆ k = ∆ k -i∆ k . At zero temperature the thermal expectation values of the pseudospin components are given by s To investigate the collective modes in our model, we study the equations of motion for the pseudospin expectation values s k that have the form of Bloch equations: This equation together with the self-consistency equation for the superconducting gaps ) yields a closed set of coupled differential equations, which defines the temporal evolution of all relevant quantities. To drive the system out of equilibrium we model the electric field of a laser pulse by including a time-dependent vector potential A(t) via the Peierls substitution. This results in T (see Supplementary Material for details). To consider the possibility of exciting order parameter symmetries, different from the ground state one it is instructive to split the equations of motion in Eq. ( As the pulse temporarily breaks C 4 -rotational symmetry, different symmetry representations may mix. In particular, we can decompose the pseudomagnetic field into all even parity irreducible representation for the tetragonal D 4h symmetry as follows: where we define T , where we have introduced the symmetrized notations for . There appears no odd-parity component of the pseudomagnetic field B k , as can be seen immediately from the definition above. Let us now discuss the symmetry mixing in nonequilibrium. Denoting the ground state symmetry as l 0 , one finds that d dt s x k,l = 0 and d dt s y k,l = B k,l × s k,l0 , where l = l ⊗ l 0 is the symmetry of a product of functions with symmetries l and l 0 . Therefore, a finite l-symmetry component of B k field is needed to induce pairing correlations of symmetry l . Moreover, the self-consistency equations imply that inducing an out-of equilibrium order parameter ∆ l additionally requires a non-zero V l , making the consideration of the sub-dominant pairing interaction crucial. In our case, the pseudospin expectations values s k at t = 0 are the equilibrium values, with sor d x 2 -y 2 -wave symmetry. Consequently, one requires B z k,d x 2 -y 2 = ξ k,A,d x 2 -y 2 to be finite at non-zero t to induce a finite d x 2 -y 2 -wave order parameter in the s-wave ground state and vice versa. In particular, a finite ξ k,d x 2 -y 2 ∼ cos(A x ) -cos(A y ) (see Supplementary Material for details) can be induced by a vector potential A with polarization at φ ≈ 0, where φ is the polar angle in momentum space. Importantly, the effect manifestly depends on the polarization of A, suggesting a possibility to control the induced order parameter symmetry in non-equilibrium. As ξ k,A,dxy , ξ k,A,g xy(x 2 -y 2 ) and the odd-parity components are identically zero, only sand d x 2 -y 2 -components remain in Eq. ( We note that this result does depend on the absence of spatial variations of A. However, for THz light used in the experiments, We also considered the excitation of the Bardasis-Schrieffer mode in the d x 2 -y 2 -wave ground state, which should also exist once the s-wave ground state is close enough. As the d x 2 -y 2 -wave gap is nodal, all excited modes are strongly damped. However, we still see a clear damped mode at ω < 2∆ d,max = ω H . Due to the finite size effects and the limited accuracy of the numerical integration, the error bar is quite broad. we only show the frequency of this close to the s + id transition in the inset of (4). To obtain frequencies we can again equivalently use both, a pulse or a quench, for example, if one sets ∆ s = 0.1∆ d x 2 -y 2 . Note, for a better numerical accuracy all frequencies in the inset of Fig. ( The presence of the signatures of the Bardasis-Schrieffer mode in the order parameter dynamics raises the possibility of an enhanced third-harmonic generation when the pump frequency roughly matches ω BS . Unlike the Higgs mode, where the issues of quasiparticle contribution is still under debate, To conclude we analyze the short-time dynamics in single band unconventional superconductor with multiple competing pairing symmetries. Driving the system out of equilibrium with a light pulse (modeled as a time-dependent vector potential), we show how the collective signatures of symmetries different from a given ground state symmetry, known as Bardasis-Schrieffer modes gap structure more quasiparticles are excited, which leads stronger damping. However, this also means that the total error bars in the main text are due to both finite accuracy of the Fourier transform and numerical errors due to finite grid size effects. We consider a d x 2 -y 2 -wave ground state at n ≈ 0.437 and drive the system out of equilibrium by quenching the s-wave order parameter into ∆ s = 0.1∆ d . The result in Fig. Here, we perform the linearization of the equations of motion around the equilibrium state at T = 0. We start with linearizing Eq. ( with the equilibrium pseudomagnetic field B eq k = (2∆ l0 γ k,l0 , 2∆ l0 γ k,l0 , 2ξ k ) T and the equilibrium pseudospin expectation value s eq k = -B eq k /(2E k,l0 ). We use l 0 to denote the groundstate symmetry. After some rearrangement of this expression one obtains a matrix equation where ∆ 0 k = ∆ l0 γ k,l0 , which corresponds to the equilibrium order parameter in either s-wave or d x 2 -y 2 -wave ground state depending on band filling. Eq. ( 