In pursuit of infrared (IR) radiation absorbers, we examine quasi-crystal structures made of graphite wires. An array of graphitic cages and cage-within-cage, and whose overall dimensions is smaller than the radiation wavelength exhibit a flat absorption spectrum, A~0.83 between 10-30 microns and a quality loss factor of L~0.83 (L=A/Q, with Q -the quality factor). Simulations at microwave frequencies show multiple absorption lines. In the case of a cage within cage, energy is funneled towards the inner cage which result in a rather hot structure. Applications are envisioned as anti-fogging surfaces, EM shields and energy harvesting. There is a growing interest in perfect absorbers Conductive-dielectric absorbers on a sub-wavelength scale may broadly fall into several categories: resonating structures such as meta-materials A metric, by which one compares all absorbers, regardless of their frequency of operation or their dielectric loss factor is defined as the absorption-bandwidth product, normalized by the center frequency of operation. The bandwidth-to-frequency ratio is just the inverse of the quality factor Q, thus, L=A=A/Q. For example, an ultimate absorber, such as a frequency independent black body with an absorption coefficient of A max =1, has very large bandwidth response and its center frequency is at the bandwidth center. In this case, the bandwidth is twice its center frequency: Q max =0.5 and L max =2. In the Yablonovitch limit A Faraday Cage Periodic metallo-dielectric structures (also known as screens, or metal meshes) have been studied in the past, and in particular in the long wavelength region -the wavelength region where the array pitch is of the order of, or smaller than the radiation wavelength Simulations: As indicated earlier, the structure takes advantage of the negative dielectric constant of graphite at the mid IR -the same effect that leads to surface plasmons polaritons (SPP) in that spectral range and the relatively low conduction losses The electromagnetic intensity distribution is shown for the middle cross-section. Since the dielectric is made of air, the rise in temperature is seen on the conductive wires. Specifically, the inner cage becomes hotter. Both distributions were evaluated at a wavelength of 14.9 microns. The value of the trapped energy varies is a function of wavelength, though. For the cage-withincage in the near infrared we found 