We have studied the visible and infrared radiation emitted by multiwalled carbon nanotubes of different diameters when exposed to 2.45 GHz microwaves. A comparison of the spectra suggests that multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) with larger diameters emit radiation of greater intensity than those with smaller diameters. Furthermore, the MWCNTs continued to emit visible and infrared radiation over the course of several microwave-irradiation cycles, with no degradation in the intensity of the emitted radiation. A comparison of Raman D-to G-band peak-intensity ratios revealed that microwave-irradiation did not significantly impact the MWCNTs' defect densities. The results of our experiments suggest that MWCNTs may have the potential for use in lighting technologies, and that ohmic heating caused by the polarization of the MWCNTs in the microwave field is likely responsible for the observed emissions of visible and infrared radiation. Microwaves are commonly used in order to aid in the synthesis There has been some controversy concerning the mechanism responsible for the phenomenon. Wadhawan et al. Although microwaves are commonly used to help synthesize, purify, and functionalize CNTs, there have been surprisingly few studies performed to investigate the interactions of CNTs and microwaves at a fundamental level (i.e. at low pressures and in the absence of chemical reagents). The main goals of the experiments described here were to determine how the diameters of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) effect their behavior in microwave fields, and to determine whether multiple exposures to microwaves results in substantial structural modifications of MWCNTs. Spectra of the radiation emitted by MWCNTs of various diameters when exposed to microwaves were obtained, as well as spectra of the radiation emitted by a single sample of MWCNTs during multiple microwave irradiations. Microwaveinduced changes in the structures of MWCNTs were investigated using Raman spectroscopy, which is one of the most sensitive and informative techniques used to characterize disorder in sp 2 carbon materials All five of the MWCNT samples used in the experiments were procured from Cheap Tubes (USA). Three of the samples contained MWCNTs with lengths of 10-30 μm and diameters of < 8 nm, 10-20 nm, and 20-30 nm. The other two samples contained MWCNTs with lengths of 10-20 μm and diameters of 30-50 nm and > 50 nm. All five samples had purities of > 95 wt% and ash contents of < 1.5 wt%. Fig. MWCNT samples with masses of 150±0.3 mg were irradiated with microwaves while in a Pyrex test tube at pressures ranging from 4.9×10 -5 torr to 9.6×10 -5 torr. The 2.45 GHz microwaves were produced using a magnetron positioned approximately 0.8 cm away from the test tube containing the MWCNTs. The MWCNTs were irradiated with microwaves for durations of 20 seconds. Spectra of the radiation emitted by the MWCNTs while exposed to the microwaves were obtained using an Ocean Optics spectrometer probe, which was placed approximately 1.5 cm away from the bottom of the test tube. The orientations of the magnetron antenna, Ocean Optics probe, and Pyrex tube were the same in all experiments. Raman spectra were obtained using a Jobin Yvon HORIBA LabRam Raman spectrometer equipped with a 633 nm-wavelength He-Ne laser. Background contributions were subtracted from the spectra using software developed by Candeloro et al. During the experiments, the MWCNTs continuously emitted visible radiation while they were exposed to microwaves. In addition to the glowing, intermittent flashes of light were also observed, which were likely the result of outgassing. The spectra of the radiation emitted by the MWCNT samples while being irradiated with microwaves is shown in Fig. The theoretical work of Shuba et al. In general, Fig. The spectra of the radiation emitted by a sample containing MWCNTs with diameters of > 50 nm during four 20-second irradiation cycles is shown in Fig. It is evident from a comparison of the spectra that the intensity of the radiation emitted by the MWCNTs while exposed to microwaves increased over the course of the irradiation cycles before reaching a limiting magnitude. These results are in agreement with a previous study involving SWCNTs The data in Fig. A comparison of the radiation emitted by MWCNTs with diameters ranging from < 8 nm to > 50 nm suggested that MWCNTs with larger diameters emit much more intense infrared and visible radiation than MWCNTs with smaller diameters. When these results are considered in the context of the theoretical work of Shuba et al. A single sample containing MWCNTs with diameters of > 50 nm was exposed to microwaves during four 20-second irradiation cycles. The intensities of the visible radiation emitted by the MWCNTs during the irradiations increased before reaching a limiting value over the course of the four irradiation cycles. Comparisons of the ID/IG values of pristine MWCNTs to those of MWCNTs that had undergone one, two, three, and four irradiation cycles did not indicate a major change in the ID/IG values, which indicates that the radiation emissions from MWCNTs exposed to microwaves may be sustainable. These results are also consistent with ohmic heating. While the data shown here suggest that MWCNTs have the potential for use in lighting technologies, there is still a need for more experimental data in order to gain a better understanding of the microwave-CNT interaction at both fundamental and applied levels. Recently, during the late stages of this paper's preparation, we performed experiments similar to those discussed here which involved a 150 mg sample of C60 fullerenes (99.5 wt%), rather than MWCNTs. During exposure to 2.45 GHz microwaves, we observed radiation emissions from the fullerenes that were similar to the radiation emissions from MWCNTs that have been described here (although there was no evidence of outgassing from the fullerenes during irradiation). However, during a subsequent experiment involving a much larger sample (800 mg), no radiation emissions were observed from the fullerenes. Previously, Palstra et al. 