The convection plays a very important role in heat transfer when MEMS work under air environment. However, traditional measurements of convection heat transfer coefficient require the knowledge of thermal conductivity, which makes measurements complex. In this work, a modified steady state "hot wire" (MSSHW) method is proposed, which can measure the heat transfer coefficient of microwires' convection without the knowledge of thermal conductivity. To verify MSSHW method, the convection heat transfer coefficient of platinum microwires was measured in the atmosphere, whose value is in good agreement with values by both traditional measurement methods and empirical equations. Then, the convection heat transfer coefficient of microwires with different materials and diameters were measured by MSSHW. It is found that the convection heat transfer coefficient of microwire is not sensitive on materials, while it increases from 86 W/(m 2 • K) to 427 W/(m 2 • K) with the diameter of microwires decreasing from 120 μm to 20 μm. Without knowing thermal conductivity of microwires, the MSSHW method provides a more convenient way to measure the convective effect. With the prosperous development of micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS), heat dissipation within highly integrated circuits has drawn wide attention According to previous works, there are several methods to measure the thermal conduction of 1-D microwires including the steady-state hot wire method Besides the thermal conduction, convective heat transfer has also been investigated. It has been proved that the convection shows different performances when the size of sample shrinks to micro/nanoscale. For example, convection heat transfer coefficient continuously increases from 5~10 W/(m 2 • K) (natural convection on bulk material) There are three main methods to measure the convection heat transfer coefficient of 1-D structure. The first one is the modified 3ω method Since conductive and convective effects are coupled in heat transfer of MEMS and traditional methods ignore thermal conduction or get it by other ways, a method for characterizing convective heat transfer effect without the knowledge of thermal conduction is convenient and important. Yue et al. proposed a method to study conductive and convective heat transfer of microwires simultaneously by using steadystate Joule-heating and Raman mapping together In this paper, we proposed a modified steady state hot wire (MSSHW) method which can characterize convection heat transfer coefficient of microwires without the knowledge of thermal conductivity. Firstly, we theoretically derived the mathematical model of MSSHW method. Secondly, we measured convection heat transfer coefficient of a platinum microwire to verify MSSHW method. Then, using MSSHW method, we studied the material dependence of convection heat transfer coefficient by measuring microwires of platinum, stainless steel and tungsten. Lastly, microwires with different diameters ranging from 20 to 120 μm were measured to study the size effect on convection heat transfer coefficient. This work presents a convenient experimental method, MSSHW method, to study the heat transfer at microscale by convection. The schematic illustration of experimental setup is shown in Fig. When a direct current is applied to an electroconductive microwire, the microwire will heat itself up due to Joule heating. The temperature increase is closely related to both the conduction and the convection of the microwire, when the radiation can be neglected. When a series of microwires with different length has been measured, the thermal conductivity can be eliminated from the calculation of convection heat transfer coefficient. Thus, it provides a possibility to measure the convection heat transfer coefficient without knowing thermal conductivity. The heat transfer in a microwire can be described by 1-D heat transfer equation as: where κ is the thermal conductivity, A is the cross area, h is the convection heat transfer coefficient, T E is the environment temperature, P is the perimeter, ε is the emissivity, σ is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant as 5.67× 10 -8 W/(m 2 • K 4 ),and q is the heat generated per unit volume. The four terms in the left side represent the thermal conduction, the natural convection, the radiation and the heat generated inside the thin wire, respectively. The contribution from radiation is much smaller than that from conduction and convection, which can be therefore neglected. To confirm this assumption, the temperature profiles were calculated with/without radiation according to Eq. 1 by MATLAB. The calculated sample is a platinum microwire, whose length and diameter are 16.3 mm and 32.6 μm, respectively Since the heat sinks have much larger heat capacities compared to the thin wire, the boundary condition is thus expressed as where L is the length of the microwire. The solution of the 1-D heat transfer equation is Then, T(x) is integrated over the length and the average temperature increase is calculated as It is noticed that, when the characteristic length of sample is in microscale, e mL ≫ 1. Then, the right side of Eq. 5 can be simplified as The error made from this simplification is within 0.001%. Moreover, the resistance change caused by the average temperature change can be described with resistance change rate with temperature The resistance change rate with temperature dR dT can be calculated using temperature coefficient of resistance β shown as Eq. 8 Where R 0 is the resistance of the microwire at the environment temperature, and it can be calculated as Where ρ is the electrical resistivity. The heat generated per unit volume q is calculated using Joule's first law Where V is the volume of the wire sample. Then Eq. 7 can be expressed as: It shows that there is a linear relationship between the increase of resistance and the length of samples. Based on Eq. 11, the main equations of MSSHW method are derived out as where d is the diameter of the thin wire and I is the given current. That is, convection heat transfer coefficient (h) can be obtained by measuring linear relationship between ∆R and L without knowing thermal conductivity. Based on Eq. 11, the thermal conductivity can also be calculated as However, the equation of κ includes the intercept b which is a very small value compared with ∆R. The value of b is so small that it is highly uncertain. So that the thermal conductivity κ calculated by this equation has a high uncertainty. Therefore, we don't discuss the thermal conductivity here. To proof the validity of MSSHW method, we measured the natural convection heat transfer coefficient of platinum microwires. Firstly, the diameters of the platinum wire were measured by optical microscope and the picture is shown in Fig. To study the material effect on the convection heat transfer coefficient, microwires (~40 μm in diameter) of platinum, tungsten, and stainless steel (Fig. Moreover, microwires with different diameters were measured to show the size effect of convection heat transfer coefficient (Fig. to 427 W/(m 2 • K) . The measured convection heat transfer coefficients decrease sharply when the diameter increases, and converge to a constant for bulk. This phenomenon might attribute to two physical mechanisms Qcv/Qtotal can be obtained by measurements as Besides, from Eq. 5, the value of ratio can also be estimated as Firstly, we studied the dependence of Qcv/Qtotal on the diameter of microwires. The data from measurements (Eq. 14) are matched well with the prediction curves by theory (Eq.15). As shown in Fig. Moreover, the ratio depends on the materials, as shown in Fig. In conclusion, a modified steady-state hot wire (MSSHW) method is proposed to characterize the conductive and convective heat transfer of microwires simultaneously. The method is verified by measuring the convection heat transfer coefficient of microwires. The convective heat transfer between micro metal wires and their surrounding air environment is found to be irrelevant to material composition, but is strongly connected with the diameter of the wires. When the diameter of microwires decreases from 120 μm to 20 μm, the natural convection coefficient increases from 86 W/(m 2 • K) to 427 W/(m 2 • K) . The convection coefficient is in reasonable range compared with those from the references. This MSSHW method provides a convenient way for measuring convective heat transfer of microwires without knowing thermal conduction, which is beneficial to studying the comprehensive heat transfer at microscale