The symmetry-based indicator [H. C. Po, A. Vishwanath, H. Watanabe, Nat. Commun. 8, 50 (2017)] is a practical tool to diagnose topological materials in the band theory. In this note, we present two directions to generalize the symmetry-based indicator for other classes of topological materials. The one is for superconductors. The careful definition of the atomic insulators and the trivial vacuum Hamiltonian yields the symmetry-based indicators specific to superconductors. The other is for ingap boundary states. The quotient of the group of atomic insulators by a subset of atomic insulators such as those localized at the interior of the unit cell gives us the symmetry-based indicator for detecting ingap corner, hinge, and surface states. The concept of the symmetry-based indicator (SI) After the proposal and the enumeration of the SI for 1651 magnetic space groups in spinless and spinful electric systems, In this paper, we just argue some routes to generalize the SI. We leave the classification and derivation of the SIs as future works. The plan of this paper is as follows. In Sec. 2, we give a mathematical formulation of the SI so that it is easy to see generalizations. The hierarchical structure associated with various definitions of nontrivial topology of the band structure is presented. In Sec. 3, we give several examples of the SIs beyond electric materials. We leave Appendix A for how to compute homomorphisms f : A → B of abelian groups, which can be used to make the algorism to compute the classification of SIs for superconductors. Notations-We use the following notations. μ In this section, we illustrate how the SI is formulated for the band theory. To make our discussion concrete, we consider 2-dimensional systems. The formulation for generic space dimensions is parallel. In Sec. 2.2, we assume for simplicity the abelian group E 0,0 1 of topological invariants has no torsion. In cases where E 0,0 1 includes torsion, one can formulate the SI by using the method described in Appendix A. Let E 0,0 1 be the set of abelian groups for the spaces of topological invariants at high-symmetric points in the Brillouin zone (BZ). The concept of the SI would be summarized as "something nontrivial" that is detectable from irreps at high-symmetric points. We would like to exclude the group X composed of "something trivial" from the group E 0,0 1 . Then, the SI associated with X lives in the quotient group E 0,0 1 /X. There are many choices of the space X. The best way to consider the structure behind the SI is the sequence of subgroups This is the filtration for 2-spatial dimensions. The ingredients above are introduced in order. The groups E 0,0 p (p = 2, 3) are defined as the kernel of the (p -1)th differential of the Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence Here, the group E p,-p+1 p is the set of abelian groups generated by gapless Dirac points in the form p j=1 k j γ j within p-cells. The differential d 0,0 p measures the obstacle to glue the band structrue specified by a data of E 0,0 p toghther at the whole p-cells. The first differential d 0,0 1 is easily computed by using the irreducible character, which is called the compatibility relation in the band theory. We define the group {TI d≤p }(p = 0, 1, 2) as the abelian group generated by possible TIs/TSCs supported on d-dimensional subregions in the real space where d is less than or equal to p. In particular, the group {TI d≤0 } is generated by atomic insulators. Elements of {TI d≤p } can be dependent each other, but they should be exhaustive so that it covers all TIs/TSCs with dimension less than or equal to p. The homomorphism is defined as the set of topological invariants at high-symmetric points for the model x ∈ {TI d≤p }. Since x ∈ {TI d≤p } represents an insulator/superconductor, there are no gap-closing points in the BZ, implies that f ({TI d≤p }) ⊂ E 0,0 3 for p ≤ 2. Moreover, f ({TI d≤2 }) ∼ = E 0,0 3 holds true, since the set of irreps n ∈ E 0,0 3 can be glued together in the whole BZ, implying that there exists a TI/TSC in the real space. The definition of the group {AI d≤p }(p = 0, 1, 2) is more involved. It relates to the ingap localized states localized at corners, hinges of materials. is defined again as the set of topological invariants n j of E 0,0 1 for the model x ∈ {AI d≤p }. Then, for example, a band structure with irreps n so that n ∈ f AI d≤2 ({AI d≤2 }) and n / ∈ f AI d≤1 ({AI d≤1 }) hosts an ingap corner state. We should note that the definition of the unit cell is not unique for a given magnetic space group. It should be fixed so that it is compatible with the real-space boundary. In this section, we see how the indicator formulas are made provided that the subgroups in (1) of E 0,0 1 are given. For the purpose to illustrate the formulation, we for simplicity assume E 0,0 1 is a free abelian group so that its subgroups are also free. This assumption simplifies the calculation of the coimage of d 0,0 p and the cokernel of f AI d≤p , f TI d≤p . The indicator formulas will be obtained recursively. As noted before, we assume E 0,0 1 is free abelian. Let us write Here, f j s are generators of torsion. A set of irreps of E 0,0 The group E 0,0 2 = Ker d 0,0 1 ⊂ E 0,0 1 and the quotient E 0,0 1 /E 0,0 2 in which the SIs live are given as follows (see Appendix A). First we introduce an integer-valued matrix Md 0,0 with c j → cj ∈ Mat 1×m (Z), (j = 1, . . . l), integral lifts of c j s. We compute the Smith normal form (SNF) of Md 0,0 1 to get where λ i (i = 1, . . . q) are nonnegative integers, and u, v are unimodular matrices. The following linear combinations of b j s generates Ker d 0,0 1 , To find the explicit basis of E 0,0 2 , we introduce the submatrix and consider the SNF of it, u (1) With this, define new basis of E 0,0 1 by (b We have the desired results The explicit formulas of the SIs are read from the set n of irreps of E 0,0 1 in the basis of {b (1) j } m j=1 . The SIs detecting the quotient E 0,0 1 /E 0,0 2 are given as Here, d = 0 implies that there exists a gapless point in a 1-cell. In the same way as before, we have the kernel and the cockernel of the second deferential d 0,0 2 : E 0,0 2 → E 2,-1 2 . We compute the SNF of the submatrix like as in 1 , . . . , d (1) m1 b (1) m1 )[u (2) ] -1 = (b 1 , . . . , b (1) m1 )D (1) [u (2) ] -1 , ( we have The second SIs are given as A nontrivial value of the second SI μ (2) i = 0 implies that there exists a gapless point in the form of 2d Dirac Hamiltonian k 1 γ 1 + k 2 γ 2 inside a 2-cell. The abelian group E 0,0 3 expresses the set of topological numbers at high-symmetric points that can extend to the entire BZ without a gapless point, i.e., E 0,0 3 represents band insulators/superconductors. The next step is to derive the SI for 1st-order TIs/TSCs. As noted before, in 2-spatial dimensions, all possible insulators/superconductors {TI d≤2 } cover the group E 0,0 3 . Put differently, Therefore, the first SI detecting TIs/TSCs, which we denote by ν i , arises from the subgroup f TI d≤1 ({TI d≤1 }) ⊂ E 0,0 3 , where {TI d≤1 } is the abelian group generated by TIs/TSCs supported on 1 dimensional subspaces in the real-space manifold. in the form where c j (j = 1, . . . , r) express TIs/TSCs with the dimension less than or equal to 1. Note that the generators {c j } r j=1 include atomic insulators. Since we have assumed E 0,0 1 is free, {TI d≤1 } can be assumed to be a free abelian group. To derive the SI for the 1st-order TIs/TSCs, we rewrite the homomorphism f TI d≤1 : {TI d≤1 } → E 0,0 1 in the basis of E 0,0 3 as in 1 , . . . , d (2) m2 b (2) m2 , b (2) m2+1 , . . . , b (2) m1 , b Since f TI d≤1 ({TI d≤1 }) ⊂ E 0,0 3 , the representation matrix can be written as Introducing the SNF of M sub we have 1 , . . . , b (3) m2 ) := (b The SIs to detect the 1st-order TIs/TSCs are given as Again, the SI ν i s have nontrivial. When, μ (2) i take trivial values, a nontrivial SI ν (1) i = 0 implies a 1st-order TI/TSC. Let a 1 , . . . , a p0 be atomic insulators located at in the inertia of the unit cell, a p0+1 , . . . , a p1 be those located at the edge of the unit cell not including the corner, and a p1+1 , . . . , a p2 be those located at the corner of the unit cell, so that they generate the groups of atomic insulators {AI d≤0 }, {AI d≤1 } and {AI d≤2 }, respectively. In the same way as in where f AI d≤p is defined by the set of topological invariants of E 0,0 1 for a given model x ∈ {AI d≤p }. Let u (4) , v (4) , D (4) = diag(d m4 ) be the data of the SNF of f AI d≤2 as in Under the condition that the lower SIs ν i , μ (1) i are trivial, a nontrivial value of ν (2) i means that the band structure is a 2nd-order TI/TSC. Similarly, let u (5) , v (5) , D (5) = diag(d m5 ) be the data of the SNF of f AI d≤1 as in At last, let u (6) , v (6) , D (6) = diag(d m6 ) be the data of the SNF of f AI d≤0 as in Table (2) SIs for 2-spatial dimensions based on the subgroups (1) are summarized in Table For SCs, we should be careful about what a nontrivial Hamiltonian is. Let E be the one-particle Nambu-Hirbert space compsoed of an atomic insulator and its particle-hole pair on which the BdG Hamilotnian defined. The K-group is represented by a Karoubi's triple [E, H, H 0 ] of Hamiltonians H, H 0 that act on the common Nambu-Hilbert space E. with the positive chemical potential > 0, which can also be written as in the many-body Hilbert space, where R, α, j run over all the degrees of freedom, namely the positions of the unit cell, Wyckoff poisitoins, and internal degrees of freedom, respectively, and f † Rαj , fRαj are complex fermion creation and annihilation operators. The positive chemical potential means that the ground state of Ĥ0 is the vacuum state |0 of the complex fermions. In other words, for the SI, we should define topological invariants at high-symmetric points for a given BdG Hamiltonian H as a relative index of the pair [H, H 0 ] with H 0 = τ z the reference BdG Hamiltonian. We also define atomic insulators for superconductors. They are defined as the atomic insulators in the usual sense. For a given Nambu-Hilbert space E, the atomic insulator is defined as the fully occupied state that is represented by the BdG Hamiltonian H(k) = 2 τ z with a negative chemical potential < 0. Therefore, as an element of the K-group, the atomic insulator for a Nambu-Hilbert space E is given by the triple In usual, the superconducting gap function ∆(k) is much smaller than the energy scale of the normal state h(k). This means that topological invariants of the BdG Hamiltonian at high-symmetric points, which compose SIs, can be usually computed solely by the normal part h(k) by adiabatically decreasing the gap function ∆(k) to zero. We call this simplification of the topological invariants the weak coupling limit. In this section, we illustrate the framework developed in Sec. 2 with several examples. Some parts of this section are intentionally written long. It is for the purpose to be easily extensible to general magnetic space groups. Let us start with the simplest example of the SI for superconductors, that is, 1d class D systems with only translation symmetry. The symmetry constraint in the k-space is just the class D PHS where K is the complex conjugation. At two high-symmetric points k = 0, π the effective AZ class are class D, while that for generic points is class A. Thus, we have Here, Z 2 is generated by the triple and characterized by the Z 2 -quantized Pfaffian for k = 0, π. In the weak coupling limit, this is rewritten as where N [H] denotes the number of occupied state of the Hamiltonian H, and h is the normal part of the BdG Hamiltonian H. Similarly, Z is generated by the triple at a generic point k ∈ (0, π), and characterized by the integer-valued invariant We also have the particle-hole symmetric pair The group {AI d≤1 } of atomic insulators is generated by the relative difference between the atomic insulator and the vacuum in the one-band system This generates the group {AI d≤1 } = Z 2 . Therefore, there is a nontrivial SI associated with the quotient This is nothing but the Pfaffian formula for the 1d TSC by Kitaev. This means that if the normal state has an odd number of fermi points in between the momentum k = 0 and k = π and the superconducting order induces a mass gap to the fermi points, the system becomes a TSC. Let us consider 1d TRS-broken odd-parity SCs. The symmetry constraint is summarized as in addition to the PHS (39). Here, is the inversion operator for the BdG Hamiltonian with p(k) one for the normal state. At the high-symmetric points k = 0, π, the PHS operator C exchanges two irreps P (k) = ±1, implying that the effective AZ classes are class A. The group E 0,0 1 is given by E 0,0 where each Z is generated by the following triple characterized by the Z invariant with N ± [H] the number of occupied states of the Hamiltonian H with the positive/negative parity P (k) = ± at the high-symmetric point k ∈ {0, π}. In the weak coupling limit, this is simplified as the difference of the numbers of positive and negative parity eigenstates in the occupied states, At a generic point k ∈ (0, π) in the BZ, the little group G k of symmetry group is Z 2 that is generated by CP (k). This symmetry operator satisfies (CP (k)) 2 = -1, meaning that the effective AZ class is class C. No stable point nodes exist in the 1-cell. Therefore, E 1,0 1 = 0, and we have E 0,0 2 = E 0,0 1 . Let {AI d≤1 } is the group generated by atomic insulators. We have two atomic insulators a 0 , a 1 2 located at Wyckoff positions x = 0, 1 2 in the unit cell. These are classified by Z as well as that for BdG Hamiltonians in the k-space at a high-symmetric point, thus, {AI d≤1 } = Z ⊕2 . In the k-space, the BdG Hamiltonians and symmetry operators for these atomic insulators and the corresponding vacuum are written as For these triples, the Z invariants of E 0,0 1 are computed as follows. This gives the homomorphism f AI d≤1 : We have the nontrivial quotient E 0,0 1 /Im f AI d≤1 = Z/2Z characterized by the SI The SI ν detects the same Kitaev chain phase as in Sec. 3.1. In the weak coupling limit, the SI is simplified as the SI (47) without inversion symmetry A simple example is the spinless p-wave SC (the Kitaev chain) In the parameter region |μ| < |t| so that there is a fermi point in k ∈ (0, π), a Majorana zero mode γ appears at the edge. In the presence of inversion symmetry, one can further construct the SI for the Andreev bound states. Let {AI d≤0 } = Z[a 0 ] be the group generated by the atomic insulator at the center of the unit cell. The homomorphism f AI d≤0 : {AI d≤0 } → E 0,0 1 is given by We have the quotient Im f AI d≤1 /Im f d≤0 = Z characterized by the SI This takes a value in Z provided that the SI ν for the TSC is trivial. The SI ξ for the Andreev bound state is demonstrated for the Hamiltonian H(k) ⊕2m with an even number of copies of the Kitaev chains (60). The system is trivial as a TSC as the SI ν is, however, the SI ξ for the Andreev bound states takes a nontrivial value ξ = m. In fact, at the edge, there exist 2m Majorana fermions and they form m complex fermions with finite energy. Let us consider 1d TRS-broken even-parity SCs. We have the same symmetry constraints as (39) and ( with The group E 0,0 where each b k ± is generated by the triple that is characterized by the Z 2 -quantized Pfaffian where 1±P (k) , (k = 0, π), is the projector onto the positive/negative parity states. In the weak coupling limit, n k ± is reduced as At a generic point k ∈ (0, π), the little group is Z 2 generated by CP (k) with (CP (k)) 2 = 1. The effective AZ class is class D, and we have characterized by the Pfaffian and in the weak coupling limit. The compatibility relation, which is the first differential d 0,0 1 : E 0,0 1 → E 1,0 1 , is given by We have a nontrivial quotient E 0,0 1 /E 0,0 2 = Z 2 charactrized by the SI which is reduced to in the weak coupling limit. When μ = 1 mod 2, we have a nodal point (Bogoliubov Fermi surface) in a 1-cell, irrespective of the gap function ∆(k). A simple example is the spinless SC When the gap function ∆(k) obeys the even-parity condition ∆(-k) = ∆(k), one can show ∆(k) vanishes, implies that the fermi point is stable. The next step is to compute the quotient E 0,0 2 /Im f AI d≤1 . It turns out to be zero, which can proven as follows. One can show that there is no 1d TCs compatible with the inversion symmetry with even-parity gap function, thus, we have {TI d≤1 } = 0. Therefore, the subgroup of E 0,0 2 starts at the group {AI d≤1 } of 1d atomic insulators, and so the homomorphism f AI d≤1 : {AI d≤1 } → E 0,0 2 is surjective. In a similar way to Sec. 3.2, one can construct the SI for Andreev bound states. Let -] be the group generated by the atomic insulators localized at the center of the unit cell. Two generators are given by the triples and have topological invariants This gives the homomorphism f AI d≤0 : . We have the nontrivial quotient E 0,0 2 /Im f AI d≤0 = Z 2 with the SI for the Andreev bound state This is recast as in the weak coupling limit. Under the assumption of the triviality of the SI μ and that the dof are not located at the boundary of the unit cell, ξ = 0 implies the existence of an ingap edge state of the BdG Hamiltonian, i.e., the Andreev bound state. A prime example is the two-orbital SC with an even-parity inter-orbital gap function (equivalently, the spinful SC with an odd-mirror gap function). At the edge there are two Majoran zero modes γσx=+ , γσx=-, and these Majorana fermions form a complex fermion ψ = (γ σx=+ + iγ σx=-)/2, and it may have a finite energy ψ † ψ depending on the microscopic structure of the edge. Let us consider 2d spinless electrons with time-reversal (TR) and C 4 -rotation symmetry. The relationship between the corner state and the momentum-space invariants in this system was examined in Ref. where c 4 k = (-k y , k x ). At generic points in the BZ, the effective AZ class is AI, where effective TRS is the composition The group E 0,0 1 is given by E 0,0 1 = Z 3 + Z 3 + Z 2 generated respectively by irreps at Γ, M , and X points. We employ the 1-skeleton of the BZ as shown in Fig. be the basis of E 0,0 1 , where the superscripts and subscripts represent high-symmetric points and irreps, respectively. Similally, let (c Γ→X , c X→M ) be the basis of E 1,0 1 . The compatibility relation define the first differential The SNF of M d 0,0 1 is given as where u, v are unimodular. Introduce the submatrix v sub = {v ij } 1≤i≤8,3≤j≤8 that spans Ker d 0,0 1 . The SNF of v sub gives the basis of E 0,0 2 and the SIs. We have u (1) and 1 , . . . , b We get two Z-valued SIs μ (1) 8 to detect the quotient group E 0,0 2 /E 0,0 8 , which are given as μ A nontrivial value of the SIs (μ 8 ) = (0, 0) implies the existence of a gapless point in a 1-cell somewhere. Actually, μ In the 2-cell α (shown in Fig. where we have written the base of E 2,-1 2 by c α . This can be verified as follows. One can show that in the presence of the C 4 symmetry the Berry phase e iγ ∂α around the boundary of the 2-cell α shown in Fig. where w P g is the product of eigenvalues of the symmetry operator g at the high-symmetric point P for the occupied states. This reduces to by TRS. From Table (87), we find that if either of the bases b 6 changes the occupation number, the Berry phase e iγ ∂α changes by -1. An alternative brute-force derivation is to classify possible Hamiltonians of the band inversion followed by the creation of a Dirac point for each high-symmetric point. We will describe the detail elsewhere. According to the strategy in Sec. 2.2, we introduce an integral lift The SNF of Md 0,0 2 is given by u Md 0,0 from which, we have the group E 0,0 3 spanned as with b (2) We have the Z 2 -valued SI Note that modulo Im d 0,0 1 , namely by using μ Since no building-block TIs in 1-and 2-dimensions exist for class AI systems, any elements of E 0,0 3 should be represented as an abelian sum of atomic insulators. Let us confirm the equivalence Im f AI d≤2 ∼ = E 3 0,0 directly. The group {AI d≤2 } is generated by atomic insulators in the unit cell. Let us write the atomic insulator induced by the irrep ρ at the coordinate x in the unit cell by a x ρ . There are eight generators with the data of topological invariants in the k-space, This gives the homomorphism f AI d≤2 : {AI d≤2 } → E 0,0 1 and that in the basis of E 0,0 3 as in 6 , b (1) where This has the SNF M sub A nontrivial inclusion of insulators starts at the atomic insulators not located at the corner of the unit cell, The group {AI d≤1 } is generated by atomic insulators at high-symmetric points (0, 0), ( 1 2 , 0), (0, 1 2 ) in the unit cell. We have five generators with the data of topological invariants in the k-space, This gives the homomorphism in the basis of E 0,0 3 . 5 , 2b ) where Provided that the lower SIs μ are trivial, (ξ 6 ) = (0, 0) implies the existence of a corner state. See Sec. 3.4.6 for demonstration. The last step is to evaluate the SI for an ingap edge state. Let {AI d≤0 } be the abelian group generated by atomic insulators at (0, 0) in the unit cell, says, {a is given by To compute the SI detecting edge states, we rewrite the homomorphism f AI d≤0 in the basis of Im f AI d≤1 as in where Therefore, the basis {b (3) j } 3 j=1 is already the basis for Im f AI d≤0 . The SIs detecting the quotient group Im 4 ] is given by ξ 4 . Provided that the SIs μ are trivial, the nontrivial SI ξ (1) 4 = 0 implies the existence of an edge state without corner states. Table In this section, we demonstrate how the SIs gapless phases and ingap boundary states work. The first example is the spinless Hamiltonian on the square lattice with a nearest neighbor hoping. When the chemical potential is set in -2 < μ < 0, a fermi line exists enclosing the Γ point. The second example is the following tight-binding model with four dof sitting the center of the unit cell. This has four flat bands with Bloch energies E k = 2, 0, 0, -2, of which the Wanner orbitals are located at the corner of the unit cell. Here, we focus on the lowest energy band E k = -2 that has the Bloch state |u(k) = 1 2 (1, e -ikx , e -ikx-iky , e -iky ). The third example is a semimal phase. Consider the following 2 by 2 Hamiltonian This model has a Dirac point with the π-Berry phase in the quarter of the BZ. The fourth example is given by stacking two layers of the semimetal phase H 3 (k). One can induce a finite mass gap to the Dirac points as with a small constant. The occupied states of H 4 (k) is the direct sum of Chern insulators with C = 2 and C = -2, and is a fragile topological phase since it cannot be represented as a linear combination of atomic insulators listed in Table Model (1) 8 We see that the SIs correctly capture gapless states and ingap boundary states. The last example is TR-symmetric odd-parity SCs in the 3-dimensional cubic lattice. The symmetry constraints are summarized as At eight high-symmetric points in the BZ, the effective AZ class is class AII, so we have E 0,0 1 = Z 8 generated respectively by characterized by the Z invariant at eight high-symmetric points. Here, N ± [H] denotes the number of occupied states of H with the positive/negative eigenstates of P (k), and the prefactor is due to the Kramaers degeneracy. In the weak coupling limit, n k is simplified to the difference of the numbers of positive and negative parity occupied states At generic points in the BZ, the EAZ is class CII, meaning no stable gapless points in 1,2, and 3-cells. Thus, we have E 0,0 1 . Every element in E 0,0 1 can be represented by a fully gapped superconductor. To compute the homomorphisms f TI d≤p : {TI d≤p → E 0,0 1 , (p = 0, 1, 2), we should list all possible SCs with space dimension less than p. For inversion symmetry, the layer construction suffices. with TRS and PHS operators T = is y K, C = τ x K. The group {TI d≤p } is generated by the triples of these building-block states located at either of eight inversion centers relative to the vacuum Hamiltonian H 0 = τ z . The 0d atomic insulator H 0d can be put on either of eight high-symmetric points in the unit cell. The triples [E, H, H 0 ] have the following topological invariants defined by (119). [M f TI d=0 ] T = P (k) H n 000 n 100 n 010 n 001 n 110 n 011 n 101 n 111 a (0,0,0) 0d Here the superscript of a x represents the Wyckoff position on which the Hamiltonian is defined, and that of n lmn represents the high-symmetric points k = π(l, m, n). Similarly, 1d building-blocks are listed as ). Every element of E 0,0 1 (= E 0,0 4 ) should be represented as a fully gapped SC. To see this, consider the homomorohism f TI d≤3 : where The SIs can be written as Note that the SI ν 8 eventually becomes a Z/8Z-valued SI. Similally, the SIs ν It should be noted that the same SIs are obtained by the quotient E 0,0 1 /Im f TI d=0 . The SNF of M f TI d=0 is given as We have the SIs ν i = From the expression (120) in the weak coupling limit, the SIs can be written only with the normal state. For instance, The essentially same SIs ν i s were derived in Ref. In the same way as in Secs. 3.4.4, 3.4.5, taking the quotient by atomic insulators localized at the interior of the unit cell, one can define the SIs for Andreev bound states. We do not repeat here. In this note, we depicted two routes for generalizing the SI for electric material in Refs. for the integral lifts. We have the commutative diagram The homomorphism f and inclusions i A , i B are given as follows. Let us write The inclusions i A , i B are given as The homomorphism f is represented as where M ∈ Mat l×k (Z), α j ∈ Mat 1×k (Z qj ), (j = l + 1, . . . m), β ij ∈ Hom(Z pi , Z qj ) = (q/gcd pi,qj )Z/q j Z( ∼ = Z gcd p i ,q j ), (i = k + 1, . . . , m, j = l + 1, . . . , n). (150) The homomorphism f is given by integral lifts of matrix elements The final step is to apply the Smith decomposition to M . We have u (1) M v In what follows, we borrow the notation from the Aityah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence associated with the filtration of the BZ so that the p-skeletons are given by a cell decomposition of the BZ so that all high-symmetric subspaces are contained in a some cell. There is no efficient algorism to get {TI d≤p } yet. Here, we simply assume that {TI d≤p } is given. Since no nontrivial homomorphisms exist from a torsion Zn to the free abelian group Z. In fact, the Z topological invariant (44) is zero for the pair (H, H 0 ) of the generator (40). This is not always the case. In general, a generating model forms a pattern of local building-block states in the real space that may not be defined on a layer. Here, it is not needed to add the model H 1d,x on the Wyckoff position ( 1 2 , 0, 0), since the triple [E, H 1d,x , H 0 ] of it has the same topological invariants as that on the Wyckoff position (0, 0, 0). Here we took unimodular transformations to make the formulas of the SIs simple.