Recent angle-resolved photoemission electron spectroscopy (ARPES) experiments demonstrate that the momentum dependence of the spectral gap in underdoped cuprates does not follow a pure d-wave form [H. Anzai et a., Nat. Comm. 4, 1815 Introduction: Are there two energy scales in superconducting cuprates? One of the most challenging problems of high-T c cuprates is the interpretation of the spectral gap. Contrary to conventional superconductors where the spectral gap vanishes at the critical temperature, as described by the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory More recently, low-temperature experiments revealed a non-trivial angular dependence of the gap as a function of doping. While in overdoped samples the gap follows a strictly d-wave behavior, a clear deviation from d-wave is observed on the underdoped side of the phase diagram (see As first noted by Kondo et al. An analogous formula was later used by Anzai et al. A separate analysis performed by Vishik et al. In this paper, we reconcile the contradictory experimental analysis and give a simple explanation for the angular dependence of the gap in the whole doping range, from underdoped to overdoped regimes. Our analysis demonstrates that the latter is essentially governed by the doping dependence of the antiferromagnetic coherence length ξ AF , which determines the size of pairs forming the SC condensate. There is an overall agreement that, at least in the overdoped regime, the spectral gap as a function of angle has a simple d-wave form: At the Fermi surface (k = k F ), this formula can be well approximated by The angle in the above formula is taken from the (π,π) corner of the first Brillouin zone. With these coordinates, the antinodal direction (π,0) corresponds to θ = 0 while the nodal direction (k x = k y ) corresponds to θ = π 4 . Deviations from this standard form have been observed in the underdoped regime by several groups Although the angular dependence of ∆(θ) includes new harmonics as mentionned above, in the underdoped regime the overall shape still has a d-wave character. We find it useful to reformulate Eq. 1, in an alternate algebraic form: In this form, the gap at the antinode is by definition ∆(θ = 0) = ∆ p while the so-called nodal gap is defined by: Note that while the common name often given to ∆ N is the nodal 'gap', it is in fact the slope of ∆(θ) at the node. Thus, α appears as the key parameter giving rise to the difference between the nodal and the antinodal gaps. We have fit the experimental spectra from Anzai et al. We now come to the determination of the slope of ∆(θ), i.e. the nodal gap. In ref. Contrary to the procedure used in The nodal gap inferred from our analysis is plotted in Fig. In addition, the doping dependence of the parameter α which characterizes the deviation from d-wave, closely follows the one deduced from the data of Anzai et al. The present approach thus reconciles ARPES experiments where contradictory interpretations were given. We now turn to the physical origin of the anomalous angular dependence. As demonstrated by pionieering works in the early nineties in the context of the Hubbard or t -J hamiltonians, two holes in an antiferromagnetic background can form a bound state for a sufficiently large t/J ratio with the expected d-wave symmetry We have extended this concept to realistic systems In recent articles, we have proposed that high-T c superconductivity can be explained in terms of the formation of hole pairs, or pairons, in their local antiferromagnetic environment Two different temperatures can be distinguished corresponding respectively to the formation of the pairs and their condensation, both being linked to a single energy scale, J, the exchange energy. Pairons form at a temperature T * higher than the critical temperature and undergo a Bose-like condensation at T c as a result of repulsive pairpair interactions The pairon model is supported by several experimental facts, in particular by (i) the presence of a low-temperature energy gap within the vortex core where coherence is lost iii) the scaling of the critical temperature with the exchange energy T c ∝ J The nature of pairons is revealed in the excitation spectrum as a function of temperature. Indeed, two welldefined signatures are observed in ARPES measurements: a Fermi arc near the node at T c and below The pairon model also provides a physical explanation for the observed gap angular dependence. Indeed, to understand the shape of ∆(θ), one needs to consider how the gap is modified at low doping as the size of antiferromagnetic correlations increases. For this purpose, we start from the expression of the hole pair wavefunction in relative coordinates. In our previous work -φ( r -aŷ) -φ( r + aŷ)] where a is the lattice parameter, and φ( r) = e -r 2 2b 2 / √ 2πb 2 . The parameter b fixes the spatial extension of the pair wavefunction in relative coordinates. The overlap between the various amplitudes in Eq. 6 has been neglected. Note that the sign in the above formula originates from the antiferromagnetic symmetry which imposes that the wavefunction must vanish in the lattice diagonal (corresponding to the nodal direction in k-space). It follows that the associated gap is expressed in the standard d-wave form (Eq. 2) where φ(k F ) is the Fourier transform of φ( r) taken at k = k F , A 1 is a constant and As the doping is lowered, the size of the pairons, of the order of ξ AF , increases. The delocalized wavefunction must then include the contribution of next nearest neighbours (blue dots in Fig. pair ( r) ∝ rj c j φ( r -r j ); the sum runs over all the i th nearest neighbours and c j = ±1 determines the sign of each term and is imposed by the AF symmetry, as explained below. The second neighbour correction is expressed as -φ( r + 2ax + aŷ) + φ( r The Fourier transform of the wavefunction ψ pair ( r) (Eq. 9) then gives rise to additional terms. As described in a previous article where φ(k F ) A i g i (k x , k y ) is the contribution to the gap amplitude of the i th nearest neighbours. The first term has the standard d-wave form, while the second nearest neighbour contribution, deduced from Eq. 10, is expressed as: There are two possible signs for the second neighbour correction to the wavefunction, g 2 ( k). The positive sign in front of the bracket was chosen in order to properly describe the experimental results. It is compatible with the AF symmetry, introducing new nodal lines in the second neighbour correction, in agreement with the higher angular harmonics of Eq.4. This effect reduces the nodal gap compared to the antinodal value (see Fig. The previous expression accounts quantitatively for the angular dependence of the gap. The reason is that, for any choice of A 1 and A 2 , the above formula is strictly equivalent to formula 4 used for the fits (i.e. there is an equivalence between the parameter α used in Eq. 4 and A 2 /A 1 ). The correspondence between the parameter using formula 4 and 11 restricted to second neighbours can be found in table The second neighbour correction to the gap must be directly related to the extension of the pairon wavefunction, i.e. to the size of the AF correlations. Let us rewrite Eq. 11 in the equivalent form: Assuming that A2 A1 = ηe √ 5a being the distance between two holes when first and second neighbours sites are occupied (red and blue dots in Fig. The doping dependence of the antiferromagnetic correlation length has been deduced from neutron experiments and is close to 1/ √ p where a is the lattice parameter. The parameter p AF has been introduced in order to describe more precisely the data of Ref. As indicated in the table, ξ AF (p) varies between ∼3 a, and ∼6 a in the entire SC doping range. Since a ∼3.8 Å, it explains why the third and fourth nearest neighbours do not have a significant contribution. This leaves only the second neighbour contribution (with the coefficient A 2 ) to fit the experimental curves of ∆(θ). The precise fits to the experimental ARPES data can be done with either using the α parameter, and Eq. 4, or the ratio A 2 /A 1 , using Eq. 13. Both the α parameter and the ratio A 2 /A 1 , representing the extension of the pairon wavefunction to the second neighbors, vary continuously and monotonically with doping which is a strong indication that ∆ N and ∆ AN have a single origin. The evolution of the shape of ∆(θ) as a function of doping can thus be coherently interpreted as a direct consequence of the spatial extension of pairons, which follows ξ AF (p) as a function of hole concentration as predicted in As shown in the phase diagram of Fig. In this article, we have shown that the deviation of the superconducting gap from pure d-wave symmetry observed in cuprates by ARPES can be interpretated as the result of the existence of hole pairs, or pairons, in their local antiferromagnetic background. In the overdoped regime, the gap has a pure d-wave symmetry, due to the small extension of the pairon wavefunction, restricted to first nearest neighbours. In the underdoped regime, the pairon wavefunction extends beyond first nearest neighbours, on the scale of the antiferromagnetic coherence length, which reduces the gap amplitude near the nodal direction. The model reproduces quantitatively the measured angular dependence of the gap and its doping dependence. Furthermore it reconciles some divergences in the interpretation of ARPES data in the litterature. One concludes that the nodal and antinodal gaps originate from the same phenomenon, both intimately linked to the superconducting phase transition. ξ AF (K) (meV) (meV) (a units) 0.25 37. 