We use density functional theory to study the structure and the band structure of the monolayer FeSe deposited on the SrTiO 3 substrate with the additional layer of Se between them. Top of the SrTiO 3 is formed by the double TiO layer with and without oxygen vacancies. Several structures with different arrangements of the additional Se atoms above the double TiO layer is considered. Equilibrium structures were found and the band structures for them were obtained. Near the Γ = (0, 0, 0) point of the Brillouin zone, the hole Fermi surface pockets persist and, additionally, an electron pocket appears. Thus neither the presence of the additional Se layer nor the oxygen vacancies in the double TiO layer leads to the sinking of hole bands below the Fermi level near the Γ point. Necessity to include the strong electronic correlations into account is discussed. Iron-based materials represents a class of high-T c superconductors that is based on the conducting layer of Fe surrounded by As or Se in pnictides and chalcogenides, respectively Discovery of superconductivity in FeSe monolayers with T c as high as 100 K presents another mystery in the physics of iron-based materials Any pairing theory is tightly connected to the underlaying band structure and the Fermi surface. Thus, knowledge of the band structure details becomes extremely important. Angle-resolved photoemission spec-troscopy (ARPES) shows that there is only one kind of Fermi surface sheets -electron pockets around the corners of the Brillouin zone (M points), while there is no hole pockets around the center (Γ point) Here we use DFT calculations to study the influence of the additional Se layer on FeSe/(2TiO)SrTiO 3 electronic structure. Several possible positions of additional Se atoms and of FeSe monolayer in the unit cell of FeSe/Se/(2TiO x )SrTiO 3 heterostructure were modeled to search for favorable configurations and the electronic structure of these configurations were investigated. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents details of the computational procedure, Section 3 contains results and their discussion, and Section 4 is the conclusion. DFT In Fig. Oxygen vacancies play an important role, so we study the band structure of the FeSe/SrTiO 3 system with and without O vacancies in the double TiO layer. To show the general effect of vacancies and to make the calculations manageable, we consider the case of one vacancy per two unit cells. This corresponds to 50% of vacancies and represents a limiting case, i.e. the result for the fractional number of vacancies x would lie somewhere between the results for x = 0 and x = 0.5. Thus, formally, we are dealing with the FeSe/Se/(2TiO x )SrTiO 3 heterostructure. Since from the experimental study Presence of the oxygen vacancies [50% in the calculation, see Fig. From the study of the two energetically favorable cases, we see that the small increase of the electron charge in the FeSe monolayer due to the additional Se layer does not lead to the sinking of the hole bands below the Fermi level at the Γ point. On the contrary, new electron pockets formed by the bands with upward dispersion below the Fermi level appear. In general, this is in a disagreement with the ARPES data We have studied the effect of the additional Se layer on the band structure of the FeSe/SrTiO 3 heterostructure. The additional layer is situated between the FeSe monolayer and the double TiO x layer on top of SrTiO 3 . For x = 0 and x = 0.5, the band structure near the Γ point results in the hole Fermi surface pockets and, additionally, a new electron pocket. Therefore, the presence of the additional Se layer does not leads to the sinking of hole bands below the Fermi level. In the presence of the oxygen vacancies in the double TiO layer, Se atoms plays a role of the missing oxygen, i.e. it localizes the charge and prevents its transfer to the FeSe monolayer. We conclude that the strong electronic correlations have to be taken into account to peoperly describe the low energy physics of FeSe monolayers.