The influence of material characteristics-i.e., type or surface texture-to wetting properties is nowadays increased by the implementation of ultrafast lasers for nanostructuring. In this account, we exposed multilayer thin metal film samples of different materials to a femtosecond laser beam at a 1030 nm wavelength. The interaction generated high-quality laser-induced periodic surface structures (LIPSS) of spatial periods between 740 and 790 nm and with maximal average corrugation height below 100 nm. The contact angle (CA) values of the water droplets on the surface were estimated and the values between unmodified and modified samples were compared. Even though the laser interaction changed both the surface morphology and the chemical composition, the wetting properties were predominantly influenced by the small change in morphology causing the increase in the contact angle of ~80%, which could not be explained classically. The influence of both surface corrugation and chemical composition to the wetting properties has been thoroughly investigated, discussed and explained. The presented results clearly confirm that femtosecond patterning can be used to mold wetting properties. Generating periodical sub-wavelength structures on material surfaces by interaction with pulsed laser beams has been performed known for some time The causes of LIPSS generation and shaping are seen most probably in the emergence of the surface plasmon polariton (SPP), as well as in the hydrodynamic features Changing the wetting and tribological properties of the material by LIPSS formation opens new fields of application in nano/microfluidics, optofluidics, fluid microreactors, biomedicine, biochemical sensors, and thermal management Laser interaction can induce the change in chemical composition of the surface, forming ultra-thin oxide layers, which contribute to the wetting. Wetting is initially enhanced, but as time passes, it is ultimately reversed by surface chemistry phenomena that take place on the irradiated surfaces-i.e., hydrophobicity is increased Van der Waals and electrostatic forces play an important role in adsorption, adhesion and wetting phenomena The morphology of surface micro/nanostructures obtained by fs laser is evaluated with the aim of determining the influence of morphology on their wetting. By interaction with fs laser beam, we generated LIPSS on the surfaces of several metallic multilayer materials. We estimated the contact angle (CA) difference for different materials and also for materials before and after LIPSS forming, thus examining the change in hydrophobicity. The samples were multilayer thin films on Si substrate: 15×(Zr/Ti), 15×(Ti/Zr), 8×(Zr/Cr/Ti), with the topmost layer being Zr, Ti and Zr, respectively. The total thickness of each multilayer structure was aimed to be ~500 nm, making the thicknesses of individual layers-controlled by the deposition rate-about 17 nm for bi-layer samples and ~21 nm for tri-layer sample. The samples were exposed to femtosecond beam which generated the LIPSS. The laser source was the Pharos SP Yb:KGW laser system from Light Conversion. The surfaces of the thin films were irradiated at normal incidence in open air by focusing a linearly polarized pulsed beam with a 1 kHz repetition rate, 160 fs pulse duration, and 1030 nm central wavelength to a 43 μm Gaussian spot (1/e2) diameter. The samples were mounted on a motorized, computer-controlled, X-Y-Z translation stage, which enabled scanning (3 mm/s) and positioning out-of-focus to widen the scanning line. For higher precision, the irradiations were conducted at identical conditions, covering a surface of 5 × 5 mm at a pulse power of 2.5 mW (fluence of 0.662 J/cm2) and scan velocity of 3 mm/s with a constant distance between the lines of 15 μm. In order to determine the effects of chemical composition and morphology on wetting, the drops of distilled water were placed onto both the unmodified and laser-processed surface areas in open air. The volume of each droplet was of 3 μL, controlled by a motorized syringe, while the shape was determined by micro-photographing in the horizontal direction by using Data Physics OCA (optical contact angle) Series device. The values of contact angles were estimated from the images by the utilization of the Gwyddion software The wetting properties of the surfaces were influenced both by their chemical composition and by their morphology-i.e., corrugation The contact angle of a surface processed by laser beam evolves after the processing. It was shown for some alloys that CA increases to the equilibrium level with a higher rate for lower implemented laser fluence: for alloys containing Ti and fluence of 0.78 J/cm2, it takes a couple of days to be close enough to the equilibrium The values of the LIPSS periods estimated from the micrographs, as well as measured values of contact angles of both surfaces, are summarized in Table From the SEM images (Figure While LIPSS are anisotropic, the isotropy of the contact angles was not investigated. The direction of LIPSS (sample orientation) relative to the direction of recording (camera orientation) was arbitrary for each sample and undetermined. No significant difference in the left and right contact angles can be seen in Tas Figure Corrugation is responsible for hydrophobicity (wetting). Classical theory demands the size of corrugation to be above micrometer level in order to achieve super-hydrophobicity. If we assume that a multilayer structure can be imagined as an optical cavity, quantum effects cause the rise of super-hydrophobicity Here, the authors are the first, to our knowledge, to report significant change in the wetting properties by subwavelength corrugation. The increase in hydrophobicity caused by fs nano-patterning experimentally confirms the model developed by Dellieu et al. Furthermore, the presented study goes beyond the proposed model, since super-hydrophobicity is achieved on the metallic surface (not only the molecular solid). In the end, the possibility of attaining super-hydrophobicity using submicron corrugation by controlling quantum vacuum modes opens large almost unlimited fundamental and technological applications. While the responsibility for the change in the dispersion component is doubtful, the corrugation is responsible for all the changes in the CA. However, the magnitude of the effects is too big for such small corrugations, which can be explained with the abovementioned non-classical approach We have investigated the wetting of laser modified multilayer thin films of different metal materials by using contact angle measurements. The values do not differ much for different materials (both asdeposited and laser modified) but significantly change after the laser interaction and the formation of LIPSS. Here, due to nanometer-sized structuring, wetting cannot be explained without taking quantum effects into consideration. To our actual knowledge, this is the first example of significant wetting change by nanostructures and it is in good agreement with previous publication 