We demonstrate a polarization rotator integrated at the output of a GaAs waveguide producing type I second harmonic generation (SHG). Form-birefringent phase matching between the pump fundamental transverse electric (TE) mode near 2.0 μm wavelength and the signal fundamental transverse magnetic (TM) mode efficiently generates light at 1.0 μm wavelength. A SiN waveguide layer is integrated with the SHG device to form a multi-functional photonic integrated circuit. The polarization rotator couples light between the two layers and rotates the polarization from TM to TE or from TE to TM. With a TE-polarized 2.0 μm pump, type I SHG is demonstrated with the signal rotated to TE polarization. Passive transmission near 1.0 μm wavelength shows ∼80 % polarization rotation across a broad bandwidth of ∼100 nm. By rotating the signal polarization to match that of the pump, this SHG device demonstrates a critical component of an integrated self-referenced octave-spanning frequency comb. This device is expected to provide crucial functionality as part of a fully integrated optical frequency synthesizer with resolution of less than one part in 10 14 . Second harmonic generation (SHG) is an important nonlinear process for stabilizing the carrier-envelope offset frequency of an octave-spanning frequency comb. This process, known as f -2f self-referencing, produces a stable frequency reference that finds various uses for timing A common approach for f -2f self-referencing is to compare the 2.0 μm and 1.0 μm parts of a frequency comb using SHG High conversion efficiency SHG has recently been demonstrated in GaAs An exemplary polarization rotator has minimal loss and supports a broad bandwidth with tolerance to fabrication error. This can be achieved with a passive device. Coupling between TE and TM polarizations can be either resonant or adiabatic, with resonant coupling producing a much smaller device and adiabatic coupling supporting a larger bandwidth Here we report a type I SHG waveguide integrated with a passive polarization rotator. The design produces a high polarization rotation from the fundamental TM to the fundamental TE mode in a single coupling stage. Two sets of measurements are performed to characterize the device. First, SHG is demonstrated with a TEpolarized 2 μm pump to produce a TE-polarized signal at the output of the chip. This confirms the polarization rotator efficiently converts the TM-polarized signal to the TE polarization. Second, the bandwidth of our polarization rotator is characterized by transmission measurements at 1 μm. By integrating both a SiN and a GaAs waveguide, we have broad flexibility in the design to introduce both vertical and horizontal asymmetry. The thickness of the SiN layer is 400 nm to provide a balance between sufficient confinement at the 2.0 μm wavelength and efficient coupling between the SiN and GaAs layers at the 1 μm wavelength. This SiN layer can also support additional photonic elements necessary for f -2f self-referencing. The GaAs waveguide is 150 nm thick and 1500 nm wide in the straight section, which is designed for phase-matching with a 2.0 μm pump. The complete polarization rotator schematic is shown in Fig. The input coupler dimensions are shown in Fig. The output GaAs-SiN coupler designed for polarization rotation is shown in Fig. 2 ) dx dy. The mode profiles shown in Fig. For a GaAs width taper from 250 nm to 150 nm, the transmission is simulated from an input TM mode in Fig. The width of the GaAs waveguide where the optical modes hybridize and polarization rotation occurs is referred to as the polarization transition width for this adiabatic rotator. This width may shift if the GaAs and SiN waveguides are offset from the nominal design, which occurs from lithography misalignment. Additionally, it can shift if the waveguide widths or heights are different from the design. However, this effect is mitigated by tapering the GaAs width over a larger range than necessary. For example, the simulation shows that the polarization is rotated efficiently when the GaAs width tapers over a range of 10 nm around the polarization transition width. If the GaAs waveguide is tapered over a 100 nm range around the same polarization transition width, then the polarization can still be rotated efficiently when accounting for the expected tolerances in our fabrication process. These include an alignment accuracy between layers of less than 70 nm, transverse to the direction of propagation, a thickness accuracy within 20 % of the SiO 2 spacer layer, a thickness accuracy within 2 % of the SiN and GaAs layers, and a width accuracy within 20 % of GaAs and SiN waveguide widths. The devices are fabricated on Si wafers using LIGENTEC SiN PIC technology, outlined in Fig. The GaAs waveguide layer is formed by directly bonding a GaAs chip to the SiO 2 spacer layer. First, ∼5 nm of Al 2 O 3 is deposited on the GaAs surface by atomic layer deposition to improve the bonding energy For the SHG experimental setup, shown in Fig. Passive transmission measurements are performed using the setup shown in Fig. SHG is demonstrated in both the reference device and the polarization rotator. The spectrum of the generated signal for each is shown in Fig. The SHG signal of the reference device in Fig. Besides the efficient operation of the polarization rotator, both devices have lower SHG conversion efficiency than expected: 0.11 W -1 in this work compared to 2.50 W -1 from our previous work To understand the dependence of the polarization rotation on the signal wavelength, passive transmission measurements are performed with two different tunable lasers with wavelengths near 1 μm. The polarization at the output of the polarization rotator is defined as T TE /(T TE + T TM ). Light is input to the chip with a TM polarization and both TE and TM polarizations are measured separately at the output. These results are shown in Fig. We have demonstrated a polarization rotator in a hybrid GaAs/SiN waveguide to couple light from a GaAs SHG waveguide to a SiN waveguide. The platform allows for the polarization rotator to have both vertical and horizontal asymmetry, which supports coupling between the fundamental TE and TM modes. SHG is demon-strated in this type I waveguide with a TE pump and a final TE signal at the output of the polarization rotator. The InGaP etch-stop process likely limits the conversion efficiency, and future work will minimize the roughness on the top surface of the GaAs waveguide. Polarization rotation is measured over a broad bandwidth, close to 100 nm, with excellent agreement to the design simulation. This device is suitable for integration with a SiN-based photonic integrated circuit to route and detect light for f -2f self-referencing of an octave-spanning frequency comb.