The interplay of photon spin and orbital angular momentum (OAM) in the optical fiber (1D waveguide) has recently risen to the forefront of quantum nanophotonics. Here, we introduce the fermionic dual of the optical fiber, the Dirac wire, which exhibits unique electronic spin and OAM properties arising from confined solutions of the Dirac equation. The Dirac wires analyzed here represent cylindrical generalizations of the Jackiw-Rebbi domain wall and the minimal topological insulator, which are of significant interest in spintronics. We show the unique longitudinal spin arising from electrons confined to propagation in a wire, an effect which is fundamentally prohibited in planar geometries. Our work sheds light on the universal spatial dynamics of electron spin in confined geometries and the duality between electronic and photonic spin. Introduction.-Confined solutions of Maxwell's equations exhibit unique phenomena such as transverse photon spin and universal spin-momentum locking Here, we introduce the Dirac wire [see Fig. The radius of the proposed Dirac wire is on the order of the Compton wavelength of the electron; fundamentally different from the well-known quantum wire limit Dirac Wire.-We describe the Dirac wire as a cylinder with an effective electronic mass m 1 , surrounded by a medium with an effective electronic mass m 2 [Fig. For a cylindrical Dirac waveguide, the difference in electronic mass inside and outside the wire gives rise to bound fermionic waves. These solutions can be derived from the time-independent Dirac equation, Eigenstates of the Dirac equation can be identified by five good quantum numbers which correspond to five commuting operators. In cylindrical coordinates, these op-erators are the Hamiltonian H, longitudinal total angular momentum J z , longitudinal momentum p z , transverse momentum p 2 ⊥ , and the transverse helicity h ⊥ Here, 2 k 2 are the eigenvalues of total momentum operator p p p 2 , and n ± ∈ Z are integers. The s = ±1 signs appearing in Eq. ( The vector spin operator of the Dirac equation is de- , where σ σ σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) are the Pauli matrices expressed in vector operator form. The longitudinal component of the orbital angular momentum (OAM) operator is Lz = -i ∂ ∂φ . Together with the spin operator, we obtain the longitudinal total angular momentum Ĵz = Σz + Lz . In the subsequent sections we will use these operators to find the expectation values of the spin and orbital angular momentum of the modes. Cylindrical Jackiw-Rebbi domain wall.-We now solve the cylindrical wire geometry with an effective electronic mass m 1 surrounded by a medium with an effective electronic mass m 2 . This is the cylindrical analogue of the 1D Jackiw-Rebbi (JR) domain wall For the case of m 1 , m 2 > 0 (JR + ), solutions of Eq. ( Dispersive Jackiw-Rebbi (topological insulator).-We now solve the Dirac Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where m 0 is the electron rest mass in the wire and B is the dispersion factor. Denoted by JR-D, the dispersive mass gives rise to solutions satisfying open boundary conditions (ψ μ = 0) on the surface of the wire, irrespective of the mass outside. This is confirmed by the plot of the probability density [right panel in Fig. Hence, the medium ρ < a is a topological insulator ζ = 1. Note, we do not consider the inverse problem in this paper, where the medium ρ > a is topological and the wire is treated as a cylindrical defect. In the JR-D case, the eigenfunctions are of similar form as Eq. ( where )'s are given by Eq. (2). Here k z with k (i) being two possible propagation constants within the wire, resulting from the dispersive mass [27], (5) Unlike 1D solutions of the topological insulator Like the JR ± states, we can label the modes depending on whether the two transverse propagation constants, k ⊥ and k F = 1 eV and B 2 = 50 eVÅ 2 . Due to confinement in the cylindrical geometry, the bandgap is opened for all three problems. For JR-D, however, the bandgap closes and reopens for certain values of a as seen in panel (b). Note that the summation Jz = Sz + Lz produces the conserved value of 1 2 in all three cases. In the limit a → ∞, OAM vanishes Lz → 0 for JR + , while spin vanishes Sz → 0 for JR -and JR-D. ⊥ both belong to the interior of the wire ρ < a as there are now two characteristic wavelengths [Eq. ( (1,2) ⊥ , respectively. The third row of Fig. The dispersion relation E = E(k z ) of the dominant modes is presented in Fig. More interesting is the bandgap of the topological insulator (JR-D) where for some finite values of radii, the bandgap closes and re-opens in an oscillatory fashion with a. For JR-D, spin also exhibits oscillatory behavior and passes through regions of positive and negative S z upon increasing the wire radius [Fig. Conclusion.-Our results show important differences between the 1D JR 