We develop an effective field theory to describe the superfluid pairing in strongly interacting fermions with arbitrary short-range attractions, by extending Kaplan's idea of coupling fermions to a fictitious boson state in Nucl. Phys. B 494, 471 (1997). This boson field is assigned with an unconventional kinetic term to recover the exact scattering phase shift obtained either from scattering data or model calculations. The theory works even if the explicit form of the interaction potential has not been constructed from scattering data. The contact boson-fermion coupling allows us to go beyond mean-field to include Gaussian pair fluctuations, yielding reliable predictions on equations of state. As an application, we use our theory to address the non-univerisal ground-state energy of strongly paired fermions, due to the non-trivial momentum dependence of the phase shift characterized, for example, by effective range. We find a good agreement between our predictions and recent quantum Monte Carlo simulations on the effective-range dependence in both three and two spatial dimensions. We propose that in cold-atom experiments, the non-universal dependence in thermodynamics can be probed using dark-state optical control of Feshbach resonances. In quantum many-body Fermi systems, attractive inter-particle interaction leads to Cooper pairing and superfluidity The universal properties of an ultracold Fermi gas stem from its simple form of the scattering phase shift in the dilute limit, characterized by a large s-wave scattering length and negligible effective range In this work, we aim to establish a genuine and elegant theory to describe strongly paired fermions with arbitrary short-range interaction V (r). The conventional way to handle this problem is technically difficult. For example, within mean-field theory one needs to solve the gap equation, where ∆ k is the gap function, V kk ′ is the Fourier trans-form of the interaction potential, and E k is the BCStype single-particle dispersion. Even at the mean-field level, this integral equation is not easy to solve Apart from numerically expensive quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) simulations, going beyond mean-field seems impossible, since V kk ′ is generally not separable. Here, our strategy is to develop an effective field theory following the pioneering work by Kaplan The key advantage of our effective field theory is that it is constructed to precisely reproduce the full two-body scattering phase shift of the potential V (r) of interest, which is assumed to be known, either directly from scattering data (i.e., for nucleon superfluids As a simple application, we predict the effective-range dependence of the ground-state energy near s-wave resonances in both three (3D) and two dimensions (2D). Our results are in good agreement with existing QMC calculations. To demonstrate the potential of using cold atoms to understand the non-universal properties of strongly paired fermions due to the effective-range effect and beyond, we propose dark-state optical control of Feshbach resonances, which leads to a non-trivial momentum dependence of the phase shift and consequently non-universal thermodynamics. Our results pave the way to using cold atoms to simulate realistic many-body Fermi systems, which exist ubiquitously in all fields of physics. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we construct a general effective Lagrangian for an arbitrary short-range interaction. In Sec. III, we formulate the many-body theory of strongly paired fermionic superfluids based on the effective Lagrangian. The effectiverange dependence of strongly paired fermions is studied in Sec. IV, and an experimental scheme to probe the non-universal thermodynamics is proposed in Sec. V. We summarize in Sec. VI. For the sake of simplicity, we assume that the shortrange two-body interaction V (r) is around an s-wave resonance, and thus we neglect the contributions from higher partial waves. The s-wave scattering amplitude A(E) can be expressed in terms of the s-wave scattering phase shift δ(k), where E = k 2 /m is the scattering energy and m is the mass of fermions ( = 1 hereafter). In 3D, we have For a short-range interaction, k cot δ(k) is an analytical function of E, leading to the expansion Truncating to the first two terms, we obtain the so-called effective range expansion, with c 0 = m/(4πa) and c 1 = -m 2 r e /(8π), where a and r e are the scattering length and effective range, respectively. A low-energy effective Lagrangian including only fermion fields ψ σ (x) (σ =↑, ↓) can be constructed order by order according to the expansion (3) where KF = i∂ t + μ + ∇ 2 /(2m) and KB = i∂ t + 2μ + ∇ 2 /(4m) are the Galilean invariant kinetic operators for fermion and boson, respectively, with μ being the chemical potential of fermions. The crucial point of our construction is that the boson field has an unconventional kinetic term, represented by the function F ( KB ), which can be designed to recover precisely the phase shift δ(k). To see this, let us recall that the scattering amplitude A(E) is given by the ladder summation with an interaction vertex F -1 (E), which gives Here, the two-particle bubble diagram reads with ε p = p 2 /(2m) and p = d 3 p/(2π) 3 for 3D. The ultraviolet (UV) divergence in B can be regularized via a hard cutoff Λ for |p|, leading to where the divergent part is given by Thus, the scattering amplitude takes the same form of Eq. ( Here F R (E) = F (E) + D(Λ) is the renormalized version of the F -function. It is readily seen that the expansion Eq. ( Since all terms in Eq. ( The effective Lagrangian (4) also applies to 2D systems, where In 2D, the the s-wave scattering amplitude is given by For a short-range interaction, we have where ε 2D = 1/(ma 2 2D ), with a 2D being the 2D scattering length. The 2D effective range can be defined as R 2D = -4πc 1 /m 2 , which has units of length 2 . Even though the leading term is nonanalytical in E, it is purely from the two-particle bubble diagram B(E). Using the same cutoff regularization we obtain Direct ladder summation shows that where the the renormalized F -function reads F R (E) = F (E) + D(Λ), with the counter term The energy scale ε 0 can be chosen arbitrarily, and we set ε 0 = ε 2D for convenience. Thus in 2D, the F -function is given by We consider a Fermi gas with a short-range two-body interaction V (r). Now we can solve the many-body problem based on the effective Lagrangian (4), instead of directly using the interaction potential V (r). In the imaginary time path integral formalism, the partition function Z is given by where x = (τ, r) and dx = β 0 dτ dr after the replacement t → -iτ , with τ being the imaginary time and β = 1/(k B T ) the inverse temperature. The fermions can be directly integrated out and we obtain where the bosonic effective action reads with the fermion matrix The partition function can be alternatively expressed as Thus the many-body problem can be simulated using the Lattice Monte Carlo method since the fermion determinant det M F is positive, which has been applied to the zero-range interaction case In this work, we aim to develop an analytical theory. One advantage of the effective Lagrangian ( Here . Without loss of generality, we can set ∆ to be real and positive. At T = 0, the gap equation determining ∆(μ) is given by In the strong attraction limit, the system forms a BEC of tightly bound dimers and we have ∆ ≪ |μ|. The gap equation thus reduces to a two-body equation determining the negative-energy pole of the scattering amplitude, where ε B is precisely the binding energy of the dimer state determined by solving the Schroedinger equation with the interaction potential V (r). In the weak attraction limit, where μ ≃ ε F , with ε F = k 2 F /(2m) being the Fermi energy, the gap equation provides a reasonable effective-range dependence of the pairing gap. By approximating the F -function as F R (E) ≃ c 0 + c 1 E, the pairing gap reads indicating that a positive (negative) effective range suppresses (enhances) the pairing gap. The mean-field theory is only qualitatively correct for strongly paired fermions. To have a more quantitative description, we consider quantum fluctuations around the saddle point by writing φ(x) = ∆ + φ(x). The effective action can be expressed as and the partition function becomes An exact analytical treatment of the fluctuation contribution S FL is impossible. Here we consider only the Gaussian fluctuations, i.e., the contributions that are quadratic in φ(x) and φ † (x), corresponding to the contributions from collective modes. In the momentum space, this Gaussian fluctuation contribution, S GF , can be expressed as where The inverse Green's function of collective bosonic modes, M(Q), is a 2 × 2 matrix, with elements satisfying the relations Here and in the following, we use the notation Q = (iq l , q), with q l = 2πlT (l ∈ Z) being the bosonic Matsubara frequency. At T = 0, the elements of M can be explicitly evaluated as where and the BCS distribution functions are defined as The plus and minus signs denote the momenta k + q/2 and kq/2, respectively. Within the Gaussian pair fluctuation (GPF) approximation and the phase shift δ M (ω, q) = -ImW(ω + iǫ, q), with the W-function given by The grand potential Ω(μ) in the GPF theory can be determined, by solving ∆(μ) from the gap equation The density equation of state is then calculated using n(μ) = -∂Ω(μ)/∂μ. It is worth noting that as the full scattering phaseshift is reproduced by our theory in the two-body limit, we recover correctly the virial expansion of the equation of state at high temperature, i.e., the Beth-Uhlenbeck formalism for the second-order virial coefficient can be derived. At high temperature, the system is a normal gas with large but negative μ. The equation of state can be expanded in powers of the fugacity z = e βμ ≪ 1 where λ T = 2πβ/m is the thermal wavelength. Our theory recovers the correct virial equation of state up to the order O(z 2 ). To see this, we write b 2 , where the one-body contribution b (1) 2 = -2 -5/2 . To find the two-body contribution b (2) 2 , it is sufficient to use Eq. where δ 2B (E) = -Im ln[A -1 (E)]. Using Eq. ( where ε B is the exact binding energy and δ(k) is the exact phase shift. The many-body theory for 2D is quite similar to the 3D case. Due to the energy scale ε 0 = ε 2D , the mean-field thermodynamics and gap equation are modified to, and respectively. Moreover, for the Gaussian fluctuations, the matrix element M 11 (Q) takes the form, (37) All the notations, i.e., u 2 ± , v 2 ± and Y ± , are the same as in the 3D case. The consistency and validity of the GPF theory has been studied for both 3D We now consider the zero-temperature equation of state of a Fermi gas with fixed density n = k 3 F /(3π 2 ) in 3D. We focus on the effective-range dependence of the ground-state energy at resonance, where the F -function is approximated as While the theory in Sec. III applies for both positive and negative effective ranges, here we focus on a negative effective range since it is relevant to cold atom systems and the computational cost is small (see the Appendix). For a negative effective range, r e < 0, this truncation is equivalent to the two-channel model description of the Feshbach resonance where the Bertsch parameter reads ξ = 0.591 in the mean-field theory and ξ = 0.401 in the GPF theory. The GPF result agrees well with the latest experimental In the BEC limit, the effective interaction between two composite dimers may be deduced. As μ → -∞ and ∆ ≪ |μ|, we expand the gap equation The solution can be expressed as 2μ = -ε B + μ B , with μ B ≪ ε B being the dimer chemical potential. We find where where α ∼ O(1) comes from the Gaussian-fluctuation contribution and depends on the details of the Ffunction. Thus, we recover the Bogoliubov equation of The GPF results (solid lines) are compared with the mean-field predictions (dotted lines) and the diffusion QMC data (solid circles) in 3D state for weakly interacting bosons, μ B = 4πa dd n B /m B , where m B = 2m is the mass of the dimers and n B = n/2 is the density of the dimers. The dimer-dimer scattering length a dd is then given by Note that the above discussions are valid only for the case C > 0, i.e., for a repulsive dimer-dimer interaction. For zero-range interaction, we have a dd (0) = 2a from the mean-field theory and a dd (0) ≃ 0.57a from the GPF theory. The GPF result is close to the exact result a dd (0) = 0.6a from solving the four-body problem For a large negative effective range, |r e | ≫ a, we have a dd ≃ a 2 /(2|r e |) ≪ a. For a positive effective range, a dd is enhanced. The divergence at r e = a/2 is artificial due to our simple truncation to effective range and is likely cured by the inclusion of the shape term O(E 2 ). We also observe that the quantity C vanishes at r e = a/2, indicating that the dimer-dimer interaction turns to be attractive for a larger effective range. The qualitative change around r e ∼ a indicates that the present analysis fails and the ground state in this regime remains to be explored. Recent few-body calculation shows that two dimers may form a cluster state for r e > 0.46a We also calculated the ground-state energy of a 2D Fermi gas with fixed density n = k 2 F /(2π) as a function of the effective-range parameter k 2 F R 2D . In Fig. In cold atom experiments, the s-wave scattering length a is tuned by magnetic field where a bg is the open-channel background scattering length, γ is the difference of the magnetic moment between the open and the closed channels, and B ∆ is the resonance width. For broad resonances in experiments, such as 6 Li at 832G and 40 K at 202G, the effective range k F r 0 is negligible. Here we consider dark-state optical control of the Feshbach resonance where Σ(E) is the optically induced Stark shift. In the dark-state regime, we have Σ(0) = 0 and Σ where Ω 1 and Ω 2 are the Rabi frequencies for the transitions |1 ↔ |e and |2 ↔ |e . Thus the resonance does not shift but the effective range can be tuned by changing the ratio Ω 1 /Ω 2 Figure We have proposed a convenient way to describe strongly paired fermions without knowing the details of the short-range interaction potential. Within our effective field theory, it is easy to go beyond mean field to include quantum fluctuations for arbitrary potential. The predicted effective-range dependence of the ground-state energy is in good agreement with recent quantum Monte Carlo simulations. At a large effective range, the effect beyond the effective-range expansion may become significant. Our theory can be readily generalized to include the contributions from higher partial waves The functions A, B, C, D, and F are defined as A(ω, q) = m 2 r e 8π 2μ - (A6) This expression for Ω GF leads to a rapidly convergent result. However, for positive effective range (r e > 0), the function M C 11 (z, q) has zeros in the left half plane for sufficiently large values of |q|. In this case, the above trick fails and we need to use the phase shift expression 