We demonstrate fabrication of single-mode optical waveguides on lithium niobate on insulator (LNOI) by optical patterning combined with chemo-mechanical polishing. The fabricated LNOI waveguides have a nearly symmetric mode profile of a mode field size of ~2.5 μm (full-width at half maximum). We develop a highprecision measurement approach by which the single mode waveguides are characterized to have a propagation loss of ~0.042 dB/cm. The pursuit of photonic integrated circuit (PIC) has been lasting in the past a few decades as inspired by the enormous success of the electronic integration Early investigations in establishing PICs on lithium niobate (LN) focused on Titanium diffused LN waveguides with only subtle refractive index contrast, of which the large radius of bending poses a challenge for scalability Recently, we have developed a fabrication approach which has allowed to fabricate both high quality (Q) factor LN microdisks and low loss LN ridge waveguides A commercially available X-cut LNOI wafer was used in fabrication of the ridge waveguides. The LNOI wafer was produced by crystal ion slicing, and then bonded onto a silica layer of a 2 μm-thickness supported by a bulk LN substrate of a 500 μm-thickness. The structure of LNOI wafer is shown in Fig. The scanning electrical microscope (SEM) image of the fabricated LN ridge waveguide is presented in Fig. Our high-precision loss measurement method is established based on the design illustrated in Fig. Here, λ is the wavelength (i.e., 1550 nm), ne is the refractive index of extraordinary light, and r33 (= 30.8 × 10 -12 m/V) is the largest electrooptic coefficient of LN, V is the applied voltage. The measured half-wave voltage V are 6.7 V for the Phase Shifter and 36.8 V for MZI 1 and MZI 2. The results agree well with the numerical calculation. Next, we tuned the splitting ratio for both MZI 1 and MZI 2 to a precise 50:50 using the following procedures [Ref. 23]: 1. Adjust the voltage on the Phase Shifter to minimize the output power of output port G. 2. Scan the voltages on both MZI 1 and MZI 2 to minimize the output power of port G. Steps (1)-( In our experiment, the extinction radio between port G and port U was determined to be ~40 dB based on the experimental curve in Fig. The curve in Fig. The measured output power at port U in Fig. To measure the propagation loss of the single mode waveguide, the laser was coupled to the input port U2 of the bottom beam splitter in Fig. Then the power output from Port S was tuned to be maximum via adjusting the voltage applied on phase shifter. Finally, the power output from Port S was tuned to be the half of the maximum value. In other words, the phase difference  between the two arms of Phase Shifter in the bottom beam splitter was /2, and the powers injected into the output ports S and L are the same. The propagation loss was measured to be 0.042 dB/cm by comparing the powers at the output port S (counts: 3943) and L (counts: 3898). To conclude, we fabricate single mode LNOI waveguides with a propagation loss of ~0.042 dB/cm and a mode field size of ~2.5 μm. The high-precision loss measurement is achieved using an EO controllable beam splitter to ensure the simultaneous injection of two light waves of a same input power into two waveguides of unbalanced lengths. This method avoids the fluctuation in the coupling efficiency when carrying a conventional cut-back measurement, enabling to differentiate two waveguides of propagation losses close to each other. The low-loss single mode LN waveguides can be used for constructing complex photonic circuits.