Using three-dimensional kinetic simulations, we examine the emission of collimated gammaray beams from structured laser-irradiated targets with a pre-filled cylindrical channel. The channel guides the incident laser pulse, enabling generation of a slowly evolving azimuthal plasma magnetic field that serves two key functions: to enhance laser-driven electron acceleration and to induce emission of gamma-rays by the energetic electrons. Our main finding is that the conversion efficiency of the laser energy into a beam of gamma-rays (5 • opening angle) can be significantly increased without increasing the laser intensity by utilizing channels with an optimal density. The conversion efficiency into multi-MeV photons increases roughly linearly with the incident laser power P , as we increase P from 1 PW to 4 PW while keeping the laser peak intensity fixed at 5 × 10 22 W/cm 2 . This scaling is achieved by using an optimal range of plasma densities in the channel between 10 and 20n cr , where n cr is the classical cutoff density for electromagnetic waves. The corresponding number of photons scales as P 2 . One application that directly benefits from such a strong scaling is the pair production via two-photon collisions, with the number of generated pairs increasing as P 4 at fixed laser intensity. Over the past decade, x-ray free electron lasers (XFELs) The next challenge is to develop a source of dense gamma-ray beams with photon energies in the multi-MeV range. However, upscaling the existing technology used at XFEL facilities may not be practical or feasible. Increasing the energies of emitted photons while maintaining a comparable photon yield would require a significant magnetic field increase. The desired field strength is well beyond what can be achieved using the existing technology, even with the proposed use of superconducting undulators One option is to use high-power high-intensity laser beams to drive extreme magnetic fields Strong quasi-static magnetic fields enable efficient generation of gamma-rays inside the laser-irradiated plasma by not only inducing the photon emissions We have previously examined this method for a PWclass laser pulse with parameters projected for the Texas PW laser system In this work, we investigate how the gamma-ray photon emission scales with the incident laser power in order to provide quantitative predictions for multi-PW laser facilities, such as ELI In addition to varying the laser power, one has to consider the target geometry when optimizing the photon yield. Our previously published results indicate that a structured target with a channel serving as an optical wave-guide delivers a well-directed photon beam Our main finding is that the energy conversion efficiency into multi-MeV photons emitted into a narrow cone (5 • opening angle) increases roughly linearly with the incident laser power P , as we increase P from 1 PW to 4 PW. As a result, the emitted power by multi-MeV photons reaches 143 TW for the 4 PW case. The corresponding number of photons scales as P 2 . This scaling is achieved by using an optimal plasma density between 10 and 20 n cr in the channel, where n cr is the classical cutoff density for electromagnetic waves. In comparison to that, the conversion efficiency for an initially empty channel is much lower and it remains relatively flat with the power increase. The power increase is particularly beneficial for generation of photons with energies above 100 MeV because of the increased electron energy gain that we observe to take place. The rest of the manuscript consists of five sections. In Section II, we discuss a baseline simulation for a 1 PW laser pulse to highlight the key features of the photon emission process and to provide the context for the discussion of multi-PW simulations. In Section III, we present results of a scan over the incident laser power P for an optimal plasma density of 20 n cr in the channel. In Section IV, we perform a density scan to better understand the role of the channel plasma. In Section V, we apply the discussed gamma-ray sources to produce electron-positron pairs from two-photon collisions with the goal to determine how the number of the generated pairs scales with P . Finally, in Section VI we summarize our results and discuss the implications of our findings. Photon emission from a structured target irradiated by a PW-level laser pulse has been previously investigated and the results indicate that gamma-rays are efficiently emitted in the form of a well-directed beam The main points of the set-up utilizing a structured target are shown in Fig. In the considered setup, the choice of the bulk and channel materials is dictated by the peak amplitude E 0 of the electric field in the incoming laser pulse. The laser pulse quickly ionizes the irradiated material and turns it into a plasma, so that the optical properties are determined by the electron density n e in the resulting plasma. The property that is important for our setup is the transparency. The transparency condition is defined using a dimensionless parameter that we refer to as the normalized laser amplitude: where m e and e are the electron mass and charge, ω is the frequency of the laser pulse, and c is the speed of light. In the case of non-relativistic plasma electrons, the plasma is transparent to the laser pulse if n e < n cr , where n cr ≡ m e ω 2 /(4πe 2 ) is the classical critical or cutoff density. Plasma electrons become highly relativistic at a 0 1, which is the regime of interest for this paper. In the case of relativistic electrons with a characteristic relativistic factor γ , the plasma is transparent to the laser pulse if n e < γ n cr As a baseline, we have performed a 3D PIC simulation where a 1 PW laser pulse irradiates a structured target whose parameters are picked based on the discussed criteria. The parameters of the pulse are shown in Table The target material in our simulation is initialized as fully ionized plastic, represented by carbon ions (see Table In the described simulation with a 1 PW laser pulse, the laser pulse indeed generates high energy electrons while propagating through the channel. Figure The quasi-static azimuthal magnetic field, whose profile is shown in Fig. The resulting photon emission pattern for photons with E γ > 10 MeV is shown in Fig. We calculate the emission efficiency by considering only a single lobe. This approach was adopted over a standard calculation of the total energy conversion efficiency in order to provide a better metric for those applications that call for a well-collimated photon beam. The energy conversion efficiency into photons with energies above 1, 10, and 100 MeV is shown in the lower panel of Fig. In this section we examine how the photon emission varies with the power P of the incident laser pulse. We are specifically interested in a regime where the power is increased while the peak intensity is held constant. The next generation of laser systems is likely to achieve both higher power and higher peak intensity. However, the most significant improvements over the last several years have been associated with the increase in power Figure There are three aspects that independently impact the discussed photon emission: 1) the power emitted by a single electron, 2) the number of emitting electrons, and 3) the duration of the emission. It is important to point out that the number of emitting electrons has to increase faster than P in order to cause an increase in the efficiency. This is because the laser pulse duration is fixed and the laser energy increases only as a result of the power increase. In order to explicitly take this aspect into account, we introduce a re-normalized emitted power that is the actual emitted power into a single lobe, P lobe , divided by a factor proportional to P or, equivalently, to w 2 0 . An increase in P γ with power is then a clear indicator of increased energy conversion efficiency into photons. Figure We find that the efficiency increase in the power scan results from increased emission by individual electrons, discussed below in Sec. III A, and from increased number of emitting electrons, discussed below in Sec. III B. We first examine the change in synchrotron emission of individual electrons. In order to be quantitative, we consider the emission of photons with E γ > 10 MeV into a single lobe defined in Sec. II. The power of synchrotron emission P synch is determined exclusively by the electron acceleration in an instantaneous rest frame where E and B are the electric and magnetic fields acting on the electron, γ e and v are the relativistic factor and velocity of the electron, c is the speed of light, and E S ≈ 1.3 × 10 18 V/m is the Schwinger field. The power of the synchrotron emission scales as The characteristic η during the photon emission increases with P , as seen in Fig. The key conclusion is that an emitting electron typically emits more at higher incident laser power. The two major factors that can increase η are the increase in γ e and the change in the field configuration. The later includes not only an increase in the field strength, but also changes in the relative orientation between the electron velocity and the fields. In order to quantify this aspect, we introduce an effective field strength defined as so that where E 0 is the maximum electric field strength of the laser pulse in the absence of the target, i.e. in vacuum. According to this definition, F ef f = 1 for a single nonrelativistic electron in vacuum with v = 0. We have implemented detailed tracking of emissions in EPOCH, which allows us to distinguish the changes in η caused by changes in F ef f and γ e of the emitting electrons. Specifically, we record the position and momentum of each photon at the moment of the emission together with the corresponding η and γ e of the emitting electron. 1. Changes in F ef f of emitting electrons P γ as a function of the effective field strength F ef f at the time of maximum emission is shown in Fig. Simple estimates for the quasi-static magnetic field suggest that we might expect a much stronger increase in F ef f compared to what we have obtained from our fully self-consistent simulations. Indeed, the maximum strength of this magnetic field B scales as B ∝ jR ch , where j is the current density driven by the laser beam in the channel cross-section and R ch is the channel radius. If the current density does not change significantly with power, but the channel is made wider, the maximum magnetic field inside the channel has to increase. In our power scan, the channel radius is increased as √ P , which leads to B ∝ √ P . We could then expect for F ef f to double as we go from 1 to 4 PW in incident power. Our simulations confirm the increase of the maximum quasi-static magnetic field inside the channel. The detailed field structure in the channel cross-section is shown in Appendix A. The values for the maximum magnetic fields B at P = 1, 2, and 4 PW are 0.17B 0 , 0.23B 0 , and 0.31B 0 , where B 0 = 2 MT is the maximum magnetic field of the laser pulse in vacuum. We calculate B by averaging the magnetic field over four laser periods. An important aspect that is missing in our estimate is that the magnetic field limits the amplitude of transverse electron displacements across the channel. The maximum displacement scales as 1/ √ j Figure The observed increase in γ e occurs for the same peak laser intensity and laser pulse duration, which suggests that the enhanced energy gain is related to the changes in the quasi-static magnetic field inside the channel. We have previously shown that a static azimuthal magnetic field can significantly increase the energy gain by laseraccelerated electrons The increase in the energy conversion efficiency results not only from the increased emission by individual electrons, but also from an increase in the number of emitting electrons. In Sec. III A, we showed that the characteristic η for the emission of photons with E γ > 10 MeV doubles as the incident power increases from 1 to 4 PW. We can then expect an increase in the conversion efficiency by a factor of 4. However, Fig. Snapshots of the electron energy spectra at the time of maximum emission for P = 1, 2 and 4 PW (see Fig. The number of electrons with the average γ e that is shown in Fig. The electron spectra in Fig. In this section we perform a density scan to better understand the role of the channel plasma. In our scan we use four channel densities: n ch /n cr = 0, 10, 20, and 60. All four values satisfy the criterion for the relativistically induced transparency, with n ch /n cr < a 0 = 190. We again only consider the photon emission into a narrow cone that is aligned with the direction of the maximum emission. We determine this direction for each set of target and laser parameters from a time-integrated angular photon emission distribution as the ones shown in Fig. The results of the scan are summarized in Tables II-IV, where the energy conversion efficiency is given for E γ > 1, 10, and 100 MeV. At P = 4 PW, n ch /n cr = 10 and 20 deliver comparable conversion rates that are significantly higher than the conversion rates for the other two densities. It is also noteworthy that the conversion rate markedly increases with incident laser power for these two densities. In contrast to that, the power increase delivers no significant increase in the conversion rate for n ch /n cr = 0 and 60 and it can even have a detrimental effect. The fact that n ch /n cr = 10 and 20 perform equally well suggests that the range of optimal densities is relatively wide and that fine-tuning of the channel density is not required to achieve the optimal performance. In what follows, we compare the emission of photons with E γ > 10 MeV at n ch /n cr = 0 and 60 to the emission at n ch /n cr = 20 from the previous section. Our goal is to elucidate the underlying cause for the enhanced performance at the optimal density. We limit our consideration to P = 4 PW since this power delivers the highest conversion rate for the optimal channel density. Figure In contrast to the case of n ch /n cr = 60, an initially empty channel is able to effectively accelerate electrons injected into the channel by the laser pulse and generate a directed beam of energetic electrons. We find that the laser depletion is a lot slower than at the optimal density of n ch /n cr = 20. As a consequence, the photon emission lasts longer and it peaks at a later time, as shown in Fig. Figure We continue this section by examining the key features of emission by individual electrons at n ch /n cr = 0 and n ch /n cr = 60. Figure The parameter η depends on the electron relativistic factor γ e and the effective field strength F ef f defined by Eq. (4). Figure The effective field strength F ef f however is considerably lower at n ch /n cr = 0 than at the optimal density. We found that the axial current density in an initially empty channel and the resulting azimuthal quasi-static magnetic field are much lower than at n ch /n cr = 20. The maximum strength of this magnetic field, B, in the channel cross-section at the axial location of maximum emission only reaches 0.1B 0 . We have already established that the number of electrons in an initially empty channel is reduced. The reduced quasi-static magnetic field is a manifestation of that. The plasma magnetic field in this regime is so low that most of the emissions are caused by the laser fields. This is evident from the fact that the average value of F ef f ≈ 0.2 is two times higher than the maximum strength of the plasma field at the axial location of the emission, B/B 0 ≈ 0.1. We can further confirm the importance of the laser field by using simple estimates for η in two limiting cases. If the plasma magnetic field dominates the emission, then η is approximately given by η ≈ γ B/E S . ( If the laser fields dominate the emission, then we can estimate η as This estimate is obtained for an ultra-relativistic electron that is moving at an angle θ with respect to the wavevector of a plane electromagnetic wave whose magnetic field amplitude is B 0 . It follows from Eqs. ( According to Fig. B. Photon emission at n ch /ncr = 60 The enhancement in η in this regime is caused by a significant enhancement in F ef f even though the electron spectrum is less energetic than at n ch /n cr = 20 and the characteristic γ e is also lower (see Fig. An important detail of our analysis should be reiterated: we have discussed the emission of photons into a narrow emission cone of only 5 • . Our motivation was to evaluate a performance of a gamma-ray source that can be used at larger distances from the laser-irradiated target. A much wider opening angle would lead to higher energy conversion rates. The conversion rate of laser energy into photons with E γ > 1 MeV that are emitted in the forward direction is 8.7% for n ch = 20n cr , 4.5% for n ch = 60n cr , and 1.0% for n ch = 0n cr . In Sec. IV we showed that the number of photons emitted into a narrow cone with an opening angle of 5 • increases rapidly with the incident laser power, provided that the channel has the optimal density. In fact, the number of multi-MeV photons increases as P 2 with the incident laser power P while the laser intensity remains the same. Multiple applications can benefit from such a strong scaling. In this section, we examine one of them, which is generation of matter and antimatter directly from light via collisions of gamma-rays We are considering a setup that is schematically shown in Fig. , where E a γ and E b γ are the energies of the colliding photons. The increase of the multi-MeV photon numbers N γ produced by each of the targets significantly increases the number of produced pairs N pairs . We first show this using simple estimates in order to derive the corresponding scaling. The photon density in each of the beams is n γ ≈ N γ /lS, where l is the beam length and S is the beam cross-section at the location where the two beams collide. Taking into account that the collisions occur far from the emission region, we estimate that S ≈ π(θd) The number of multi-MeV photons in our beams scales as P 2 , which yields a strong scaling with the incident laser power P for the number of electron-positron pairs: The derived scaling of N pairs with the laser power has been confirmed by calculating the corresponding reaction rate for the computed photon spectra as the ones shown in Fig. Our photon spectra extend only down to E γ = 1 MeV, which means that the number of pairs produced by a photon spectrum extending to lower photon energies would be higher. However, calculating the spectra of photons emitted into a narrow cone becomes prohibitively difficult at lower energies due to a large total number of photons emitted in the sub-MeV energy range. We estimate that the error in N pairs associated with the sub-MeV photons is roughly 25%. We obtained this number by extrapolating our spectra down to E γ = 0.1 MeV. We have examined the emission of collimated gammaray beams from structured laser-irradiated targets with pre-filled and empty cylindrical channels. Our goal was to determine how the conversion efficiency of the laser energy into gamma-rays scales with the incident laser power when the peak intensity is held constant. We found that the conversion efficiency into a narrow beam of gamma-rays with a 5 • opening angle can be significantly increased by utilizing channels with an optimal density. The conversion efficiency into multi-MeV photons increases roughly linearly with the incident laser power in the range between 1 and 4 PW. The optimal range of densities for the peak laser intensity of 5 × 10 22 W/cm 2 is between 10 and 20n cr . The considered setup involving a structured target becomes a powerful gammaray source when irradiated by a 4 PW laser pulse. At the optimal target density, the power emitted by multi-MeV photons into a 5 • cone reaches 143 TW. The resulting gamma-ray intensity 1 cm away from the emission location is 6 × 10 15 W/cm 2 . Our detailed particle tracking has revealed that the underlying cause for the improved conversion efficiency is the enhanced electron acceleration in the laser-pulse assisted by the quasi-static magnetic field generated in the channel We have also examined how the increased conversion efficiency impacts the yield of electron-positron pairs in a collision of two gamma-ray beams. We found that the number of generated pairs increases as P 4 at a fixed laser intensity as opposed to just P 2 , which one would expect in the case of a constant conversion efficiency. Our results indicate that increasing the peak laser intensity is not necessary to achieve a dramatic increase in the number of generated electron-positron pairs. This work also emphasizes the need for the target development since achieving the observed power scaling requires pre-filled targets. Empty structured targets have already been used experimentally to achieve greater control over laser interactions with solid-density targets Finally, it must be stated that our results for the initially empty channels qualitatively differ from some of the results that have been published over the last several years TABLE III: Density scan for Eγ > 10 MeV.