We investigate a solid-state, reversible, alkali-ion battery (AIB) capable of regulating the density of alkali atoms in a vacuum system used for the production of laser-cooled atoms. The cold-atom sample can be used with in-vacuum chronoamperometry as a diagnostic for the voltage-controlled electrochemical reaction that sources or sinks alkali atoms into the vapor. In a combined reactiondiffusion-limited regime, we show that the number of laser-cooled atoms in a magneto-optical trap can be increased both by initially loading the AIB from the vapor for longer, and by using higher voltages across the AIB when atoms are subsequently sourced back into the vapor. The time constants associated with the change in atom number in response to a change in AIB voltage are in the range of 0.5 s -40 s. The AIB alkali reservoir is demonstrated to survive oxidization during atmospheric exposure, simplifying reservoir loading prior to vacuum implementation as a replacement for traditional resistively-heated dispensers. The AIB capabilities may provide an improved atom number stability in next-generation atomic clocks and sensors, while also facilitating fast loading and increased interrogation times. Since the first demonstration of laser cooling, ensembles of laser-cooled neutral atoms have been implemented in a wide variety of precision instruments due to the long interrogation times that can be achieved without interaction with the environment. These properties are notably utilized in state-of-the-art metrological experiments, such as atom interferometers and atomic clocks Among the many challenges associated with moving cold atom instrumentation from the laboratory to the field is the stabilization of the alkali atom density. As the temperature of the environment changes, so too does the density of the alkali vapor from which the cold atom sample is loaded. The absence of an alkali density regulator will ultimately degrade the long-term magneto-optical trap (MOT) number stability, and can prevent a MOT from forming altogether for large enough deviations from room temperature. Techniques such as light-inducedatomic-desorption (LIAD) have demonstrated the ability to modulate and control the background alkali density Previously, we demonstrated stabilization of the alkali density in a vapor cell with a micro-fabricated, reversible, in-vacuum electrolytic device, and showed that alkali atoms sourced from such a device could be laser cooled and trapped in a MOT The experimental setup is illustrated in Fig. The internal body of the AIB houses a layer of ion conducting Rb-β"-alumina, sandwiched between upper and lower electrodes. The upper electrode couples the Rb-β"-alumina to the outer environment via an array of electrode fingers that cover the upper surface. The lower electrode is housed within a graphite alkali reservoir, which stores neutral alkali atoms. The alkali vapor density is enhanced when voltage is applied across the electrodes MOT image acquisition was carried out with fluorescence imaging on a CCD camera. The background Rb level was actively measured using absorption spectroscopy and subtracted from the fluorescence data to reduce the effect of the changing background Rb density levels. The typical response of the measured MOT atomnumber N and AIB current I to a change in the applied voltage polarity V is illustrated in Fig. The behaviour shown in Fig. By integrating the current, the total charge Q that has flowed between the upper and lower electrodes can be found. This charge represents the number of ions conducted through the Rb-β"-alumina, as permitted by electrochemical reactions at the lower and upper electrodes. Following the electrochemical process, the neutral Rb metal likely diffuses across the upper AIB surface to form a metallic film, and is evaporated into the vacuum. It is interesting to note that the response of the MOT atom number at t = 14 s is somewhat slower that the corresponding decay of the AIB current. We attribute this difference to the fact that in order for the alkali vapor density (and hence MOT atom number) to increase, the alkali metal likely diffuses on the AIB surface to form a film and subsequently evaporates into the vacuum chamber. The current flow through the AIB does not depend on these processes and if they take longer than the electrochemical processes, changes in the atomic vapor (and hence MOT atom number) would be expected to occur more slowly. At t = 58 s, the polarity of the voltage is reversed and the device switches from being a source of alkali atoms to the vapor to being a sink from the vapor. Under these conditions, vapor-phase Rb atoms that strike the upper electrodes are ionized and flow through the Rb-β"-alumina to the reservoir due to the applied electric field. The Rb + ions undergo reduction at the lower electrode-graphite interface, and diffuse into the reservoir The number of laser-cooled atoms in the MOT, (b) the applied voltage, and (c) the corresponding current through the solid-state battery, as a function of time. At t = 14 s, a positive voltage is applied to the battery causing current to flow and leading to an increase in the number of cold atoms with a time constant τS. At t = 58 s, the polarity of the applied voltage is reversed, leading to a reverse current and a decrease in the number of cold atoms with time constant τL. If instead, the voltage is set to zero (red lines), the atom number decreases with the time constant τD. as neutral Rb until a source voltage is applied. If instead of sinking to the reservoir, the source voltage is simply turned off, the atom number decays at a much slower rate τ D . We speculate that this slower decay results from a slow decrease of the metallic Rb coverage on the AIB surface due to removal of Rb from the vapor (and hence AIB surface) by the ion pump. This reduces the rate at which alkali atoms vaporize from the surface and, combined with a constant pumping rate from the ion pump, results in a lower overall Rb density in the vapor. The number of atoms in the MOT depends on the time over which atoms were initially loaded into the AIB, t L . To ensure a repeatable initial state of the experiment, a positive voltage was applied across the AIB to deplete any previously stored Rb from the reservoir. Prior to the set of AIB loading time measurements, the alkali dispenser was heated to temporarily increase the Rb pressure in the vacuum chamber. For each loading time tested, Rb was loaded into the AIB by applying -30 V to the AIB electrodes for a variable time. Following loading, the voltage was briefly turned off, then the polarity was reversed and atoms were sourced from the AIB at 30 V while monitoring the fluorescence from the MOT. The applied voltage as a function of time and the corresponding number of atoms detected in the MOT are shown in Fig. Longer loading times at the same loading voltage should result in a larger number of neutral Rb atoms entering the device, and hence a higher density of Rb within the reservoir. Such an increased Rb content produces a larger total charge during sourcing under the same sourcing voltage, leading to the formation of a larger number of Rb metal atoms on the surface and greater device surface coverage. This results in an increased evaporation rate and larger Rb vapor density and MOT number. The reason that τ S increases with AIB loading time requires further investigation, but is possibly due to the atoms penetrating deeper within the reservoir. The measured increase of the sourced atom number and charge transfer indicates the peak atom number for a constant applied voltage is dictated by the bulk concentration within the reservoir. We found that Rb could be stored within the AIB reservoir during exposure to atmosphere. Rb was loaded into the AIB from a background alkali density before exposure to atmosphere for one hour. Following this exposure, the vacuum was reestablished below 10 -8 mbar in the chamber and when a sourcing voltage was applied to the AIB, the MOT could be loaded, demonstrating the ability to store pure metallic Rb in oxygen and water vapor containing atmosphere without complete Rb oxidation. The MOT atom number and loading time depended on the applied sourcing voltage for constant loading conditions. The voltage across the AIB was set to -30 V to load Rb from the vacuum for 30 minutes. Subsequently, positive voltage V s was applied as illustrated in Fig. The steady-state atom numbers that were measured following sourcing are plotted in Fig. The time constant τ S , shown in Fig. If the voltage across the AIB is reversed while trapped atoms are present, the atom number in the MOT decays with the time constant τ L , as shown in Fig. Alkali ion batteries can be used to store, source and sink alkali atoms in instruments based on laser-cooled atomic ensembles. We have demonstrated here that the density of an alkali vapor, and hence the number of atoms in a magneto-optical trap can be controlled by the conditions over which the battery is operated. Increasing the time over which alkali atoms are initially loaded into the AIB results in larger MOT numbers upon subsequent sourcing to the vapor, but also implies longer sourcing time constants. Increasing the sourcing voltage also leads to a larger number of trapped atoms, but with shorter time constants. By combining these parameters it is likely that a long loading time and subsequent large source voltage could provide the best of both worlds, with a large atom number and simultaneous fast time constant. Finally, depletion of atoms from the vapor and MOT depends strongly on the loading voltage and can be made as low as 540 ms under optimal conditions with the current device design. The reversible functionality demonstrated by the device makes an ideal candidate for stabilizing the MOT number in a fluctuating background density or temperature environment The results also allow us to elucidate some aspects of the device operation. It appears that both electrochemical reaction and diffusion within the device or on the surface both contribute to the transfer of atoms between the vapor and reservoir. Changes in electrode design may therefore improve the overall device time constants by enabling faster Rb transport on the device surface. It is not yet clear what the capacity of the device to store Rb is since only slight indications of saturation in the MOT atom number were evident for the range of device parameters we explored. The ultimate capacity of the device to store Rb will also be explored in future research.