A direct patterning technique of gallium-irradiated superconducting silicon has been established by focused gallium-ion beam without any mask-based lithography process. The electrical transport measurements for line and square shaped patterns of gallium-irradiated silicon were carried out under self-field and magnetic field up to 7 T. Sharp superconducting transitions were observed in both patterns at temperature of 7 K. The line pattern exhibited a signature of higher onset temperature above 10 K. A critical dose amount to obtain the superconducting gallium-irradiated silicon was investigated by the fabrication of various samples with different doses. This technique can be used as a simple fabrication method for superconducting device. It has been recently discovered that heavily hole-doped group-IV semiconductors like diamond The group-IV semiconductors, especially, diamond and silicon are candidates for high-Tc superconductors because they show remarkable high Debye temperature The focused ion beam (FIB) is one of the most popular nanofabrication techniques for semiconducting devices FIB nanofabrication provides direct etching and deposition for desired shapes without resist-based process. In general, the desired region of sample can be milled by scanning the ion-beam over it in the FIB fabrication. The etching rate is determined by the dose amount of gallium ions which are tuned by the condenser lens, aperture size and dose time. If the dose amount of FIB beam achieves a certain criterion for the emergence of superconductivity in silicon, it will be possible to obtain desired patterns of superconducting silicon directly without resist-based lithographic process. In this study, we investigated the irradiation effect of accelerated gallium-ions on silicon substrate by FIB. The surface states of irradiated region were analyzed by a core-level X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Two kinds of line and square shaped gallium-irradiated silicon with different dose amount were evaluated using an electrical resistance measurement. The gallium irradiations for silicon substrate were carried out using a SMI9800SE FIB machine (Hitachi High-Technologies), equipped with Ga + beam. The acceleration voltage of the ion beam, FIB current, chamber pressure were 30 keV, 3.6 μA with an aperture size of 2 mm, and 3×10 -5 Pa, respectively. The dose amount of gallium ions, which is determined from the formula IT/S where I is FIB current, T is dose time, and S is dose area, was mainly adjusted by the dose time. The surface states of gallium-irradiated region on silicon was analyzed by the core-level XPS (AXIS-ULTRA DLD, Shimadzu/Kratos) with AlKα X-ray radiation (hν = 1486.6 eV), operating under a pressure of the order of 10 -9 Torr. The background signals were subtracted by using an active Shirley method on COMPRO software The gallium-irradiated region on silicon was evaluated from the temperature dependence of resistance via a standard four probe method using physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design) with 7 T superconducting magnet. The electrodes were made by a silver-paste painting and gold wires on the irradiated region. The temperature dependence of upper critical field (Hc2) of the silicon was determined from onset Tc value. Figure To confirm a flexibility for fabrication of superconducting silicon, we also prepared a square pattern (200×200×0.3 μm) with dose amount of 8.5×10 17 C/cm 2 and evaluated in Fig. There are two possibilities for the origin of the superconductivity that is the aforementioned gallium-doped silicon and elemental β-gallium Figure In this study, a nanofabrication technique for mask-less patterning of superconducting region by gallium-irradiated silicon on the substrate using FIB was introduced. In various substrates of silicon, diamond, boron-doped diamond, ITO glass, and SiO2 glass, only silicon substrate showed superconductivity with onset Tc of 7 K after gallium irradiation. The line and square shapes of gallium irradiated silicon were fabricated to confirm the versatility of patterning. Although both patterns exhibited superconductivity, very large antistrophic behavior against applied magnetic field was observed in square pattern. In the line pattern, we observed a signature of higher Tc onset above 10 K maybe due to an inhomogeneity of dose amount. The depth profile of XPS spectrum revealed that the irradiated gallium was shallowly distributed in the silicon surface. The surface of irradiated silicon changed to the amorphous like state from the peak broadening of Si 2p XPS spectra. The critical dose amount for superconductivity is between 227×10 15 C/cm 2 and 885×10 15 C/cm 2 . This direct patterning technique of superconducting circuit on silicon substrate without any masks significantly contributes to the application of superconducting devices, such as SQUID magnetometer.