We report the effect of Nb doping on the upper critical field of the cubic Laves-phase superconductor HfV 2 studied in a series of HfV 2-x Nb x samples with 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.3 under pulsed fields up to 30 T. The undoped HfV 2 undergoes a martensitic structural transition around 110 K, and becomes superconducting below T c = 9.4 K. Upon Nb doping, while the structural transition is suppressed for x ≥ 0.1, a maximum in T c of 10.1 K and zero-temperature upper critical field B c2 (0) of 22.4 T is found at x = 0.2, which is ascribed to an increase of the density of states at the Fermi level. For all samples, the temperature dependence of B c2 can be well described by the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) theory that takes into account both the spin paramagnetic effect and spin orbit scattering. In addition, a comparison is made between the B c2 behavior of HfV 2-x Nb x and those of Nb-Ti and Nb 3 Sn. HfV 2 based superconductors with the C15 cubic Laves-phase structure have received considerable attention because of their potential as high-field superconducting magnets For superconductors with spin-singlet Cooper pairs, superconductivity(SC) can be destroyed by the application of magnetic field via two effects. The first one is the orbit effect, which is a manifestation of the Lorentz force. The second one is the spin paramagnetic effect, which tends to align the spin of Cooper pairs and can be partially cancelled out by introducing the spin-orbit scattering. The investigation of the B c2 has been shown to provide valuable information on the contributions from these effects In this paper, we present a study on the superconducting properties of HfV 2-x Nb x for x in the range of 0 to 0.3, focusing on the B c2 (T ) behavior. Bulk SC with indication of strong coupling nature is observed in this x range, and a maximum T c of 10.1 K is found at x = 0.2. The B c2 (T ) data for all x values are well fitted by the WHH model including the effects of spin paramagnetism and spin orbit scattering. The extrapolated B c2 (0) exhibits a maximum of 22.4 T also at x = 0.2, which is 4.1 T higher than that of undoped HfV 2 . The enhancement of both T c and B c2 (0) is attributed to an enhanced density of states of the Fermi level [N(E F )], as revealed by the specific heat results. We also compare the B c2 (T ) curve at the optimal doping with those of Nb 0.44 Ti 0.56 and Nb 3 Sn, and discuss its implication on the B c2 improvement. Polycrystalline HfV 2-x Nb x samples with x = 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 were prepared by the arc-melting method. High purity Hf slugs (>99.9%), V (>99.99%, 200 mesh) and Nb (>99.99%, 200 mesh) powders were weighed according to the stoichiometric ratio and melted in an arc furnace under high-purity argon atmosphere. The melts were turned over and remelted by the same procedure several times to ensure homogeneity, following by rapid cooling on a water-chilled copper plate. The samples were used as cast without further annealing treatment, which was reported to result in T c degradation Figure Figure The main panel of Fig. Figure To obtain B c2 (T ) for the HfV 2-x Nb x samples, temperature dependent resistivity measurements at constant fields up 9 T (in PPMS) are combined with isothermal magnetoresistance measurements under pulsed fields up to 30 T. Examples for x = 0.2 are shown in Fig. According to the WHH theory Using this formula, the calculated B orb c2 (0) for the HfV 2-x Nb x samples falls between 33.2 to 41.9 T, which is much higher than the estimated B c2 (0) ∼ 20 T. This indicates that the spin paramagnetic effect is at work, and hence the Cooper pairs are in the spin singlet state. Note that the paramagnetically limiting field B P c2 (0) can be expressed as where α M = √ 2B orb c2 (0)/B P (0) is the Maki parameter and B P (0) is the Pauli limiting field at 0 K It is known that the B c2 (T ) of a type-II superconductor in the dirty limit can be calculated from the the linearized Gor'kov equation, with spin paramagnetic effect and spin-orbit scattering parameterized as α M and λ so The normalized upper critical field h * = (π 2 /4) h for the HfV 2-x Nb x samples with x ≤ 0.3 is plotted against t in Fig. To gain more insight, the values of T c , B c2 (0), γ e , α M and λ so from the above results are plotted as a function of the Nb content in Fig. with where Θ D is the Debye temperature, μ * is the Coulomb pseudopotential, I 2 is the average square electron-ion matric element, M is the atomic mass, and ω 2 is the average square phonon frequency. Hence one could see that T c increases with increasing N(E F ), which explains the enhancement of T c by Nb doping. On the other hand, it is noted from Fig. In the dirty limit, we have (dB c2 /dT ) T =Tc ∝ γ e ρ c , where ρ c is the resistivity value just above T c In summary, we have studied the superconducting properties, with focus on the upper critical field, of polycrytalline C15-type Laves phase compound HfV 2-x Nb x with x up to Enhancement of the upper critical field in the cubic Laves-phase superconductor HfV 2 by Nb doping7 0.3. While the martensitic structural transition is suppressed for x ≥ 0.1, a maximum in T c (= 10.1 K) as well as B c2 (0) (= 23.1 T) is found at x = 0.2. Furthermore, the specific heat results indicate a strong coupling SC in the whole x range studied, and an increase of N(E F ) induced by Nb doping, which is suggested to be responsible for the enhancement of both T c and B c2 (0). The B c2 (T ) data of all samples are found to be well described by the WHH model considering the spin paramagnetic effect and spin orbit scattering. In addition, a comparison between the B c2 (T ) behavior of HfV 2-x Nb x and those of Nb-Ti and Nb 3 Sn signifies the importance of spin orbit scattering in the B c2 (0) improvement for the former case. Our results call for further studies to increase the density of states at the Fermi level and spin orbit scattering in the HfV 2 based Laves-phase superconductors, which may facilitate the high-field application of these materials. 