High coercivity magnets are an important resource for renewable energy, electric vehicles and memory technologies. Most hard magnetic materials incorporate rare-earths such as neodymium and samarium, but the concerns about the environmental impact and supply stability of these materials is prompting research into alternatives. Here, we present a hybrid bilayer of cobalt and the nano-carbon molecule C 60 which exhibits significantly enhanced coercivity with minimal reduction in magnetisation. We demonstrate how this anisotropy enhancing effect cannot be described by existing models of molecule-metal magnetic interfaces. We outline a new form of magnetic anisotropy, arising from asymmetric magneto-electric coupling in the metal-molecule interface. Because this phenomenon arises from π -d hybrid orbitals, we propose calling this effect π -anisotropy. While the critical temperature of this effect is currently limited by the rotational degree of freedom of the chosen molecule, C 60 , we describe how surface functionalisation would allow for the design of room-temperature, carbon based hard magnetic films. The coupling between molecules and magnetic thin films has been intensively explored over the last fifteen years. It has been observed that anti-ferromagnetic interface states form between a variety of organic molecules and Co or Fe films, resulting in changes to their magnetic anisotropy. The predicted change in interface anisotropy calculated by Bairagi et al in ultra-thin Co films was 1.5 meV, whereas the pinning observed in Co-C 60 films is 10.8 meV. SQUID magnetometry results show Co-C 60 bilayers cooled in an external field appear to exhibit exchange bias fields of up to 0.45 T and coercivity up to 1.5 T, figure where k is the pinning factor, β is the critical exponent of the ferromagnet and T c the Curie temperature. The high temperature region is fit to a single exponential while the low temperature region is fit to the sum of the high temperature behaviour and a low temperature pinning factor with differing k(0) and T c . The high temperature pinning factor corresponds to domain wall pinning sites commonly found in thin magnetic films and described in the JA model, while the low tempature pinning factor corresponds to interfacial pinning from the C 60 . The T c of the high temperature region is found to be 739 ± 6 K. While it is not possible to verify this Curie temperature in a bilayer, C 60 evaporates at between 600 700 K, we expect that strong hybridisation between thin-film Co and C 60 would supress T c as well as saturation magnetisation. The critical temperature of the low temperature region is found to be 351 ± 9 K, well above room temperature. The steep reduction in pinning above 100 K does not fit to a JA model but shows critical behaviour. Following a single demagnetisation cycle, the coercivity of the loop drops by 50 % and the exchange bias is reduced to zero. Changes in exchange bias after successive sweeps is observed in conventional exchange bias FM/AF bilayers where it is known as training. The first-order-reversal-curve (FORC) technique decomposes a hysteresis loop into individual demagnetisation quanta or hysterons. This can then be transformed into the bias field, H b , and coercivity, H c , using the definitions: FORC analysis can qualitatively distinguish between a conventional exchange bias mechanism and the mechanism suggested above. In the case of conventional exchange bias with a large training effect, the change in the bias field will move the peak of the hysteron distribution closer to H b = 0 while the distribution in H c will be similar or unchanged. However, if the hysteresis loop is the combination of two very different reversal mechanisms, the peak and distribution of the hysteron density will change significantly between the first and second sweeps. The results of FORC measurements on a Co-C 60 bilayer during the first and second sweeps are shown in figure Notably, the small step at zero field evident in figure 1 a does not produce a hysteron peak. This is because it is completely paramagnetic. In the second sweep, the hysteron peak is reduced, broadened and pushed towards zero bias. In addition, there is now a long tail extending to high bias and coercivity. This distribution indicates a broad range of activation energies for different reversal modes. The difference between the first and second sweep is clear in the hysteresis loops, figure The transition temperature range between the high and low temperature regions in figure The polarization induced by spin-dependent hybridization is defined as: Where r ij is the vector pointing from a given transition metal atom i with spin S i , to a light atom j. If the molecule is bonded on the vertex between two hexagonal faces, the HH orientation, all in-plane components of the polarization in equation 5 will cancel. However, if it is bonded between a hexagonal and pentagonal face, HP orientation, there will be a component of ΣS xy ij • r ij which does not cancel, due to the symmetry dependence of the hybridisation, meaning an in-plane spin rotation will change the magnitude of the out-of-plane electric dipole. In addition to this spin-dependent surface dipole, there exists an in-built potential between molecule and metal due to the mismatch of fermi-levels. DFT predicts an interfacial dipole density between a 4x4 Co(111) slab and a C 60 molecule of 3.79 × 10 -3 e/ Å for the h-p configuration. The magnitude of the spin-dependent dipole is dependent on the magneto-electric coupling, A ij , of Co/C 60 , which is currently unknown. However, using example values for cobalt-ferrite gives a change in the spin dependent dipole density of approximately 1 × 10 -6 e/ Å for a 90 • rotation of the surface spins of the 4x4 Co slab. We performed micromagnetic simulations of a Co film in contact with an antiferromagnetic layer with anisotropy K = 27 M J/m 3 which simulates the surface pinning. The bottom surface of the Co film is in contact with a 3 nm paramagnetic layer which simulates a Ta/Co intermixing region. The hysteresis simulation is initialised in the positive x-direction and relaxed in a 2.5 T field to simulate field cooling, varying the external magnetic field between 2.5 and -2.5 T in steps of 10 mT. We relax the system to an equilibrium state at each value of an external magnetic field and use the resulting configuration as an initial state for a new energy minimization. These simulations show coercivity of 1.5 T, figure The FORC analysis and simulations both indicate the first demagnetisation occurs via an exchange spring mechansim, in which a vertical domain wall forms in the thin film which is then compressed toward a pinned interface. Anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) measurements show a negative peak at zero field, while the first demagnetization at higher field does not feature in the AMR at all. After de-pinning, however, negative peaks are observed in the high field AMR for both forward and backward sweeps indicating reversal through the formation of lateral domain walls. In magnetic thin films at low temperature, negative AMR is strongly dependent on spin scattering at domain walls, making the MR an approximate probe of the density of in plane domain walls. Similarly, changing the structure of the Co thin film has a strong effect on the coercivity. The roughness, crystal structure and orientation of the Co surface is strongly dependent on the seed layer. In order to produce high pinning, the Ta seed layer must be in a 1 nm thickness window, figure 4c. These limitations are consistent with the predictions of DFT. They also suggest that further research on the ideal surface properties may increase the critical temperature and magnitude of this effect. We have measured the properties of Co/C 60 bilayers and demonstrated an extremely strong anisotropy enhancing effect arising from the C 60 film. We have demonstrated how this anisotropy enhancing effect and resulting loop asymmetry cannot be explained by conventional models of exchange bias and surface anisotropy, indicating that molecular exchange bias is a distinct phenomenon. Non-magnetic C 60 is responsible for exchange spring-like behaviour through π-d hybridisation at the interface producing a spin dependent surface dipole which interacts with the in-built potential to create a new form of surface or π-anisotropy. Because this phenomenon would theoretically require only a single molecular layer to pin thin metal films, bilayers of this type may represent a means to create thin films and multilayers with extremely high μ 0 M H energy products. As of yet, this phenomenon is limited to low temperatures. However, we have shown evidence that the critical temperature could be much higher if it were not for the rotational degree of freedom in C 60 . A better choice of molecule, with reduced symmetry, dopants or ligands which prevent rotation, may produce similar or even better results at higher temperatures. We performed finite-element micromagnetic simulations using Finmag 30 and finitedifference simulations using Mumax3 (stable release 3.10) on a portion of a 3 nm thin Co film split into 128x128x10 cells. Co film is given bulk values for anisotropy, K = 60 kJ/m 3 exchange stiffness, A = 30 pJ/m, and magnetization, M = 1400 emu/cc. The antiferromagnetic interface anisotropy barrier is 27 M J/m 3 . Values were chosen to match the simulated coercivity to experimental data. DFT simulations were performed using the Projected Augmented Wave (PAW) formalism as implemented in the VASP program. 