We report fabrication of a multifunctional photonic integrated chip on lithium niobate on insulate (LNOI), which is achieved by femtosecond laser assisted chemo-mechanical polish. We demonstrate a high extinction ratio beam splitter, a 1 × 6 optical switch, and a balanced 3 × 3 interferometer on the fabricated chip by reconfiguring the microelectrode array integrated with the multifunctional photonic circuit. Photonic integrated circuits (PICs) pave an endless path for the future development of information technology. The high expectation is established on the facts that photons can efficiently transfer and process large amount of information at high speed. Once the photonic information processing can be conducted on integrated microchips in a scalable fashion, many aspects of our modern society will be revolutionized. Until recently, silicon photonics has been the main platform for PIC applications owing to its compatibility with the mature complementary-metal-oxidesemiconductor (CMOS) technology In this work, we take a crucial step toward realization of large-scale LNOI-based PICs by demonstrating a multifunctional photonic integrated chip. The idea is to take the advantage of reconfigurability as provided by the large electro-optic coefficient of crystalline LN which allows us to swiftly switch the optical paths in the LN PICs. The functionalities of the fabricated device are examined in a quantitative manner. It is noteworthy that our device is fabricated using femtosecond laser assisted chemo-mechanical polish, which is compatible with other optical lithographic technologies as we have explained before The photonic integrated chip was fabricated on an x-cut LNOI wafer with a thickness of 700 nm (NANOLN, Jinan Jingzheng Electronics Co., Ltd., Jinan, Shandong, China) using the technique described in great detail in A laser beam generated by a tunable laser (LTB-6728, Newport Corporation, Santa Clara, CA, USA; wavelength ~ 1550 nm) can be coupled into any of the six input ports of the fabricated device using a fiber lens mounted on a 6-axis nano positioning stage (Throlabs Inc., Newton, NJ, USA). The gold microelectrodes are connected to direct current (DC) voltage sources through a DC multi-contact wedge (MCW-26, GGB Industries Inc., Naples, Florida, USA). The polarization of the input light is controlled by an in line polarization controller (FPC561, Throlabs Inc., Newton, NJ, USA). The output signal is collimated using a 50× objective lens (M Plan Apo NIR, Mitutoyo Corporation, Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan) mounted on a 3-axis nano positioning stage, and directed into a high-sensitivity InGaAs power meter (S155C, Throlabs Inc., Newton, NJ, USA) for power measurement, as illustrated in Figure Figure First, we demonstrate a high extinction ratio cascaded MZI using only part of the photonic circuit as indicated by the waveguides highlighted in red in Figure 1. Send the laser beam into port 1, and then tune MZI4 until the power of output 0 is minimized; 2. Tune EPS2 until the power of output 1 is minimized. 3. Simultaneously vary the electric voltages applied to MZI2 and MZI7 by the same quantity until the power of output 1 is minimized. 4. Tune EPS2 until the power of output 1 is maximized. 5. Simultaneously vary the electric voltages applied to MZI2 and MZI7 by the same quantity but of opposite signs until the power of output 1 is maximized. 6. Repeat steps 2-5 until the power of output 1 cannot be further reduced. Figure Second, we demonstrate a 1 × 6 switch using the waveguides highlighted in red in figure Third, we demonstrate the balanced 3 × 3 interferometer using the waveguides highlighted in red in Figure To conclude, we have demonstrated realization and implementation of a reconfigurable multifunctional photonic integrated chip fabricated on LNOI substrate. Our device can be used as a high extinction ratio cascaded MZI, a 1  6 beam splitter, and a balanced 3  3 interferometer. The benchmark functionalities show that LNOI PIC devices can become a powerful platform for classic and quantum information processing owing to its unique advantages including the low propagation loss and high electro-optic coefficient.