We explore a spin-fermion model with fermion-spin-quadrupolar interaction. In a nematic phase, this interaction reduces to a four-fermion interaction that is the basis of superconductivity. When the coupling constant is positive the superconductivity is a p-wave with spinparallel paired fermions. When it is negative the superconductivity is a p-wave and fermions are spin-antiparallel paired. For a system with zero chemical potential, even a very small coupling can bind fermions into bound state that leads to the superconductivity. When the chemical potential is non-zero the system possesses quantum critical transition from the normal spin-nematic phase to the phase where superconductivity coexists with spin-nematicity. The value of the quantum critical fermion-spin-nematicity coupling constant depends on the chemical potential. Introduction. -The interplay of superconductivity and magnetism is a very old topic in solid state physics The spin systems in the nematic phase have zero magnetization. The spin-nematic order, also known as quadrupolar order, breaks down the discrete lattice rotational symmetry but preserves time-reversal symmetry. The order parameter is an element of the tensor representation of the spin group O(3) Nematic order in F eSe is a well-established experimental fact. At 90K the system undergoes a structural tetragonal-to-orthorhombic transition where S i are the spin operators, the sum is over all sites of a three-dimensional cubic lattice, and i, j denotes the sum over the nearest neighbors. The overall exchange constant J is positive and the angle γ takes value in the interval [0, 2π]. To study quadrupolar order one introduces the p-1 where a, b = x, y, z. The Hamiltonian Eq.( (3) The spin one representation of O(3) group is three dimensional. It is convenient to introduce 3 × 3 matrixes E ab with only one non-vanishing matrix element, at the intersection of the ath row and bth column, that is equal to unity. The (αβ) matrix element of the E ab matrix reads where α, β = x, y, z. In the terms of E ab matrixes the matrix elements αβ of spin and quadrupolar operators have the form (5) The next step is to generalize the Schwinger-bosons approach. To this end we introduce three Bose operators φ a i and φ a+ i The representation of the spin and quadrupolar operators by means of Schwinger-bosons is In the terms of Schwinger-bosons the spin Hamiltonian (1) reads To identify the ground state in semiclassical limit we replace the Schwinger-boson operators by classical complex fields f a r and f a r . The energy of the system is given by the classical expression of the Hamiltonian ( (9) For values of the angle in the interval 5 4 π < γ < 3 2 π [12] the semiclassical energy ( The solution of these equations which does not depend on the lattice site and satisfies the condition ( Replacing the Schwinger operators in equation ( The expression When the angle γ in the Hamiltonian (1) runs the interval 1 2 π < γ < 5 4 π the system is ferromagnetic. For values of the angle γ in the interval -1 2 π < γ < 1 4 π the ground state of the Hamiltonian (1) is antiferromagnetic Fermion-Quadrupolar Interaction. -As mentioned above the selenium ligands surround the iron ions and form tetrahedral structure. Hence the energy of the t 2g triplet state (d xy , d xz , d yz ) is higher than the energy of e g doublet. Moreover, the energy levels in the triplet are split and the d xy electrons occupy the lowest one. This permits to consider one band theory of electrons. With these assumptions the Hamiltonian of the 3d electrons of iron is where H s is the spin Hamiltonian (1), H f is the free fermion Hamiltonian and H f q is the Hamiltonian of the fermion-quadrupolar interaction. To construct the interaction we follow the idea of the Schwinger-bosons approach. To this end, we introduce a three-component spin-one vector built by fermions in momentum space representation where the wave vector k runs over the first Brillouin zone of a simple cubic lattice. The components of the vector satisfy D a k = -D a -k due to the fermion exchange. We rewrite the vector in coordinate space and, following the prescription from equation ( where Ŝab αβ is the matrix representation (5) of the quadrupolar operator. By means of the spin quadrupolar operator In the semiclassical limit, we replace the quadrupolar operator S ba i by its average value < S ba i > In the nematic phase only two of the components of the tensor are not equal to zero Superconductivity. -Following the standard procedure we present the Hamiltonian where ε k = -2t (cos k x + cos k y + cos k z ) and ∆ ap k , ∆ p k are the gap functions. To obtain the representation The classification for spin-triplet functions ∆ ap k = -∆ ap -k and ∆ p k = -∆ p -k in the case of simple cubic lattice where ∆ ap and ∆ p are real parameters. For a system with Hamiltonian ( where with e k = sin k x + sin k y + sin k z , are the dispersions of the Bogoliubov quasiparticles. The gap equations are the equations for the minimum of the free energy as a function of the gap parameters One can write them in the form . The system of equations ( In both cases, the system of equations where ∆ = ∆ p when κ > 0 and ∆ = ∆ ap if κ < 0. The solutions of the equation ( The main result, evident from 1, is that for a system with zero chemical potential even a very small coupling can bind fermions into a bound state that leads to superconductivity. When the chemical potential is non-zero, the system possesses quantum critical transition from a normal spin-nematic phase to a phase where superconductivity coexists with spin-nematicity. One can obtain 3 , 0 g a p / t k / t μ/ t = 0 p a r a l l e l μ/ t = 4 p a r a l l e l μ/ t = 0 a n t i p a r a l l e l μ/ t = 4 a n t i p a r a l l e l Fig. the equation for the critical value of the coupling constant κ cr from equation ( The critical value of the dimensionless constant κ cr /t as a function of the dimensionless chemical potential μ/t is depicted in Fig. Conclusion. -The appearance of unconventional superconductivity in Fe-based systems is commonly thought to arise from a spin fluctuation pairing mechanism The present paper highlights the possibility of superconductivity induced by spin-nematic order. It is shown that in spin-nematic phase fermion-quadrupolar interaction in a spin-fermion system leads to spin triplet superconductivity with T 1u configuration. The system is spinnematic below critical value of the fermion-quadrupolar coupling constant and undergoes a quantum phase transition to a phase where superconductivity coexists with spin-nematicity when the coupling constant increases. The critical value depends on the chemical potential. It is zero when the chemical potential is zero. In the nematic but not superconducting phase the fermion-quadrupolar interaction (17) can be treated in a mean-field approximation to obtain a fermion system with broken rotational symmetry but invariant under the time reversal transformation. This fermion-nematic system is itself important and deserve separate consideration. The model where τ x , τ y τ z are Pauli matrices. This term is not important when the system is in a spin nematic state but it is paramount to describe the coexistence of the antiferromagnetism and superconductivity. These comments are inspired by the experiments reported in In the present paper, we discussed three-dimensional systems but the results are qualitatively the same and for the two-dimensional ones.