Atomic ions trapped in electromagnetic potentials have long been used for fundamental studies in quantum physics. Over the past two decades trapped ions have been successfully used to implement technologies such as quantum computing, quantum simulation, atomic clocks, mass spectrometers and quantum sensors. Advanced fabrication techniques, taken from other established or emerging disciplines, are used to create new, reliable ion trap devices aimed at large-scale integration and compatibility with commercial fabrication. This Technical Review covers the fundamentals of ion trapping before discussing the design of ion traps for the aforementioned applications. We overview the current microfabrication techniques and the various considerations behind the choice of materials and processes. Finally, we discuss current efforts to include advanced, on-chip features into next generation ion traps. The trapping of atomic ions in confining electric fields in vacuum was first conceived and demonstrated by Wolfgang Paul and Hans Georg Dehmelt, earning them a share of the 1989 Nobel prize in physics The traditional ion trap design introduced by Paul, the Paul trap, uses oscillating (RF) voltages to create potential minima in up to three dimensions (Fig. These 'trap-on-chip' devices use established fabrication techniques from the semiconductor and micro-electro-mechanical system (MEMS) industries to realise micron-scale architectures in both 2D (surface traps) In addition to the miniaturisation of ion traps, the integration of peripheral components, such as photodetectors To create a quantum computer with sufficient number of qubits to perform interesting operations, the ability to connect different individual modules is required. Two methods that address this connectivity have been proposed. One scheme The application of an RF voltage to the ion trap electrodes, creates a trapping potential. In addition, DC voltages produce a static field, that confines the ion in the axial direction (1) where φφ tttttt , φφ DDDD and φφ RRRR is the total, DC and RF potentials respectively and Ω is the frequency at which RF is being driven. The equations of motion for a particle of mass m in a Paul trap are given by, where r0 is the distance from the centre of the trap to the RF electrodes. These equations can be written in the form of the Mathieu equations where ai and qi are the stability parameters in a direction, i. Only a small subset of these parameters provide stable trapping which are given by the Floquet theorem This Technical Review overviews the state-of-the-art of microfabricated ion traps including efforts to integrate advanced features such as optical components and electrical devices. For a further discussion of ion trap supporting hardware, and other ion trap fabrication methods, we suggest Refs In this section we discuss basic ion trap geometries for top layer electrode design, and the geometrical considerations for ion transport and advanced ion trap designs. The basics of ion trapping are covered in Box 1 and a typical ion trap experimental setup is described in Box 2. The evolution of ion trap geometries is discussed in Box 3. Panel c in Box 3 shows a simplified planar view of a surface ion trap in a symmetric, five-wire geometry. An RF voltage is applied to a pair of linear electrodes while all the other electrodes are held at RF ground. The ponderomotive potential generated by the RF voltage confines ions parallel to the z axis at a height given by the widths of the RF and central ground electrode. Assuming infinitely long rails, the zero potential line from the RF, the RF nil, can be expanded along the longitudinal direction, and the axial position of the ions can be determined by static electric fields only. To generate the static electric field required for trapping or shuttling the ions in the axial direction, a calculated, DC voltage set is applied to the segmented electrodes The five-wire electrode geometry of surface ion traps has been analytically modelled in numerous studies The width of the RF and ground (denoted a and b respectively in panel c in Box 3) electrode in a gapless, five-wire geometry can be used to determine the trap depth, ψE, and ion height, hRFnil Ref. where the trap depth is the difference in the ponderomotive potential between the RF nil and the escape point (that is the energy of the ion is larger than the trapping potential), and Ω, e, m, and V indicate the RF drive frequency in Hz, elementary charge in Coulombs, ion mass in kilograms, and RF voltage amplitude in volts, respectively. A high trap depth is required to trap ions for a long time. For a low ion motional heating rate, a large ion-electrode distance is wanted. These parameters cannot be optimised simultaneously (especially given differing scaling laws), and compromises are determined by considering the constraints given by the specifics of the experimental setup In a typical ion trap experiment setup the ions are trapped in an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) chamber with feedthroughs to connect the ion trap to supporting electronics and viewports for optical access. An atomic oven with a small aperture produces a flux of atoms parallel to the trap surface To initially cool the ions, Doppler cooling is used In a typical experimental setup with a surface ion trap, the allowed laser paths are limited to the directions parallel or perpendicular (through a vertical hole penetrating the substrate Some applications of trapped ions, especially quantum computation, require the ability to move ions in a trapping potential such that certain operations are only performed on particular ions. In general, there are four types of operations required: linear shuttling, junction shuttling and separation and combination of ion crystals. These operations are carried out using time-dependent voltages applied to control electrodes which are located on the trap. The optimal geometries of these electrodes (in relation to electrode-ion distance) for operations such as linear shuttling and ion crystal (re)combination have been discussed in Refs The first Paul trap (panel a) used hyperbolic electrodes in a 3D configuration One of the most important characteristics of this linear trap is that ions in the same string share their motional modes. High voltages (>1 kV) can be applied to the four-rod trap, which allows the creation of deep trapping potentials whilst maintaining stable trapping parameters. The electrodes are sufficiently far from the ions to minimise the effects of electrical noise from the electrodes. Segmenting these rods allows axial control of the trapping potential so these traps are used in experiments with ion chains in situations that do not require microfabricated devices Several quantum computing architectures Whilst linear shuttling operations can be performed using the types of ion traps previously discussed, junction shuttling, and by extension, ion trapping in 2D grids or planes, require several modifications. Arrays of trapping zones arranged in a 2D plane were first proposed in Ref. Whilst the previous designs are used for generic ion traps, for quantum simulations, 2D ion lattices of stationary ions (with small inter-site distances) can be beneficial. Ion traps to create these lattices have been successfully fabricated as mechanical structures As the scope of ion trap experiments has evolved, so have the requirements of the ion traps themselves. Such requirements include the introduction of vertical holes penetrating the substrate for additional access of laser light or atomic flux to the ion position The semiconductor industry revolutionised the creation of miniature, electronic devices using patterned conducting and insulating materials, the most common example being CMOS. Key to this success are highly reliable and reproducible processes using well-established fabrication facilities (foundries). Microfabricated ion traps have been made in such foundries Critical features that should be considered when designing ion trap chip structures and the required fabrication processes are as follows: • The electrodes should be able to sustain a RF voltage suitable for that particular ion species (heavier ions require larger voltages). A higher RF voltage allows trapping of ions farther from the chip surface, reducing the effects of the electrical field noise and laser scattering from the chip surface. In addition, higher voltages can allow for higher trap depths and secular frequencies. • Coupling of the RF field into the substrate should be minimised to prevent power loss and heating of the device Designing a fabrication process for ion trap chips starts with the selection of layer materials, since the number and dimensions of thin film layers can drastically change the complexity of the entire process. Dielectric and conductive (or semi-conductive) substrates have their own distinct advantages and disadvantages. The use of dielectric substrates allows for a very simple fabrication process and low power loss and heat in the substrate. However, accurate bulk micromachining of dielectric substrates for introducing vertical penetration holes and buried metal layers can be difficult. Another concern is that of exposed dielectric surfaces can trap charges, causing stray electric fields Silicon is the most widely used material in modern semiconductor technology and has the advantage of using most processes that are not compatible with insulating substrates. It is, however, very lossy in the mid-range resistivity (10 2 -10 4 Ω cm) for RF frequencies A typical fabrication process of a silicon based, surface ion trap chip is shown in Fig. Ref. The fabrication methods described here are commonly used to create a silicon-based ion trap chip. Microfabricated ion traps can also be made by many different, additional processes not discussed in this Technical Review The fabrication methods described here are commonly used to implement a silicon-based ion trap chip. Microfabricated ion traps can also be fabricated by many different, additional processes not discussed in this review Despite many successful implementations of surface traps, miniaturising the ion trap structure has also created a number of side effects, one being the so-called `anomalous heating' of the trapped ions The figure below summarises the heating rates in microfabricated ion traps as a function of ionelectrode distance. The measurement results of heating rates are expressed as noise spectral density with a fit line demonstrating a heating rate scaling of d -3.79 As ion trap geometries become more complex, either for quantum simulation or scalable quantum computation purposes, supporting systems are often required to sit within the footprint of the ion trap device Several schemes for implementing quantum logic gates between qubits rely on magnetic field gradients, either static Permanent magnets are commonly used for the static gradient scheme, achieving gradients of up to 36 Tm -1 (Ref. In-plane CCWs have been shown to provide oscillating gradients of up to 54.8 Tm -1 (Ref. Sub-surface CCWs, situated beneath the ion trap, do not impinge on the electrode design and can be used for both static and oscillating gradients. For the latter, the field is likely to be attenuated due to shielding induced by currents in the ion trap electrodes and ground plane layers. The device in Ref. Larger gradients could be achieved with sub-surface CCWs by reducing the wire to ion distance. Ref. Whilst a relatively new technology for ion traps, CCWs are common place in the atom-trapping community, where large, steep magnetic fields are used to trap neutral systems For many trapped-ion technologies addressing and state readout of ions is required using optical techniques on an individual ion basis. It is sometimes beneficial that such optical components are integrated in the device, to increase the fidelity of addressing and readout operations. Optical fibres have many uses in trapped-ion experiments for both addressing and readout operations. The typical structure of a fibre, however, is not naturally suited to an ion trapping experiment as an exposed dielectric near the ion can significantly disturb the trapping field. By integrating an optical access hole, the dielectric can be shielded by the ion trap itself, allowing for fibres to be brought close to the ion To address multiple ions, integrating optical waveguides into the ion trap is a promising way forward. Refs Ref. Integrating mirrors into the ion trap surface can allow for more photons from the ion to be collected, by reflecting otherwise lost photons. In Ref. Standard ion trapping detection uses large collection optics which helps counteract the effect of being outside the vacuum system and hence farther from the ion Capacitors, resistors and inductors are a key part of any ion trapping experiment in filtering, resonators and general electronics One method for the high-density integration of passive components takes advantage of advanced CMOS facilities by incorporating a CMOS die. Ref. Capacitors can be fabricated into the trap with two metal planes separated by a dielectric. Trench capacitors take advantage of an increased surface area by etching vertically into silicon using well established processes. This allows for a substantial increase in the capacitance per unit area. For ion traps, this was first in Ref. To create the low-noise, high-voltage RF trapping field, a helical resonator is commonly used In analogy to Rent's rule Ref. It has been proposed that back-side connections to the ion trap will be required for a large-scale quantum computer to connect to its supporting systems Ref. Much progress has been made in the last 10 years on the development of complex microfabricated ion traps. Whilst the creation of custom potentials through simulations is well understood, many unanswered questions still remain in terms of the integration of advanced technologies. A summary of the requirements for many different advanced ion traps is illustrated in Fig. Commercial realisation of quantum technologies requires the large-scale fabrication of devices, with high reliability and yields. Many of the proposed technologies discussed in this Technical Review will require CMOS devices integrated into the ion trap. However, unlike the standard operation environment of CMOS, ion traps are often required to work at cryogenic temperatures. Whereas the development of cryogenic control electronics is also a priority for superconducting qubit platforms Although fabrication and assembly industries allow individual aspects of an ion trap to be demonstrated, combining these technologies will be essential for creating a more advanced ion traps. Separating the technologies on a wafer-by-wafer level may prove prudent in reducing risks of compatibility, but introduces new issues with inter-wafer connectivity for large devices and heat flow. Whilst integrating electronics can reduce some of the noise thanks to the proximity of the supporting electronics and hence less 'pick-up', it can introduce new noise spectra due to the integration of active components. This can be mitigated by additional filtering and noise manipulation to move the noise spectrum to frequencies that do not affect the ion. Some of the optical technologies discussed in this Technical Review will perform optimally only at certain wavelengths. Integrating many of these optical components could therefore require multi-species schemes to best take advantage of these technologies Trapped ions constitute an extremely powerful system to realise and control quantum phenomena such as entanglement and superposition, showcasing unmatched fidelities and coherence times. The emergence of ion microchips allows us to incorporate the advantages of modern microfabrication and microprocessor advances to this system, giving rise to a fully scalable hardware platform for a wide range of quantum technologies. 