We described the effect of nonmagnetic impurity on the superconductivity behavior of the NdFeAsO 0.8 F 0.2 iron-based superconductor. The resistivity measurement showed that the superconductivity suppressed upon increasing the low amounts of calcium impurity (x0.05). Also, the Tc decreased with the increase in the residual resistivity. Such behavior was qualitatively described by the Abrikosov-Gorkov theory and confirmed that these impurities act as scattering centers. For our samples, the exchange constant between the calcium and the conduction electron spins was estimated J exc =|8| meV. Moreover, we presented the phase diagram of our synthesized samples for the various calcium dopings and found that according to increase of the calcium impurities and temperature decreasing of the spin-density wave (T SDW ), Fe ions arranged stripe antiferromagnetically at lower temperatures and also the superconducting transition temperature (T C ) declined. Based on our results and in agreement with the available theories as explained in the text, since the S++ state has not an effect on the impurity-doped samples, and the S± state that is attributed to the spin-fluctuations mechanism causes the superconducting suppression for low amounts of calcium. So, it confirms the role of the spinfluctuations as a dominant pairing mechanism in our synthesized samples. For the first time, the discovery of superconductivity in LaFeAsO 1-x F x compounds (with T C =26 K) by Y. Kamihara et al. From this one can conclude that they play and important role in the superconducting mechanism of FeSCs. However, the cause of the structural transition is still under debate and has been proposed that either spin Moreover, up to now, two superconducting mechanisms have been reported for the FeSCs: spin-and orbital-fluctuations. Based on the spin-fluctuations theory, fully-gapped sign-reversing s-wave (S±) state had been predicted The theoretical models However, the conclusions remain discussible and the more experimental and theoretical works are needed to illuminate the impurity effects in the FeSCs that can help us to understand the superconducting mechanism. In our previous work, we studied the effects of Ca 2+ /Nd 3+ substitution on polycrystalline Nd 1-x Ca x FeAsO 0.8 F 0.2 samples with 0x0.1 We used one-step solid state reaction method for synthesizing the polycrystalline samples with the nominal compositions of Nd 1-x Ca x FeAsO 0.8 F 0.2 (x=0.0, 0.01, 0.025, 0.05, and 0.1), as indicated in Refs. rature in tates at To summarize, we have studied the superconducting behavior of the Nd-1111 iron-based superconductor that was doped by the calcium impurity. The samples were synthesized through the one-step solid state reaction method. We found that: 1. Superconductivity had been suppressed for the low amount of calcium impurity. 2. The T C decreased linearly with the increase of impurity and also T C reduced by increasing the residual resistivity. So, the calcium impurity acted as scattering centers and the Abrikosov-Gorkov theory was true for our samples. Accordingly, we estimated the exchange constant between calcium and conduction electron spins (Jexc=|8| meV). 3. In phase diagram of our synthesized samples, upon increasing the calcium impurity, the temperature of the spin-density wave (T SDW ) state declined, so at the lower temperatures, the Fe ions arranged stripe antiferromagnetically. 4. According to the previous results and the matching of our experimental-and the theoretical-phase diagram that can concluded from the available theoretical model, the role of the spin-fluctuations (the S± state) has been confirmed as a dominant pairing mechanism in our samples.