We present here the temperature dependence of heat capacity (C(T )) and thermal conductivity (κ(T )) in the superconducting state as well as in the normal state of as-cast V 1-x Zr x alloys. Distinct jumps in the C(T ) of the alloys indicate the presence of three superconducting phases with transition temperatures T C1 = 5.4 K, T C2 = 8.2 K and T C3 = 8.5 K. From the metallography micrographs, these three phases are identified to be β-V, γ-ZrV 2 , and γ ′ -ZrV 2 respectively. Apart from these phases, α-Zr and β-Zr phases are also detected in these samples. The experimental κ(T ) in the superconducting state of these alloys is observed to be significantly higher than that expected theoretically. Our analysis suggests that the above observation is due to the coexistence of multiple superconducting and non superconducting phases which resulted in the two-parallel channels for the conduction of heat. The C15 Laves phase (Hf,Zr)V 2 based superconductors have been considered to be promising materials for high field applications as an alternative to the Nb based alloys and compounds In this article we show that the electrons are the major carriers of heat in these as-cast V 1-x Zr x alloys. The thermal conductivity in the superconducting state of these alloys is larger than that expected for the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) type superconductors. Our analysis suggests that this discrepancy is due to the existence of two parallel channels for the conduction of heat in these alloys. The V 1-x Zr x (x = 0-0.4) alloys were prepared by taking elemental vanadium (Alfa Aesar, 99.8%) and zirconium (Alfa Aesar, 99.99%) in stoichiometric proportion and melted together in a tri-arc furnace in Ar (99.999%) atmosphere. The buttons were remelted six times to ensure homogeneity. The details of metallography can be found elsewhere The equilibrium phase diagram of the V 1-x Zr x alloys shows a peritectic isotherm at 1300 0 C for the 0.02≤ x ≤ 0.33 alloys and an eutectic isotherm at 1230 0 C for the 0.33≤ x ≤1 alloys Figure where the electronic part of the thermal conductivity κ ez limited by the scattering from impurities and phonons can be expressed as Here, κ -1 ei,z and κ -1 el,z are the thermal resistivities due to the scattering of electrons from the defects and phonons respectively. The subscript z = n represents the normal state and z = s represents the superconducting state. In the normal state, κ -1 ei,n = AT -1 and κ -1 el,n = BT 2 + O(T 4 ) where A and B are constants and the exact form of κ el,n can be found in Ref. where M = k 4 B /(2π 2 3 v s ), k B is the Boltzmann constant, v s is the sound velocity and is the reduced Plank's constant. The coefficients N, L, C and P represent the strength of phonon scattering due to boundaries, dislocations, electrons and point defects respectively. The g(x) is the ratio of the phononelectron scattering cross-sections in the superconducting and normal states The metallography images shown in the Fig. The solid lines Fig. x To analyse the κ s (T ) in the superconducting state, we have subtracted the κ ln from the κ s to obtain κ es (T ). The κ ei,s is given by Bardeen-Rickayzen-Tewordt where y = ∆(T ) k B T (∆(T ) is the superconducting energy gap), and the Fermi integral f (-y) is given by f (-y) = ∞ 0 zdz 1+exp(z+y) . Figure To estimate κ ei,s , we have used ∆/k B T C = 1.9 obtained from the analysis of C(T ) of an annealed ZrV 2 sample which has only γ and γ ′ phases (not shown here). We find that experimental value of κ es (T ) of x = 0.40 alloy is higher than the κ ei,s obtained from the BCS theory and is true for other alloys as well. This suggest that there is an additional channel for heat conduction in these samples. The phases such as α-Zr, β-V and β-Zr are not superconducting in the temperature range about 5-8.5 K. Therefore, in this temperature range, a normal channel for heat conduction is available in parallel to the superconducting channel. In such cases, by taking two conducting channels in parallel, the temperature dependence of κ ei,s can be expressed as Therefore, where c is the weight factor for the thermal resistivity in the normal state of ZrV 2 phase. The solid lines are the fit to the data obtained using eq.5. The values of c are given in table 1. It is observed that c = 0.95 for x = 0.05 and it decreases with the increasing x. For x = 0.40 alloy, the c turns out to be 0.8. The κ es ≈ κ ei,n at T On the other hand, the κ es ≈ κ ei,s at T << T C = T C3 as cR ei << (1 -c) (R ei ≈ 0 at T = T C ). Figure In conclusion, the experimental thermal conductivity in the superconducting V 1-x Zr x alloys is observed to be larger than that expected from the BCS theory. We show that the coexistence of multiple superconducting and non superconducting phases results in the two-parallel channels for heat conduction. We have also shown that in the superconducting state, more than 80% of the heat is carried by the normal channel. These findings along with the large J C make these alloys as potential candidates for high magnetic field applications.