Despite the exceeding 23% photovoltaic efficiency achieved in organic-inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells obtaining, the stable materials with desirable band gap are rare and are highly desired. With the aid of first-principles calculations, we predict a new promising family of nontoxic inorganic double perovskites (DPs), namely, silicon (Si)-based halides A 2 SiI 6 (A = K, Rb, Cs; X = Cl, Br, I). This family containing the earth-abundant Si could be applied for perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Particularly A 2 SiI 6 exhibits superb physical traits, including suitable band gaps of 0.84-1.15 eV, dispersive lower conduction bands, small carrier effective masses, wide photon absorption in the visible range. Importantly, the good stability at high temperature renders them as promising optical absorbers for solar cells. Since the organic-inorganic hybrid perovskite was first proposed in 2009, the photovoltaic efficiency has been significantly jumped to over 23% that is close to the maximum efficiency of crystalline silicon solar cell Moreover, the toxicity of water-soluble lead compounds drives the exploitation of alternative inorganic lead-free halide perovskite materials with improved stability Recently, the inorganic DPs (A 2 B(I)B(III)X 6 , A 2 B(IV)X 6 ) have been proposed as environmentally friendly and promising alternatives for lead-free hybrid perovskites In this paper, we initially calculated the structure and band gap for a series of earth-abundant Si-based DPs A 2 SiX 6 (A = K, Rb, Cs, X = Cl, Br, I ) based on the first-principles calculations. Three iodides A 2 SiI 6 (A = K, Rb, Cs) are found to have suitable direct band gaps of 0.84-1.15 eV. The electronic, optical properties of the three candidates are systemically investigated. The results indicate that the three A 2 SiI 6 are more suitable for n-type semiconductors and can be utilized as high efficiency optical absorbers. Importantly, K 2 SiI 6 and Rb 2 SiI 6 exhibit high thermal stability and thus hold great promise for future optoelectronic devices. Density hybridized functional theory calculations were performed by the Vienna ab initio simulation package with the projected augmented-wave pseudopotential DP is a defect variant for typical perovskite ABX 3 structure such as MAPbI 3 The band gaps of A 2 SiX 6 (A=K, Rb ,Cs; X=Cl ,Br ,I) DPs are all direct types. Figure This trend can be analyzed by the electronegativity and density of electronic states (DOS). We present the charge density of Cs 2 SiI 6 in Fig. To achieve deeper insight into the bonding nature, we analysed the electron localization function (ELF). The ELF renormalizes the values range from 0.00 to 1.00. And the values of 1.00 and 0.50 characterize fully localized and delocalized electrons, respectively, while 0.00 denotes a very low charge density According to the Shockley-Queisser limit As their dispersive conduction bands states revealed, all three DPs possess small effective electron masses [ and Cs 2 SnI 6 , where ε 1 (ω) and ε 2 (ω) are the real and imaginary parts in several, and ω is the photon frequency Therefore, we calculated the elastic constants to evaluate mechanical stability of the three I-based DPs. For cubic crystal system, the elastic constants satisfy the Born stability criterion C 11 -C 12 > 0, C 44 > 0 and C 11 + 2C 12 > 0, manifesting mechanical stability Here E is the energy of the crystal, V 0 denotes equilibrium volume, and ε gives a strain. Table We also calculated the decomposition enthalpy (∆H) to evaluate the thermodynamical stability. The ∆H is defined as The detailed ∆H are listed in Table According to international standard (IEC 61646 climatic chamber test), the long-term stability of the 85 • C is required for PSCs. Hence, the molecular dynamics (MD) of the three I-based DPs at the temperature of 400K were simulated. Figure and the final structures of K 2 SiI 6 and Rb 2 SiI 6 , which can be seen that the both potential energy finally converges to a range less than 50 meV/atom, indicating outstanding dynamic stability. The well maintained structures of K 2 SiI 6 and Rb 2 SiI 6 also prove their stabilities. However, Cs 2 SiI 6 was found to be dynamically unstable at 400 K [Fig. S4 (SOC) effect is further considered to correct the band. The corrected values are 0.71 eV, 0.82 eV, and 0.99 eV for K 2 SiI 6 , Rb 2 SiI 6 , and Cs 2 SiI 6 , respectively. These effects on band gaps are much smaller than that of Cs 2 SnI 6 or Cs 2 TeI 6 due to the quite lighter B-site element