In a two-dimensional arrangement of closely spaced elliptical nanomagnets with in-plane magnetic anisotropy, whose major axes are aligned along columns and minor axes along rows, dipole coupling will make the magnetic ordering "ferromagnetic" along the columns and "anti-ferromagnetic" along the rows. Noise and other perturbations can drive the system out of this ground state configuration and pin it in a metastable state where the magnetization orientations will not follow this pattern. Internal energy barriers, sufficiently larger than the thermal energy kT, will prevent the system from leaving the metastable state and decaying spontaneously to the ground state. These barriers can be temporarily eroded by globally straining the nanomagnets with time-varying strain if the nanomagnets are magnetostrictive, which will allow the system to return to ground state after strain is removed. This is a hardware emulation of simulated annealing in an interacting many body system. Here, we demonstrate this function experimentally. Consider a system of elliptical nanomagnets with in-plane magnetic anisotropy arranged as in Fig. In a magnetostrictive nanomagnet system, strain can be the external agent that triggers the simulated annealing action. To understand why strain has this effect, consider the cartoon in Fig. We have assumed that the nanomagnet has imperfections such as edge roughness, thickness variations, material defects, etc. that cause the potential profile to have one or more metastable states that would be absent in an ideal (perfect) nanomagnet. There is a global energy minimum and some local energy minima, which are arbitrary in this figure because they are caused by random defects. Note that because of dipole coupling, one orientation along the major axis ( = 180 0 ) is slightly preferred over the other ( = 0 0 ). If we perturb the magnetizations of one or more nanomagnets and drive the array out of the global energy minimum and pin it into a local minimum, the system will get stuck in the metastable state and cannot decay to the ground state because of the potential barriers separating the metastable and ground states as shown in Fig. To test this model, we fabricated cobalt nanomagnets on a piezoelectric LiNbO 3 substrate using electron beam patterning of a resist, electron beam evaporation of cobalt on to the patterned substrate and lift-off. An atomic force micrograph of a 3  3 array is shown in Fig. Fig. We then determined the magnetic ordering with magnetic force microscopy (MFM). The MFM image of the 3  3 array is shown in Fig. Next, we intentionally perturb the magnetization in the array with a high-moment tip and we show the MFM image of the resulting configuration after the perturbation in Fig. In conclusion, we have shown that in an interacting system of magnetostrictive nanomagnets (interacting via dipole coupling), time-varying strain associated with a surface acoustic wave acts as an agent of simulated annealing. This is an example of hardware based simulated annealing. It may have applications in hardware accelerators to solve combinatorial optimization problems.