The production process of integrated electronic circuitry inherently leads to large heterogeneities on the component level. For electronic clock networks this implies detuned intrinsic frequencies and differences in coupling strength and the characteristic time-delays associated with signal transmission, processing and feedback. Using a phase-model description, we study the effects of such component heterogeneity on the dynamical properties of synchronization in networks of mutually delay-coupled Kuramoto oscillators. We test the theory against experimental results and circuit-level simulations in a prototype system of mutually delay-coupled electronic clocks, so called phase-locked loops. Contrary to the hindering effects of component heterogeneity for the synchronization in hierarchical networks, we show that clock heterogeneities can enhance self-organized synchronization in networks with flat hierarchy. That means that beyond the optimizations that can be achieved by tuning homogeneous coupling strengths, time-delays and loop-filter cut-off frequencies, heterogeneities in these system parameters enable much better optimization of perturbation decay rates, the stabilization of synchronous states and the tuning of phase-differences between the clocks. Our theory enables the design of custom-fit synchronization layers according to the specific requirements and properties of electronic systems, such as operational frequencies, phase-relations and e.g. transmission-delays. These results are not restricted to electronic systems, as signal transmission, processing and feedback delays are common to networks of spatially distributed and coupled autonomous oscillators. In modern electronics the coordination of complex systems and processes in time is necessary for a defined system behavior, efficient operation and reliable parallel information processing In this paper we study and analyze the effects of heterogeneity on the synchronization dynamics of mutually delay-coupled electronic clocks. We use a Kuramoto-type model, i.e., networks of delay-coupled phase oscillators with node dynamics that include processing and inversion of signals and delayed feedback The paper is organized as follows. We introduce a model for heterogeneous networks of non-identical mutually delay-coupled digital electronic clocks with signal filtering in Sec. II. For such systems we calculate the frequencies and phase configurations of synchronized states, and analyze their stability as a function of different heterogeneous system parameters in Sec. III. In Sec. IV we discuss the effects of these heterogeneities and compare to the case of networks of identical clocks. We present how the different types of time-delays and their interplay affects the dynamical properties of synchronization in such systems. We summarize in Sec. VI, connect the results to modern electronic applications and components, and discuss the potential of self-organized synchronization for microelectronic systems and processes. We consider a system of mutually delay-coupled electronic clocks, so called phase-locked loops (PLLs) where h PD ( • ) denotes 2π-periodic coupling functions that depend on the type of phase detection at the PD (e.g. XOR or analog multiplier), φ l (t -τ kl ) denotes the phases of the input signals from other PLLs, delayed by transmission-delays τ kl , φ k (t -τ f kl ) denotes the phase of the feedback signal, delayed by a feedback-delay τ f kl , and n k = l c kl is the node degree and denotes the number of the nodes' input signals. The c kl , equal to one if there is a connection between PLL l and PLL k and zero otherwise, denote the elements of the adjacency matrix that specifies the coupling topology. The LF then processes the PD signal which yields the filtered control signal x C k (t) where p k (u) denotes the impulse response of the LF. Usually the LF is implemented as a RC low-pass. Its transfer-function in Laplace-domain is represented in time-domain by the Gamma-distribution The VCO is operated such that it responds linearly to the control signal where k = 1, . . . , N indexes the PLLs in the network, ω 0 k denotes the intrinsic frequency and K VCO k denotes the input sensitivity of VCO k. Using Eq. ( where we defined the coupling strength and . We here consider the high frequency components to be ideally filtered by the LF We now consider a system of two delay-coupled phaselocked loops. This minimal system is suitable to exemplify the implications of component heterogeneities for the dynamics of self-organized synchronization. The general case of N delay-coupled heterogeneous PLLs is shown in the Supplementary material V. The instantaneous frequencies of the two analog delay-coupled PLLs are given by φ1, We are interested in phase-locked synchronized states, i.e., all oscillators evolve with same collective frequency Ω and have constant phase-lag β between them In this case synchronized solutions with global frequency Ω and phase difference β are given by the following transcendental equations (derivation see Appendix A) where B = (Ω∆τ e )/2 + β and The heterogeneous parameters, ω 1,2 , τ 12,21 , τ f 12,21 , K 1,2 , ω c1,c2 are written in terms of their mean x = (x 1 + x 2 )/2 and difference ∆x = x 2 -x 1 . Parameter symbols without a subscript indicate identical parameters for both oscillators. We also defined τe = (τ -τ f ), and ∆τ e = (∆τ -∆τ f ). For the case of identical oscillators, in-and antiphase synchronized states exist, characterized by a common global frequency Ω and a constant phase difference β which is either zero or π, respectively. How heterogeneous parameters affect the existence of synchronized solutions, the global frequencies and phase configurations given by Eq. ( The stability of such solutions can be determined by analyzing the response to small perturbations. More precisely, we can look at the perturbation mode related to the phase-difference between the oscillations of two PLL clocks. The characteristic equation governing the exponential growth or decay rate λ of these perturbations is given by (derivation see appendix B) where the λ denote the eigenvalues of the perturbation modes, p(λ) = (1 + λb k ) -1 denotes the Laplace transform of the impulse response function introduced in Eq. ( with h being the derivative of the coupling function with respect to its argument. The eigenvalue (λ max = σ + iγ) with the largest real part σ dominates the long-term behavior and determines the stability of synchronized states. For σ > 0 perturbations to synchronized states grow and the solution is unstable, whereas σ < 0 implies linear stability and that perturbations decay at a characteristic time-scale t c = -σ -1 . The case of σ = 0 denotes marginal stability, i.e., perturbations neither grow or decay. This is always a solution to Eq. In this section, we systematically analyze the effects of heterogeneity in the different clock components. The results are compared to those obtained from an experimental setup of two identical delay-coupled PLLs. We show how the notion of in-and antiphase synchronized states, observed for identical oscillators, becomes blurred when heterogeneities in the intrinsic frequencies, coupling strength, transmission and feedback-delays are introduced. For those cases we define so called asymptoticinphase and -antiphase synchronized states that approach the in-and antiphase synchronized states for identical clocks as the heterogeneities approach zero. In the following sections we will introduce the heterogeneities gradually, starting with heterogeneity in the intrinsic frequencies, followed by the heterogeneities in the other parameters. Here we analyze how synchronization in a system of two delay-coupled PLLs is affected by heterogeneous intrinsic frequencies. The results that we obtain for the second-order Kuramoto-model are identical to the ones obtained for the first-order Kuramoto-model with timedelayed coupling and no signal filtering The feedback-delays are set to zero, τ f 12 = τ f 21 = 0. Under these assumptions we find for the frequencies in Eq. ( and the corresponding phase differences FIG. This quantifies the phase differences β as a function of the detuning ∆ω between the intrinsic frequencies. The phase differences are no longer 0 (inphase) or π (antiphase) as in the case of identical oscillators. Instead, new phase configurations emerge due to the detuning. They depend on the ratio of frequency differences to coupling strength ∝ (∆ω/K), see Eq. Therefore, synchronized solutions do not exist below a critical value of the coupling strength K c = ∆ω/2 for any delay value, that is, if |∆ω/2K| > 1. From Eq. ( where α 12,21 = -K sin(-Ωτ ± β) and p(λ) = (1 + λb) -1 . In Fig. In that case, we find that pairs of synchronized solutions go through a saddle-node bifurcation as the magnitude of the detuning ∆ω is increased from ∆ω = 0, see Supplementary material Fig. Linear stability of such synchronized states is also affected by the detuning as it depends on the values Ω and β of the synchronized solutions. In Fig. Now we add heterogeneous transmission-delays, i.e., τ 12 = τ 21 to the system with detuned intrinsic frequencies. The frequencies and phase configurations then are and if sin (Ωτ ) < 0, where α 12 = -K sin(-Ωτ 12 + β), α 21 = -K sin(-Ωτ 21β) and p(λ) = (1 + λb) -1 . These equations show that the frequencies of synchronized states depend only on the mean delay value τ = (τ 12 + τ 21 )/2 but not the delay difference ∆τ = τ 21 -τ 12 . The same is true for the characteristic equation which only depends on the mean delay τ , see Analyzing Eq. ( In Fig. So far we have discussed the effects of heterogeneities in the intrinsic frequencies of the VCOs, the transmissiondelays and the cut-off frequencies of the LFs. The filtering process is associated with a processing time-delay which is inversely proportional to its cut-off frequency τ c = b = 1/ω c , the LF integration time. As these pro- cessing time-delays increase, perturbation decay rates become smaller In Fig. FIG. The characteristic equation For the characteristic equation no single effective delay parameter representing the combined effect of transmission and feedback-delays can be defined. We find that the transmission-delays affect the eigenvalues only through their mean value τ . Fig. The coupling strength K denotes the sensitivity of the VCO to the control signal. It interacts with the effects of the transmission-and feedback-delays as well as the filtering process on the dynamics of the coupled system. For example from Ref. where k = 1, 2. The stability of these solutions and is given by Eq. To validate our theoretical predictions, we performed experiments using prototype DPLLs. These are coupled via a microcontroller that buffers and thereby delays their output signals We also performed circuit-level Spice simulations using the freeware implementation LTspice Taking into account the measured heterogeneity in the intrinsic frequencies and coupling strengths of the DPLL prototypes we show in theory, experiment and simulation that the phase-model can precisely predict the phasedifferences and global frequencies of synchronized states, see Fig. In this work we studied how breaking parameter symmetry affects the synchronization dynamics in systems of mutually delay-coupled oscillators. We focused our analysis on the tractable case of two oscillators. For studying larger systems we provide the analytic expressions, but their analysis is beyond the scope of this paper. How the effects found for the two PLL system change with, e.g., coupling topologies, the number of oscillators, or in dependence of the distributions of the heterogeneities are interesting starting points for further research and need to be addressed when moving into application. Certainly the control of self-organized synchronization will be highly relevant for the design of large distributed networks of mutually delay-coupled clocks. The selforganization approach to synchronization discussed here is fundamentally and qualitatively different from hierarchical approaches. There is no accumulation of phaseerrors between the oscillators and signaling delays do not necessarily cause phase-offsets between the oscillators in synchronized states, to name two key strengths of self-organized synchronization. However, the complex dependencies of the dynamics on the system parameters pose a challenge when it comes to the control and robustness of synchronization in the light of process, voltage and temperature (pvt)-variations, relevant to modern microelectronics. Contrary to the expected hindering effects of component heterogeneity, known from synchronization in hierarchical networks, we here showed that clock heterogeneities can actually enhance synchronization in networks with flat hierarchy. Specifically, this reflects in the optimal difference of the coupling-strengths that optimizes the decay of perturbations to synchronized states, and heterogeneous LF cut-off frequencies that can stabilize synchronized states. Furthermore time-delays that usually complicate the synchronization of spatially distributed clocks are essential for the stability of synchronized states and control the clocks' mutual phasedifferences. Interestingly this dependence of the phaseconfigurations on the effective delays is linear. Hence, the complex interplay between the different system parameters leads to rich dynamics and can provide the means to tune into synchronized states with, e.g., arbitrary phase relations. These findings have strong implications for the application of self-organized synchronization in engineering. Such an approach without hierarchical structures can only be taken if synchronization dynamics can be controlled. As heterogeneities in the clock components are inevitable in modern integrated circuitry, adding transmission and feedback-delay elements and allowing for tunable loop-filters can enhance the control of the dynamics and perturbation decay processes in such systems. Defined phase differences between frequency synchronized clocks for example enable beamforming, i.e., spatially focused emission of electro-magnetic waves, relevant for communication, audio and radar applications provides, Therefore, the phase difference β in the synchronized state is given by, We rewrite this expression as where Ã = ∆ω/H and B = ∆K cos(Ωτ e )/H. Depending on positive and negative values of K sin(Ωτ e ) and ∆K cos(Ωτ e ), above expression provide asymptotic-inphase and -antiphase configurations in the synchronized state. , if K sin (Ωτ e ) > 0, (asymptotic -antiphase) One can obtain the frequencies of synchronized state from above equation by substituting the value of B from Eq. (A7). In sec. IV, equal coupling strengths are assumed to study the effects of heterogeneous intrinsic frequencies, filters and different delay-times. For this case (K 1 = K 2 = K), using Eq. (A3), the expressions for synchronized solutions can be obtained as following. Using Eq. (A5) and (A11) for ∆K = 0 yields sin Ω(τ -τ f ) sin Ω(∆τ and For oscillators with identical frequencies (ω 1 = ω 2 ) and delay-values such that Ω(τ -τ f ) = nπ, n = 1, 2, 3 • • • , pair of non-generic solutions exist with equal global frequencies and two distinct phase difference values. Consider Eq. (A12) for identical oscillators ω 1 = ω 2 , coupled with symmetric delay values τ 12 = τ 21 and τ Multiplying by (τ -τ f ) and using Ω(τ -τ f ) = nπ, we have With this ansatz and using Eq. (A1) we obtain the dynamics of weakly perturbed synchronized states Here we introduced the notations q u+τji i = q i (t -u -τ ji ) and q Expanding the coupling function to first order, the perturbation dynamics can be separated Then, using the exponential ansatz, i.e., q i (t) = d i exp(λt) we obtain where and the Laplace transforms of the impulse response functions p i (u) are given by pi (λ) = ∞ 0 du p i (u)e -λu = (1 + λb i ) -a . Rearranging and sorting for d 1 and d 2 yields This expression can be written in matrix form as where, ζ = 1, vector d = (d 1 , d 2 ) T and the elements of the matrix G 2×2 are for k, l = 1, 2. From Eq. (B6), we identify ζ (= 1) as the eigenvalue of G which must satisfy the expression From that we obtain the condition which leads the following characteristic equation for the complex eigenvalues λ = x + iy From this equation we calculate the complex eigenvalues λ = x + iy and determine stability of the synchronized solutions characterized by collective frequency Ω and phase difference β, as discussed in section III. data-set, we calculate their respective mean values Ω, β and the corresponding errors. In order to calculate an average phase-difference β, we use the complex order parameter defined as r β exp(iβ) = (J T ) -1 j exp(iβ j ). As for large J T the value r β approaches zero if the angles β j are equally distributed between [0, 2π) and one if all β j 's are equal, the value (1 -r β ) was used to calculate the measurement error of β. The error can then be specified in the range [0, π) by multiplying the value (1 -r β ) by π. Note that the incomplete cycles at the beginning and at the end of the signals and the transients after the system had been turned on were excluded. Using the results of the analysis of the phase model for mutually delay-coupled heterogeneous DPLL elements, we study the global frequencies and phase-differences as a function of the transmission delay. The time-series of the signals were recorded and measured in a system of two mutually delay-coupled DPLL prototype units with detuned intrinsic frequencies and coupling strengths, see also table I in section V of the paper. From these measurements for different transmission-delays we obtained the times of rising and falling edges which we use to extract a phase. Here we made the assumption that the frequency is constant between two consecutive rising or falling edges and advance the phase linearly by 2π in the resulting time window, see Fig. where σ = Re(λ), γ = Im(λ) and C 0 a constant related to the initial perturbation vector The transmission-delays are controlled using the microcontroller. Using the internal clock of the microcontroller the output signals are delayed by defined times and then sent out to the DPLLs in the network. This can be done individually for each transmission-delay, i.e., for the signal transmission-delay from PLL 1 to PLL 2 and vice versa. For the experiments, the delays are changed such that the mean value of the transmission-delays remains constant. For each value of delay-difference we measure the individual transmission-delays, record the signal timeseries and the frequencies. To confirm the value of transmission-delay set by the microcontroller we measured the time-difference between the same rising edge at the output of each PLL and the input at its coupling partner using the oscilloscope. We plot the theoretical predicted values for the global frequencies and phase differences for DPLL elements with heterogeneous intrinsic frequencies and coupling strength. The experimental results and corresponding LTspice simulations are in very good agreement with the results predicted by the phase model, see Figs. 13-14 in section V of the paper. The current experimental setup allows only a coarse-grained setting of the cut-off frequencies of the loop filter elements using tunable resistors. These potentiometers range from R min = 100 Ohm to R max = 2 MOhm with a tolerance of ±10% and can be tuned using a screwdriver, thereby changing the cut-off frequency of the loop filter. The cut-off frequency is given by where the conductance of the RC loop-filter in our experimental setup is fixed at C LF = 22nF and R LF denotes the resistance. We then measured signal time-series for the case of identical and different cut-off frequencies of the loop- filters, while we kept the mean cut-off frequency constant. Transient measurements were also carried out, detuning the cut-off frequencies of the loop filters while the system was running. In Fig. We validate the theoretical results obtained from the phase model using LTspice simulations Then we use a setup of two mutually delay-coupled DPLLs to simulate self-organized synchronization on the circuit level, see Fig. where A denotes the output amplitude V high of the XORs, and k = 1, 2 indexes the DPLLs. The resistance-values of the resistors of the loop-filter cut-off frequency ω c k and gain S k1 of the phase-detector signal can be calculated from where C LF is the capacitance of the loop-filter capacitor. A. An ath order filter: PLL dynamics as (a + 1)th order differential equation In the following, we show that system dynamics with ath order filter can be written as (a + 1)th-order differential equation. For this, consider the dynamics of N delay-coupled PLLs, FIG. where, (p * x PD k ) represents the convolution operation on p and x PD k . Taking the Laplace transform (L) of this equation, and using the property L [(f * g)(t)] = L(f (t)) • L(g(t)), we get, Here hats ( ˆ) represent the Laplace transforms of the respective functions. Since φk (s) = s φk (s) -φ k (0), one can rewrite this equation as, Laplace transform of the impulse response function p(s) for ath order filter is given by, p(s) = 1 (sb + 1) a . ( Substituting this value in Eq. ( Therefore, with ath order filter, dynamics of the system in Laplace space is given by Substituting binomial expansion for (sb + 1) a i.e., we get, Using the property that the Laplace transform of nth-order derivative of a function (say Eq. ( Inverse Laplace transform of above equation back into the time domain gives, where, Here δ(t) represents the Dirac-delta function and δ [n] (t) its nth derivative. Hence, the dynamics of the system with ath order filter is governed by (a+1)th order differential equation, which is given by Eq. Filter of order zero (a = 0): For a zero-th order filter, P δ k (0) = 0, and the frequencies of the VCOs are given by a simple first order differential equation, Filter of order one (a = 1): Now for a first order filter i.e., a = 1, Therefore, the phase dynamics for the first order filter is given by Filter of order two (a = 2): For second order filter [2] (t) + ω k • δ [1] (t) , The dynamics is govern by the third order differential equation Therefore, depending on the order of the loop-filter a, one can rewrite the integro delay-differential equation for the phase-dynamics of coupled PLLs system as (a + 1)th order delay differential equation. For our study we consider the PLLs with first order loop filter. For this system, the phase dynamics can be written as see Eq. ( x PD,digital Therefore, the dynamics of delay-coupled analog PLLs system is given by We use this second order differential equation for our simulations and examine different dynamical scenarios exhibited by the system at different parameter values. One can choose the parameter values and the history for initial conditions and see how the system settles into a modified-inphase, modified-anti-phase states, or remains desynchronized (either synchronized states are unstable or it do not exist). Examples of these cases are shown in the Supplementary Figs. 18 (a)(b)(c) and (d) respectively. These simulations are helpful in quickly verifying the analytical results and to get insight into the behavior of the system. The results shown in Supplementary Fig. V. EXTENSION TO THE NETWORK OF N DELAY-COUPLED OSCILLATORS Sec. III in the paper provides the analysis for two delay-coupled oscillators with heterogeneous components, where we obtain the expressions to evaluate synchronized solutions and their stability. These transcendental equations can be solved numerically to calculate the global frequency, the phase difference and the corresponding perturbation response rates. For a larger network of delay-coupled PLLs (N > 2) with heterogeneous components, the analysis can be extended as presented in the following. The dynamics of N delay-coupled PLLs, in a general form, is given by, Synchronized solutions are given by the ansatz where Ω is the common collective frequency and β k is the phase deviation. Putting these solutions in Eq. ( were β kl = (β k -β l ). Eqs. (3) provide condition for the synchronized solutions described in Eq. ( Therefore, the phase-locked solutions satisfy, A compact form of the condition for synchronized solutions can be obtained by averaging over all oscillators, These equations provide synchronized solutions of a notwork of delay-coupled oscillators for a given coupling function and connection topology. For larger N > 2 it is nontrivial to obtain explicit analytic expressions for synchronized frequency and phase differences. One can use, however, for example, linear approximations for coupling function or numerical methods to estimate these solutions. For a system of N oscillators, we here obtain a general expression for the stability of synchronized solutions. In order to calculate linear stability, we apply small perturbations q k to the synchronized solutions, i.e., and examine the behavior of these perturbations. Putting these values in Eq. ( Expanding function 'h' to the first order, we have Therefore, the perturbation dynamics is given by qk Assuming exponential variations in the perturbations, i.e., q k = d k e λt , we get For notation simplicity, denoting, ckl = c kl /n k and above equation read, Now using pk (λ) = ∞ 0 du p k (u)e -λu , we have Therefore we find where, In a matrix form we can write, where T and the elements of the matrix G N ×N are, From Eq. ( Using above condition, for the network of N delay-coupled PLLs, one can evaluate eigenvalues λ of the perturbation dynamics and determine stability of the synchronized states. As discussed in the paper, one of the effects of the detuned intrinsic frequencies is the appearance of the region in parameter space where synchronized solutions do not exist, see Fig. In Supplementary Fig. In the paper we discussed how the synchronized states are effected by the heterogeneity in the transmission delays. Specifically, for a fixed mean delay τ , we showed that the global frequencies of the synchronized state remain unaffected while the phase-difference changes linearly as a function of delay-heterogeneity ∆τ . Here we present additional results when the delay-heterogeneity ∆τ is fixed and show the behavior of the system as a function of mean delay τ . In Fig. In section IV E, we have discussed how the difference in coupling strengths ∆K affects the frequencies of synchronized states and phase difference in identical and detuned PLLs. We also observed how the coupling strength heterogeneity changes the perturbation decay rates of the synchronized solutions while the mean of the coupling values is kept constant (see Fig. 