Interlayer twist between van der Waals graphene crystals led to the discovery of superconducting and insulating states near the magic angle. In this work, we exploit this mechanical degree of freedom by twisting the graphene middle layer in a trilayer graphene spacer between two metallic lead (Magnetic and nonmagnetic). A large difference in conductance is found depending on the angle of twist between the middle layer graphene and the ones at the interface this difference ,called twisting resistance, reach more than 1000% in the non-magnetic Cu case. For the magnetic Ni case, the magneto-resistance decreases and the difference in conductance between twisted and not twisted depends strongly on the relative magnetization configuration. For the parallel configuration, the twisting resistance is about -40%, while for the anti-parallel configuration it can reach up to 130% . Furthermore, we show that the twisting resistance can be enhanced by inserting a thin Cu layer at the interface of Ni/graphene where it reaches a value of 200% and 1600% for parallel and antiparallel configurations, respectively. These finding could pave the way toward the integration of 2D materials on novel spinmechatronics based devices. Graphene incorporation in magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs) Those findings have promoted graphene, and subsequently other two dimensional (2D) materials, as potential candidates to replace oxide barrier in conventional MTJs. The weak coupling between different layers of 2D materials allows to manipulate the relative twisting angle (RTA) between two or more layers of graphene leading to the formation of moiré superlattices. The electronic properties of such herterostructure strongly depend on the RTA between two or more layers. This led recently to the discovery of superconductivity In this work, using first principle calculations, we demonstrate a significant difference in resistance between non-twisted and twisted tri-layer graphene (TTLG) spacer, we call as twisting-resistance (TwR), between two metallic leads (magnetic or non-magnetic). In case of non-magnetic Cu substrate, the TwR could reach more than 1000% which is attributed to the absence of conducting state in large region around the K point in reciprocal space. Once the middle layer of graphene is twisted, it start to feel the populated states present round the M point and thus a large current go through the graphene layer. For the magnetic Ni case, the current are mostly dominant by the minority electrons for parallel configuration as explained and shown earlier by V. M. Karpan et. al. First, we start by examining the transmission map across the Brillouin zone at Fermi level for pure Cu film as shown in Fig. To verify our hypothesis and to investigate the effect of RTA on the electronic transport properties in vertical graphene-based junctions, we setup a structure of Cu/TTLG/Cu, where only the middle layer graphene is rotated relative to the graphene layers at the interface as shown in Fig. Our first-principles calculations were performed using SIESTA package For transmission calculation a 100×100×1 and 50×50×1 is used for RTA of 21.787 • and 32.2 • using the TBTrans code, respectively. In general the twisting magneto-resistance can be defined as the difference between two conducting state with/without different twisting angle and/or different magnetization orientation, as following: Where, θ and α represent the RTA and magnetization configuration, namely parallel (P) or anti-parallel (AP), respectively. In this case, the magneto-resistance (MR) is nothing but M R(θ) = ∆G G α,-α (θ) where the RTA is fixed and the magnetization direction (α) is changed from P to AP. Similarly, the Twisting resistance is nothing but T wR α = ∆G G α (θ, θ ) where the magnetization direction is fixed either to parallel or anti-parallel and the RTA is varied. Next, we discuss the non-magnetic case (Cu/TTLG/Cu) by looking at the variation of quantum conductance at Fermi energy and at room temperature as function of RTA (θ) as shown Fig. For the magnetic case, i.e in Ni/TTLG/Ni junctions (Fig. To enhance the TwR in the Ni/TTLG/Ni case, we propose to introduce a thin Cu film at the interface between Ni and Gr which will increase the TwR without affecting too much the MR. Fig. In conclusion, we demonstrate, Using spin-dependent transport calculations, the mechanical control of electric current by twisting the graphene middle layer in a trilayer graphene spacer between two metallic leads (magnetic and non-magnetic). A large difference in conductance has been found between two RTA where the TwR could reach more than 1000% for Cu/TTLG/Cu junctions. For the Ni/TTLG/Ni case, we show that the magnetoresistance decreases when the middle layer is twisted with respect to those at the interface, and the TwR depends strongly on the relative magnetization configuration. For the parallel configuration, the TwR is about -40%, while for the anti-parallel configuration it can reach up to 130% .Furthermore, we report a heterostructure composed of Ni/Cu/TTLG/Cu/Ni where the TwR for parallel and anti-parallel configurations can reach up to 200% and 1600%, respectively. Those findings pave the way towards the integration of 2D materials in novel spinmechatronics based devices.