We report on the demonstration of the first axial AlInN ultraviolet core-shell nanowire light-emitting diodes with highly stable emission in the UV wavelength range. During the epitaxial growth of AlInN layer, an AlInN shell is spontaneously formed, resulted in the reduced nonradiative recombination on nanowire surface. The AlInN nanowires exhibit high internal quantum efficiency of ~ 52% at room temperature for emission at 295nm. The peak emission wavelength can be varied from 290 nm to 355 nm by changing the growth condition. Moreover, significantly strong transverse magnetic (TM) polarized emission is recorded which is ~ 4 times stronger compared to the transverse electric (TE) polarized light at 295 nm. This study provides alternative approach for the fabrication of new type of high-performance ultraviolet light-emitters. Ultraviolet (UV) light-sources have been in great attention due to their wide range of applications. Such UV light-emitters have primarily used in several key applications include remote detection of biological and chemical compound Until recently, fundamental and applied research approaches for light-emitters, have essentially focused on the use of InGaN and AlGaN alloys in the active region for near UV Albeit holding tremendous advantages, AlInN semiconductor research is highly limited due to the immature epitaxial growth of high quality AlInN. Molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) growth of group-III nitrides under metal-rich conditions usually provides smooth surface morphologies at low growth temperatures. However, under nitrogen-rich growth at these low temperatures results in rough surfaces However, to our best knowledge, axial nanowire-based AlInN semiconductor grown by MBE has not been reported even though nanowire structures offers several advantages. Nanowire structures offer significant attributes, for instance, significantly improved light output power due to drastically reduced dislocations and polarization fields In this context, we have performed a detailed investigation of the epitaxial growth, structural and optical properties of catalyst-free AlxIn1-xN/GaN nanowires grown on Si (111) substrate by plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy (PAMBE). We have also further demonstrated the first axial AlInN core-shell nanowire UV LED heterostructures operating in the UV-A and UV-B bands. An AlInN shell is spontaneously formed during the growth of AlInN epi-layer which can lead to drastically reduced nonradiative surface recombination. By controlling the Al compositions in the AlInN active region, the emission wavelength can be varied from 290 nm to 355 nm. The AlInN UV nanowires with emission wavelength at 295nm exhibit high internal quantum efficiency (IQE) of ~52% at room temperature. Moreover, the UV LED device exhibits strong UV light emission with highly stable peak emission at 295nm. The polarized optical properties of AlInN nanowire LEDs were also investigated. It is suggested that the UV light from AlInN nanowire LEDs is mainly TM polarized with emission about 4 times stronger than that of TE light. In this study, AlInN nanowire light-emitters were grown on n-Si (111) substrates by a Veeco Gen II MBE system equipped with a radio-frequency plasma-assisted nitrogen source. Illustrated in Figure Moreover, it is also suggested that a core-shell AlInN/GaN structure is spontaneously formed during the epitaxial growth of AlInN layer. In order to reveal the compositional variation along the nanowire radial direction, energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDXS) analysis was performed along the GaN and AlInN regions which are indicated as lines 1-2 and 3-4 in Figure The formation of such core-shell nanowire structures can be well explained by the diffusioncontrolled growth mechanism of III-nitride nanowires under nitrogen-rich conditions which was carefully studied in previous studies We have further demonstrated the AlInN/GaN UV nanowire LEDs on Si substrate utilizing the optimal growth conditions of AlInN nanowire on GaN templates. The device structure is schematically illustrated in Figure Photoluminescence (PL) spectra of AlInN nanowire on GaN templates were measured using a 266 nm diode-pumped solid-state laser as the excitation source. The PL emission was spectrally resolved by a high-resolution spectrometer and detected by a photomultiplier tube. Figure Presented in Figure Such vertically aligned AlInN nanowire LEDs are fully compatible with the conventional fabrication process for large area nanowire LED devices. The device fabrication is described in the method section. The UV nanowire LED devices with an areal size of 500×500 μm 2 were chosen for characterization. The AlInN LEDs have excellent current-voltage characteristic with low resistance measured at room temperature, shown in Figure In addition to study the performance of AlInN UV nanowire LEDs, we have performed detailed simulation comparing the characteristics of AlInN nanowire LEDs with and without the integration of electron blocking layer. It is clearly shown that, in both LED device structures, electron leakage does not exist or is negligible with quite similar electron current density distribution, shown in Therefore, the optimal EBL structure is limitted which requires higher bandgap energy to effectively prevent electron overflow. Moreover, the use of EBL will also affect the hole transport, resulted to the reduced hole injection efficiency to the device active region. Further optimization in term of device structure, active region thickness and composition will be performed to achieve high power AlInN deep UV nanowire LEDs. In summary, we have successfully demonstrated the first AlInN axial nanowire LEDs operating the UV-A and UV-B bands with relatively high IQE of ~ 52% at room temperature. The electron overflow was not observed within these nanowire UV emitters. The devices exhibit stable emission with strong TM polarized light emission. The device performance can be further improved by engineering the device structure, nanowire morphology as well as nanowire diameter and spacing to enhance the light extraction efficiency of such AlInN UV core-shell nanowire LEDs. Vertically aligned self-organized AlInN/GaN heterostructures and AlInN core-shell nanowire LEDs were grown on Si(111) substrates by radio frequency plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy. The extremely high purity nitrogen generation system was employed to introduce ultrahigh quality nitrogen gas to the RIBER RF-nitrogen plasma cell. This system includes a Delux Nitrogen purifying system with bypass assembly life status indicator, valve control for bypass and purifier The UV nanowire LED fabrication process includes the following steps. The nanowire LED samples were first cleaned by HCl then HF to remove native oxide on nanowire surface and oxide layer on the backside of Si substrates, respectively. Ti(20 nm)/Au(120 nm) metal layers were then deposited on the backside of Si wafers for n-contact. The p-metal contact of Ni(10 nm)/Au(10 nm) was deposited on the top of nanowire samples by e-beam evaporation. For enhancing efficient current spreading of this p-contact layer, the top portions of nanowires have to be linked together which can conducted by tilting the substrate holder with a certain angle during the deposition. Thick Ni(20 nm)/Au(120 nm) layers were subsequently deposited on top of the device to serve as metal pad. The fabricated devices with Ti/Au and Ni/Au contacts were annealed at ~ 550 o C for 1 min. Filling material and Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) were not used in this fabrication to eliminate any light-absorption in this UV wavelength range which is different from our visible InGaN/(Al)GaN nanowire LED fabrication. LEDs with chip areas of ~ 500×500 μm 2 were fabricated and selected for characterization. JEOL JEM-2100F equipped with near field emission gun with an accelerating voltage of 200 kV was used to obtain bright-field TEM images. For STEM-and STEM-HAADF imaging same equipment with a cold field emission emitter operated at 200 kV and with an electron beam diameter of approximately 0.1 nm was used. A 266 laser (Kimmon Koha) was used as the excitation source for the photoluminescence measurement of the nanowire heterostructure. The photoluminescence was spectrally resolved by a high-resolution spectrometer and detected by a photomultiplier tube (PMT). The current-voltage characteristics of AlInN UV core-shell nanowire LEDs were measured Keithley 2400 digital source meter. Electroluminescence emission of the LED devices were collected by an optical fiber and analyzed using an Ocean Optics spectrometer. The light emission polarization set up consists of an optical fiber together with a Glan-Taylor polarizer mounted on a rotating arm. Signal from the lateral surface of AlInN nanowire LEDs was polarization resolved by polarizer and collected and analyzed by Ocean optics spectrometer. The measurement was performed at 20mA CW injection current. 