We report on the demonstration of a deep submicron normally-off AlGaN/GaN HEMT with high on-current and high threshold voltage (VTH). The high-performance device was realized by utilizing a gate recess with length and depth of 200 nm and 124 nm respectively. The recess etched region had a roughness of 0.7 nm. Various recess etch depths and dielectric annealing conditions were used to tune the VTH. The optimized device exhibited on-current and VTH of 500 mA/mm and 5 V respectively. The measured breakdown characteristics of the devices and their limitations were investigated using 2D-TCAD device simulation. The penetration of the residual electric field in most of the recess region could be the reason for premature breakdown of deeply scaled recess-gate e-mode HEMTs -NITRIDE power devices are becoming increasingly popular due to their superior figures of merit compared to state-of-art of silicon (Si) power MOSFETs The epi-stack (Fig. The recess depth of the device was 60 nm (barrier + channel) as measured by AFM. As the high temperature PDA had resulted in a negative VTH of the device (before PMA), a lower PDA temperature was implemented for subsequent device processes. The transfer characteristics of device II is shown in Fig. The recess depth in this case was 40 nm (barrier + channel). The device II exhibited a VTH of -3V and 2V before PMA and after PMA. The gate leakage was also found to reduce from 1 A/mm to 0.1 nA/mm after gate metal annealing (not shown). As the VTH was found to be 2V even with shallower etch depths with lower PDA temperatures, a deep recess etching was implemented to further increase the VTH. Device III The three terminal breakdown characteristics of device III (deeply recessed) are shown in Fig. The low breakdown characteristics were further investigated by Silvaco TCAD simulations of short and long channel recess devices. The material parameters used in the device simulation were defined under kp.set2 and pol.set2 in Silvaco ATLAS. The HEMT stack considered in simulation had 24 nm of Al0.25Ga0.75N barrier on 300 nm UID GaN (10 15 cm -3 ) channel. The GaN buffer was 600 nm. The gate lengths were 200 nm and 2 m for short and long gate recessed devices respectively while access regions were fixed at 500 nm (source side) and 4 m (drain side). 30 nm of Al2O3 was used as gate dielectric. The recess depth was 35 nm (AlGaN barrier=25 nm + GaN channel 10 nm). The simulated electric field profiles below the gate along the drain for short and long gate length devices are shown in the Fig. The poor breakdown characteristics of 200 nm recess device could be related to field induced carrier transport through the Al2O3/etched GaN interface. Current leakage through the interfaces are widely reported in III-Nitrides A recess etched normally-off AlGaN/GaN HEMT with excellent on current and VTH was demonstrated. Various recess depths and annealing conditions were investigated and optimized. The subpar breakdown characteristics were investigated using Silvaco TCAD simulations and it could be attributed to the penetration of residuals electric fields in most of the recess region. Further enhancement in the breakdown characteristics can be achieved by a slightly larger recess length and/or improved Al2O3/etched GaN interface. S. Kumar, S. Vura, R. Muralidharan, and Digbijoy N. Nath are with Centre for Nano Science and Engineering (CeNSE), Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bengaluru, India (e-mail: sandeepku@iisc.ac.in) S. B. Dolmanan and S. Tripathy are with Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), Agency for Science, Technology, and Research (A*STAR), Singapore