We develop a quantum many-body theory of the Bose-Hubbard model based on the canonical quantization of the action derived from a Gutzwiller mean-field ansatz. Our theory is a systematic generalization of the Bogoliubov theory of weakly-interacting gases. The control parameter of the theory, defined as the zero point fluctuations on top of the Gutzwiller mean-field state, remains small in all regimes. The approach provides accurate results throughout the whole phase diagram, from the weakly to the strongly interacting superfluid and into the Mott insulating phase. As specific examples of application, we study the two-point correlation functions, the superfluid stiffness, the density fluctuations, for which quantitative agreement with available quantum Monte Carlo data is found. In particular, the two different universality classes of the superfluid-insulator quantum phase transition at integer and non-integer filling are recovered. The Hubbard model is one of the most celebrated models of quantum condensed matter theory. The main reason is probably the widespread belief that its twodimensional fermionic version holds the key to understand how high-temperature superconductivity emerges upon doping a Mott insulator The archetypal competition between the kinetic and interaction energies is found in the bosonic version of the model, the so-called Bose-Hubbard (BH) model On the theoretical side, a very common approach to the BH model is based on the Gutzwiller ansatz. While many important features of both the superfluid and the insulating phases are accurately captured by the Gutzwiller wave function, its local, site-factorized form typically makes physical quantities involving off-site quantum correlations to be missed. In the weakly-interacting regime, a Bogoliubov approach for the fluctuations around the mean-field Gross-Pitaevskii (GP) ground state of a dilute Bose-Einstein condensate provides an accurate description of the equilibrium state and of the excitations of the gas In spite of these remarkable advances, a complete, easily tractable and physically intuitive description of the collective excitations and their fingerprint on quantum observables across the whole phase diagram of the model is still lacking. In particular, the development of non-local correlations across the Mott-superfluid transition and the proper characterization of the stronglyinteracting superfluid state and of its excitation modes remain a challenging problem. In this paper, we combine the successful features of the Gutzwiller and Bogoliubov approaches to develop a new strategy to systematically quantize the time-dependent Gutzwiller ansatz. In spite of the local nature of the Gutzwiller ansatz -see Eq. ( The paper is organized as follows. Sect. II is devoted to the derivation of the quantum Gutzwiller theory for the Bose-Hubbard model. The original features of the method are highlighted and its advantages and disadvantages are discussed in comparison to other approaches. In Sect. III, we present the predictions of the quantum Gutzwiller method for observables in which local and non-local quantum correlations strongly modify the standard mean-field picture, such as two-point correlation functions, superfluid density and pair correlations. We conclude in Sect. IV with an outlook on future studies and on possible extensions of the quantum formalism introduced in this work. In Subsect. II A, we briefly review the basic concepts of the Bose-Hubbard model and of the C-number Gutzwiller ansatz needed to develop the quantum Gutzwiller approach presented in the following Subsects. II B to II D. The quantum Gutzwiller method is put into perspective and compared with other approaches in Subsect. II E. We consider the three-dimensional BH model where J is the hopping amplitude, U the on-site interaction, μ the chemical potential, while r, s labels all pairs of nearest-neighboring sites. The annihilation and creation operators of a bosonic particle at site r are âr and â † r respectively, and nr = â † r âr is the local density operator. We use the Gutzwiller ansatz where the wave function is site-factorized and the complex amplitudes c n (r) are variational parameters with normalization condition n |c n (r)| 2 = 1 to reformulate the Bose-Hubbard model in terms of the following Lagrangian functional In the previous equation, the dot indicates the temporal derivative, are the on-site terms in the Hamiltonian and is the mean-field order parameter. In this formulation, the conjugate momenta of the parameters c n (r) are c * n (r) = ∂L/∂ ċn (r). The classical Euler-Lagrange equations associated to Lagrangian (3) are the time-dependent Gutzwiller equations as derived, e.g., in The spectrum of the collective modes ω α,k is plotted in Figure The quantum phase transition from the MI to the SF phase can belong to two different universality classes In order to go beyond the Gutzwiller ansatz reviewed in the previous subsection, it is natural to consider how quantum (and thermal) effects populate the excitation modes of the system and to address how they affect the observable quantities. We include quantum fluctuations by building a theory of the excitations starting from Lagrangian (3) via canonical quantization In analogy with the Bogoliubov approximation for dilute Bose-Einstein condensates The normalization operator Â(r) is a function of δĉ n (r) and δĉ † n (r) and ensures the proper normalization n ĉ † n (r) ĉn (r) = 1. By restricting to local fluctuations orthogonal to the ground state n δĉ † n (r) c 0 n = 0 one has In a homogeneous system, it is convenient to work in momentum space by writing Inserting Eq. ( where E 0 is the mean-field ground state energy, the vector δ Ĉ(k) contains the components δ Ĉn (k), and Lk is a pseudo-Hermitian matrix, the explicit expression of which is given in App. B. A suitable Bogoliubov rotation of the Gutzwiller operators recasts the quadratic form (10) into a diagonal form where each b † α,k corresponds to a different many-body excitation mode with frequencies ω α,k , labeled by its momentum k and branch index α. Bosonic commutation relations between the annihilation and creation operators bα,k and b † are enforced by choosing the usual Bogoliubov normalization condition where the vectors u α,k (v α,k ) contain the components u α,k,n (v α,k,n ). As a direct consequence of the spectral properties of L k , the fluctuation operators δĉ n (r) satisfy the quasi-bosonic commutation relations the calculation of which is made explicit in App. C. The correction term on the right-hand side of Eq. ( Even though in this paper we focus only on Gaussian fluctuations, the inclusion of terms beyond second order in δĉ n arising from the quartic hopping term in Eq. ( which represents the small control parameter of our theory In particular, for commensurate density, the quantity F approaches zero both in the deep MI (dashed line) and in the deep SF regime, that is in both limits where the Gutzwiller ansatz recovers exactly the ground state of the BH model. As expected, its maximum is located at the transition point. For non-commensurate densities, F tends to zero in the deep SF regime (where again the Gutzwiller ansatz recovers exactly the ground state) and eventually increases in the strongly interacting superfluid regime for decreasing J/U → 0. Note that for non-commensurate densities this limit does not correspond to a Mott insulator and the Gutzwiller ansatz is not able to fully capture the ground state. In this subsection we summarize the protocol that we use to compute physical observables within the quantum Gutzwiller theory. The evaluation of the expectation value for any observable Ô(â † r , âr ) consists in applying the following four-step procedure: 3. Expand the operator Ô order by order in the fluctuations δĉ n and δĉ † n , taking into account the dependence of the operator Â on the fluctuation operators. The contribution of Â may be of fundamental importance when higher orders in the fluctuations become relevant; 4. For the specific case considered in this work of negligible interactions between excitation modes, invoke Wick theorem to compute the expectation value of products of operators on Gaussian states -such as ground or thermal states obtained from H (2) . In the following, we apply this protocol to compute Ô , where the expectation value is intended to be evaluated on the Bogoliubov vacuum, i.e. bk,α |0 = 0. Before proceeding with the presentation of the predictions of our theory, it is worth shortly commenting on the relation of our theory with other competing methods. Our approach owes much to the time-dependent Gutzwiller method in When only Gaussian fluctuations above the MF result are considered, our approach to the BH model has strong similarities to including quantum fluctuations by slave boson techniques, as done, e.g., in the comprehensive work by Frérot and Roscilde In the next Section, we will show how the quantum Gutzwiller method can reproduce both local and nonlocal correlations with very high accuracy and successfully compares to Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) calculations. Moreover, the study of time-dependent problems appears to be a straightforward generalization of the quantum Gutzwiller approach. This is a crucial feature compared to QMC, which can hardly describe dynamical properties. Dynamical properties can be instead attacked by means of the bosonic version of Dynamical Mean Field Theories (B-DMFT) After having introduced the quantum Gutzwiller theory, in the present Section we apply it to the calculation of some relevant correlation functions: (i) the coherence function; (ii) the current-current correlation function and superfluid density; (iii) the density-density correlation function. We compare our results with the predictions of Quantum Monte Carlo calculations, when available, finding striking agreement. The single-particle correlation function, referred to also as coherence function, is defined as where the last expression is the result of the quantization protocol outlined in the previous section. (c) FIG. Expanding ĉn and ĉ † n to the lowest order in the fluctuations δĉ n (r), δĉ † n (r), one obtains where ψ 0 = n √ n c 0 n-1 c 0 n is the order parameter in the ground state and the particle (hole) amplitudes satisfy the Bogoliubov normalization In this way, the Bose field ( up to second order in the fluctuations. At the same level of approximation, the normalized zero-temperature one-body coherence function reads In Figure In the deep SF phase [panel (a)], the spectral weight is saturated by the Goldstone mode and our prediction for g (1) (r) reduces to the result for the weakly-interacting gas (dashed lines). In the region 2 d J/U ≤ 1 [panel (a')] of strongly-interacting superfluid, the contribution of other excitation modes Moreover, the present quantum theory is also able to capture the different critical behaviours of the superfluidinsulator transition depending on whether the transition is approached at integer or non-integer filling. Approaching the superfluid transition from the Mott phase away from the tip of the Mott lobe, the correlation length ξ of the MI grows but remains bounded [panel (b)]. As soon as one enters the SF phase, long-range order suddenly appears as a non-vanishing long-distance coherence, â † r â0 r→∞ = 0: such a quantity physically corresponds to the condensate density |ψ 0 | 2 and continuously grows from zero as one penetrates the superfluid phase. On the other hand, when approaching the SF phase at the tip of the Mott lobe, the correlation length ξ diverges and a power-law dependence for g (1) is found at the critical point [panel (c)]. This remarkable difference is related to the distinct universality class of the MI-SF transition at non-integer or integer filling It is worth noticing that result ( The superfluid density n s is defined through the static limit of the transverse current-current response func-tion where is the local kinetic energy operator along the direction x of the phase twist [54] and is the current-current response function for the current operator The expectation value while the first non vanishing contribution to the response function Λ xx J turns out to be the 4 th -order correlation Equation ( The results of the quantum Gutzwiller method for the superfluid density are illustrated in Figure Further insight is obtained by isolating the two contributions appearing on the right hand side of Eq. ( For completeness in Figure We consider the normally-ordered equal-time density correlation function Applying the procedure outlined in Sect. II D, and since our states are translational invariant, g (2) (r) reads g (2) (1) g (2) √ 2 FIG. where the density N (r) and the square density D(r) operators are defined as The expectation values in Eqs. where Specifically, all second order terms in the expansion arise directly from the normalization operator Â(r). This corresponds in saying that, in Eqs. ( The quantum Gutzwiller result (2) M F (0) ∝ D 0n 0 = 0, the quantum Gutzwiller result The role of quantum fluctuations and the accuracy of the method can be further explored by looking at the offsite density correlations function for |r| = 1 and √ 2. In panel (b) of Figure In this paper, we have introduced a simple and powerful semi-analytical tool to study the many-body physics of quantum interacting particles on a lattice based on a canonical quantization of the fluctuations around the Gutzwiller ground state. The power of the method has been validated on the archetypal case of the Bose-Hubbard model. In spite of the locality of the initial mean-field Gutzwiller ansatz, the quantization procedure proposed in our work is able to accurately capture very non-local physical features such as the superfluid stiffness of the superfluid phase, the behaviours of the correlation functions at the different critical points, and the spatial structure of the virtual particle-hole pair excitations on top of a Mott insulator. In particular these last predictions are in quantitative agreement with Quantum Monte Carlo results available in the literature. In addition to its quantitative accuracy and to its computational simplicity, the quantum Gutzwiller method has the crucial advantage over other approaches of providing a deep physical insight on the equilibrium state and on the quantum dynamics of the system under investigation. Due to its flexibility and numerical accessibility, our formalism can be straightforwardly extended to treat inhomogeneous configurations, more exotic hopping and interaction terms, and to deal with more complex forms of the initial ansatz, such as the cluster Gutzwiller wavefunction, which include at least some quantum correlations already in the ground state. An important application of our quantized model for the excitations is the investigation of finite temperature and/or time-dependent problems, including non-equilibrium dynamics. Going beyond the quadratic expansion around the mean-field, our method can in fact naturally incorporate additional nonlinear terms describing interactions between quasiparticles The n max × n max blocks H k and K k are identical to the ones controlling the Gutzwiller dynamical equations at the linear response level is the energy of a free particle on a d-dimensional lattice. The ground state energy is set by the classical evolution of the c 0 n 's at the meanfield level and, shifting the diagonal elements of Lk , assures a gapless spectrum in the superfluid phase. Among the relevant spectral properties of the pseudo-Hermitian matrix Lk of the quadratic form in Eq. 