Organic Light Emitting Diodes (OLED) have experienced vast attention in the scientific literature as the leading contender for the next generation of electronic lighting technology. However, while research continues to push the limit for OLED performance and efficiencies, minimal attention is paid to the processability and suitability for mass production. In this regard, Solution Processability (SP) and Thermally Activated Delayed Fluorescence (TADF) in OLEDs are two recent discoveries which have significantly improved the capacity for low-cost processing without compromise to their performance efficiencies. This meta-analysis is focused on these discoveries and their application to OLEDs. Recent peer-reviewed studies of OLEDs employing both SP and TADF are reviewed in order to highlight physical fundamentals and discover synergistic effects when incorporating both factors into a single OLED device. Additionally, some other recent trends targeting efficient manufacturing of OLEDs are identified, and logical future directions for interested researchers are discussed. Organic light emitting diodes (OLED) are expected to serve as the next generation of technology for electronic lighting and display applications. While not yet sufficiently developed for broad commercialisation, OLEDs are beginning to show superior performance to their inorganic counterparts -in fact, several global electronics developers have opted for OLED-based displays in their product lines. The organic materials used in OLEDs carry added versatility in that they can maintain complete opto-electronic function when deposited onto flexible plastics or even fabrictype substrates. Furthermore, the underlying organic molecular structure allows for endless possibilities in tailoring production and performance efficiencies through unique molecular designs. Finally, recent research has focused on two inherent properties that dramatically improve production efficiency, which are only available to organic materials: Thermally Activated Delayed Fluorescence (TADF) and Solution Processability (SP). The first notable demonstration of TADF by Chihaya Adachi and collaborators in 2012 Many industrial reports and popular science articles recognise that despite the exceptional performance of modern OLEDs, the cost involved with manufacturing is preventing them from dominating the electrical lighting and electronic display markets. It is believed that the key to these manufacturing issues lies in breakthroughs of the fundamental physics and chemistry of materials processing and OLED design, which is likely to be found in scientific literature and academic publishing (as opposed to grey literature). o Review all recent peer-reviewed papers examining OLED devices using a solution-processed and TADF EML; o Examine the concepts of TADF and solution processing in organic semiconductors, and identify any issues uniquely associated with OLED devices employing both phenomena, incl. synergistic effects; and o Highlight significant findings and identify a direction for future studies regarding solution processability, TADF and economic design of OLEDs. Given the relatively low number of studies with exact relevance (i.e. development or discussion of OLED devices with both SP and TADF), articles are reviewed on a case-by-case basis and categorised with similar papers. Then, the findings are summarised and discussed with respect to the aims listed above. Articles not showing significant findings or discussions relevant to the advancement of SP TADF OLEDs or low-cost processing are not discussed here. Whereas other recent reviews on SP TADF OLEDs focus on novel molecular designs and structure-property relationships The foremost benefit of polymers is their high solubility in organic solvents due to their long aliphatic chains. On the other hand, their large size and variability in molecular structure between production batches results in difficulties controlling molecular design factors that affect TADF emission performance. An example of such a design factor is the distances and torsions between donor and acceptor moieties; both must be separated in order to reduce overlap of the HOMO and LUMO (typically localised around the donor and acceptor, respectively), which is directly related to ∆EST In 2015, Nikolaenko, et al. Nobuyasu, et al. Zhu, et al. The same polymer was used in an SP TADF OLED by Lin, et al. A study by Xie, et al. The devices utilised a novel transfer mechanism where an additional TADF small molecule was included as an "assistant dopant", which mediates charge transfer between the host and TADF dopant and contributes towards a portion of the RISC processing of singlet excitons. Devices with optimised structure showed remarkable EQE of 16% with near 100% IQE. While the assistant dopant strategy is likely to improve device efficiencies, a three-component-EML is likely to require extra design considerations and, consequently, production costs for commercial production. Interestingly, the results also indicated that RISC rates are higher in polymers than small molecules. Ren, et al. Small molecules are relatively low molecular weight (as compared to polymers) tightly-packaged molecules that form discrete particular neat films. As opposed to polymers, small molecules are not always soluble in ideal solvents, and thus present an extra complication if solution processing is desired. On the other hand, the tightly-packed, discrete particle film structure of small molecular neat films are more electrically conductive and thermally stable than polymers, and are thus more resistant to dissociation after formation of the neat film. A review of solution-processable small molecules for OLEDs can be found here In what might be the first of its kind, Cho, et al. Cho et al. The same group Kim, et al. Ultimately, the study demonstrates a resourceful method to simultaneously improve both device efficiency and manufacturability. Adachi's group Xie et al. Not long after the worldwide recognition of TADF, Chen, et al. Verma, et al. Sun, et al. Chen, et al. Huang, et al. Dendrimers serve as a new class of molecules with sizes in between those of small molecules and polymers. Dendrimers are identified by their tree-like structure, with "branch" molecules surrounding a single core in three dimensions. These branches then attach to subsequent branch molecules, thus giving the dendrimer a tree-like structure. Branch molecules are referred to as dendrons, while the number of branches in succession is termed "generation". Dendrimers are often designed using some existing small molecule as either dendrons or the core molecule. A typically high molecular weight ensures a good degree of solubility in common solvents, but also avoids forming inhomogeneous, impure or poorly distributed thin films that often occur in polymers with indefinite molecular weight Albrecht, et al. This orthogonal dendrimer and a device with fully solution-processed organic layers was later developed by the same group through the use of a similar triazine-and carbazole-based dendrimer The same group then continued their work and developed devices with t-butyl-substituted dendrimer as a dopant and a carbazole-dendrimer-based hosts The most recent effort of Albrecht's group As noted in previous studies, the dendrimers showed good resistance to alcohols, which allows for solution deposition of neighbouring ETLs in alcohol without degradation of the EML. While the EQEs of these dendrimers were comparatively lower than the authors' previous work, the synergy of AIE with TADF and solution processability serves as an innovative method to improve both performance and cost effectiveness of devices. Hu, et al. Li et al. Ban, et al. Ban et al. There do not appear to be any beneficial synergistic effects between TADF and SP; in other words, the effects of TADF and SP do not combine to boost performance to levels unexpected by each factor individually. There are, however, notable detrimental effects -soluble materials have inherent properties that can affect the performance of TADFs and thus must be considered during design stages (and vice versa): o Deposition via solvent alters atomistic morphology and molecular orientation (as compared to solid crystalline structure), and thus effects the electron orbital configuration. Consequently, this has significant effects on the excitonic and electronic pathways, which will alter photo-and electroluminescent efficiencies; o Different types of solvents will alter emission characteristics, whether through alterations to the film structure, molecular orientation or both; o Both TADF contribution and solubility are currently precisely controlled by molecular structure -altering structure to tune one property is likely to affect the other. For example, increasing alkyl chain length to increase solubility may separate donor and acceptor moieties, disrupting the charge transfer mechanism or ∆E ST; and o Solution processed neat films are expected to have greater decay lifetimes Polymers have higher solubilities as a result of the longer aliphatic chain. However, the electronic performance of TADF polymers is initially at a disadvantage as the length, complexity and variability of polymer structures introduces difficulties in tuning the structure-related properties of TADF (e.g. ∆EST and consequent IQE, which are related to D-A separation). On the other hand, small molecules are smaller and more precise in nature, allowing one to tune structure-related properties and performances through minor alterations to molecular structure or composition. Furthermore, they are also associated with simpler and more controllable synthesis methods, which is likely to reduce the costs of large-scale production. Finally, assuming a decent dissolution, small molecules generally produce well-ordered, neatly-packed thin films, resulting in greater electronic performance and lifetime. Dendrimers are a great middle ground for low-cost design, capturing the solubility of polymers with the facile synthesis methods and the ability to precisely control molecular structure of small molecules. Dendrimers are suitable for TADF emission as the electronic structure and exciton transmission can be tuned through addition and modification of dendrons. Additionally, molecular weight can be largely varied by tuning the number and structure of dendrons; this allows one to selectively tune solubility and/or resistance to orthogonal solvents. Ken Albrecht's group has performed a number of studies into the characteristics of dendrimers and development of suitable dendrimer-based SP TADF OLEDs. Future work could focus on finding novel dendrimer and dendron structures for optimal performance along with suitable solvents and device structures. While recognised as a critical factor for OLED design, few experimental studies actually discuss solubility or the consideration thereof before design. Since solubility is not easily quantified, many researchers simply rely on qualitative descriptors such as length of alkyl chains or molecular size to evaluate solubility. Glass transition temperature is one parameter that is associated with solubility While solution processability is important in organic emissive materials, each device layer, including the electrode material, must be compatible with R2R processes in order to experience complete low-cost, large-scale manufacturing; this includes the electrode, which is typically metallic. Several articles have been devoted to SP metallic electrodes via deposition of metallic ink -a suspension of metallic nanoparticles in a colloidal system Designers should also consider the solution processability of organic transport layers for fully SP OLEDs. However, transport layers have fewer design criteria than EMLs, and will not experience the same number of detrimental synergistic effects when depositing via solution as discussed earlier. Thus, there are fewer considerations when incorporating SP transport layers. Solvent orthogonality is perhaps the most significant consideration. The majority of SP-OLED studies use spin coating as the chosen method for deposition. While spin coating is indeed a wet process and allows one to analyse film structure, it does not necessarily translate into large-scale manufacture. Not only is the physical process of spin coating not applicable to the large scale, it cannot be incorporated into R2R processes. On the other hand, inkjet deposition is compatible and thus more suitable for commercial manufacture. In fact, electronic developers have recently begun using inkjet deposition in production lines or unveiled inkjet-deposited OLED prototypes. Thus, by using inkjet deposition in initial studies, researchers can ensure any developed materials are suitable for manufacture immediately and skip additional steps involved in translating their research to the market. More efforts should be paid towards reducing production costs through single-layer devices and non-doped (i.e. no host) EMLs. Not only will this minimise production costs through reducing materials consumption, it will lessen the number of factors needing to be considered during design stages, thus simplifying the overall design procedure. As an example, doped EMLs require additional consideration of the entire electronic structure of the dopant along with that of the host. Similarly, in a fully-solution processed device, each layer needs a high level of orthogonal resistance to certain solvents to avoid dissolution when depositing neighbouring layers; single-layer devices will not require such consideration. In recent years, non-doped EMLs have made substantial progress in the literature, boasting greater stability and somewhat similar performance efficiency when compared to their doped counterparts 