We investigate the possible occurrence of field-effect induced superconductivity in the hydrogenated (111) diamond surface by first-principles calculations. By computing the band alignment between bulk diamond and the hydrogenated surface we show that the electric field exfoliates the sample, separating the electronic states at the valence band top from the bulk projected ones. At the hole doping values considered here, ranging from n = 2.84 × 10 13 cm -2 to n = 6 × 10 14 cm -2 , the valence band top is composed of up to three electronic bands hosting holes with different effective masses. These bands resemble those of the undoped surface, but they are heavily modified by the electric field and differ substantially from a rigid doping picture. We calculate superconducting properties by including the effects of charging of the slab and of the electric field on the structural properties, electronic structure, phonon dispersion and electron-phonon coupling. We find that at doping as large as n = 6 × 10 14 cm -2 , the electron-phonon interaction is λ = 0.81 and superconductivity emerges with TC ≈ 29 -36K. Superconductivity is mostly supported by in-plane diamond phonon vibrations and to a lesser extent by some out-of-plane vibrations. The relevant electronphonon scattering processes involve both intra and interband scattering so that superconductivity is multiband in nature. The metallization of 3D covalent solids can be beneficial for superconductivity, as the cases of MgB 2 1 , H 3 S 2 and B-doped diamond An alternative route to bypass the slow increase of the DOS in bulk samples is to dope 2D materials or surfaces where the density of states is constant as a function of energy. These systems are also appealing because doping techniques alternative to the chemical ones can be applied. For example, one way to avoid the introduction of boron in diamond samples is through the field effect, i.e. the induction of additional charges at the surface by means of a transverse electric field in a FET-like configuration. In a conventional FET, however, the applied electric field is limited by the breakdown field of the solid dielectric, and by the fact that the thickness of the latter must be large enough to ensure the absence of pinholes. Electrochemical gating allows overcoming both these limitations. The technique consists in replacing the solid dielectric with an electrolyte (usually an ionic liquid or a polymer-electrolyte solution) as shown in Fig. Previous computations on the hydrogenated (110) diamond surface in FET configuration In this work we study the possibility of inducing superconductivity in (111) hydrogenated diamond thin films by means of electrochemical gating, using first-principles techniques. We consider the effect of hole doping and of the FET geometry in a self-consistent way both on electrons, phonons and on the electron-phonon interaction, by using a recently developed theoretical approach The paper is organized as follow. In Sec. II we expose the computational details used for ab-initio calculations. After that, in Sec. III we move to the discussion of the results. In particular, in Sec. III A we analyze the effects of the electric field on the relaxation of structural parameters, while in Sec. III B we show that there is a field-driven 'exfoliation' of the electronic bands. In Sec. III C we investigate how the charge distribution is affected by the electrochemical gating and in Sec. III D we study the electronic structure of our system by varying the amount of charge induced at the surface. In Sec. III E we investigate the effect of the electric field on vibrational properties and compute the electron-phonon coupling constant and the superconductive critical temperature as a function of the induced charge density by using the Allen-Dynes/McMillan equation. In Sec. IV the critical temperature is calculated more accurately by solving the isotropic linearized single-band Eliashberg equations. Finally, conclusions are given in Sec. V. We consider a slab structure made of 14 layers of C atoms, oriented along the (111) direction, terminated on both sides by a layer of H atoms (fig. All the ab-initio calculations are performed using density functional theory with Quantum ESPRESSO package We use the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional for exchange correlation, and the Brillouin zone integration is performed with a 24 × 24 electron momenta (k-points) Monkhorst-Pack grid both for the neutral and charged systems. For hydrogen atoms we use ultrasoft pseudopotentials, while for carbon we use a norm-conserving pseudopotential. The convergence criteria for the self-consistent solution of the Kohn-Sham equations are set to 10 -9 Ry (1 Ry ≈ 13.6 eV) for the total energy and to 10 -3 Ry/a 0 (a 0 ≈ 0.529177 Å is the Bohr radius) for the maximum force acting on atoms. We also set the kinetic energy cut-off to 65 Ry for the valence electron wave function and to 600 Ry for the density. The starting geometry for the FET configuration is similar to that described in Ref. We use Gaussian smearing of 0.004 Ry (for n dop,1 ), 0.03 Ry (for n dop,2 ) and 0.006 Ry (for n dop,3 ). Their value is chosen in such a way that the converged total energy per atom has a variation < 1 mRy upon changing the value of the smearing. We also require that their magnitude is less then the energy difference between the top of the valence band and the Fermi level. When computing the electronic density of states (DOS) we used a tetrahedra smearing with a k-point grid of 48 × 48, which ensures better convergence of the results. The convergence of phonon modes is checked at q = Γ. Convergence is found using 24 × 24 uniformly distributed k-points and widths of the Gaussian smearing of 0.003 Ry, 0.02 Ry and 0.004 Ry, for the three doping values respectively. Also for linear response calculations the smearing is always smaller than the energy difference between the top of the valence band and the Fermi level. Electron-phonon computations are initially performed only at Γ for all three doping regimes. For the highest surface charge densities, we also perform an interpolation of the electron-phonon matrix elements on the whole Brillouin zone through Wannier functions via the procedure described in Ref. [16]. We can Wannier-interpolate the electronic band structure 21 using a grid of 6 × 6 k-points for the non-self consistent computation. We then interpolate the electron-phonon matrix elements to 75 × 75 k-points and phonon momenta (q-points) grids, which ensures convergence of quantities of interests. An electric field applied at the surface of a material with free charge carriers penetrates only few layers inside the material, because of electronic screening. This kind of perturbation has different effects on our system: it breaks the symmetry along the z direction (possibly lifting degeneracies in the electronic spectrum); it changes the charge distribution of electrons; and it modifies the relative positions of atoms (and therefore structural and vibrational properties). First of all we analyze the effects of the applied electric field on the structure parameters of our sample. Then we study how the charge distribution, the electronic struc-ture and the phonon dispersion are affected. Finally we tackle the problem of electron-phonon interactions and see if a superconductive phase can appear as a function of doping. The most relevant structural changes induced by the electric field occur in the first three layers of the slab, while the inner carbon atoms are barely affected. In the lowest doping regime (n dop,1 ), the modifications are very subtle and only the distance between hydrogen atoms and the first carbon layer (H-C(1)) is shortened by 0.14%, while other atomic distances vary by ∼ 0.03 -0.05%. Both the angles HC(1)C(2) and C(1)C(2)C(3) (that we will call Θ H and Θ C in the following) remain unaffected (see Fig. As we move from low to medium values of the induced charge density (n dop,2 ), atomic distances further differ from equilibrium values. The H-C(1) bond is reduced by 0.72% while the distance C(1)-C(2) has an increment of 0.37%. As a consequence, also the angles Θ H and Θ C increase by 0.57%. The C(2)-C(3) bond is the least affected, with a reduction of only 0.25%. Finally, at the highest doping (n dop,3 ) all three layers suffer considerable modifications. The H-C(1) bond is reduced by 0.97%, the distance C(1)-C( From this analysis we can observe that variations of atomic distances get more substantial as we increase the amount of charges induced at the surface and, consequently, the magnitude of the electric field to which the sample is subjected. The structural modifications primarily concern the hydrogen atoms and the first layer of carbon atoms, as they directly face the metallic gate, but they also involve the second and third carbon layers with smaller intensities since the electric field is screened by the charge distribution inside the material. The changes in the chemical bonds also suggest a redistribution of the electronic density inside the material due to the electrochemical gating, as it will be shown in the next subsection: indeed, as the magnitude of the electric field is increased, electrons tend to accumulate in certain spatial regions while depleting others, and this results in a variation of atomic distances. The results are summarized in Tab. I. In order to understand which are the surface and bulk electronic states, we plot the band structure of the hydrogenated (111)-diamond slab on top of the surfaceprojected bulk-diamond electronic bands. The latter For angles and atom labeling see Fig. FIG. However, the two band diagrams (bulk and slab) have to be properly aligned in energy before being superimposed to each other. As a matter of fact the surface, that is the interface between vacuum and the material under investigation, perturbs the electronic charge distribution and generates an electrostatic potential discontinuity. This is the same problem as the band alignment between two different semiconductors or at a metal/semiconductor interface: indeed in these cases a Schottky barrier is formed, whose height measures the valence band discontinuity across the interface. By lining up the electrostatic potential on the two sides of the surface we can compute the band offset, that is the differ-ence between the top of the valence band of the surface and that of the remaining bulk of the material. We define the planar-averaged electrostatic potential as: where V 3D (x, y, z) is the 3D electrostatic potential and Ω 2D is the area of the primitive cell. Then, in order to extract only the relevant interface-related phenomena, we compute the macroscopic average 34 of the planaraveraged electrostatic potential: that is an average of the local electrostatic potential performed inside a window of width a, whose size depends on the system under study and has to be big enough in order to filter-out the microscopic details of the material. The computational procedure goes as follows: • We take the hydrogenated (111)-diamond and compute the macroscopic average of the planaraveraged electrostatic potential. Its value in the bulk-like region of the slab ( RS ) will serve as the reference energy for the surface system. Then we define ∆ S = S VB -RS as the difference between the energy of the top of the valence band ( S VB ) and the reference energy of the slab; • We take diamond in its bulk form and compute the macroscopic average of the planar-averaged electrostatic potential. Its mean value ( RB ) will serve as the reference energy for the bulk system. Then we define ∆ B = B VB -RB as the difference between the energy of the top of the valence band ( B VB ) and the reference energy of the bulk; • The energy shifts between the band structure of the slab and that of the bulk projected over the surface is given by ∆ SB = ∆ S -∆ B . This is the quantity by which the surface bands have to be shifted before being plotted on top of the bulk projected bands. This procedure has to be applied both for the undoped and doped surface. It turns out that, when the surface is undoped (Fig. In order to understand how many layers are affected by the electrochemical gating, it is important to see how the charge density profile evolves as we go from a low to a high doping regime. In the lower panels of fig. Here ρ h || (z) and ρ 0 || (z) are respectively the planaraveraged charge densities for the hole-doped and undoped cases: where Ω 2D is the area of the unitary cell and ρ i 3D (x, y, z) is the 3D charge density for the hole-doped (i = h) and undoped (i = 0) cases. Both the undoped and doped charge densities are computed from the slab with atomic parameters obtained from the relaxation in presence of the electric field. The 3D charge density is given by: Here e is the electron charge, N k is the number of k points belonging to the first Brillouin zone (FBZ), σ is the spin index, n is the band index, E F is the Fermi energy and ψ σ k,n (x, y, z) is the Bloch wavefunction for band n, spin σ and k-point k. These charge profiles contain information on both the amount of carriers induced in the sample and on how preexisting valence electrons re-arrange themselves in order to screen the applied electric field We can also get information on where charges are localized in these three cases by plotting the normalized cumulative integral of the absolute value of the planaraveraged charge density: where L is the size of the cell. This quantity is shown in the upper panels of fig. After the analysis of the charge distribution we can study how electronic properties are affected by the electrochemical gating. In Fig. The Fermi level, E F (red line), appears crossing the valence bands: at the lowest charge doping it is right below the top of the first two valence bands (bands will be referred to according to the labelling of Fig. The DOS shows the typical energy dependency of 2D systems (i.e. DOS( ) ∼ const.). For the first doping value we already have a relatively high DOS at the Fermi level, due to two bands crossing, but it nearly triples when the third band is crossed as well (Tab. III). Since this is a multiband system, we are also interested in the contribution to the total density of states from each single energy band. This information will be important in the next subsection for understanding the origin of the electron-phonon interactions, since they are directly proportional to the density of states per spin per band. Band 1 contributes to the total DOS ∼ 2 -3 times more than band 2 for all three doping values, while the contributions of bands 2 and 3 have a similar value (Tab. III). This is a preliminary clue that the most important electronphonon interactions will take place in the first band. The projected density of states on atomic orbitals (PDOS) can give us more details on the nature of the electronic bands. The central panels of Fig. The FET doping also induces a change in the curvature of the bands themselves that, obviously, indicates a change in the effective masses of the carriers (as shown in Fig. If we approximate our bands by simple parabolas: n dop (cm -2 ) Ntot(0) N1(0) N2(0) N3(0) the effective masses are proportional to the inverse of the band structure curvature: From Tab. IV we can see that the effective mass of band 1 decreases along Γ-M and increases along Γ-K on going from zero doping to n dop,1 , and then remains stationary. The effective mass of band 2 first decreases (in both directions), but also in this case it doesn't change anymore after the intermediate doping value. Finally, the effective mass of band 3 decreases along Γ-M and increases along Γ-K. As for the band anisotropy, band 1 is initially quite anisotropic but recovers a parabolic symmetry when we increment the amount of induced charge density. Band 2 is symmetric already at the lowest doping, and does not change its character throughout the various doping regimes. Finally, band 3 is the one which has the highest anisotropy and this is accentuated as n dop increases. Let us finally discuss the evolution of the Fermi surface as a function of the induced charge density (Fig. In this section we study how both the induced charge density and the presence of the electric field modify the vibrational properties of our system. First of all we analyze the phonon dispersion relations and density of states and then we move to the electron-phonon interactions at Γ and, through Wannier interpolations, on the whole Brillouin zone at the maximum doping. Finally, in order to compute the superconductive transition temperature we use the Allen-Dynes/McMillan formula where λ is the electron phonon coupling constant, ω log is the logarithmic averaged frequency and μ * is the Morel-Anderson pseudopotential while μ * will be considered as a parameter ranging from 0.13 to 0.14 (which are the values used in boron-doped diamond where N tot (0) is the total density of states per spin, N q and N k are the number of q-and k-points in the first Brillouin zone considered for the computations, and the energy is measured from the Fermi level. The electronphonon matrix elements g ν kn,k+qm between band n and m (n, m = 1, 3 in our case, as labelled in Fig. where |kn is the Bloch-periodic part of the Kohn-Sham eigenfuction, v SCF = e -iq•r V KS is the periodic part of the Kohn-Sham potential V KS . Atoms in the unit cell are labelled by A and their cartesian coordinates by α, while their mass is denoted by M A . The Fourier transformed displacement of atom A along the cartesian direction α is denoted by u q Aα and e Aα qν is the phonon eigenvector normalized on the unit cell of components Aα. As we discussed above, on increasing the doping the system evolves towards a quasi-2D structure, where the use of Eq. 9 is not completely justified. In fact, in the 2D limit, fluctuations are greatly renormalized In Fig. Carbon atoms frequencies instead range from 0 to ∼ 1400 cm -1 and their eigenvalues arrange in very rich dispersion relations. For all three doping values, the phonon DOS for the carbon atoms is very concentrated around high-energy modes (where we have a majority of nearly-flat bands) while the low energy ones are less populated. From the phonon dispersion relation it is also possible to observe the softening of an optical in-plane mode, which is highlighted in Fig. Let us start with the calculation of electron-phonon interactions at q = Γ, which is a computationally inexpensive task. This procedure provides approximate results with the assumption that the electron-phonon matrix elements (eq. 13) are constant, or nearly constant, in the portion of reciprocal space delimited by the phonon vectors q that give non-zero contributions to the nesting factor: The Dirac deltas appearing in eq. 14 limit the summation over the vectors q which can scatter an electron from the n-th to the m-th Fermi surface (since we have set E F = 0 in Eq. 14). As a matter of fact, if we define k = k + q, the first Delta tells us that |k| = k F n while the second one gives |k | = k F m . Therefore, since q = kk we have that: where θ is the angle between k and k . Then, assuming spherical Fermi surfaces, the electronphonon matrix elements computed at q = Γ are considered constant inside the region delimited either by a circle of radius |q| = 2k F n if n = m (Fig. In order to see which are the strongest electron-phonon modes as a function of the induced charge density, we compute the squared average of the electron-phonon matrix elements for each phonon mode ν: where N n (0) is the density of states of band n at the Fermi level, n, m = 1, 2, 3 are band indices (obtained from Fig. In the case of n dop,1 , there are two degenerate in-plane modes at ω = 1176 cm -1 that have the strongest e-ph matrix elements, with g 2 = 0.167 eV 2 . These modes mainly contribute to intraband 1 -1 and interband 1 -2 scattering processes, while the 2 -2 channel is negligible. As for n dop,2 there are again two degenerate in-plane modes at ω = 959.25 cm -1 with g 2 = 0.441 eV 2 . In this case the in-plane mode contributes both to inter-and intra-band processes which are relevant for the electronphonon interaction, including the 2-2 scattering process. This is reasonable since at this doping level the size of the second band is no longer negligible. At the highest doping level, i.e. n dop,3 , the largest g 2 ν are associated to two degenerate in-plane modes at ω = 626 cm -1 (with g 2 = 1.105 eV 2 ) and a single out-of-plane mode at at ω ⊥ = 817 cm -1 (with g 2 ⊥ = 0.248 eV 2 ). In this case the only negligible process of the in-plane mode is the intra-band scattering within the third Fermi surface. On the other hand, the out-of-plane mode only favors the intra-band processes of all the three bands. The fact that also an out-of-plane mode becomes relevant in this last case is not so obvious. However, the electronic projected density of states of Fig. With these pieces of information we can compute λ and ω log (Fig. the vibration eigenvalue ω Γν , i.e. the frequency of the phonon of mode ν at q = Γ: The logarithmic averaged frequency ω log is given instead by: In Fig. The calculated values of λ and ω log can now be inserted in the Allen-Dynes formula to determine T C . It turns out that, for the first two doping values (n dop,1 and n dop,2 ) there is no superconducting transition. However at n dop,3 there is a superconductive phase with a critical temperature in the range 63.14 -57.20 K for μ * ∈ [0.13; 0.14]. The corresponding value of λ is almost three times the value of boron-doped diamond Since the highest doping value (n dop,3 ) seems to show a superconductive phase transition with a sizable critical temperature, we try to further investigate this phenomenon by a more accurate procedure. This is accomplished by interpolating the electron-phonon matrix elements over the whole Brillouin zone by using the Wannier functions. In this way we do not consider the interactions only at q = Γ, but we actually compute their value for every point in reciprocal space. Since the atoms which contribute most to the DOS at the Fermi level are the carbon atoms belonging to The calculation of the electron-phonon interaction performed by using the Wannier functions gives an electronphonon coupling constant λ = 0.81, which is ∼ 35% smaller than that computed at q = Γ. However, the logarithmic averaged frequency obtained through Wannierization is bigger than that obtained via the simplified approach, with a difference of ∼ 40 cm -1 . This reduces the final critical temperature to T C ∈ [34.93-29.60] K for μ * ∈ [0.13; 0.14], which is ∼ 30 K smaller than the one obtained by diagonalization of the dynamical matrices computed only at the center of the Brillouin zone. This means that, from a quantitative point of view, the simple model we adopted before overestimates the critical temperature, but qualitatively it seems to catch the main physics of this system. A comparison of the quantities relevant for the superconductivity is reported in Tab. V. The Wannier interpolation can actually give us further details on the nature of the phase transition. Fig. Since the Eliashberg spectral function is inversely proportional to ω, we can plot α 2 F (ω) • ω in order to get rid of its the frequency dependece. In Fig. We can now see how the various intra-and inter-band processes contributes to the final λ. This is obtained by computing the band-resolved Eliashberg spectral function (Fig. From this analysis it is possible to observe that the relevant processes are those concerning the first band. The intra-band scattering of the first Fermi surface (which is clearly an in-plane process) gives the highest contribution, while the other two intra-band processes are negligible. The other important processes for the superconductive phase transition are the inter-band scattering between the first and the second band (which is due to an in-plane mode) and between the first and the third bands (which is due to an out-of-plane mode). Indeed, the second and the third Fermi surfaces have similar electronic densities of states at the Fermi level and, since the electron-phonon interaction depends linearly on the DOS, they will contribute in the same way. Finally, as the Wannier interpolation gives information on the electron-phonon matrix elements for each q-point in the Brillouin zone, we can compute the following quantity: which is the q-dependent electron-phonon coupling constant normalized by the nesting factor. In this way we can investigate how the electron-phonon interaction strength varies over the Brillouin zone. Indeed, the actual λ is an average of λnm (q) over the q-points of the FBZ: FIG. In Fig. Allen-Dynes's equation (Eq. 9) only gives a good qualitative estimate of the superconductive critical temperature but it is not quantitatively correct be constant at the Fermi energy. Moreover the Fermi surface shown in Fig. where iω n = i π β (2n + 1) are the Matsubara frequencies (for fermions), The superconducting critical temperature T C is defined as the temperature where the energy gap closes, i.e. when ∆(T C ) = 0. The electron-phonon coupling constant is defined as: (24) which in our computations was evaluated using the Eliashberg spectral function α 2 F (ω) obtained through the Wannier procedure described in the previous section. The sums in Eq. 22 and Eq. 23 diverge unless one limits the number of Matsubara frequencies (or, in other words, the energy range). Usually, the energy range is upperlimited by a cutoff ω c = 4ω max or ω c = 10ω max , where ω max is the maximum phonon frequency after which the α 2 F (ω) is equal to zero. In this case, the Coulomb pseudopotential is different from zero only in an energy range [-ω c , ω c ], i.e. μ * c = μ * • θ(ω -|ω c |). Instead of defining a cutoff energy, we compute the energy gap ∆ 0 = ∆(iω 0 ) for increasing numbers of Matsubara frequencies, n max (which corresponds to increasing the energy range) and find the value of n max necessary to ensure the saturation of the gap value. Then, we put to zero the Coulomb pseudopotential after a typical phonon frequency taken to be proportional to the square-root of the second moment of the Eliashberg spectral function: In our previous estimation of the superconducting critical temperature through Allen-Dynes formula, we used typical values of the Coulomb pseudopotential μ * ∈ [0.13, 0.14] for boron-doped diamond (as discussed in the previous section). However it is known When solving the Eliashberg equations for our slab at a doping value n dop,3 , the first thing we can notice is that, for each value of the Coulomb pseudopotential, ∆ converges at T = 10 K when n max = 192, i.e. when ω c ≈ 1040 meV. Since in our case ω max ≈ 3200 cm -1 = 397 meV, the cutoff energy used in the standard approach would have been ω c = 4ω max = 1588 meV. As mentioned above, the critical temperature we get if we solve the Eliashberg equations using μ * ∈ [0.13, 0.14] is actually bigger than the one we obtain via Allen-Dynes's formula: as a matter of fact we get T C (μ * = 0.13) = 44.9 K and T C (μ * = 0.14) = 42.9 K instead of 34.93 K and 29.60 K, respectively (see Table In this work we investigated the occurrence of fieldeffect induced superconductivity in the hydrogenated (111) diamond surface by first-principes calculations including the effects of charging and of the intense electric field at all steps in the calculation (electronic structure, structural and vibrational properties and electron phonon coupling). This has been possible due to the recent methodological developments in Ref. 17. Previous works Our calculations show that high T C superconductivity emerges at electron doping of the order of n = 6 × 10 14 cm -2 . The critical temperature, calculated by using the Allen and Dynes/McMillan equation, ranges between 29 and 35 K for values of μ * typical of boron-doped diamond. The solution of the isotropic linearized single-band Eliashberg equations gives T C 36 K. Superconductivity is mostly supported by planar vibrations and to a lesser extent by out-of-plane vibrations. The average electron-phonon coupling is λ = 0.81 and the logarithmic averaged frequency is ω log ≈ 670 cm -1 . The coupling arises partly from interband scattering, so that our values of T C may be an underestimation of the real T C , as superconductivity in this system is multiband in nature. Our work demonstrates that achieving high-T C superconductivity in field-effect doped hydrogenated diamond is possible, even though hole charge densities of the order of 6×10 14 cm -2 are required. . As a reference (blue dashed lines) we also plot the uniform doping as obtained from jellium. Black solid lines refer to the FET case, the red line is the Fermi Energy. TABLE IV. Effective masses for the hydrogenated (111) diamond surface in units of the electron mass me. Bands are labelled according to Fig. 4 (c).