We investigate theoretically the origins of observed variations in the critical currents of Nb/Al-AlOx/Nb Josephson junctions in terms of various types of disorder. We consider the following disorder sources: vacancies within the Al layer; thickness variations in the AlOx layer; and "pinholes" (i.e., point contacts) within the AlOx layer. The calculations are all performed by solving the microscopic Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian self-consistently. It is found that a small concentration of vacancies within the Al layer is sufficient to suppress the critical current, while the presence of a small number of thick regions of the oxide layer induces a similar effect as well. The pinhole scenario is found to result in anomalous behavior that resembles neither that of a pure tunnel junction nor that of a superconductor-normal-superconductor (SNS) junction, but a regime that interpolates between these two limits. We comment on the degree to which each of the three scenarios describes the actual situation present in these junctions. Recent progress in the fabrication of nanoscale superconducting devices has led to a resurgence of interest in superconducting electronics. We argue that of the scenarios we considered, the likeliest explanation for the critical current variations observed in the MIT experiments is vacancies and small fluctuations (of the order of one lattice spacing) in the thickness of the oxide layer, as these are physically reasonable sources of disorder that are in fact seen in these junctions. Reasonable statistical distributions of this type of disorder are shown to lead to distributions of crit- ical currents consistent with that realized in experiments. On the other hand, we argue that pinholes are unlikely to provide a reasonable explanation for these. However, we make the case that pinholes are a likely origin of device failures, owing to the fact that even a tiny concentration of pinholes leads to critical currents much larger than the pinhole-free cases, and thus result in the failure of the junctions to work to their intended specifications. It should be stressed that the list of disorder types we have considered is by no means exhaustive. It is known that grain boundaries suppress the critical current for high-T c superconductors, To allow for an apples-to-apples comparison of the effect of different kinds of disorder, it is important first to fix the parameters of the system. The Nb/Al-AlO x /Nb junction is modeled as a superconducting-normal metalinsulator-superconductor (SNIS) junction, and for simplicity the Al and AlO x layers are taken to be distinct from each other. (A schematic diagram of the grown junction is shown in Fig. For simplicity we assume that the full junction lives on a square lattice in two spatial dimensions, and hence the barrier is one-dimensional. The Hamiltonian describing the junction is given by the following standard expression: This can be recast into Bogoliubov-de Gennes form by applying a particle-hole transformation. The BdG eigenvalue problem can be written in the following more illuminating manner: Here u n and v n are the particle and hole amplitudes. Meanwhile the order parameter ∆ ij is obtained selfconsistently from the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of H using Note here that only the diagonal elements of ∆ ij are nonzero and that all its off-diagonal elements vanish, in keeping with the requirement that only s-wave superconductivity is present. Also note that within the normal metal and insulating barrier regions, the s-wave pairing interaction V vanishes. To calculate the Josephson current, a phase gradient is applied across the system. The phase of the order parameter is held fixed at the left and right ends of the system with phases given by 0 and φ, respectively, where φ is the phase difference across the junction; the phase in the rest of the system is allowed to fluctuate freely in the course of the self-consistent solution of the problem. The current flowing between any two points r i and r j is computed using the following expression: The system consists of 30 × 30 lattice sites, with periodic boundary conditions along the y-direction and open boundary conditions along the x-direction. The s-wave pairing interaction V = 2 is chosen to ensure that the superconducting coherence length is parametrically larger than the thickness of the oxide barrier. It is assumed that only nearest-neighbor hopping exists for the electrons (with t = 1), that the hopping amplitude is the same in both superconducting and normal regions, that both S and N are at half-filling, and that the temperature is in the limit T → 0. The Al and AlO x layers are taken to be four lattice spacings and one lattice spacing thick, respectively. The thinness of the barrier (AlO x ) layer relative to the normal-metal (Al) region is chosen to mimic the small average thicknesses of the oxide layers seen in this particular class of Josephson junctions-for the junctions grown in particular by the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, the base aluminum layer from which the oxide is formed is around 8 nm thick 2 , while the thickness of the oxide layer is generally of the order of 1 nm Figure For both the clean and disordered cases, the CPR has a sinusoidal form, with a peak corresponding to the critical current near φ = π/2. This is to be expected from a tunnel junction in the low-temperature limit. The final case of pinholes is fascinating, not least because it turns out to behave completely differently from the other two forms of disorder we had considered. Figure That the critical current is suppressed in the presence of strong on-site impurities within the Al layer should come as no surprise. The local density of states is strongly suppressed at sites which host such impurities, and as a result the effective amplitude for hopping from one site to an impurity site is decreased considerably. Thus the presence of strong impurities places a severe constriction on the available transport channels through which the Josephson current can pass. The effect of impurity concentration on the critical current can be seen in Fig. The suppression in the presence of vacancies is in fact stronger than this effective area-law expectation, and is likely due to the real-space interference effects that are inevitably present in a randomly disordered system such as what we study. It is important to note the large range over which the critical current varies (at 20% concentration of vacancies, the critical current is down by almost 40% relative to the clean limit). If we are to take this form of disorder as an explanation for the observed variations in the critical current, we have to ask if the sample fabrication process results in a highly variable number of defects present within the junctions. There is at present no good answer to this question. Given the very large number of samples that have been synthesized, the degree of junction-to-junction variation of the degree of disorder present remains largely unknown. We hypothesize that if the growth processes used yield a broad distribution of vacancy concentrations among all the samples synthesized, then this defect-centered explanation is very plausible. However, if it turns out that the processes result in a rather narrowly spread distribution of impurity densities, then any defect-based explanation would have to be reliant on specific junction-to-junction disorder configuration variations at one concentration level. We can in fact make an estimate of the distribution of the critical currents if we assume that the junction-tojunction vacancy concentrations are distributed in some known fashion. As noted before, it can be seen in Fig. The variation of the barrier thickness has frequently been invoked in the literature to explain the variability in the critical currents. From the numerics we have performed, the main mechanism by which the current is suppressed in the presence of thick portions of the barrier region is the suppression of transport across the thicker regions of the oxide barrier. In Fig. It is interesting to see if, despite this atomic-scale variability in the barrier thickness, the critical current still has an exponential dependence on the barrier thickness. Figure the average thickness of the oxide barrier. This functional dependence however becomes progressively less accurate with increasing average thickness, corresponding to a larger fraction of thick oxide barriers. Nevertheless the overall dependence of the critical current on average barrier thickness-and not, for example, the minimum thickness-reflects the fact that the bulk superconducting coherence length (approximately 2-3 lattice sites for the parameters chosen in our simulations) is larger than the characteristic length scales of the oxide barrier region (which is one lattice size thick for the clean case), and hence the overall effect on bulk quantities such as the critical current is determined by averages over spatially fluctuating regions. We can make estimates for the distribution of the critical currents assuming knowledge of how the concentrations of thick-barrier sites are distributed on a junctionto-junction basis. Unlike the vacancies scenario, for oxide-barrier variations I c is a nonlinear function of the concentration of thick-barrier sites n b , as one can see in Fig. Here A, B, p, and q are to be determined by a curvefitting procedure. The precise functional form is not relevant-similar results can be obtained by a quadratic fit. Nevertheless with this functional form we can estimate P (I c ), assuming that the thick-barrier site concentrations n b are normally distributed. Figure It is presently not well understood if the process employed by the MIT Lincoln Laboratory spontaneously generates pinholes in the fabricated junctions, and presently available information from TEM measurements suggests that these are not present in functioning junctions. Therefore much of this section is speculative and driven mainly by the academic question of what the effects of a nonzero concentration of pinholes are, as well as how the critical currents of junctions depend on the 12. Critical current versus number of pinholes. The leftmost limit shows a uniformly thin barrier with thickness of one lattice spacing, while the rightmost limit shows an SNS junction with no insulating barrier. A plot of one particular configuration of this disorder type (with 5 pinholes) can be seen in Fig. In Fig. It is worth noting that the critical currents for junctions with even a small number of pinholes present are much larger than in the pinhole-free case-witness how a 10% concentration of pinholes gives rise to a critical current twice as large as in the clean case-with the critical current scaling approximately linearly with the pinhole concentration. Of all the forms of disorder studied in this paper, pinholes are the only type which gives rise to an enhancement on the order of the clean-junction critical current itself, while the other two disorder types result in critical currents whose suppression relative to the clean case is comparatively small. The variability of the critical current seen in experiment is small relative to the mean value of the critical current, and appears to suggest that vacancies or oxide-barrier variations are far likelier explanations for the aforementioned variation than pinholes. With the knowledge of the qualitative effects of various kinds of disorder on the critical current of SNIS Josephson junctions, one can make educated guesses as to the causes of the variability of the measured critical currents. One important factor that must be considered when attributing this effect to disorder is the variability of the junction-to-junction disorder levels. For instance, the presence of oxygen vacancies in the barrier regions depends crucially on details of the growth process such as the exposure time. In general, there is no indication that the disorder in these junctions is "controlled" in the sense that fixed concentrations of, for example, vacancies, dopants, or barrier fluctuations can be induced in a systematic way. Disorder arising here from the growth process appears to be intrinsic, but to our knowledge there is no quantitative information, besides the critical-current variations, about the level of disorder present. Even estimates of junction properties such as the barrier thickness depend on averaging out the spatial variations that are intrinsic to these materials. Thus vacancies and barrier-thickness variations are excellent explanations for the critical-current variability in these junctions. The main appeal of these explanations is that these two forms of disorder are known to be present in these materials, and are intrinsic byproducts of the growth processes used for these junctions. It remains to be seen if the growth processes result in broadly distributed levels of disorder across various samples, as this would account for much of the observed junctionto-junction variability of the critical current to a greater degree than a narrowly-distributed disorder source would (for which the resulting junction-to-junction criticalcurrent fluctuations would be less distributed and far more reliant on rare-region effects present within one sample). Pinholes by themselves on the other hand appear to be unlikely explanations for the observed variability in the critical current. The reason is that the critical-current variability is much more uncontrolled and of a larger order of magnitude than seen in experiments. As mentioned earlier, the presence of even a small density of pinholes within the oxide barrier results in critical currents whose magnitude is far greater than in the clean-junction case. Therefore, when considered as an explanation for the critical-current distributions reported in the literature, pinholes would appear to result in a much wider distribution than seen in reality. However, it has to be noted that the reported distributions pertain only to functioning devices. If the fabrication process results in some fraction of junctions having a finite concentration of pinholes within their respective oxide-layer barriers, then one can imagine a scenario in which junctions with pinholes let through much larger currents than the other components of the devices are capable of, owing to the large barrier transparency present, and therefore result in device failures. It is not known what the yield is for the process employed in fabricating these junctions. From the point of view of optimizing the yield of the fabrication process, an interesting direction is to revisit the non-functioning devices and examine if these have pinholes present within the oxide barrier. If pinholes are indeed the culprit behind low yields, it would be worthwhile to modify appropriately the fabrication process in order to reduce the probability that device failures occur. A direct measurement of the current-phase relationship of these junctions, e.g. with a SQUID, would be an independent test for the existence of pinholes. We have also seen that the current-phase relation of the junction at low temperatures is an important indicator of the presence of pinholes, with high-transparency (i.e., pinhole-infested) junctions showing a sawtooth-like CPR, as opposed to a sinusoidal one. One possible future direction is to directly measure the current-phase relation on these junctions to see if these indeed conform to the expectations seen theoretically for SNIS junctions with a nonzero concentration of pinholes. 