From systematic analysis of the high pulsed magnetic field resistance data of La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 thin films, we extract an experimental phase diagram for several doping values ranging from the very underdoped to the very overdoped regimes. Our analysis highlights a competition between charge density waves and superconductivity which is ubiquitous between x = 0.08 and x = 0.19 and produces the previously observed double step transition. When suppressed by a strong magnetic field, superconductivity is resilient for two specific doping ranges centered around respectively x ≈ 0.09 and x ≈ 0.19 and the characteristic temperature for the onset of the competing charge density wave phase is found to vanish above x = 0.19. At x = 1/8 the two phases are found to coexist exactly at zero magnetic field. The phase diagram of high-T c cuprate superconductors encompasses a rich variety of behaviors and competing phenomena. The antiferromagnetic Mott-insulating state that characterizes the undoped parent compound is rapidly disrupted upon doping, and the Néel temperature vanishes in the hole-doped compounds for doping p ≥ 0.02, while the superconducting critical temperature T c rises and then decreases. The density of states at the Fermi energy is also partially suppressed in all cuprate families below a crossover pseudogap temperature T * Under high magnetic field the topology of the Fermi surface is deeply affected in the underdoped region and magnetotransport studies This variety of behaviours naturally involves an interplay of physical mechanisms and a variety of theoretical proposals. First of all the pseudogapped phase below T * (p) might be due to a novel exotic metallic state driven by strong correlations in the proximity of the Mott insulating phase 2 or it might arise from some quantum critical point (QCP) underneath the superconducting dome associated to some ordered state: circulating currents In this Article, we analyze resistance data under high magnetic field for LSCO thin films with various dopings, ranging from heavily underdoped to heavily overdoped (0.045 ≤ x ≤ 0.27). We use large magnetic fields to tip the balance between different phases across the entire doping range. The phase diagram is in excellent agreement with a scenario in which, at low doping, disorder induces filamentary superconductivity (SC) inside an otherwise charge-ordered phase A minimum at T M IN in the temperature-dependence of the resistivity separating a negative slope at low T from a positive slope at larger T at p < 0.17 and high H was evidenced long ago The sample preparation and characterization are described in Refs. The top panel of Fig. We interpret the plateau as due to quantum critical behavior between an insulating state and a superconducting state over an extended temperature range. For a conventional QCP, this behavior would extend down to zero temperature and intersect the resistance axis at a finite value. We see in Fig. As a function of doping we basically encounter three different situations. For overdoped samples (x ≥ 0.2), the R(H) curves never cross, the resistances at any field are all increasing functions of T , so that no plateau appears in the R(T ) curves as already mentioned (see, e.g., Fig. A scaling analysis in the vicinity of QCP1 for four different samples revealed a set of critical indices νz = 0.45 -0.63 ± 0.1 (See Fig. In Fig. Next, we extract from the R(T ) curves the characteristic temperature scales, T M IN , T IN F , and T M AX that we use as proxies for the onset of CO, of superconducting fluctuations and SC as in Ref. Some typical phase diagrams are displayed in Fig. For x = 0.06, R(T ) has a minimum at all H, so R (T ) > 0, except at low H and T , where SC occurs. The line separating red and green regions in the top-left panel of Fig. We now analyze the behavior of the characteristic temperatures as a function of doping. In Fig. We interpret T M IN (x) as the onset temperature for static short-range CDW Based on the outcomes of our analysis, we can draw the phase diagram of Fig. Based on the many evidences for CDW mentioned in the introduction and on theoretical arguments The main evidence in favour of the identification of the phase with negative R (T ) with a CDW phase arises from the occurrence of a low-temperature superconducting phase in the underdoped region, well inside the domain of stability for CDWs. This was recently explained in terms of disorder-promoted filamentary SC topologically protected at the domain boundaries of CDW domains Concerning the quantum critical regimes at H * C and H C (orange dashed lines in Fig. The above results were obtained for LSCO thin films. We briefly discuss here how they can be relevant to other cuprates. First it is noteworthy that the dip in T c at x = 1/8 is a common feature of all hole-doped cuprates. And the splitting of the T c dome into two different domes observed at high field was previously observed in YBCO In summary, the complex behaviour of the resistivity throughout the doping-temperaturemagnetic field phase diagram in LSCO thin films can be rationalised in terms of two simple ingredients: a) a competing, polycristalline CDW phase inducing the negative-slope behaviour in R(T ) at low T and high fields and b) superconducting Cooper fluctuations that, upon decreasing the field, overcome the CDW state and induce SC. The effect of changing the doping level is to slide in a non-monotonic way the observation window provided by the magnetic field over the phase diagram for this two phases, as illustrated in Fig. Resistance versus magnetic field and resistance versus temperature are displayed for an overdoped sample (x = 0.25) in Fig. In Fig. Fig. The phase diagram for x = 0.125 shows that the plateau (orange dashed line in Fig. 