We explore CdTe fractional monolayer quantum dots (QDs) in a ZnCdSe host matrix for potential application in an intermediate band solar cell device. Careful consideration has been taken during the initiation of the growth process of QDs by migration enhanced epitaxy, in order to avoid the formation of undesirable interfacial layers that can form due to the lack of common anion between the two materials. A superlattice structure of 100 periods of alternating QD and spacer layers is analyzed by high resolution X-ray diffraction (XRD) and photoluminescent (PL) spectroscopy. Simple arguments are used following continuum elastic theory to deduce the size of the dots and the strain within the superlattice from XRD data. This is further verified using PL and used in the energy calculations that yield the values of the intermediate band energy. The results suggest that the optimized materials are highly suitable for these high efficiency solar cells. The goal of higher efficiency in solar cells has been driving solar cell research since their inception, and its significance has never been greater than it is today. One possible solution to overcoming the single junction solar cell efficiency imposed by the Schockly-Quisser limit Type-II Zn(Cd)Te /ZnCdSe submonolayer QDs have been explored by our group for their promising properties as IBSCs A schematic of the structure investigated is shown in Fig. The shutter sequence recently developed by our group entailed a growth interruption with exposure of only a Cd flux for 5 s after the growth of the ZnCdSe spacer, followed by a short wait time of 1 s without any shutters open, instead of the 5 s wait times previously performed. The shutter opening and closing cycles used are shown in Fig. These values suggest that the superlattice region is nearly pseudomorphic to the InP substrate, due to the small difference between the in-plane lattice parameters which is only 0.22%. The SL period is made up of the combination of a spacer layer of the same composition as that of the ZnCdSe buffer layer and the CdTe QD layer, which we will show can be modelled as fractional layers of CdTe. For a more complete understanding of the energy at which the IB level forms within the host material, a good understanding of the strain and the thickness of the quantum dots is necessary. For this we utilize the symmetric and anti-symmetric HR-XRD scans (Figs. 2(a) and 2(b)) using the following simple arguments and considerations. From the (004) scan the out-of-plane thickness of the period can be obtained by the distance between higher order superlattice peaks and is calculated to be t ⊥ SL = 43Å. Considering the superlattice structure as a pseudo-crystal, we describe the lattice constant a ⊥ SL as the weighted average of the strained individual layers that make up the period: where, t ⊥ Sp , and t ⊥ QD are the thickness of the ZnCdSe spacer and the average thickness of effective CdTe QD layer, respectively; a ⊥ QD and a ⊥ Sp are the strained lattice constants of the individual materials. Fig. Here C 12 SL and C 11 SL are the weighted averages of the elastic constants of the individual unstrained CdTe and ZnCdSe layers given by where t 0 QDs , t 0 Sp , t 0 SL are thickness of the unstrained corresponding layers. These thicknesses, as well as the thickness of strained layers can be conveniently expressed in terms of the number of corresponding monolayers, N Correspondingly, We note here that using Eq. ( Therefore, we will take this, in further calculations, as a varying parameter, which, as shown below, uniquely determines the unknowns (a ⊥ QDs , N QDs , t ⊥ QDs ) for our given case via the measured SL lattice parameters and period. Using Eqs. ( Inserting Eqs. ( Here x = a ⊥ QD (a ⊥ QD -a ⊥ SL ), α = a 0 QDs (a ⊥ SL -a 0 Sp ), β = a 0 QDs (a ⊥ SL -a ⊥ Sp ); a ⊥ QDs can be calculated from a ∥ Sp via an equation similar to Eq. ( Intensity dependent PL shown in Figure Using Vegard's law and the known band alignments for these two materials Where a ν is the linear hydrostatic deformation potential for the valence band maxima and b is the shear uniaxial deformation potential. The strain components are given by, and Typically, compressive strain increases the band gap of the material and, depending on how large the strain is, it could significantly increase the VBO in a heterostructure. In our case this is highly desirable and allows for another tuning parameter to obtain the idealized value for the IB band. Due to the large lattice mismatch between the CdTe QDs and the spacer regions a large shift in the heavy hole energy can ultimately be observed that would be beneficial in being able to tune the energy level of the IB band. From our calculation in HR-XRD we find that the QDs are partially relaxed (35%). Thus, we find the VBO is now ~ 1.0 eV. The HH energy is calculated, using self-consistent variational calculation of the Schrödinger equation, We have successfully grown submonlayer CdTe QDs within a ZnCdSe host. The structural quality of the material was confirmed by the HR-XRD and their optical properties were established using intensity dependent PL. These materials have interesting properties that could be used towards the design of an ideal IBSC. The large VBO offset that exists between CdTe and the ZnCdSe host material, which is sufficient to provide the needed IB energy values, can be further tuned with strain. To have an accurate understating of the strain of the QDs we used HR-XRD to analyze the superlattice structure. We found that the dots were partially relaxed, and their fractional coverage could be extracted from the strain measured within the spacer region. Even though the dots were partially relaxed, our calculations show that we should expect an increase in the VBO of about 140 meV due to strain, which is helpful towards tuning the IB energy level to the desired value of 0.7eV. From the PL measurements and energy calculations we concluded that the dots in the current structure are too small (~1 monolayer in height) and thus the growth must be modified to achieve larger (thicker) dots. Acknowledgements: This work was supported by NSF CBET award number 1512017 and NSF award number HRD-1547830 (CREST-IDEALS). 