The emergence of second generation (2G) high-temperature superconductor (HTS) tapes has favored the development of HTS magnets for their applications in areas such as NMR, MRI and high field magnets. The screening current-induced field and the field drift are two major problems hindering the use of HTS tapes in the mentioned areas. Both problems are caused by the screening current, then it is necessary to have a modeling strategy capable to estimate such phenomena. Thus far, the H formulation has been the most successful and used approach to model medium-size systems (hundreds of tapes). However, its application to large-scale systems is still impaired by excessive computation times and memory requirements. Homogenization and multi-scaling strategies have been successfully implemented to increase the computational efficiency. In this contribution, we show that using the homogenization technique with the recently developed T-A formulation allows reducing the computation time and the amount of memory up to the point that real-time simulations of slow ramping cycles of large-scale systems are possible. The T-A homogeneous model also allows systematically investigating the screening current using numerical simulations The quality of second-generation high-temperature superconductor (HTS) tapes has improved during recent years. Now that HTS tapes are commercially available in sufficient length, there is an increasing interest in the development of devices based on this technology. The applications include power system devices In this section, a brief description of the T-A homogenous approach is presented. Comprehensive descriptions of the T-A formulation can be found in where B and J are the magnetic flux density and the current density, respectively where ρ is the resistivity and μ is the magnetic permeability. The study of solenoidal coils can be addressed by means of a 2D axisymmetric model, see figure where ρ HTS is the resistivity of the HTS material. The transport current flowing through the tapes is imposed by the Dirichlet boundary condition on T r , that must satisfy the following relation, where I is the transport current, T 1 and T 2 are the T r values at the edges of the superconducting line, and δ is the thickness of the HTS layer. The latter being infinitely thin, equation ( The case study used in this manuscript is a solenoidal coil made of 10 HTS pancakes, already described in The electrical resistivity of the HTS material is modeled with the so-called E-J power law, It is considered that the critical current density (Jc ) has an anisotropic dependence on the magnetic field, described by the following elliptic relation, where B z and B r are the magnetic flux density components. The values of the parameters of ( The pancakes, once converted into bulks, is meshed with 60 equally-spaced rectangular elements, along the tape's width. The number of elements along the bulk's thickness is 11, the distribution of these elements is graded with increasing number of elements at the extremities of the bulk. The symmetries of the coil allow employing adequate boundary conditions to model just the right upper quadrant of the full coil. The model was implemented in COMSOL Multiphysics 5.4, with the help of the PDE and AC/DC modules. The screening current is induced by the gradual penetration of the magnetic field into the tapes. The magnetic field penetrates from the extremities of the tapes producing current fronts. The screening current affects the magnetic field distribution all over the coil and particularly attenuates the central magnetic field. This attenuation is referred to as screening current-induced field (SCIF) Once the coil is charged and the transport current is fixed, the flux creep inside the HTS material causes the of the screening current and the SCIF, which in turn produces a drift in the central field. In this section, the effect of J c and n on central field drift is investigated. As in the previous section, the two batches of simulations are considered anew. However, the transport current is a single ramp that reaches a maximum value equal to 26.5 A at t = 1 h, followed by a plateau extends for 30 h to observe the field drift. Figure There are some remedies for the SCIF and the field drift. For example, the SCIF can be reduced by applying an external AC magnetic field forcing the "vortex shaking effect" The penetration of the magnetic field into the HTS tapes causes screening currents. The coils wound with HTS tapes face two major problems caused by the screening current, the SCIF and the field drift. These problems, amongst others, must be understood and solved to pave the way for the use of HTS coils in applications like NMR, MRI, high field magnets, etc. The effects of J c and n in both problems (SCIF and field drift) were studied by means of several numerical simulations. It was demonstrated that higher J c values cause higher screening current, while higher n values hinder the relaxation of such screening current. The main conclusion is that the reduction of both quantities J c and n causes the attenuation of the mentioned problems but they go against the use of high performant HTS tape technologies for which greater critical currents at larger n are sought to the generation of higher magnetic field. Fortunately, the striation of the HTS tapes and the current sweep reversal are effective methods to mitigate the SCIF and the field drift. However, simulations showed that the field drift could reappear for current sweep reversal with 5 and 10% overshoot. This effect could be avoided if the overshoot is increased to 20%. It is likely that the magnitude of the overshoot will depend on the coil configuration as well as the ramping cycle and studies should be performed for each magnet for different operating cycles. The efficiency of the T-A homogenous models was exploited in this paper to run dozens of simulations allowing studying the behavior of the magnet during its operation. It should be mentioned that the use of other modeling strategies such as the ones based on the H formulation would have required computation times in the order of months to obtain the same conclusion.