We revisit the theory and experiment on spin Hall magnetoresistance (SMR) in bilayers consisting of a heavy metal (H) coupled to in-plane magnetized ferromagnetic metal (F), and determine contributions to the magnetoresistance due to SMR and anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) in four different bilayer systems: W/Co20Fe60B20, W/Co, Co20Fe60B20/Pt, and Co/Pt. To do this, the AMR is explicitly included in the diffusion transport equations in the ferromagnet. The results allow precise determination of different contributions to the magnetoresistance, which can play an important role in optimizing prospective magnetic stray field sensors. They also may be useful in the determination of spin transport properties of metallic magnetic heterostructures in other experiments based on magnetoresistance measurements. Spin Hall magnetoresistance (SMR) is a phenomenon that consists in resistance dependence on the relative orientation of magnetization and spin accumulation at the interface of ferromagnet and strong spin-orbit material (such as 5d metals Although early SMR experiments were performed on heavy-metal/ferromagnetic-insulator bilayers Moreover, as charge current flows in plane of the sample, additional phenomena may occur, such as anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) or anomalous Hall effect (AHE) Here, we revisit the theory of spin Hall magnetoresistance in metallic bilayers by explicitly including the contributions from AMR and AHE into the spin driftdiffusion theory for the ferromagnetic metal layer. The expressions for magnetoresistance are then fitted to the data obtained from resistance meansurements on heavymetal (H)/ferromagnet (F) bilayers, where H: W, Pt, while F: Co, Co 20 Fe 60 B 20 . This allows us to determine more accurately contributions from various magnetotransport phenomena occuring in metallic bilayers where the spin Hall effect is the driving source. Such analysis may also be useful in the efforts to optimize 1. Schematic representation of the system considered in this paper. The system consists of heavy-metal (H) and ferromagnetic-metal (F) layers. The bilayer is deposited on a substrate and capped with a non-conductive layer (C). Thicknesses tH and tF of the H and F layers are varied, in general. Electric field, Ex, is applied along the x axis, while the unit vector m along magnetization of the ferromagnet is oriented in the plane and at an angle φ to the x axis. prospective devices for information technology. The paper is organized as follows: Sec. II contains theoretical derivation of the formulas for multilayer magnetoresistance with explicit AMR and AHE contributions from metallic ferromagnet and SMR from H/F interface. Section III contains experimental details on the resistance and resistivity of the samples studied in this paper. Section IV contains results and discussion of the to experimental data on magnetoresistance. Finally, in Sec. V we briefly summarize the paper. Figure where êx and êy are unit vectors along the axes x and y, respectively. The spin current density tensor (measured in the units of charge current density) in the heavy-metal (H) layer can be written as follows: where i = x, y, z, and in the r.h.s. we used the convention for dyadic vector products according to which the first vector denotes the flow direction, and the second vector describes the spin polarization and magnitude of the spin current. Only the component flowing along the normal to interfaces is relevant and will be taken into account in the following, i.e. êz • 2e q H s ≡ j H s (z), where Here θ SH is the spin Hall angle, ρ H 0 is the bare resistivity of the heavy metal, and μ H s (z) is the spin accumulation that is generally z-dependent. The charge current density in the heavy-metal (H) layer, in turn, can be written in the form and contains the bare charge current density and the current due to inverse spin Hall effect. Note, that the spin current in general can induce charge current also flowing along the axes x and y. However, due to lateral dimensions of the samples much larger than the layer thicknesses and spin diffusion lengths, those additional components can be neglected. Analogously to the above, we define the spin current density tensor (in the units of charge current density) in the ferromagnetic layer (F) as However, now the first vector on r.h.s. describes direction flow and magnitude of spin current while the second one spin polarization, which now is along the magnetization. Thus, one can write 2e q F s • m = j F s , where j F s is given by the equation in which θ AH and θ AMR are the anomalous Hall angle and AMR angle, defined as Charge current density in the ferromagnetic layer (F) can be written as Note, in the above equations for the current densities in both H and F layers we assumed linear response to electric field, i.e. we neglected the so-called unidirectional spin Hall magnetoresistance effect The interfacial spin current density tensor can be written as where the spin current j HF s flowing through the heavymetal/ferromagnet interface is given by the following expression Here and G ↑ and G ↓ denoting the interface conductance for spin-↑ and spin-↓. Furthermore, G r ≡ Re G mix and G i ≡ Im G mix , where G mix is the so-called spin-mixing conductance. Note, that we neglect explicitly a contribution from the interfacial Rashba-Edelstein spin polarization In the following discussion we assume η = 0 and treat G F as an effective parameter. To find charge and spin currents we need to find first the spin accumulation at the H/F interface and also at external surface/interfaces. This can be found from the following boundary conditions: Having found spin accumulation and also electrochemical potential, one can find the longitudinal (l) and transversal (t) in-plane components of the averaged charge current j( m) from the formula: The total charge current can be written down in the Ohm's-law form, where the conductivity (resistivity) tensor takes the form: with In the above expressions the following dimensionless coefficients have been introduced to simplify the notation: With the resistivity defined in Eq. ( In order to compare the models with and without AMR and AHE, we define SMR as: which simplifies our model to that introduced by Kim et. al Table The resistance of the system was measured with a twoand four-point technique using Keithley 2400 sourcemeters and Agilent 34401A multimeter. As shown in Fig. Table x(-1) spin transport, i.e. G F → ∞, and also assumed G i to be neglible. Both assumptions are valid for metallic interfaces and the fitted parameters should be understood as upper limits. Although the theory predicts influence of AHE on the magnetoresistance, we neglect it in further discussion, as the so-called anomalous Hall angle is small in ferromagnets considered here, but should play an important role in out-of-plane magnetized systems or inplane magnetized systems with more significant anomalous Hall angle. Finally, we assumed spin polarization β = 0.3 for both Co and Co 20 Fe 60 B 20 . Figures Due to relatively high spin Hall angle in W, magnetoresistance as a function of heavy-metal layer thickness, shown in Figs. The dependence of magnetoresistance on ferromagnetic layer thickness for fixed thickness of heavy-metal layers' is shown in Figs. In conclusion, we have developed an extended model of magnetoresistance for magnetic metallic bilayers with in-plane magnetized ferromagnets, which explicitly treats both SMR and AMR contributions. The model was then fitted to experimental data on magnetoresistance in W/Co 20 Fe 60 B 20 , W/Co, Co 20 Fe 60 B 20 /Pt, and Co/Pt heterostructures to estimate the strength of SMR and AMR effects. These results allow for a more accurate estimation of different contributions to magnetoresistance in magnetic metallic systems, which is important for applications for instance in spintronic memory read-heads or in other experimental schemes that rely on magnetoresistance measurements in evaluation of the spin transport properties.