We apply high resolution scanning tunneling microscopy to study intrinsic defect states of bulk FeSe. Four types of intrinsic defects including the type I dumbbell, type II dumbbell, top-layer Se vacancy and inner-layer Se-site defect are extensively analyzed by scanning tunneling spectroscopy. From characterized depression and enhancement of density of states measured in a large energy range, the type I dumbbell and type II dumbbell are determined to be the Fe vacancy and Se Fe defect, respectively. The top-layer Se vacancy and possible inner-layer Se-site vacancy are also determined by spectroscopy analysis. The determination of defects are compared and largely confirmed in the annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy measurement of the exfoliated FeSe. The detailed mapping of defect states in our experiment lays the foundation for a comparison with complex theoretical calculations in the future. Atomic defects are ubiquitous in condensed matter materials. The type, density and distribution of atomic defects can be controlled in material preparation to introduce doped carriers FeSe is the structurally simplest iron-based superconductor In most previous STM reports of FeSe Both Fe vacancy and antisite Se Fe defect are detected and determined, consistent with the STM results. We provide a detailed mapping of defect states, which lays a foundation for comparison with complex theoretical calculations in the future. High quality single crystals of FeSe in stoichiometry were grown using the KCl-AlCl 3 flux technique The STM and STS experiments were conducted in a commercial system with ultra-high vacuum and low temperature. The samples were cleaved at liquid nitrogen temperature at ∼ 77 K and were inserted into the STM head immediately. An electrochemically etched tungsten tip was treated by e-beam sputtering and field emission on Au (111) surface before the STM measurement. A constant current mode with a feedback loop control was used to take STM images. The dI/dV spectra were taken at a bias modulation of 2 mV with a modulation frequency of 1213.7 Hz. Since we are mostly interested in determining the defect states, we are not bound to temperatures below the superconducting transition. All STM and STS data were acquired at liquid nitrogen temperature (∼ 77 K). The temperature is a bit lower than the structural phase transition (T s ∼ 90 K). The ADF-STEM measurement was performed in a so-called probe-corrected STEM (FEI Titan Chemi STEM) operated at 200 kV at room temperature. The convergence angle was set at 21.4 mrad and the range of acceptance angle of ADF detector was between 53 mrad and 200 mrad. Few layers of FeSe on silicon nitride (SiN x ) grid was prepared by a mechanical exfoliation. The cleavage plane was exposed to atmosphere for less than 20 min and was not contaminated by any other reagents. The unit structure of FeSe is composed of a square iron plane sandwiched by two square Se planes The dI/dV spectrum is next measured at different sites, which is proportional to the local electronic DOS. Initially we choose a tunneling condition of V b = 100 mV and I s = 100 pA. At clean area without any defects, the dI/dV spectrum displays a V-shaped form around the Fermi level, as shown by the black curve in Fig. host Fe atom on it. The Fe vacancy can be recognized as a substitution of a high valence state ion (Fe 2+ ) with a low valence state ion (V 0+ Fe ). For the antisite defect Se Fe , Fe 2+ is substituted by an even lower valence state ion (Se 2-). For the Se vacancy, a low valence state ion (Se 2-) is substituted by a high valence state ion (V 0+ Se ). With the different valence change of defects, the scattering potential with different degrees may depress and enhance the DOS at negative energy correspondingly. Based on the order of valence change, the type I and type II dumbbell defects are determined to be the Fe vacancy and Se Fe defect, respectively. In addition, the approximate density of the type I dumbbell defect is observed to decrease with the experimental progress or the cooling cycles, consistent with the fact that the Fe vacancy can be wiped out by annealing The defect-induced change of DOS can be explored in a larger voltage range around the Fermi level. For the type I dumbbell defect, the dI/dV spectrum from -600 mV to 600 mV is measured and compared with a clean-area spectrum [Fig. Consistent with that in Fig. We then explore the spatial distribution of the electronic states around different types of defects. Series of linecuts of dI/dV spectra are measured across defects. The tunneling condition is chosen to be V b = -100 mV and I s = 100 pA. Due to the negative bias voltage applied to this measurement, the spectra are normalized by the DOS of occupied states. In Figs. We have systematically analyzed the electronic state of intrinsic defects in bulk FeSe. For two types of Fe-site defects, the distinct topographies under negative bias voltage lead to the The detailed mapping of the defect states can be compared with complex theoretical calculations in the future. The determination of two different types of dumbbell defects will also help to clarify the in-gap state 