On-chip ultraviolet to infrared (UV-IR) spectrum frequency metrology is of crucial importance as a characterization tool for fundamental studies on quantum physics, chemistry, and biology. Due to the strong material dispersion, traditional techniques fail to demonstrate the device that can be applied to generate coherent broadband spectrum that covers the full UV-IR wavelengths. In this work, we explore several novel techniques for supercontinuum generation covering near-UV to near-IR spectrum using AlN micro-photonic waveguides, which is essential for frequency metrology applications: First, to create anomalous dispersion, high order mode (TE10) was adopted, together with its carefully designed high efficiency excitation strategies. Second, the spectrum was broadened by soliton fission through third order dispersion and second harmonic generation, by which directional energy transfer from near-IR to near-UV can be obtained. Finally, high quality single crystalline AlN material was used to provide broadband transparency from UV to IR. Under decently low pulse energy of 0.36 nJ, the experimental spectrum from supercontinuum generation covers from 490 nm to over 1100 nm, with a second harmonic generation band covering from 405 nm to 425 nm. This work paves the way towards UV-IR full spectrum on-chip frequency metrology applications. On-chip supercontinuum generation spanning from UV through IR with low (sub-nJ) powers has been a quest of researchers since the original demonstration in the 1960's on silica ridge waveguides which successfully reached into the UV range To achieve supercontinuum generation covering near-UV to near-IR spectrum, several nonlinear optical processes can be proposed as the potential broadening mechanisms for the device design with both advantages and limitations. For example, SPM is the most commonly observed process in the initial stage of spectrum broadening, however it requires excessive high excitation power to further expand the spectrum To optimize the dispersion of the AlN waveguide, the modal dispersion for a series of waveguide geometries was computed from an in-house made numerical solver based on finite-difference method (FDM) provided in Using these calculations as the basis for device fabrication design, single crystalline AlN thin films were epitaxially grown by metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) on sapphire substrates. The surface roughness was determined by atomic force microscopy (AFM) in a 5 μm × 5 μm scan with a root mean squared (RMS) roughness of ~ 3 nm. Refractive indexes of the thin films were measured by ellipsometry. Figure The experimental setup is depicted in Fig. The broadened spectrum can be identified as the composition of TE00 and TE10 modes. Due to the ultra-short pulse width and different group velocities, the TE00 and TE10 modes split in the temporal domain after a propagation length of a few microns. Therefore, throughout this study, the mutual nonlinear coupling between TE00 and TE10 modes were neglected. By comparing the propagation loss and on-chip average power of TE00/TE10 modes, the power difference between TE00 and TE10 mode can be justified to be ~ 10 dB. According to the numerical simulation, the excitation efficiencies of TE00 and TE10 modes are 15% and 20%, respectively (see S.I.). On-chip average power was estimated to be ~ 50 mW, thus the average power within TE10 mode was estimated to be 30 mW, corresponding to a pulse energy of 0.36 nJ, which is low when compared with other supercontinuum generation methods at short wavelengths By solving the nonlinear Schrodinger's equation (NSE), the simulated spectrum for each mode can be obtained which is also shown in the spectrum plot in Fig. where β indicates wavevector. ω s and ω indicate angular frequency of soliton and DW, respectively. β 1 is equal to ∂β ∂ω ⁄ . P is the power within soliton modes. γ is the nonlinear parameter that described by (ωn 2 ) (cA eff ) ⁄ , where the c and Aeff indicate vacuum speed of light and effective modal area, respectively. The blue shifts of DW with increasing power can be attributed to the power dependent term in the Eq. (1). Given the dependence shown in Figure Combining the observations in Figs. The optical coherence of the spectrum can be determined by applying the first-order coherence function which is the ensemble average of multiple supercontinuum pulses. The simulation took 100 supercontinuum pulses with a standard shot noise at the input spectra, and the obtained first-order coherence of TE10 supercontinuum is shown in Fig. Figure In conclusion, we obtained supercontinuum generation from dispersion engineered AlN waveguide, the optical energy of which directionally transferred from near-IR towards near-UV wavelengths. The main spectrum covers from 490 nm to over 1100 nm with a secondary SHG spectrum that covers from 405 nm to 425 nm. Near-visible pumping was implemented to improve energy efficiency. To overcome the strong material dispersion, the AlN waveguides were designed to support high order modes. The experiment results were compared with the theoretical results from NSE simulation, which confirmed that DWs were generated from solitons perturbed by TOD, allowing for directional energy transfer. Further investigations on high order dispersion terms and propagation losses reveal that the SF process can only be initiated within a narrow window of waveguide width, which was supported by experimental observations. The SHG spectrum was investigated by solving modal dispersions near 800 nm and 400 nm, and the corresponding phasematching wavelengths were determined. Simulation on first-order coherence function suggests that the spectrum broadening procedure is robust to noise, which is essential for frequency metrology related applications. This work provides novel waveguide design strategies and paves the way towards UV-IR frequency comb generations. Fabrication AlN waveguides. The AlN thin films were coated with a ~ 600 nm SiO2 layer using plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD), followed by an 80 nm Cr layer using electron-beam evaporation. The two layers served as hardmasks for the dry etching processes. Photoresist ma-N 2403 was used to perform electron-beam lithography (EBL). The Cr layer was etched away using a user developed (chlorine + argon) reactive ion etching (RIE) process, while the SiO2 layer was removed by standard anisotropic RIE etching process developed by ASU NanoFab. The AlN waveguide patterns were defined using a user developed inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etching with Cl2, BrCl3, and Ar chemistries at a bias voltage near 300V. The waveguides were coated by 2 μm SiO2 coating layers to reduce scattering loss. After fabrication processes, samples were cut and polished down to 0.1 μm grade. The fabricated waveguide has ~ 50 to 100 nm width variance due to the underneath isotropic etching during Cr etching process, this variance was involved in numerical simulations. Detailed process flow and scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of the fabricated AlN waveguides can be found in S.I. Simulation on pulse propagation. The pulse propagation along the waveguide was simulated using an in-house developed solver for nonlinear Schrodinger's equation using split-step Fourier method where A(z,t) denotes the pulse slow varying amplitude, α is the propagation loss, β k is the kth order dispersion, γ is the nonlinear parameter, and TR is the Raman response parameter. It should be noted that we keep the most simplified Raman response form in Eq. ( High order mode excitations. We adopted different waveguide excitation strategies in this work, the detailed descriptions (Pros. and Cons.) of each excitation methods are discussed in S.I.. The most efficient excitation method was applying normal taper with a ~ 5 μm taper width. Under low power operation, the beam was first focused at the center of taper, then slowly varying the nanostage to move the focal point from center to the edge of taper facet. The out-scattered light was monitored by CMOS camera at the same time. Since the TE10 mode has higher scattering loss comparing to the TE00 mode, when the out-scattered light reaches its maximum (as recorded by CMOS camera), the excitation efficiency of TE10 mode will be near its maximum. At this stage, the location of focusing point is near the edge of taper facet, which can be confirmed by the CMOS camera. An alternative way to excite TE10 mode was to operate the system under higher power (near 30 mW on-chip average pumping power). By slowly varying the focal point from center to the edge of taper, DWs near 600 nm were generated due to the increasing excitation efficiency of the TE10 mode. The red radiation can be directly observed under microscope, and the excitation efficiency of the TE10 mode can be optimized by maximizing the red radiation. Estimation of propagation loss. The propagation losses of TE00 modes were experimentally characterized by collecting out-scattered light along the propagation direction using a CMOS camera similar to our previous investigation in The losses of TE00 modes with different waveguide widths were fitted by an in-house made dyadic Green's function (DGF) solver to obtain the sidewall roughness. The detailed description on DGF can be found in S.I.. DGF fitting gives sidewall roughness around 4 nm, which agrees well with standard optimized ICP etching process. By plugging in TE10 mode profile and sidewall roughness, the scattering loss can be estimated. The supplementary information includes material characterization, fabrication process flow, waveguide performance evaluation, high order mode excitation efficiency, propagation loss estimation, and auxiliary experimental data.