We report a combined experimental and theoretical study of the melting curve and the structural behavior of vanadium under extreme pressure and temperature. We performed powder x-ray diffraction experiments up to 120 GPa and 4000 K, determining the phase boundary of the bcc-to-rhombohedral transition and melting temperatures at different pressures. Melting temperatures have also been established from the observation of temperature plateaus during laser heating, and the results from the density-functional theory calculations. Results obtained from our experiments and calculations are fully consistent and lead to an accurate determination of the melting curve of vanadium. These results are discussed in comparison with previous studies. The melting temperatures determined in this study are higher than those previously obtained using the speckle method, but also considerably lower than those obtained from shock-wave experiments and linear muffin-tin orbital calculations. Finally, a high-pressure high-temperature equation of state up to 120 GPa and 2800 K has also been determined. Since the early study by the Mainz group reported nearly two decades ago Unlike other transition metals, vanadium (V) has scarcely been studied at high pressure (HP) and high temperature (HT). In fact, its melting T has only been calculated at one pressure point above ambient P In this work, we report synchrotron powder x-ray diffraction (XRD) studies on V up to 120 GPa and 4000 K. These studies are combined with experiments where the observation of temperature plateaus is used as a melting diagnostic. DFT calculations are carried out to validate the experimental results. These studies have allowed us to accurately determine the melting curve and the bcc-rhombohedral phase boundary of V, and its HP-HT equation of state (EOS). The reported results will be discussed and compared with previous DAC and SW experiments. Angle-dispersive XRD measurements were performed at beamline ID27 of the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF) in five different samples to reduce the chances of chemical reactions. Platelets of V (99.99% purity, Aldrich) of around 25 μm in diameter and 5 μm thick were loaded into DACs with anvil culets of 200-280 μm. We used rhenium gaskets pre-indented to a 30 μm thickness. NaCl was the pressure-transmitting medium and thermal insulator, except for the experiment carried out at 120 GPa, for which the pressure medium was MgO. Pressure was determined from the HP-HT EOS of NaCl Pressure was increased at room temperature (RT) up to the target pressure, and then the samples were gradually heated under constant load. For the experiments we used a double-side laser heating system equipped with infrared YAG lasers, previously described In addition to synchrotron experiments, a second set of experiments was performed to determine melting based upon the appearance of a plateau in the temperature as a function of applied laser power NaCl was the pressure medium, temperatures were measured using the same technique employed in HP-HT synchrotron experiments, and pressures were measured using the ruby fluorescence technique at RT We have also calculated the melting curve of V using the Z method Before presenting the results, we would like to state that in our experiments we did not find any clear evidence of chemical reactions with the pressure media However, the width of the (200) is unaffected. This is illustrated in Fig. In Fig. Using the method described above we have been able to determine the melting temperature of V at 27, 32, 53, and 64 GPa. At 120 GPa, V remained solid up to the highest temperature reached at this pressure (3750 K), but recrystallization of V was observed from 3300 to 3750 K. We have also determined the melting temperature from experiments where melting was detected using the temperature plateau criterion The first comment we would like to make, based on our results, is that both experimental techniques give melting points that are consistent with each other and agree within error bars with our computational study. The simulations determined the melting temperature at higher pressures than those covered in our experiments, the melting T at 390 GPa being equal to 6870±160 K. As in many other metals , where P is in GPa. For this melting curve, the initial slope, at P = 0 GPa, 31.4 K/GPa, is consistent with 32.6 K/GPa from isobaric-heating measurements Another important observation is that the melting curve reported here is well below the melting curve reported from SW experiments In contrast, their pressures seem to be correct: from the Hugoniot sound velocity measurements they determine the Hugoniot melting pressure of 225 GPa; this is exactly the pressure at which our theoretical Hugoniot crosses our melting curve. Another observation we can make based on our results is that the melting temperature calculated by Landa et al. [15] at 182 GPa (8000 K) is also a severe overestimation. In their experiments, Dai et al. From our experiments we have been able to determine the pressure dependence of the unit-cell volume of V following different isotherms. The results are shown in Fig. The corresponding value of the second pressure derivative of the bulk modulus Regarding the HT results, Crichton et al. We have reported an accurate determination of the melting curve and phase diagram of V up to 120 GPa and 4000 K. From the XRD experiments carried out we obtained melting points and the phase boundary between the bcc phase and the rhombohedral phase of V. These results were confirmed by the measurement of thermal plateaus in additional experiments, and by DFT calculations. Our melting curve is somewhat higher than that from the previous DAC experiment, but considerably lower than that reported in SW experiments. Explanations for these discrepancies have been provided. Finally, a PVT EOS for V is generated, which is valid for the P-T range covered in our experiments. These results will contribute to an improvement in the understanding of the HP-HT behavior of transition metals. White star represents the bcc stability point calculated by Landa et al. 