The theory of the effect of external fluctuation force on the stability and spatial distribution of mutually interacting and slowly evaporating charged drops, levitated in an electrodynamic balance, is presented using classical pseudo-potential approach. The theory is supplemented with numerical simulations where the non-homogeneous modified Mathieu equation is solved for single droplet as well as many droplets. The transition from the well ordered Coulombic crystal to randomly distributed liquid like structure is observed above a threshold value of the order parameter. The theory and simulations are found to be in fair agreement with each other. The simulation is aimed at studying the stability of structures for capturing the pollutant particle form the air streams using contactless membrane. Introduction. -The understanding and the limitations of dynamically trapping of subatomic charged microparticles in the Penning traps The levitation of multiple droplets in a trap • What will be the stability limit of the single droplet as well as two droplets in the presence of noise? • What is the threshold limit of the strength of the noise for transition from well organized to random state? • What will be the structural arrangement in case of a large number (∼100) of drops in the presence of noise? Although the theoretical analysis of fluctuations in the present manuscript is done for a thermal system it can be mapped to the external or athermal noise as long as the Gaussian white noise characteristics are maintained. Unlike Arnol S. et al. Governing equations for charged drops in quadrupole field with noise. -The equation of motion for the levitation of identically charged (q) drops and having the same mass (m), in a quadrupole balance are discussed in reference Where, r is the in plane radial direction, r 2 = x 2 + y 2 , z is the vertical direction in a cylindrical coordinate system, r 0 is the radius of the ring electrode, z 0 is the distance between the centre of a ring electrode and endcap electrode, φ 0 is the applied potential, ω= 2πf , f is the applied frequency. Consider a drop having charge q and mass m levitated in an alternate quadrupole electric field. The corresponding electric field in the radial (r) and vertical (z) directions are as follows In addition to the single drop system the N drop system experiences the force of mutual electrostatic repulsion along with the quadrupole force and the viscous drag force. The equations of motion for a N drop system without fluctuation can be modified by adding a term for accounting the fluctuations such that the resulting equations can be written as, where, τ =ωt, q i /m i is the charge to mass ration of the i th droplet, η is the viscosity of air, D pi is the diameter of the i th drop, and the subscripts i and j represent the i th and j th drop in a N drop system. The term f (τ ) is the non-dimensional form of f (t), which is a random force and will be assumed to be Gaussian zero-mean white noise. The noise is assumed to be isotropic. The properties of such a distribution are determined by the mean and the covariance of In case of a thermal noise the expression of L 0 is given by, where the h is the time step. The dynamical equation of motion for a single drop in an oscillating electric field is described by the Mathieu equation, modified to take into account the viscous drag and fluctuations forces. The other forces such as gravitational and dielectrophoretic forces are neglected by assuming that the drop is very small and the dielectric forces are ∼O(a 3 ). The force balance equation in the radial direction for a single drop can be given as, Where τ (= ωt) is the dimensionless time, ω= angular frequency of the AC field, t is the time, a is the trapping parameter, defined as a = 2qφ0 (2z0 2 +r0 2 )mω 2 , c is the coefficient of drag (dimensionless), defined as c = 3ηπDp mω , q/m is the charge to mass ratio of the drop, φ 0 is the applied electric potential and D p is the diameter of the drop. Single drop system. -The brief over view of basic analytical formulation and corresponding solution of equation of motion for case of f (τ ) = 0 The detailed derivation of intermediate steps and assumptions are given in the supplementary file. The last term in eq. 8 is a time averaged conservative force. The expression for the ponderomotive force at steady state can be written as f = 1 2 a 2 r 1+c 2 and the corresponding potential energy is . The dimensional form of the potential energy can be written as, Assuming a Boltzman distribution for the probability distribution for this potential energy, For a thermal system, in the case of Gaussian distribution, the distribution is characterized by its standard form, which can be expressed as , where P (r) is the probability distribution and σ r is the variance of the distribution. The total force acting on the drop at steady state in absence of noise will be modulated in case of additional force term in the form of fluctuations. The strength of noise in the system is introduced in the form of Gaussian white noise. Hence the probability distribution in terms of the potential energy can be obtained by simple substitution of the value of E(r) in the equation of probability distribution. The variance of the distribution can be obtained by comparing the expression of probability distribution obtained from the Boltzmann distribution and the standard form of Gaussian distribution ( as given above). The variance can be obtained as, Eq. 9 is transformed to system dependent parameters, using the definition of the strength of fluctuations i.e L 0 = 2K B T c hmω 2 , as given in the previous section. Upon substituting the expression of L 0 in eq. 9, the variance can be rearranged to express in the form of a equation given below, It can be observed from eq. 10 that the σ r 2 is proportional to L 0 and inversely proportional to a. Further, to validate the analytically obtained expression of σ r 2 numerical simulations are performed. The details of the numerical scheme and implementation are provided in Singh M. et al. In most practical cases one encounters multiple droplets. The complicated interactions in many body system can be best understood in the case of two droplet system. The additional charge interaction term (b) makes the equation non-linear and the corresponding analytical solution is expected to be more informative. It is discussed in the literature Two drop system. -Unlike the case of a single droplet, a two drop system admits mutual electrostatic repulsion in addition to the externally applied time varying alternate quadrupole force and the viscous drag force. After a sufficiently long time, the effects of initial conditions such as initial position and initial velocities are expected to diminished such that the droplets undergo stationary radial oscillations. It has been reported Recently, a rigorous theoretical formulation of interdrop distance in case of two or more than two drop system was reported by Singh M. et al. Here i=1 and 2 for drop 1 st & 2 nd . Expressing eq. 11 in more general terms in order to avoid notational complications and switch off the fluctuation force by substituting f (τ ) = 0, the eq. 11 may rewritten as In the above equation (eq. ( 16π 0 mω 2 is the fundamental coulomb interaction parameter that arises from the two charged drops interaction or repulsion, having the dimensions of volume. The parameter l c is the governing length scale for the problem. For a pair of electrostatically repelling drops, l c provides a more appropriate length scale than the radius of the ring. The average equation of slowly varying component (r) in case of two droplet system obtained using the Dehmelt approximation as, r(τ ) + c ṙ(τ ) + 1 2 The detailed derivation of eq. 13 is given in the supplementary file. The above equation of motion is homogeneous i.e. there is no net force acting on the body. Now if one introduces noise in the system in the form of Gaussian white noise (L 0 δ(τ -τ )). The eq. 13 can be written as The steady state solution of eq. 14 is Where, F N D is the steady state non-dimensional force. The potential energy (E(r)) of the corresponding force is Hence the minimum or maximum value of potential energy can be obtained by setting the first derivative of potential energy equal to zero at the center of the trap i.e (E (r = 0)). Further the expression of r at extremum point can be obtained, as given below, Substituting the eq. 17 in the second derivative of the potential energy gives the minimum potential depth for the trapping. Further expanding potential energy E(r) using Taylor series expansion gives the distribution of potential near the centre of the trap. Substituting E (r 0 ) and E(r 0 ) in the above equation gives the potential distribution in terms of system parameters, It can be observed that the first term of the eq. 20 is a constant. Similar to the single droplet motion the probability distribution associated with the given potential energy for two droplet system can be written as, The variance of distribution can be obtained by comparing the expression of probability distribution (eq. 21) with standard form of Gaussian distribution, is given below, Similar to the case of single drop, the eq. 22 can be represented in terms of system parameter, In one of our recent publications Conclusions. -The study investigates the effect of noise, induced either by background gas molecular collisions or by electric field fluctuations, on the particles levitated in an electrodynamic balance. Both the case of single and multiple drops are considered, and analytical approximations are derived for the deviations in position from the equilibrium positions. In the case of a single drop, the analytical formula compares well with the present numerical simulations. The results are also compared with the experimental results and numerical simulations of Arnold s. et al. 