We numerically examine the flow of superconducting vortices in samples containing square pinning arrays in which a band of pins is removed. When a drive is applied at an angle with respect to the band orientation, we find that the vortex depinning initiates in the pin-free channel. The moving vortices form a series of quasi-one-dimensional shear bands that begin flowing in the bulk of the pin-free channel, and the motion gradually approaches the edge of the pinned region. The consecutive depinning of each shear band appears as a series of jumps in the velocity-force curves and as sharp steps in the spatial velocity profiles. When a constant drive is applied parallel to the pin-free channel along with a gradually increasing perpendicular drive, the net vortex velocity decreases in a series of steps that correspond to the immobilization of bands of vortices, and in some cases the flow can drop to zero, creating a field effect transistor phenomenon. These results should also be relevant to other types of systems that exhibit depinning in the presence of inhomogeneous pinning. When a solid is subjected to a shear force, the dynamic response can be characterized by constructing a stress-strain curve. As the strain increases from zero, the system remains in a solid state with a linearly growing stress, and when the strain is large enough, the system yields and starts to flow as bonds between the constituent particles break. In many cases, for strains above yielding, the stress saturates or even decreases with increasing strain Another phenomenon that has similarities to the yielding transition is the depinning transition for a collection of particles driven over a random or periodic substrate In this work we use numerical simulations to show that vortex shear banding can be achieved without a Corbino geometry and with a uniform drive when the substrate consists of a strip of strong pinning coexisting with a pin-free channel. We focus on a square pinning array in which a group of adjacent rows of pins have been removed. Such a substrate could be created experimentally using artificial pinning structures We consider a superconducting system with a square pinning lattice of lattice constant a where half the pinning sites are removed and N v vortices are present, as illustrated in Fig. The damping constant is η, which we set equal to unity. The vortex-vortex interactions are repulsive and the sum of the vortex-vortex forces on vortex i is ), φ 0 is the flux quantum, and μ 0 is the permittivity. The pinning sites are modeled as parabolic traps of radius R p = 0.35λ and force Here Θ is the Heaviside step function, F p is the maximum force exerted by the pinning site, R the location of pinning site k, R ik . All forces are measured in units of F 0 and lengths in units of λ. We choose the vortex density such that the number of vortices would match the number of pinning sites if the entire pinning lattice were present, B/B complete φ = 1.0, where B complete φ is the matching field for the full pinning array. Since half of the pinning sites are missing, our vortex density is B/B φ = 2.0, where B φ is the matching field for the half pinning array. We set the pinning density to B complete φ = 0.4/λ 2 . The net drive F D is applied at an angle to the x axis and is given by The initial vortex positions are obtained using a simulated annealing protocol in which we start at a high temperature with the vortices in a liquid state and slowly cool the sample to T = 0. After the initialization, we apply a driving force that is increased in increments of ∆F D . We spend 20000 simulation time steps at each increment to ensure that the system has reached a steady state, and we measure the average vortex velocities in the parallel, We focus on the case F p = 0.75 and consider a range of drives over which depinning of the vortices trapped at the pinning sites is negligible. This model has previously been used to study vortex pinning and dynamics in systems with uniform pinning or conformal pinning arrays, where commensurability and enhanced pinning effects appear to the x axis. In Fig. , where ǫ = 0.5a and N loc = Nv i Θ(ǫ -|r y i -y|). In the pinned state at F x D = 0.0005, V loc x is zero across the entire system, while at F x D = 0.004 where there are three immobile rows in the pin-free channel, there is a step in the velocity at the edge of the flowing band of vortices. The velocity is not uniform across the flowing band but is slightly smaller next to the immobile rows, and we find that the outer moving row undergoes a phase slip with respect to the remaining moving rows. At F D = 0.0125, where there is one immobile row in the pin-free channel, the band of finite V loc x has extended nearly to the boundary of the pinning region, and the velocity of the outer moving row is again lower than that of the rest of the moving band. At F x D = 0.025, all of the vortices in the pin-free channel are moving and the band of finite V loc x reaches its widest extent, but the vortex rows closest to the pinning continue to move more slowly than the other vortices. The drop x at large y is due to the presence of the pinned region on the other side of the periodic boundary. We note that for all of these values of F x D , V y is zero. We now introduce some terminology for the different states. We denote the pinned state as phase P, while in phase M, all of the rows in the pin-free channel are flowing. In phase I, there is one immobile row of vortices in the pin-free channel, in phase III, there are three immobile rows, and so forth. For the parameters considered here, we have not observed a situation in which there are two immobile rows in the pin-free channel. In Fig. To further characterize the phase R flow, in Fig. We next consider the case where the driving force along the x or parallel direction is fixed while the drive along the y or perpendicular direction increases. Although the net force generally decreases in a series of steps as more rows of vortices become immobile. In Fig. In Fig. In Fig. We numerally examine vortices in a system with a square pinning array where half of the pinning sites have been removed to form a pin-free channel. When a drive is applied at an angle with respect to the channel, we find that the vortices in the channel depin in a series of transitions among different shear banded flow phases. The vortex velocity exhibits a sequence of steps corresponding to the quantization of the number of rows of moving vortices. As the component of the driving force parallel to the channel increases, the depinning of individual rows of vortices produces steps in the velocity-force curve. When the component of the driving force perpendicular to the channel increases, the number of immobile vortex rows in the pin-free channel also increases. A gradient in the velocity of the moving vortices appears in the pin-free channel, with vortices close to the edge of the channel moving more slowly than those in the center of the channel. When the perpendicular drive is large enough, there is a transition to a state in which the vortices move both parallel and perpendicular to the pin-free channel; however, the vortices within the pinned part of the sample move only perpendicular to the orientation of the pin-free channel. If the parallel driving force is fixed and the perpendicular driving force is increased, we find a series of downward steps in the longitudinal velocity as the number of immobile vortex rows increases, and in some cases it is even possible for the increasing perpendicular drive to produce a complete suppression of vortex motion in a field effect transistor phenomenon. In addition to vortices, our results should be general to other particle-based systems with inhomogeneous pinning, such as colloids and skyrmions.