In this work, AlGaN/GaN HEMTs with dual-layer SiNx stressors (composed of a low-stress layer and a high-stress layer) were investigated. The low-stress padding layer solved the surface damage problem caused during the deposition of the highstress SiNx, and provided a good passivated interface. The HEMTs with dual-layer stressors showed a 1 V increase in the threshold voltage (Vth) with comparable on-current (Ion) and RF current gain to those without stressors. Moreover, the off-current (Ioff) was shown to be reduced by one to three orders of magnitude in the strained devices as a result of the lower electric field in AlGaN, which suppressed the gate injection current. The dual-layer stressor scheme supports strain engineering as an effective approach in the pursuit of the normally-off operation of AlGaN/GaN HEMTs. processes, which introduce surface damages that may deteriorate the amplifying performance of the devices Due to the piezoelectric nature of GaN, the 2DEG concentration and thus the electrical characteristics of the AlGaN/GaN HEMT can be modulated by applying stress Silicon nitride (SiNx) liners deposited using plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) with dual plasma excitation frequencies have been reported as effective stressors Mansun Chan is with the Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST), Hong Kong. Guangrui (Maggie) Xia is with the School of Microelectronics, Southern University of Science and Technology (SUSTech), Shenzhen 518055, China, and also with the Department of Materials Engineering, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada (e-mail: gxia@mail.ubc.ca). Hongyu Yu is with the School of Microelectronics, Southern University of Science and Technology (SUSTech), Shenzhen 518055, Guangdong, China, also with GaN Device Engineering Technology Research Center of Guangdong, Shenzhen 518055, Guangdong, China, and also with The Key Laboratory of the Third Generation Semi-conductor, Shenzhen 518055, Guangdong, China (e-mail: yuhy@sustech.edu.cn). To overcome the surface damage problem with the singlelayer compressive SiNx, in this work, dual-layer SiNx stressors were investigated. A dual-layer SiNx stressor was composed of a low-stress SiNx interlayer for interface passivation and a highstress SiNx layer for compressive stress. The AlGaN/GaN RF HEMTs with 0.1 μm gate length for RF application were prepared, and their Vth were increased by the dual-layer SiNx stressors. The dual-layer scheme was shown to effectively prevent the semiconductor surface from the nitrogen ion bombardment during the deposition of compressive SiNx. Besides the increased Vth, the strained devices with dual-layer stressors also showed Ion and high-frequency performance comparable to those of the baseline devices with optimal passivation scheme. Moreover, the Ioff in the strained devices with the dual-layer stressors was lower than in the baseline devices. The Vth increase without etching process and the compromise of electrical performance presents an alternative to pursue normally-off RF AlGaN/GaN HEMT. The threshold voltage (Vth) of AlGaN/GaN HEMTs can be expressed by a polarization dependent model, which is given as where x is the aluminum mole fraction of AlGaN, φm(x) is the barrier height of the Schottky gate, and ΔEc(x) is conduction band discontinuity between AlxGa1-xN and GaN. ND, d, and ε(x) are doping concentration, thickness, and dielectric permittivity of the AlxGa1-xN barrier, respectively. σ(x) is the total polarization induced sheet charge density, which is given as The structure of the AlGaN/GaN HEMTs is shown in Fig. In this work, two SiNx deposition conditions were developed. In the baseline devices, the low-stress-SiNx layer was optimized for passivation to improve the drive current, which had an unintentional stress of 0.3 GPa The device with thicker interlayer shows higher on-current (Ion), consistent with the trend of 2DEG sheet resistance (R□,2DEG) extracted using transmission line model (inset). was also used to deposit the low-stress interlayer for surface passivation in the dual-layer stressor scheme. For the highstress layer, an increased duty cycles of low-frequency plasma excitation was used to introduce -1 GPa compressive stress to increase the Vth of devices. The stress values were obtained from the curvature measurements on blanket SiNx films on Si substrates. In this work, two groups of HEMTs were fabricated: the baseline devices had a low-stress SiNx layer per device, and the second group (strained devices) had a high-stress layer and may have a low-stress layer as an interlayer per device. In the second group with dual-layer stressors, different low-stress layer thicknesses were designed as listed in Table The transfer characteristics of strained devices were shown in Fig. It was shown that lower Ioff was attained with thicker interlayer. The higher Ioff of strained devices without the interlayer or with the thin interlayers were believed to have been caused by the surface damages during the high-stress SiNx deposition. However, strained devices with 7 nm or thicker interlayer showed even lower Ioff compared with the baseline devices, indicating that the passivation quality was not the only factor determining Ioff in this study. From the above data, the devices with 14 nm interlayers had the best performance (similar Ion and RF performance, one to three orders of magnitude lower Ioff and 1 V higher Vth compared with the baseline devices). Therefore, these devices were further investigated and discussed in the following sections for the stress effect on AlGaN/GaN HEMTs. For simplification, strained devices with specifically 14 nm interlayers will be called strained devices in the following sections. To further investigate the influence of the applied stress on 2DEG concentration, the distribution of the external stress and the electron concentration were simulated using two finite element analysis tools, Victory Stress and Victory Device, developed by Silvaco,. Fig. The device model was calibrated to match the subthreshold characteristics of the baseline devices, as shown in Fig. The gate length of the aforementioned devices were in submicron scale (Lg = 0.1 μm), and the electrical characteristics of submicron or even smaller device can be effectively changed by stress layers according to the edge force model In Fig. where A is a constant, E is the internal electric field of the barrier (AlGaN in this system), mn * the effective mass of the semiconductor, h the Planck's constant, and φeff is the effective barrier height. FN tunneling current is independent of temperature according to (3). As shown in Fig. The conduction band diagrams in the gate region of the baseline device and the strained device at Vg = Vth-2 V were simulated, as shown in Fig. Due to the piezoelectric nature of GaN, a 1 V increase in Vth of AlGaN/GaN HEMTs was achieved by introducing compressive stresses with the dual-layer SiNx stressors. The low-stress SiNx layer in the dual-layer SiNx stressor scheme successfully retained the similar Ion as the baseline devices by avoiding the surface damages caused during the deposition of the highly compressive SiNx layer. As a result, the comparable passivation quality translated to the comparable high-frequency performance of the strained devices and baseline devices. Moreover, the applied compression reduced the internal electric field in AlGaN, suppressing the leakage current Ioff caused by FN tunneling when a strained device is under a reverse bias. This Vth increase without a recess etching process or any compromises of the electrical performance, such as Ion, Ioff, and RF performance, supports strain engineering as an effective approach in pursuing enhancement-mode AlGaN/GaN HEMTs for RF applications. 