The superconductor-ferromagnet thermoelectric detector (SFTED) is a novel ultrasensitive radiation detector based on the giant thermoelectric effect in superconductorferromagnet tunnel junctions. This type of detector can be operated without the need of additional bias lines, and is predicted to provide a performance rivaling transition-edge sensors and kinetic inductance detectors. Here we report our numerical studies on the SFTED noise equivalent power, energy resolution and time constant, and the feasibility of a SQUID readout in both bolometric and calorimetric regimes, with the goal to provide practical design parameters for the detector fabrication and the readout circuitry implementation. The superconductor-ferromagnet thermoelectric detector (SFTED) is a novel low-temperature radiation detector Here, we discuss the SFTED in both bolometric and calorimetric regimes. Numerical results of the detector performance, i.e. noise equivalent power (NEP), thermal time constant (τ th ), and energy resolution (∆ E), will be presented with realistic design parameters. We also explore the feasibility of using a dc Superconducting QUantum Interference Device (SQUID) for the readout. Using a SQUID has the added benefit that several well-developed multiplexing schemes for large arrays already exist The sensing element of a SFTED is a tunnel junction between a superconductor and a normal metal, where the superconducting density of states has been spin split by an exchange field (h) induced by a nearby ferromagnetic insulator. To generate the electron-hole asymmetry required for thermoelectric response, where a temperature difference ∆ T between the electrodes produces a thermovoltage V th and thermocurrent I th where C h is the heat capacity, P in the absorbed power, α the thermoelectric coefficient where τ th = C h /G tot th is the thermal time constant and ZT is the thermoelectric figure of merit EuS is a ferromagnetic insulator, and has been considered as a promising tunnel barrier material for SFTED in bolometric applications However, a ferromagnetic EuS barrier with a high polarization typically has a high tunneling resistance For calorimetric applications, the energy resolution ∆ E (rms) is a figure of merit. By applying optimal filtering where NEP tot is the total zero-frequency NEP contributed by both the detector and the amplifier, and τ tot e f f is the effective thermal time constant Fig. Calorimeters are routinely used for higher energy photon detection. To absorb the incident photon with high efficiency, an absorber structure with a larger volume compared to a bolometer is required. For SFTED at a low temperature, the heat transported through tunneling can be much larger than through electron-phonon coupling (G th G e-ph ). This fundamentally relaxes the requirement of a dedicated thermal isolation platform 5 such as a membrane, therefore easing the fabrication process. However, this also limits the use of high P EuS as tunnel barrier for SFTED, since its lower specific transparency On the other hand, detectors with AlO x barriers can provide a very promising performance for calorimetric applications due to much higher transparency A numerical calculation of energy resolution (main plots) and thermal time constant (insets) for SFTEDs with two different absorber volumes is presented in Fig. The detector energy resolution (solid lines in Fig. Looking back at the energy resolution results that include readout noise in Fig. However, using a large flux transformer will introduce an electrical resonance into system and reduces the electrical bandwidth due to its large input inductance and parasitic capacitance. Fig. We have demonstrated that the novel superconductor-ferromagnet thermoelectric detector (SFTED) is a device that has promising characteristics when operated either as a bolometer or as a calorimeter. As a bolometer, SFTED with EuS as the tunnel barrier is competitive with the current state-of-the-art detector technologies. However, a current readout with a SQUID can be hard to achieve due to the high impedance of the EuS detector junction even with the highest ratio superconducting flux transformers. Other amplification techniques probing the voltage signal may thus be more suitable. On the other hand, SFTED shows a promise as a calorimeter both in terms of energy resolution and detector bandwidth (speed), if used with an AlO x tunnel barrier, or if a low tunneling resistance EuS barrier can be made. A SQUID readout with a moderate flux-transformer-coupled input is feasible for this type of detector, without sacrificing much of the bandwidth. Combined with other beneficial features such as lack of bias and self-isolation by electron-phonon coupling, SFTED can be both attractive and practical for calorimetric applications that require large sensor arrays.