Ferroelectric field-effect doping has emerged as a powerful approach to manipulate the ground state of correlated oxides, opening the door to a new class of field-effect devices. However, this potential is not fully exploited so far, since the size of the field-effect doping is generally much smaller than expected. Here we study the limiting factors through magneto-transport, scanning transmission electron and piezo-response force microscopy in ferroelectric/superconductor (YBa2Cu3O7-δ /BiFeO3) heterostructures, a model system showing very strong field-effects. Still, we find that they are limited in the first place by an incomplete ferroelectric switching. This can be explained by the existence of a preferential polarization direction set by the atomic terminations at the interface. More importantly, we also find that the field-effect carrier doping is accompanied by a strong modulation of the carrier mobility. Besides making quantification of field-effects via Hall measurements not straightforward, this finding suggests that ferroelectric poling produces structural changes (e.g. charged defects or structural distortions) in the correlated oxide channel. Those findings have important consequences for the understanding of ferroelectric field-effects and for the strategies to further enhance them. Ferroelectric field effects Owing to the extreme sensitivity of correlated oxides to carrier density variations However, ferroelectric field effects are generally weaker than those found in liquidelectrolyte gating Here we study a model system: superconducting (YBa2Cu3O7-δ)/ferroelectric (BiFeO3) heterostructures in which we observe a large ferroelectric modulation of the superconducting critical temperature accompanied by a consistently large modulation of the carrier density. The doping efficiency eΔn 2D /2P reaches up to ~20% which, despite being among the highest reported in the literature, is far from full efficiency. Furthermore, we find that eΔn 2D /2P unexpectedly decays with increasing YBa2Cu3O7-δ thickness. Using ferroelectric characterization at the nanoscale, we rule out that poor ferroelectric properties near the interface may account for any strong reduction of the doping efficiency. However, we find that that full ferroelectric switching is not achieved upon ferroelectric poling. This can be explained by the observation of a preferential polarization direction, which originates at pinned dipoles set by the atomic terminations at the interface. In addition, and very importantly, the analysis of the transport experiments shows that the carrier density modulation is accompanied by a substantial modulation of the carrier mobilityan effect generally overlooked, but whose relevance has been brought to light by recent studies on ferroelectric/rare-earth nickelate heterostructures The ingredients invoked above (ferroelectric asymmetry controlled by the terminations at polar interfaces Epitaxial heterostructures with a fixed Mn-doped BiFeO3 (BFO) thickness (30 nm) and varying YBa2Cu3O7-δ (YBCO) one (2 to 6 unit cells) with a few (typically 4) unit-cells buffer layer of PrBa2Cu3O7 (PBCO) were grown on (100) SrTiO3 (STO) substrates by pulsed laser deposition, using a KrF 248 nm excimer laser with an energy density of ~3.7 J/cm 2 , and a repetition rate of 1 Hz. PBCO is a large-gap semiconductor isostructural to YBCO. The presence of this buffer layer enhances the superconducting properties of the heterostructures After BFO growth, the samples were cooled-down to room temperature in 800 mbar of pure oxygen. Under the used conditions, the epitaxial YBCO and PBCO layers are c-axis (001) oriented. BFO grows under compressive strain on the YBCO/PBCO//STO stack, which as we showed earlier Multi-probe transport bridges were defined using a combination of standard optical lithography and Ar + ion etching. The bridges width is 15 or 20 m, depending on the sample, and the distance (longitudinal) between voltage probes is 40 m. Samples were wedge-bonded using Al wire. A four-probe configuration was used to obtain the longitudinal RX and transverse RY (Hall) resistances from the voltage (respectively VX or VY) measured under an injected current IX. Measurements were carried out either in a close-cycle refrigerator equipped with a ~1 T electromagnet or in a liquid He cryostat equipped with a ~0.6 T electromagnet, the magnetic field being perpendicular to the films plane. Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) combined with electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) studies were carried out in a Nion UntraSTEM200 operated at 200 kV and equipped with a fifth order aberration corrector and a Gatan Enfinium EEL spectrometer, at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Atomic resolution EELS maps were produced by performing multiple linear least square (MLLS) fits on unfiltered, raw EEL spectrum images. Specimens were prepared by conventional methods, including mechanical polishing and Ar ion milling. Ferroelectric domains were "written" by applying VDC between the scanning tip of a conductive-tip atomic force microscope (CT-AFM) and the YBCO layer, as discussed elsewhere A multi-probe bridge was lithographed on the samples [see sketch, inset of Fig. The main panel of Fig. We conducted electron microscopy experiments in the virgin (as-grown) samples to investigate the link between doping efficiency, structural and ferroelectric properties at the nanoscale. Having in mind that some beam broadening effects are present due to dechanneling this finding points to the presence of atomically sharp interfaces. Finally, we could not detect a clear c-axis lattice expansion (beyond the noise level, i.e. in the few per cent units) across the YBCO-BFO interface, which is consistent with the absence of any appreciable interfacial concentration of oxygen vacancies in the virgin state. This is confirmed by estimates of the Fe oxidation state from EELS data, in particular from the Fe L2,3 intensity ratio, which is constant (within the technique sensitivity) across the entire BFO layer. points from the ferrite into the cuprate Fig. Fig. A study of the ferroelectric properties at the microscale was carried out by piezo-response microscopy (PFM). The piezo-response phase (either 0o or 180o) indicates the polarity of the net polarization under the CT-AFM tip: towards the YBCO (180o) or outwards from it (0o). Fig. For example, a depression of the spontaneous polarization due to charge transfer effects The critical temperature TC2, the carrier density n 2 and mobility  2 are uniform and independent of the ferroelectric polarization far enough from the interface (layer "2"). Contrarily, close to the interface (layer "1") n 1 , TC1 and  1 depend on the ferroelectric polarization direction. Note that, although we expect an exponential decay of the accumulation of screening charges Based on that model, and using a standard approach for multilayer systems Using the relationships for the conductivities σ′ = μ′n′e , σ i = μ i n i e and the sheet carrier density n 2D i = t i n i (with i = 1,2 ), the Hall coefficient R H = 1/en′ expected in an measurement obeys the relationship: From In order to simulate the experimental behavior via model calculations, we proceeded as follows. Since the native carrier concentration n 2 is not the same in all the samples (see in Fig. We fixed t 1 for each n 2 by considering that the screening length is TF ~ 1 nm (~1 u.c.) for optimally doped YBCO (n~ 6•10 21 cm -3 ) Within the model in Fig. in YBCO the critical temperature depends on the carrier concentration Contrarily, in the depleted state TC1 is depressed, and thus the measured TC equals TC2. This allows for a qualitative explanation of the experimental results in Fig. This is understood if one considers that t 2 = t YBCO -t 1 decreases with decreasing t YBCO . Thus one expects that TC2 decreases with decreasing t YBCO , as observed, because the critical temperature of ultrathin YBCO films decreases with decreasing thickness (one can think of t 2 as an "isolated" ultrathin film since the critical temperature in t1 is strongly depressed/suppressed in the depleted state). We have unveiled and characterized various factors that limit the ferroelectric fieldeffect doping efficiency in the BiFeO3/YBa2Cu3O7- heterostructures. First, we have shown that full ferroelectric switching is not achieved after electrical poling, which clearly contributes to the carrier density modulation being below the maximum expected value 2P (with P the bulk ferroelectric polarization normal to the interface). The incomplete ferroelectric switching is likely connected with the existence of a preferential polarization direction, as denoted by both PFM and STEM experiments. The preferred direction is set by the atomic terminations at the interface, which result in a fixed interface dipole pointing from the ferrite into the cuprate. In this scenario, the weaker polarization measured when the ferroelectric is poled opposite to the preferential direction could be explained by the presence of residual domains in which the polarization remains pinned. These observations point to interface engineering as a key route to enhance ferroelectric field effects. Second, and more importantly, our experiments show that the field-effect induced carrier accumulation is accompanied by a substantial change of the carrier mobility in the oxide channel. This finding is relevant in two ways: i) On the one hand, it shows that quantitative studies of field-effect doping through Hall experiments are not straightforward, since changes in the Hall coefficient upon ferroelectric switching do not only reflect the carrier density modulation, but also the changes in the carrier mobility. Especially when the channel is thicker than the Thomas-Fermi screening length, neglecting changes of the mobility leads to misestimating the carrier density modulation. In the present experiments, if the mobility decrease is neglected the carrier density modulation is underestimated, to an extent that is greater the thicker the YBCO. ii) On the other hand, the mobility variations produced by ferroelectric poling suggest that the doping effects are accompanied by structural changes in the YBCO channel. A consistent scenario would be that, upon ferroelectric poling, charged defects such as oxygen vacancies are induced Finally, we stress that the factors discussed above may play a relevant role in other ferroelectric/complex-oxide interfaces, because the key ingredients (such as the presence of polar interfaces, oxygen vacancies, or the oxide channel being thicker that the Thomas-Fermi screening length) are ubiquitous in these systems and their studies. In order to illustrate the sensibility of the model calculations to the parameter μ 1 /μ 2 , in the following pages we will show simulations for various combinations of μ 1 /μ 2 (accumulated) and μ 1 /μ 2 (depleted), and compare them to the best fit which is obtained for μ 1 /μ 2 (accumulated) = 0.36 and μ 1 /μ 2 (depleted) = 1. Figure the steady decrease of t YBCO • |Δ(1 R H ⁄ )| with increasing t YBCO [Fig. 1 (c)] indicates that the carrier mobility varies across the YBCO layer (μ 1 ≠ μ 2 ) at least for one of the states (accumulated/depleted). • |Δ(1 R H ⁄ )| seen in Fig. 1 (c), by imposing two consistency conditions. First, the same eΔn 2D 1 = eΔn 2D = ΔP is used for all n 2 , which means that the ferroelectric properties do not change from sample to sample, as indicated by their similar PFM and STEM properties. Second, we impose |n 1 -n 2 | accumulated < |n 1 -n 2 | depleted , which accounts for the assymmetric behavior |P ↑ | < |P ↓ | evidenced by PFM. The simulation results are represented by lines in Fig. 1 (c). The continous horizontal line corresponds to the case in which μ 1 /μ 2 = 1 both in the depleted and accumulated states. Here t YBCO