Scattering-type scanning near-field optical microscopy (s-SNOM) is instrumental in exploring polaritonic behaviors of two-dimensional (2D) materials at the nanoscale. A sharp s-SNOM tip couples momenta into 2D materials through phase matching to excite phonon polaritons, which manifest as nanoscale interference fringes in raster images. However, s-SNOM lacks the ability to detect the progression of near-field property along the perpendicular axis to the surface. Here, we perform near-field analysis of a micro-disk and a reflective edge made of isotopically pure hexagonal boron nitride (h-11 BN), by using three-dimensional near-field response cubes obtained by peak force scattering-type near-field optical microscopy (PF-SNOM). Momentum quantization of polaritons from the confinement of the circular structure is revealed in situ. Moreover, tip-sample distance is found to be capable of fine-tuning the momentum of polaritons and modifying the superposition of quantized polaritonic modes. The PF-SNOM-based three-dimensional near-field analysis provides detailed characterization capability with a high spatial resolution to fully map threedimensional near-fields of nano-photonics and polaritonic structures. Phonon polaritons (PhPs), quasi particles from a hybrid of electromagnetic (EM) wave and collective phonon oscillations, have been a research focus of nanophotonics. Utilization of PhPs holds the promise for bridging electronic and photonic technologies in infrared frequencies. The short wavelength of the polaritons is associated with high momentum, which cannot be directly coupled from free-space propagating photons due to the restriction from phase matching. The operation mechanism of s-SNOM demarcates its limitation: the near-field generated from s-SNOM is an average of near-field responses at many different tip-sample distances during the tip oscillation. Different tip-sample distances correspond to different spatial confinement of EM field underneath the AFM tip, thus leading to different excitation conditions (Figs. PF-SNOM operates with the peak force tapping (PFT) mode of AFM. The sample is oscillated vertically at a low frequency (~4 kHz) that is much below the resonant frequency of the AFM cantilever. Under PFT mode, instantaneous tip-sample distance is deterministic from the extension of the piezoelectric sample stage and the dynamic deflection of the AFM cantilever. PF-SNOM simultaneously measures the scattered light signal from tip-sample region and the instantaneous tip-sample distance (Fig. Because the oscillation amplitude of the tip-sample distance in PFT mode spans more than a hundred nanometers, a linear far-field background fit can be performed on the region of large tipsample distances where the near-field signal is negligible. The resulting linear background is back extrapolated to all tip-sample distances and removed from the raw scattering signal. The result is a vertical near-field interaction curve with an explicit tip-sample distance dependence (Fig. We investigate a circular micro-disk and a reflective edge made of the isotopically pure hexagonal boron nitride (h-11 BN). We then extract the periodicity of the circular fringes of the h- We hypothesize that the confinement of the circular geometry leads to the quantized spatial frequencies in the lateral dimension. A question arises: Do polaritons behave similarly in the case of an h- The comparison of the dispersion relations between the h-11 BN micro-disk and the reflective edge confirms the above-mentioned hypothesis and suggests that the momentum of polaritons in the circular micro-disk is quantized. The quantized spatial frequencies are determined by geometrically-formed standing wave modes when hyperbolic phonon polaritons propagate and reflect inside the micro-disk. The standing wave solutions can be analytically solved by a method described in previous literature on h-BN nano-resonators, by using Equation ( where JS is the Bessel function of s th order, r0 is the disk radius, ksn is the n th root to Equation (1) and the spatial frequencies of the standing wave, n = 1, 2, 3...and φ0 is the anomalous phase shift at the edge, which is found to be -0.28 π from fitting. The standing wave solutions from Equation ( When the tip launches polaritons with momenta that coincide with the characteristic frequency k sn , one geometrical resonant condition is formed. Consequently, the amplitude of the tiplaunched polaritons is amplified at these resonant conditions with several discrete spatial frequencies. k sn from standing wave solutions are marked as vertical dashed lines in Fig. Also, when the metallic AFM tip is positioned at the crests of the standing waves, the coupling between the EM near-field of the tip and the polaritonic mode is amplified, leading to an increase of the scattering signals that is measurable by PF-SNOM. Consequently, the spatial fringes from PF-SNOM exhibit similar patterns as the amplitude square of the standing wave Changing the tip-sample distance can slightly tune the spatial frequency of PhP waves under conditions that lack geometrical resonance, such as in cases of the simple reflective edge and between two resonant conditions of the micro-disk (see Supplementary Fig. The 3D near-field response cube contains vertical sectional information on how the near-field response behaves when the tip-sample distance changes. Fig. responses at the center of the micro-disk at 1420 and 1425 cm -1 , and display them in Fig. At large d, the tip-enhanced electric field weakly couples relatively more of the standing wave mode with the lower momentum; at a small d, the strongly tip-enhanced electric field excites more of the standing wave mode with the higher momentum. As the centers of two adjacent standing wave modes of the 2D Bessel Function alternate between crest and trough (Fig. The advantage of PF-SNOM for near-field analysis over traditional s-SNOM analysis is the ability to access one additional vertical dimension along with the tip-sample distance d. In current s-SNOM, the spatial distribution of x-y lateral near-field responses is collected as the nonlinearity of scattering signal over a range of tip-sample distance, and the progression of the lateral spatial distribution within the cantilever oscillation range is not accessible. As a result, the spectrum in the spatial frequency domain is averaged in the vertical range and inhomogeneously broadened. In contrast, PF-SNOM directly provides the vertical near-field response curve with well-defined tipsample distances d over a long range, which enables the collection of 3D near-field response cube for the near-field tomography to experimentally identify the geometrical resonances from both tomographic and sectional analysis. The addition of the near-field information in the vertical dimension enables the complete characterization of optical near-fields. PF-SNOM and s-SNOM shares the same signal generation mechanism: the sharp metallic tip is used as both an antenna to generate a strong light confinement and a scatterer to emit detectable signals. Therefore, PF-SNOM can routinely provide nanometer resolution, which is better than other 3D near-field mapping methods based on aperture near-field scanning optical microscopy (NSOM), which uses the customized fiber as a light probe. The coupling between the launched phonon momentum and the momentum-quantized standing wave mode of h-11 BN structures could be useful for a wide range of applications that rely on both spectral and spatial selectivity. At the resonant frequency of the standing wave mode, the EM nearfield is strongly enhanced and spatially localized at certain positions of the disk, e.g., at 1420 cm -1 , the strongest nearfield is located at the disk center, yielding a near-field hotspot with a diameter of 500 nm, which suggests that the center of the h-11 BN micro-disk could be used for chemical sensing, as well as a platform with a strong field enhancement in mid-infrared systems or nonlinear optical mixing that involves mid infrared frequencies. In conclusion, we demonstrated the near-field analysis of h- The sample were prepared starting from a silicon wafer with 285 nm of thermal oxide. Optical lithography and gold evaporation were used to define alignment markers. Subsequently, the wafer was diced into chips. Isotopically pure h-11 BN crystal flakes were grown from a molten metal nickel-chromium solution using monoisotopic boron-11 as the boron source. The A gold cone with the end radius of 30 nm was used to simulate the AFM tip, and a Si disk with a radius of 4 μm and thickness of 80 nm was placed under the tip by a separation of 1 or 10 nm. The IR dielectric constant ε = 11.7 for Si was used. The calculated dielectric function of h-11 BN in Fig. where ε ⊥ and ε ∥ are in-plane (x and y ) and out-of-plane (z ) dielectric functions; ε ∞ is highfrequency permittivity; ω is the frequency of incident light; ω LO and ω TO are longitudinal and transverse optical phonon mode frequencies, and Γ is the phonon damping. Parameters of h-11 BN are from Giles et al. where z, ε a , ε s are the thickness of h-11 BN, dielectric functions of air and SiO2 substrate, respectively. We use z = 70 nm, ε a = 1, and ε s = 2.05. The Si substrate used in this study generally has a 285 nm thick thermal oxide layer on top of the Si. This layer contains a mixture