We show that the conclusion reported in Ref. Recent experiments have reported evidence for s + is or s + id superconductivity in K x Fe 2 As 2 2,3 . This type of superconductivity should arise in spin-singlet multiband superconductors where the broken time reversal symmetry (BTRS) is due to interband interactions. A number of theoretical arguments have been advanced in favour of these states Two sources of magnetic field have been considered: inhomogeneous external potentials such as impurities or temperature gradients, and domain walls. In contrast to the well studied p + ip case, spontaneous magnetic fields in s + is or s + id systems have received less attention and even some inconsistent claims in the literature, even from papers arguing in favour of spontaneous magnetic field. For example, a paper has recently claimed that spontaneous magnetic field appears only in the s + id state and not in the s + is state 9 , while another paper claimed that spontaneous magnetic fields appear in both states but that s+id exhibits a much stronger response In a recent paper by D. Efremov and Yu. Ovchinnikov the claim was advanced that multiband BTRS superconductors do not have spontaneous magnetic field. In this response we will demonstrate that this assertion is incorrect and demonstrate the error in their method and assumptions. If the reader wants to see work that demonstrates the existence of spontaneous magnetic field in BTRS systems see We will mostly use the notation used in the paper Where ∂ -= ∇-2ieA/ c is the covariant derivative with respect to the U (1) gauge field A. We note that whenever using indices, we will use Greek indices for spatial coordinates and Latin indices for component coordinates. Additionally, repeated Greek (spatial) indices are summed over. Note that this is the opposite from the authors usual convention however matches the convention used in 1 . Ψ i are complex order parameters which, following EO, we write Ψ k = |Ψ k |e iφ k . This leads to the GL equations where φ 12 = φ 1 -φ 2 is the phase difference between two order parameter components and j is the current. Note that for any configuration to be a minimiser of Eq. ( , where δα i is small and can be considered as a perturbation. The authors claim to find a state (that later we call the EO state) which has zero current density j = 0 and thus zero magnetic field response B = 0, which they also claim is the ground state of the free energy functional in Eq. (1). To find EO state the authors of Ref. In fact we will show that no such state exists that satisfies all the GL equations and the spurious zero-current restriction j = 0. We now introduce some useful nomenclature p k = k -2eA/ c for simplicity, which leads to The free energy can now be written, where K x = -K y = 1. In our chosen variables the current density is given by The GL equations δF/δ|Ψ 1,2 | = 0 can be written as The GL Eq.( The equation ( We follow EO and consider a weak inhomogeneity or the tail of an inhomogeneity α i = α (0) i + δα i (r), where i |. This allows considering perturbations about the ground state where the linear contribution is the most important. We linearise around the ground state values 2 and p k = 0, writing our fields as |Ψ k | = u k + Ψk and φ 12 = π 2 + φ12 . We then expand in these fields assuming that Ψk , φ12 and p k are small and neglecting any quadratic or higher order terms. We first linearise the zero current condition j = 0 where j is given in Eq. ( These restrictions coincide with Eqs.(20,21) from Ref. Using the restrictions (12,13) we can eliminate the variable Ψ2 and express p 2 and p 1 in terms of the phase difference Then Eqs. (9,10) are reduced to where we denote a 1 = 2α . At the same time Eq.( As we have said before, the EO assumption has given an overdetermined system of equations, this is more apparent now as we have three independent equations (15,16,17) for two fields Ψ 1 and φ12 , which will clearly be inconsistent in general. Let us show this explicitly for the particular case when the impurity is axially symmetric, that is αk (r) = αk (r ⊥ ) where r ⊥ = x 2 + y 2 . From Eqs. (15,16) we get that From this it follows that Ψ1 = Ψ1 (r ⊥ ) so that ) , where θ is the spatial polar angle. Thus the solution of ( As the above has both a cos(2θ) and cos(4θ) component, the result must be non-radial. The rest of the equation, namely terms proportional to ∇ 2 Ψ1 , Ψ1 and α i , are all radial, hence this equation is general has only the solution φ = 0. This means that the phase difference doesn't fluctuate. Hence finally we can use Eqs. (15, 17) to get, Which along with the condition for Ψ1 in Eq. ( If we substitute the above into Eq. (15,18) it leads to Ψ1 = 0 and hence none of the fields fluctuate and that αk = 0 and there can be no defect. This is a contradiction as we have assumed there is a defect as EO did in Ref. Additionally we have shown that in general there is no solution that can satisfy all the Ginzburg Landau equations as well as the spurious zero current restriction and EOs conclusion that the ground state around a defect has no spontaneous magnetic field is incorrect. Finally in the case where there is no defect, we have shown that in general there can be no fluctuations in any of the fields for there to be zero magnetic field. This means that in general there must be a magnetic response from defects, domain walls or fluctuations in any of the fields. We have shown that the proposed EO state in Ref. It is important to note that it may be possible to carefully construct a defect such that the magnetic response is zero in such a system, but this will be a fine tuned zero measure case. We have also shown that fluctuations in any of the fields (even with no defect) will lead to spontaneous magnetic field. It is also important to note that while we have focussed here on an s + id system (as it was the chosen system for EO) our argument holds for both s + is and p + ip states also. The introduction of anisotropies leads to the coupling of fields in general as discussed in Ref. 