Torque sensors such as the torsion balance enabled the first determination of the gravitational constant by Cavendish Hz at millikelvin temperatures in a dilution refrigerator Recent developments in levitated optomechanics provide a new paradigm for sensing and precision measurements Hz) Here we report an optically levitated nanorotor torque sensor that is several orders of magnitudes more sensitive than the state-of-the-art nanofabricated torque sensor In this experiment, we optically trap a silica nanoparticle (a nanosphere or a nanodumbbell) in a vacuum chamber using a tightly focused 1550 nm laser (Fig. Once a nanoparticle is trapped in a linearly-polarized 1550 nm laser, we collect the power spectral density (PSD) signals of its motion at 10 torr to verify its geometry After the geometry of a levitated nanoparticle is confirmed, we change the polarization of the trapping laser from linear to circular. The angular momentum of the circularly polarized laser induces a torque on the levitated nanoparticle and drives it to rotate Besides observing the fastest rotation, we employ the nanorotor as an ultrasensitive torque sensor. To test its performance, we use an additional 1020 nm laser to apply an external torque. If we modulate the 1020 nm laser sinusoidally, the net torque applied on the nanorotor is where M dc is the dc component of the optical torque which mainly comes from the trapping beam, M ac is the external ac torque drive from the 1020 nm laser, ω m is the frequency of the modulation, M th is the thermal fluctuation torque, I is the moment of inertia of the nanorotor, ω r is the angular rotation velocity of the nanoparticle, γ is the rotational damping rate because of residual air molecules. If we ignore the thermal noise M th , we have ω r (t sin(ω m t + φ) after the modulated external torque is turned on for a long time. Here ω dc = M dc /(Iγ) is the average rotation frequency and φ = tan -1 (-ω m /γ). The rotational damping rate γ can be measured experimentally. We can suddenly turn on the 1020 nm laser and measure the rotation frequency as a function of time (Fig. Here, ω 1 is the initial rotation frequency, ω 2 is the terminal rotation frequency, t 1 is the time when the 1020 nm laser is turned on, and τ = 1/γ is the damping time. From the fitting, we determine the damping time. The measured damping time at different pressures are plotted in Fig. Including the effects of the thermal noise, the single-sided power spectrum density of the time-dependent angular velocity (ω r -ω dc ) for a measurement time of ∆t is k B is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature. Note that S f (ω) can be calculated from the time-dependent rotation frequency ω r /2π (Fig. One important application of our ultrasensitive torque sensor with an optically levitated nanorotor will be to detect the long-sought vacuum friction where n j (ω) = [exp( ω/k B T j ) -1] -1 is the Bose-Einstein distribution function at temperature T j . For simplicity, we assume the temperatures of the nanosphere (T 1 ) and the substrate (T 0 ) are the same in our calculation. α(ω) is the electrical polarizability of the nanosphere. G yy (ω)]/2, where G xx and G yy are electromagnetic Green tensor components In conclusion, we have demonstrated an ultrasensitive torque sensor with an optically levitated nanorotor in vacuum. We measure a record small torque of (1.2 ± 0.5) × 10 -27 Nm and achieve a record high rotational speed exceeding 5 GHz for a nanorotor. The measured torque sensitivity of our system at room temperature is several orders better than that of the state-of-the-art nanofabricated torque sensor at mK temperatures 