The implementation of processed magnetic materials onto thermoplastics can be an approach for practical application of brittle intermetallic materials with the advantage of enlarging the range of applications. In the present work, we evaluate the effect of blending magnetocaloric Gd 5 Si 2.4 Ge 1.6 micrometric particles with 3.4 μm in different weight fractions onto a flexible, transparent and non-magnetic poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA). A close to homogeneous grain distribution along the polymer surface were achiever by using a simple solvent casting method for evaluation of their magnetocaloric properties. From XRD analysis, it was found a relative unit cell volume reduction of ∼2.5×10 3 ppm for the composite with 70 wt.% of powder as a result of interfacial interactions between the components. Although PMMA does not influence the magnetic nature of microparticles main phase, a reduction on the amount of secondary monoclinic phase occurs for all produced composite samples. As a consequence, a weakening on the effect of secondary phases on the micropowder magnetocaloric response is observed as a result of hydrostatic pressure from the difference between thermal expansions of matrix and filler. Magnetocaloric materials for heating/cooling applications at room temperature have been a field of interest for several decades for substitution of hazardous gases used in traditional vapour compression refrigerators. The discovery of a Giant Magnetocaloric Effect (GMCE) on the Gd 5 Si 2 Ge 2 compound 1 was a milestone due to the potential for magnetic refrigeration at room temperature. Since then, several strategies have been followed in order to evaluate/increase the MCE properties of the Gd 5 (Si,Ge) 4 family compounds aiming new applications, such as micro-cooling devices and medical treatments Generally, there has been an increase on research activities in polymer-based composites on the last 20 years focused on implementation in several industries such as transport, military, aerospace In this work, we have choose a more flexible poly(methyl methacrylate) thermoplastic to reinforce powders of Gd 5 Si 2.4 Ge 1.6 powder with 3.4 μm. The evaluation on the structural, magnetic and magnetocaloric effect of blending different weight fractions of the micropowder into a flexible, transparent and resistant PMMA using a simple and reproducible chemical technique. The chosen stoichiometry displays a broader working range temperature for the MCE at room temperature and with absence of hysteresis losses The magnetocaloric filler for the composite solution were prepared through the Tri-arc technique under Ar atmosphere The polymer composite samples were prepared via solvent casting technique using Gd 5 Si 2.4 Ge 1.6 (GSG) 3.4 μ m particles obtained as described above Crystallographic characterization was performed via X-ray diffraction (XRD) data obtained at room temperature using a Rigaku SmartLab diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation (1.540593 Å), 45 kV and 200 mA at IFIMUP. The diffraction patterns were collected from 20 o ≤ 2θ ≤ 60 o range in a Bragg Brentano geometry, with 0.02 o steps. Analysis were performed through Rietveld refinement considering a Pseudo-Voigt function of the XRD patterns using the FullProf software The XRD patterns for bulk, powder and composites samples are presented in Fig. Regarding the composite samples patterns, also shown in Fig. Furthermore, Fig. The normalized M-T curves for the Gd 5 Si 2.4 Ge 1.6 in the form of bulk, powder and flexible composite obtained at cooling and heating between 5 and 350 K with an applied magnetic field of 0.1 T are shown in Fig. where C=μ 2 ef f /3k b represents the Curie constant and Θ P , the Curie paramagnetic temperature. In particular, for 10 wt.% composite, a correction on the magnetization curves due TABLE II. Results obtained from the Curie-Weiss law: O(I), M and 5:3 phases calculated values of paramagnetic temperature (ΘP ), the effective moment (μ ef f ). Important magnetic parameters are also placed: the magnetization at 5 K and 5 T for the composite samples (i.e, taking into account the weight of filler and polymer) and the saturation magnetization (μsat) obtained considering the grains weight fraction. ΘP (K) to the diamagnetic contribution from the matrix was performed, also performed in similar composites As can be noted, there is no significant change on the values obtained through the different methods, since they are within the error. Most notably, the magnetic analysis seems to detect a slightly higher content of M-phase than XRD calculations which might be related to the higher sensitivity of χ -1 method. These findings confirm the assumption that PMMA polymeric matrix works as a pressure cell on the grains surface and, thus, weakens the effects of secondary M-phase. Indeed, further evaluation on the MCE results will also reveal the strong influence of the non-magnetic thermoplastic on the magnetocaloric powder. Furthermore, the μ ef f value for this phase is below the expected 7.94 μ B which has direct consequences on the MCE features of GSG magnetic material Although there is a reduction on μ ef f values, they are still close to theoretically expected 7.94 μ B for Gd 3+ ions From these curves, the important MCE parameters were extracted as can be seen on Table Concerning application goals, the volumetric entropy change ∆S V is rather informative for device engineering than the mass one Regarding the ∆S W and ∆S V curves features, the bump from 220 to 300 K is not observed for the GSG powder when is blended with PMMA thermoplastic. As already illustrated, the particles are confined on the polymeric matrix that can be acting as a pressure cell on the grain boundaries. It is known that Gd 5 (Si,Ge) 4 is highly sensitive to internal and external stimuli The results here presented shows that solvent casting is a suitable technique for the implementation of 10, 30, 50 and 70 weight fraction of 3.4μm Gd 5 Si 2.4 Ge 1.6 particles in non-magnetic PMMA. The micropowder was obtained through sieving and the reduction of particle size have intensified the effect of deformity on the grain boundaries, leading to a detection of ∼23% of deformed M-phase. Although there are no changes on the magnetic nature of the microparticles when blended with the thermoplastic, a slight reduction on the amount of the secondary M-phase is observed. The saturation magnetization at 5 K reveal that the composites magnetic response are ruled by the particle density, being bigger for larger amounts of magnetic filler. This is reflected on the MCE results where the interface GSG/PMMA interaction seems to weaken the contribution from M-phase on the ∆S curves with the absence of the bump observed for the free powder. Further investigations on thermal and mechanical properties are required for a fully understand on the mechanism of GSG/PMMA composites during thermal cycles. Furthermore, these observations indicates that the system here present can allow several applications such as energy harvesting, microfluidic system and magnetic refrigeration 