A dual-polarization balanced superconductorinsulator-superconductor mixer operating at 2 mm wavelength is realized in form of a monolithic planar integrated circuit. Planar orthomode transducers and LO couplers are enabled by using silicon membranes that are locally formed on the silicon-on-insulator substrate. The performance of the balanced mixer is experimentally investigated. Over the entire RF band (125 -163 GHz), the balanced mixer shows an LO noise rejection ratio about 15 dB, an overall receiver noise about 40 K, and a cross-polarization < -20 dB. The demonstrated compactness and the performance of the integrated circuit indicate that this approach is feasible in developing heterodyne focal plane arrays. C OHERENT astronomical observations in millime- ter (mm) and sub-millimeter (sub-mm) waves using superconductor-insulator-superconductor (SIS) heterodyne receivers enable astronomers to get access to the fine structures of electromagnetic spectra reaching a relative resolution as high as 10 -7 with the highest sensitivity. The spectra contain precise kinematic and chemical information of the celestial objects and the mediums in the transmission pathes. Coherent receiving is also indispensable in interferometry technology to achieve extremely high spatial resolution accompanied with a large collecting area. For example, the event horizon telescope, a very long baseline interferometer working at 1.3 mm wavelength, has reached unprecedented resolution of about 25μ arcsec and led to the first image of the supermassive black hole the development of heterodyne array receivers for single-dish radio telescopes, about which a comprehensive review can be found in It is a notorious engineering challenge in assembling a compact SIS array receiver by incorporating multiple singlepixel modules as basic building blocks. The difficulty originates from the discrete nature of the modular building blocks, between which there are inevitable interfaces for electrical and mechanical connections. This traditional assembling fashion is not compatible with highly compact integration because the minimum size is limited by the interconnection interfaces. Reliability is also weakened by the complexity in the connections between modules. We have been exploring an alternative approach to the layout for array SIS mixers using monolithic planar integrated circuits, on which silicon membrane-carried probes are locally formed on the chip to couple the signal (in a polarization-sensitive manner) and the local oscillator (LO) In this work, we are able to complete the RF evaluation with devices of improved quality and demonstrate that the planar integrated circuit can provide comparable performance to a traditionally modular type receiver at the measured RF band. In this paper, we begin with a brief revisit of the circuit design. It is followed by the description of the measurement methods. Then the measurement results and related discussion will be given in several aspects, including the receiver sensitivity, the noise rejection ratio (NRR), the balance of the circuit, LO noise measurement, and the crosstalk between polarizations. The mixer circuit layout is conceivable from the image of the mixer chip shown in Fig. For each balanced mixer, there is a 180 o IF hybrid coupler immediately connected to the mixer mount. The IF hybrid couplers used in this study have an amplitude imbalance of ±0.2 dB and a phase imbalanced of ±2 o across 4 -8 GHz IF band. Normally the two mixers are biased with the same polarity, and consequently the output signals from the two SIS mixers constructively build up at the ∆ port of the IF hybrid coupler and cancel out at the Σ port. In contrast to the signal, the LO noise appears mainly in the Σ port instead of the ∆ port. Each output port of the IF hybrid coupler is followed by a cryogenic isolator-low noise amplifier (LNA) assembly with a passband of 4 -8 GHz. The LNA has a nominal noise temperature of about 5 K. The mixer is measured in a 4 K cryostat cooled by a GM cryocooler. The standard Y-factor measurement, with two blackbody calibrators at liquid nitrogen temperature and room temperature respectively, is used to measure the receiver noise. The NRR is measured with a CW source, which is weakly coupled into the LO with a -20 dB waveguide coupler. The cross-polarization of the OMT is measured with a XY θ beam scanning measurement system outside the cryostat. The measurement results and related discussions will be given in the following sections. For a radio astronomical receiver, its sensitivity is of primary importance. The measured receiver noise temperature as a function of LO frequency is shown in Fig. The overall receiver noise of about 35 K is reasonable for a SIS mixer at this frequency range, but it is noticeably higher than the cutting-edge of low noise advancement, such as about 20 K (DSB) of the ALMA Band 4 receivers In addition to the direct noise generated in the SIS junctions, the finite transmission loss of the superconducting transmission line between the OMT and the SIS mixer reduces the sensitivity. The loss originates from the thermally activated quasiparticles at a physical temperature of about 4 K. The estimated loss is about 0.2 dB for a total electrical length of about 5.5 wavelengths at 145 GHz, which is calculated with SISMA The noise temperature and the hot/cold-load responses are recorded at both outputs of the IF hybrid coupler as a function of bias voltage as shown in Fig. The receiver noise is also measured as a function of IF as shown in Fig. As a major objective of this experimental study, we aim to demonstrate the feasibility of realizing sophisticated SIS mixer circuitry on a single chip, which contains membranebased probes for LO and signal coupling. The balanced mixing configuration was chosen because of its favorable feature of saving LO power, which allows pumping a large number of pixels in an array with a single LO source. Another technical reason is that a balance mixer does not require on-chip thinfilm resistors, the fabrication process of which has not yet been established in our lab. By contract, for a integrated circuit with practically interesting sideband separation configuration, onchip loads are necessary to absorb the unused potion of LO power, normally about 90% of the total input. Noise rejection ratio is the principal figure of merit of a balanced mixer. It is conventionally measured with two individual hot/cold-load measurement procedures, in which the two mixers are applied with co-polar bias and anti-polar bias respectively The use of a 180 o IF coupler rather than an in-phase power combiner allows us to measure the NRR with the two mixers biased with the same polarity. A weak CW signal is injected into the LO port as an artificial LO noise and down-converted to IF. The mixing outputs are measured at both the ∆ port and the Σ port of the IF coupler. The ratio of them is the noise rejection ratio after being corrected for the gain difference of the two IF chains. The gain difference can be measured using the same CW source but with one of the mixer biased above the gap voltage, where the conversion efficiency of that mixer is negligibly small. Under this condition, only one singleended mixer generates the down-converted CW signal, which is then equally divided by the IF coupler and amplified in the two IF chains. The ratio of the amplitudes of the resulting CW signals, which appear at the output ports of the two IF chains, is the gain ratio to be corrected for. It deserves a mention that the amplitude of the CW signal is adjusted to be sufficiently weak to avoid saturation of the mixer, but to be relatively strong (> 20 dB) with respect to the thermal noise floor, so that the influence of the thermal noise on the measurement is negligibly small. The NRR measured with frequency-sweeping of the CW source is plotted in Fig. Although the breakdown of the imbalance to each component is difficult due to the tight integration, partial separation is possible. We use the SIS junction arrays as direct detectors to measure the delivered power to each array when a CW source is injected from the signal port or the LO port. The ratio of the responses (photon-assisted tunnelling current) provides the estimation of the imbalance of the RF coupler, supposing the two SIS junction arrays are identical, which is well guaranteed by the high-precision photolithography techniques and verified by comparing their IV curves. Since the ratio, instead of the absolute value, is measured, the CW source does not need to be calibrated for the frequency-dependence of the output power. The measured response ratios (Ch2/Ch1) with the CW signal injected respectively from the signal port and the LO port are plotted in Fig. The balanced mixer can be used to measure the noise from LO and thus is a useful tool in receiver noise diagnosis. For example, we used this tool to investigate how much thermal noise and non-thermal noise is presented in the LO source used in this study. The LO source is an engineering model of ALMA Band 4 WCA (warm cartridge assembly), with the final-stage frequency doubler placed at room temperature, rather than placed at 110 K stage in an ALMA cartridge receiver. The thermal contribution, an additive noise, can be reduced by a cold attenuator, while the non-thermal noise, which is inherent and proportional to the LO power, cannot. The measurement was done in a procedure similar to the NRR measurement Stand-alone evaluation of the planar OMT by using a network analyzer is possible at microwave frequencies With an aim to enhance the capability in forming focal plane arrays with SIS mixers, we have been constructing a frame work of technical solutions to enable planar integration of the SIS receiver frontends. The planar integration concept is implemented in developing a single chip SIS mixer configured in balanced mixing and dual polarization receiving operating at 2 mm wavelength. The measured receiver sensitivity, the RF bandwidth, and the IF bandwidth are comparable to that of a typical conventional SIS mixer. The LO noise rejection ratio of about 15 dB over the RF band is achievable. The good balance is a favorable consequence of using photolithographic fabrication. The low cross polarization < -20 dB in the entire RF band suggests that the application of planar OMT in mm and sub-mm heterodyne receiver is practical. These results provide clear evidences that the planar integration of SIS mixer focal plane arrays is readily achievable with acceptable compromise between performance and compactness. The authors would like to thank Matthias Kroug of NAOJ for his helpful discussion in device fabrication.The authors are also grateful to Daisuke Iono and Alvaro Gonzalez of NAOJ for discussions and advices on potential application in astronomical observations. Thermal insulating metallic waveguides made from cupper nickel or stainless steel are often used in cryogenic receiver system for LO injection. The materials with relatively large electric resistance result in substantial loss. In this work, the thermal radiation from the lossy waveguide itself is evaluated using a model shown in Fig. where T and T +dT are the input and output radiation equivalent temperature respectively, T g is the physical temperature of the waveguide section. The waveguide is supposed to connect two stages with temperatures of T a and T b respectively, and it is also assumed that the physical temperature is linearly distributed along the waveguide as T g = (T b -T a )x/L + T a , where L is the waveguide length. After normalizing T and x with T b -T a and L respectively, the equation becomes, After introducing a new variable y and defining it as y ≡ x + Ta -T , the differential of (2) becomes The integral of (3) with respect to x gives with C being a constant to be determined by the boundary conditions. Combining (4) with the definition of y, we finally get T = Ta + x -1 αL (1 -Ce -αLx ) . Supposing that the radiation is T out at the end point of the waveguide (x = 1 ), the constant C can be determined with this condition as At the input point (x = 0 ), the radiation turns out to be The waveguide noise referred to the input port can be calculated as where, G = e -αL is the gain of the waveguide. After this calculation has been done, it is pointed out that the same problem has been studied in 