Superconductivity results from an instability of the Fermi surface -contour of poles of the single particle propagator -to an infinitesimally small attraction between electrons. Here, we instead discuss the analogous problem on a model Luttinger surface, or contour of zeros of the Green function. At zero temperature (β → ∞) and a critical interaction strength (uc∞) characterized by the residue of self-energy pole, we find that the pair susceptibility diverges leading to a superconducting instability. We evaluate the pair fluctuation partition function and find that the spectral density in the normal state has an interaction-driven, power-law 1 √ ω type, van-Hove singularity (vHS) indicating non-Fermi liquid (NFL) physics. Crucially, in the strong coupling limit (βu 1), the leading order fluctuation free energy terms in the normal state of this NFL-SC transition resembles the equivalent (O(1)) terms of the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev (SYK) model. This free energy contribution takes a simple form -βF = βuc∞ -γ ln (βuc∞) where γ is a constant equal to 1 2 . Weak impurity scattering (τ β -1 ) leaves the low-energy spectral density unaffected, but leads to an interaction-driven enhancement of superconductivity. Our results shed light on the role played by order-parameter fluctuations in providing the key missing link between Mott physics and strongly coupled toy-models exhibiting gravity duals. A central notion that captures the failure of singleparticle physics in quantum matter is the Luttinger surface (LS) -a contour in momentum space where the many-body Green function, G(p, ω), vanishes A salient property of the LS which gives rise to the aforementioned observations is a divergent Σ(p, ω) Nevertheless, the normal state of a superconductor can exhibit anomalies that deviate from a FL even in the ab-sence of explicit electron correlations. This class of phenomena originates from Cooper-pair fluctuations In this work, we introduce interactions explicitly by analyzing pairing instability and pair fluctuations on a system with a LS formed by a pole in Σ. Unlike the problem of pairing on a Fermi surface, we find a quantum phase transition into the superconducting state at a critical interaction strength (u c∞ ) where the pair susceptibility diverges. By calculating the pair fluctuation propagator L(q, ω) and partition-function, we determine the spectral density in the normal state. We find an interaction-driven, power-law 1 √ ω type, van-Hove singularity (vHS) at low energies that signals NFL physics. Hence pair fluctuations combined with LS physics describe a NFL-SC transition at T = 0. As a key feature we find that, in the strong coupling limit (βu 1), the leading order fluctuation free energy terms in the normal state of this NFL-SC transition takes a form similar to the equivalent O(1) free energy terms of the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev (SYK) model. This free energy contribution is given by -βF = βu c∞ -γ ln (βu c∞ ) where γ = 1 2 . Here u is the interaction parameter and is equal to squareroot of the residue of the self-energy pole. Moreover, we do not require random couplings for our conclusions to hold. In the presence of weak impurity scattering, the low-energy spectral density is unaffected in the strong coupling limit and gives rise to an interaction-driven enhancement of superconductivity. Our results point toward order-parameter fluctuations acting as conduits between Mott physics and strongly coupled toy-models exhibiting gravity duals LSs have been obtained in numerous models in manybody literature, both at a phenomenological level is the bare dispersion with chemical potential μ and n is the fermionic Matsubara frequency. We choose a selfenergy ansatz motivated by the well-studied Yang-Rice-Zhang model (YRZ) The constant Hartree-Fock potential is dropped as it results in a trivial renormalization of the bands. As evident from the choice of Σ, the LS and the bare electron FS occur for the same momenta set by μ at zero energy. This need not be the case in more generic systems where the self-energy can acquire multiple poles each with distinct residues. The square of the interaction, u 2 , is a quan-tity determined by microscopic parameters of the Hamiltonian. In the presence of impurities, a finite life-time τ is introduced in the Green function. While the YRZ Green function was motivated by a doped spin-liquid, it is nevertheless a popular example of a minimal (phenomenological) model that has a diverging self-energy; hence it forms a workable model of a Luttinger surface. The Bethe-Salpeter equation appearing in Fig. Strong coupling (βu 1) in clean limit (τ → ∞): The fluctuation propagator can be evaluated from Bethe-Salpeter-type equations in the particle-particle channel (see Fig. where -g is a constant bare (attractive) interaction vertex and Π(q, Ω) is the pair susceptibility. The latter is defined in d-dimensions as Π(q, Ω k ) = where n ≡ (2n + 1)πT and Ω k ≡ 2kπT are the fermionic and bosonic Matsubara frequencies. Substituting G(p, n ) into Π(q, Ω) and taking the limit of |q| ≡ q p f , the Fermi momentum, we obtain for quadratic bands in d = 2 (see Appendix A) where we make the replacements 1 ≡ 1n → n+k and 2 ≡ 2n →n , and introduce primed notation jn ≡ 2 jn + u 2 . The angular brackets ... denote angular average, and m and φ are the bare electron mass and azimuthal angle respectively. To recover well-known expressions of the pair-susceptibility for a FL, one only needs to take the limit of u → 0 (see Appendix B). We now introduce the ratio r = p f q m u, f , where f is the Fermi energy. Performing an expansion in the parameter r/u (strong interactions) and taking the static limit, the inverse fluctuation propagator is (2) (q, 0), . These sums can be evaluated exactly for odd ν and we obtain for Λ u T (see Appendix C) Here Λ is the ultraviolet cut-off of the divergent Matsubara sum for ν = 1 (plays the role of the Debye frequency ω D in the conventional BCS theory), κ ≡ βu, Γ(x) is the gamma function and K(x, y) is the modified Bessel function of the second kind. Substituting for S ν into Eq. 4 for the inverse fluctuation propagator, and expanding the resulting expression in powers of e -κ and its polynomial products, we obtain the final expression for L -1 (q, 0) in the clean limit Here N 0 is the density of states at the Fermi level in two dimensions. Note that the above expression cannot be adiabatically connected to the FL result From this expression, it is illuminating to evaluate the fluctuation contribution to the free energy to zeroth order in q above the critical point. Following the procedures described in where γ = 1 2 . This result must be compared with other quantum critical models having gravity duals such as the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev (SYK) model and its variants Π (2) (q, 0) The sums above can be performed and substituted back into the static limit of the propagator (see Appendix D) and we find, where | are numerical constants equal to the second and fourth derivatives of the digamma function ψ(x) respectively. Setting q → 0, this form of the fluctuation propagator resembles its thermal BCS counterpart plus the correction term proportional to (βu) 2 . It is hence clear that there is no sensible way to obtain a zero temperature transition into the superconducting state (since βu 1). Moreover, as the correction term is negative, its effect on BCS result is to reduce the thermal transition temperature T c for a given interaction strength g and energy cut-off Λ. This is shown in Fig. Strong coupling (βu 1) and dilute impurities (θ ≡ T τ 1): The fluctuation propagator in the presence of impurities is shown in Fig. where , and sgn(x) is the sign function. For Ω k = 0, one can perform an expansion in r similar to the clean case and write P (q, ̃ n , - ̃ n ) P (0) (q = 0, ̃ n , - ̃ n ) + P (2) (q, ̃ n , - ̃ n ), and Sν = 1 In the limit βu 1 and θ ≡ T τ 1, the denominator in Eq. 12 can be approximated by unity. This is equivalent to ignoring vertex corrections due to impurity scattering and hence Π(q, Ω k = 0) gives additional numerical justification for this approximation). The Matsubara sums can be performed exactly for u > τ -1 (Appendix F) and the final expression for the fluctuation propagator is only slightly modified from the clean limit and given by Hence its conformal structure at the quantum critical point, L -1 (q → 0, Ω = 0 2θ , as well as the free energy contribution and vHS in ρ(ω) are left essentially unchanged. On the other hand, as shown in Fig. Weak coupling (βu 1) and dilute impurities (T τ 1): The final case we consider is the weak coupling limit in the presence of dilute impurities. In this limit, vertex corrections become more important than in the strong coupling case (Appendix G) and the static longwavelength limit of the pair susceptibility is Like in the case of the clean limit, we can perform an expansion in βu and the Matsubara summations have been performed in Appendix E. The final result for the fluctuation propagator in this limit takes the form This expression for the propagator looks similar to that obtained in the limit of low q and τ < ∞, but with u 2 replacing the energy scale arising from the squared momentum factor As alluded to in the main text, the near-conformal structure of the fluctuation propagator and the associated free energy (Eqs. 7 and 8) obtained from the YRZ Green function is reminiscent of the SYK model discussed in Ref. Note Added: After the completion of this work, a follow-up preprint by Phillips and coworkers In this Appendix, we derive expression for the pair susceptibility Π(q, Ω k ) appearing in Eq. 3 of the main text. For the clean limit in d = 2 we begin with the definition ( 1 ≡ 1n , 2 ≡ 2n ) where ξ(p) = (q) -μ, and V is a constant potential. u 2 is the residue of the self-energy pole and its square-root plays the role of an interaction strength to which other quantities can be compared. Substituting Σ(p, n ) back into I(q, 1 , 2 ) and taking the limits To obtain the above, we have made the replacements x = p 2 2m -μ, d 2 p = m d p 2 2m dφ, and absorbed V into the definition of the chemical potential which is set to be large. The poles of the integrand in I(q, 1 , 2 ) are located at x = ±i 2 2 + u 2 ≡ ±i 2 and ±i 2 1 + u 2 -rcosφ ≡ ±i 1 -rcosφ. Along side these definitions, we can write the pair susceptibility as with the replacements 1 → n+k and 2 →n and the angular average ... ≡ 1 2π 2π 0 dφ . The integral over the variable x can be performed exactly by the method of residues. Using poles of the x integrand and summing over residues in the upper-half plane, we obtain the pair susceptibility as This is the expression that appears in Eq. 3 of the main text. In this Appendix, we show that Eq. 3 of the main text indeed reduces to the correct FL result in the limit u → 0. We begin with the expression for Π(q, Ω k ) (we make the replacements 1 ≡ 1n → n+k and 2 ≡ 2n →n to recover the Ω k dependence) . Noting that all square-roots appearing above are positive, we have i → | i | as u → 0. Hence, in this limit we have . FIG. is centered around z = 0, we can use the parameterization z = Re iφ where 0 ≤ φ ≤ 2π and dz = iRe iφ dφ. With this substitution, the C 1 contribution is Taking the limit R → ∞, we have where # is a constant independent of the physical parameters u and T as R → ∞. Finally, we consider the contribution from the contour C 2 (which we denote as I C2 ) formed by the straight lines originating from the branch points ±u which is given by I C2 can be split into four individual contributions depending on whether the contour is in the upper/lower complex plane or positive/negative real axis. Denoting z ± as the variable in the upper/lower complex plane we can write Since (z ± u) 1/2 and g F (z) are analytic across the branch points z = ±u respectively, we can rewrite I C2 as The quantities in the brackets above can be evaluated using the relations (1-α) |z -u| 1-α (40) Using these relations by setting α → 1/2 we can simplify I C2 to write where P.V denotes principal value. As is evident from the form above, I C2 (and consequenty S 1 ) is UV divergent; hence, we set a cut-off energy parameter Λ to isolate the divergence. Changing variables z = z u, we can evaluate the integral in the strong coupling limit βu 1 where we can approximate tanh x 1 -2e -2x . Taking the limit Λ/u 1 and substituting I C2 back into S 1 we have where K(x, y) is the modified Bessel function of the second kind. Case 2, ν = 3, 5, .. : We will now evaluate the convergent sums S ν = 1 where ν = 3, 5, ... Similar to the case of ν = 1, we can break up the sums into three individual pieces of integration around C 1,2,3 shown in Fig. We begin evaluating the large contour C 1 by replacing z = Re iφ and dz = iRe iφ dφ. With this substitution we have Taking the limit R → ∞ the integral becomes Hence the contour C 1 does not contribute to S ν . We will now show that the IR divergent contribution from contour C 3 is cancelled with that of C 2 yielding an S ν that is finite as must be anticipated for ν = 3, 5, ... We begin with the C 3 contribution from the z = u branch point. Like before, we make the substitution z = u + e iφ where 0 ≤ φ ≤ 2π and we obtain Taking the limit of → 0 and solving the φ integral we have the IR divergent term from z = u Similarly the contribution from the z = -u branch point can be obtained by the substitution z = -u + e iφ where -π ≤ φ ≤ π. The result is equal to that obtained for the z = u case discussed above and thus gives a total contribution from the C 3 contour This term is IR divergent as ∼ 1 ν 2 -1 . We now evaluate the contribution from the C 2 contour by following a similar procedure as the ν = 1 case. We have We can now utilize Eqs. 40 and 41 to substitute for quantities appearing in the square brackets above. We make the replacement α → 1 -ν 2 and after simplifications we are left with where in the last step we changed variables z = uz . To be able to solve the integrals above and extract the IR divergence, we perform the strong coupling expansion tanh x 1 -2e -2x . The integral of the first term in the expansion gives for where the second term diverges as ∼ 1 The principal value integral can be solved exactly and can be combined with the ν = 1 case to give the sum S ν as where κ ≡ βu and K(x, y) is the modified Bessel function of the second kind. This is Eq. 5 in the main text. In this section, we will evaluate relevant Matsubara sums to arrive at the expression for the fluctuation propagator in the weak coupling (κ 1) clean limit (τ → ∞). We begin with the small u expansions of the pair susceptibilities appearing in the main text (the powers (0) and (2) on top of the pair susceptibility components denote powers of the small r ≡ p f q m expansion) Π (2) (q, 0) Consider the sum Inverting signs of the summation variable in the second term, then making the variable shift n = n -1 and combining terms we get In principle the entire q integration can be performed. However, as we are interested in the limit where the spatial structure is unimportant so as to make a comparison with a zero dimensional SYK model, we only need to consider contribution to the integral from the q → 0 mode. This limit of the fluctuation propagator has been written in Eq. 7 of the main text where g has been substituted in favor of u c∞ close to the QCP, and is given by Substituting for L -1 (q → 0, Ω = 0) u=uc∞ into the Hamiltonian density, the free energy intergral can now be performed trivially where the momentum space volume cancels the volume factor V . Hence, along with an additional constant independent of temperature, one is left with Eq 8 of the manuscript given as where γ = 1/2.