The discovery of nonmagnetic Weyl semimetals (WSMs) in TaAs compounds has triggered lots of efforts in finding its magnetic counterpart. While the direct observation of the Weyl nodes and Fermi arcs in a magnetic candidate through angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy is hindered by the complex magnetic domains. The transport features of magnetic WSMs, including negative magnetoresistivity and anomalous Hall conductivity, are not conclusive since these are sensitive to extrinsic factors like defects and disorders in lattice or magnetic ordering. Here, we systematically study the temperature dependent optical spectra of ferromagnetic Co3Sn2S2 experimentally and simulated by first-principles calculations. The many-body correlation effect due to Co 3d electrons leads to renormalization of bands by a factor about 1.33, which is moderate and the description within density functional theory is suitable. As temperature drops down, the magnetic phase transition happens and the magnetization drives the band shift through exchange splitting. The optical spectra can well detect these changes, including the transitions sensitive and insensitive to the magnetization, and those from the bands around the Weyl nodes. The results strongly support that Co3Sn2S2 is a magnetic WSM and the Weyl nodes can be tuned by magnetization with temperature change. Recently, the shandite compound Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 has attracted lots of attentions since it not only shows intrinsic ferromagnetism but also is proposed to have three pairs of Weyl points around the Fermi level in the first Brillouin zone (BZ) In this work, combining optical spectroscopy and firstprinciple calculations, we systematically investigate the band structure of Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 at various T s above and below its Curie temperature (T C ). We have clearly demonstrated how the band structure evolves and identified both the magnetization sensitive and nonsensitive contributions to different optical conductivity peaks. The contributions around the Weyl nodes are also identified. Furthermore, we have found that the electron-electron correlation effect in this magnetic compound is not strong and the band renormalization factor is around 1.33. The firstprinciples calculations within local density functional approximation is suitable. These give out strong supports that Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 is a magnetic WSM. The T dependence of the real part of the in-plane optical conductivity [σ 1 (ω)] is shown in the energy range from 20 cm -1 (2.5 meV) to 7 000 cm -1 (0.87 eV) (Fig. Wave number (10 3 cm -1 ) (inset of Fig. At room temperature (300 K), the optical conductivity shows a typical metallic character, with a Drudelike free-carrier response at zero frequency. Besides a Lorentz-like feature centered around 5 000 cm -1 and some phonon peaks, in the range from 1 000 to 3 000 cm -1 the optical conductivity is almost frequency independent. This plateau persists down to T C ∼177 K, be-low which it gradually evolves into a Lorentzian, which grows up and moves to lower energy range with decreasing T . Meanwhile, the peak centered at 5 000 cm -1 starts to strengthen and moves to higher energy. These features indicate that, in the FM state, the band structure changes dramatically with T . The Drude peak at zero frequency narrows continuously with decreasing T , implying suppressed quasiparticle scattering. Below 100 K, the intra-band response is greatly suppressed, evolving into two components: an ultra-sharp Drude peak and a new interband absorption peak at 310 cm -1 (inset of Fig. From the spectral weight of σ 1 (ω)(Fig. To get some more quantitative estimates of parameters determining the optical response, we fit the optical conductivity using a Drude-Lorentz model with the dielectric function ε = ε 1 + iε 2 in which ∞ is the real part at high frequency. In the first sum ω 2 p,D;i = 4πn i e 2 /m * i and 1/τ D,i are the square of plasma frequency and scattering rate for the delocalized (Drude) carriers, respectively, and n i and m * i are the carrier concentration and effective mass. In the second summation, ω j , γ k and Ω k are the position, width and strength of the jth vibration or bound excitation. The complex conductivity is σ 377 Ω is the impedance of free space), and the real part σ 1 (ω) is fitted using a non-linear leastsquares technique. The fit to the data at 100 K shown in Fig. The T dependence of the square of plasma frequency (ω 2 p,D ), i.e., the Drude weight, and scattering rate (1/τ D ) of Drude response are shown in Figs. To better understand the optical conductivity as well as the electronic properties, we have simulated the band structure and optical conductivity of Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 through the first-principle calculations. Because of the weaker magnetic fluctuation as T drops, the effective moment on Co atoms increases upon cooling. To mimic the T effect, the magnetic moment on Co is constrained at different values during the self-consistent calculation. In paramagnetic (PM) state, the calculated band structure shows semi-metallic feature in Fig. Next, we calculated the optical conductivity with different magnetization. In addition to the inter-band contributions, the intra-band transition is included as the Drude model. The plasma frequency ω p contributed to the Drude peak can be obtained from band structure calculations. It is obtained as 1.73 eV for PM and 1.34 and 0.94 eV for FM with 0.15 and 0.33 μ B /Co, respectively. ω p decreases with magnetization, which is consistent with the shrinking of Fermi surfaces in Figs One can also notice that the optical conductivity around InterC is not sensitive to the magnetization or spin splitting in bands, while InterB is very sensitive and appears after magnetic phase transition. Considering the optical selection rule, including inter-transition energy, the enhanced joint density of states from roughly parallel bands and the angular momentum change without spin flipping, we attribute the InterC coming from to the interband transitions marked by blue arrows in Fig. In the experimental data, below 100 K, besides InterB and InterC, we observed another absorption peak around 310 cm -1 (InterA in Fig. In summary, we have carried out comprehensive optical and theoretical investigations on the electronic properties of a magnetic Weyl semimetal candidate Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 . Ex-perimental and theoretical results reveal a moderate electron correlation and show that the increasing exchange splitting renormalize the bands continuously, making the SOC induced gap approaching Fermi level. We have clearly identified the bands contributing to each absorption peak, including the magnetization sensitive and nonsensitive ones. The one from bands close to Weyl nodes is also identified. These results strongly suggest that Weyl nodes can be well controlled by magnetization, which is quite promising for potential applications.