Measuring the behavior of redox-active molecules in space and time is crucial for better understanding of chemical and biological systems and for the development of new technologies. Optical schemes are non-invasive, scalable and can be applied to many different systems, but usually have a slow response compared to electrical detection methods. Furthermore, many fluorescent molecules for redox detection degrade in brightness over long exposure times. Here we show that the photoluminescence of "pixel" arrays of an atomically thin two-dimensional (2D) material, a monolayer of MoS2, can image spatial and temporal changes in redox molecule concentration in real time. Because of the strong dependence of MoS2 photoluminescence on doping and sensitivity to surface changes characteristic of 2D materials, changes in the local chemical potential significantly modulate the photoluminescence of MoS2, with a sensitivity of 0.9 / mV Hz on a 5 μm by 5 μm pixel, corresponding to better than parts-per-hundred changes in redox molecule concentration down to nanomolar concentrations at 100 ms frame rates. The real-time imaging of electrochemical potentials with a fast response time provides a new strategy for visualizing chemical reactions and biomolecules with a 2D material screen. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) such as MoS2 are 2D semiconductors with a bandgap in the visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. They have received great interest since the discovery that a monolayer of MoS2 is a direct bandgap semiconductor with a reasonable photoluminescence (PL) efficiency One attractive application for TMDs which has not been previously demonstrated is the spatially resolved optical detection of redox molecules at the micron scale. Current approaches for spatially resolved redox molecule sensing include arrays of microelectrodes Optical detection methods such as scanned photocurrent In this work, we show that MoS2 pixel arrays are a powerful new class of sensors for detecting redox-active molecules. Patterned arrays of MoS2 squares are used to measure changes in redox concentrations with micron-scale spatial resolution and at 10 millisecond temporal resolution. We can detect concentration changes on the order of few nM, on par with the best electrical microelectrode detectors. These MoS2 pixels can be deployed in a wide variety of environments, from optical fibers to microfluidic systems, making them an attractive redox sensing platform for numerous applications. The samples consist of photolithographically patterned MoS2 directly grown on fused silica substrates using metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) Figure shows the effect of the ferrocenium/ferrocene (Fc + /Fc) redox couple on the PL intensity for different Fc + /Fc ratios at a fixed 1 mM total concentration. The PL increases dramatically with increasing concentration of ferrocenium. The Fc + ions serve to extract electrons from the MoS2, as shown in Fig. The mechanism can be understood by considering the chemical potential of the solution s set by the ferrocene/ferrocenium ratio. This chemical potential is given by the Nernst equation: , To demonstrate this quantitatively, we compare the response of the pixels to measurements of the gated devices, shown schematically in Fig. The equivalence of these different ways of shifting the charge density is demonstrated in Fig Figure By following the size of the ferrocenium cloud as a function of time we can directly measure its diffusion constant in the solution. For a localized source such as a microelectrode, the concentration of ferrocenium as a function of time (t) is expected to follow the form (27): 4 , where erfc is the complementary error function, x is the distance from the microelectrode, and D is the diffusion constant of ferrocenium. By plotting pixel brightness as a function of x for each frame and fitting every plot with the above equation (Fig. To determine the ultimate resolution of the pixel array to changes in redox concentrations, we examine noise properties of individual pixels. By recording the PL intensity of MoS2 pixels as a function of time with 10 ms exposure times, shown in the insets of Fig. , where the factor of 2 accounts for added noise from the EMCCD gain of the camera. Using a gate curve taken for a nearby transistor device on the same chip, this noise can be converted to a voltage noise. The right axis in Figure ), the resolution is given by // B r r d k T  = . This gives a redox detection resolution of r r  = 0.03 Hz -1/2 or 10% at a 25 Hz bandwidth on a 5×5 m 2 pixel. This detection limit, which is independent of the initial concentration, is advantageous for measuring changes in redox molecule concentration in dilute solutions, as we demonstrate below. We now compare MoS2 pixel redox sensors to the standard electrochemical method for measuring redox molecules, cyclic voltammetry (CV). We performed cyclic voltage sweeps at an ultramicroelectrode while monitoring the photoluminescence of nearby MoS2, shown schematically in Fig. The CV measurements and MoS2 PL measurements are related by the Nernst equation (Eq. 1). Assuming that the large initial ferrocene concentrations [Fc]0 remains constant and the concentration of ferrocenium is proportional to the current to the working electrode (a valid assumption provided the electrochemical system is in steady state as defined in the Supplementary Information), we can rewrite Eq. 1 as   ( ) . Therefore, for the region of MoS2 doping where the PL intensity is linear with the electrochemical potential, we expect that , the data should collapse onto the same curve independent of ferrocene concentration. This is indeed what we observe (Fig. Our data is well fit by Eq. 1 with kBT/e = (21 ± 5) meV (with uncertainty in the conversion between PL and voltage constituting the largest source of error), indicating a simple relationship between standard current-based detection methods for calculating concentration and our method using MoS2 PL. Since the signal for MoS2 PL detection of molecules is independent of absolute concentration and depends instead on the ratio of oxidized-to-reduced species, it provides a method for detecting redox molecules that scales favorably down to low concentrations. In order to test the detection limits of our system we performed simultaneous CV sweeps and PL measurements of MoS2 pixels at lower concentrations of ferrocene, shown in Fig. Having explored the operation of the pixel arrays for redox sensing, we illustrate their use in a variety of situations. Fig. These pixel arrays can be transferred to almost any substrate. Figure Figure This work demonstrates a new class of 2D fluorescence sensors for the detection of redoxactive species. The sensor is shot noise limited, with a sensitivity of 10% in a 30 Hz bandwidth at a 5 x 5 μm 2 pixel and detection limits down to nM concentrations. Improvements to the PL efficiency could increase this sensitivity by another 1-2 orders of magnitude. The fast, all-optical detection of chemical potentials, ionic densities, and charge transfer rates using the PL of a 2D material has great potential for monitoring various chemical and biological systems, such as hydrogen evolution reactions and neurological activity. (The supplementary materials present initial measurements of dopamine). Being flexible, chemical inert, and easily transferrable, MoS2 provides a local redox sensing method that can be easily incorporated into a broad range of environments and systems. The MoS2 sheets were grown by Metal-Organic Chemical Vapor Deposition on 1" fused silica wafers as described in reference The devices were measured using a probe-station with automated micromanipulators (Sensapex). The samples were mounted with the MoS2 side pointing up on an inverted microscope and imaged with a water immersion 60x objective with numerical aperture 1.25 and an Andor electron-multiplier CCD. The PL measurements were made using a mercury arc lamp combined with a 550 nm bandpass filter (40 nm FWHM, ThorLabs) and a dichroic mirror (552 nm long pass, Semrock) as our incident light beam. The reflected light is partially filtered by the dichroic beamsplitter and further selected using a 650 nm bandpass filter (40 nm FWHM, ThorLabs) which includes the A-exciton peak at room temperature (~ 660 nm). The monolayer MoS2 films are directly grown on 1" transparent fused silica substrates using the Metal-Organic Chemical Vapor Deposition described in reference S Before measurements, the devices are treated by bis(trifluoromethane)-sulfonimide (TFSI) following the procedures described in reference S A representative atomic force microscopy (AFM) image, Fig. MoS2. The photoluminescence (PL) spectrum (Fig. The devices were measured using a probe-station with automated micromanipulators (Sensapex). The samples were mounted with the MoS2 side pointing up on an inverted microscope and imaged with a water immersion 60x objective with numerical aperture 1.25 and an Andor EM-CCD camera. The PL measurements were made using a Hg arc lamp combined with a 550 nm bandpass filter (ThorLabs; 40 nm FWHM) and a dichroic mirror (Semrock; 552 nm long pass) as our incident light beam. The reflected light is partially filtered by the dichroic beamsplitter and further selected using a 650 nm bandpass filter (ThorLabs; 40 nm FWHM) which includes the A-exciton peak at room temperature (~ 660 nm). The setup schematics are shown in Fig. In general, the equation describing the potentials in the fluid can be written as: where Vcir is an applied potential between the solution and the MoS2, and μe(s) and μe(m) are the electrochemical potentials of the solution and MoS2 respectively. This equation can be expanded in terms of the chemical and electrostatic potentials of the solution and MoS2, μ and φ, ( ) with subscripts s and m for solution and MoS2 respectively. In the case of a floating pixel, the applied voltage between the solution and the MoS2 is zero. The electrostatic potential difference is maintained by the double layer capacitance at the interface, so we can rewrite the equation: where n is the electron doping per area and C' is the double layer capacitance per area. In the highly doped (degenerate) regime, the MoS2 chemical potential is linear in doping: where g2D is the MoS2 density of states. In the low doping (non-degenerate) limit, the chemical potential of MoS2 is not linear in carrier density and can be written as: Plugging in for μm and differentiating μs with respect to n, we arrive at: We therefore expect that the relationship between chemical potential of the solution and doping of the MoS2 should be linear either when (chemical potential of MoS2 is in the degenerate regime). Since the electrostatic capacitance and quantum capacitance for MoS2 in the degenerate regime are both on the order of 0.1 F / m 2 , for room temperature thermal energy we can safely assume that doping is linear in chemical potential when The detection of the electrochemical potential using the MoS2 PL is not limited to ferrocene ions. In order to demonstrate this, we performed similar experiments as described in the main text with ruthenocene (C10H10Ru) in place of ferrocene. Fig. The MoS2 PL can also be used to detect ionic concentrations in solutions with two different molecules. By using a solution containing both ferrocene and ruthenocene with equal concentration (500 μM), we observe changes in the PL intensity at the oxidation voltages of both molecules (Fig. PL measurements during diffusion can be used to plot concentration gradients by taking local gradients of PL. Using the same video shown in Fig. For simplicity, we model our ultramicroelectrode as a sphere, with a radius of approximately 10 μm. For oxidation of a molecule at a spherical ultramicroelectrode due to a potential step, steady state is reached when , where t is the time between the pulse and the measurement, r0 is the radius of the electrode, and DO is the diffusion constant of the oxidized molecule ( In steady state, the relationship between concentration and current can be written: ( ) where CO is the concentration of the oxidized molecule, CR* is the initial concentration of reduced molecules in the solution, i is the current and id is the limiting current, erfc is the complementary error function, and r is the distance between the center of the sphere and a position in the solution While the PL of MoS2 responds to redox molecules down to low (nanomolar) concentrations, the timescale of that response changes as a function of concentration. To demonstrate this, we set the potential of MoS2 by contacting a microprobe to a device with gold pads and adjust the electrostatic potential such that the photoluminescence is discernably different from its steadystate floating value. After the electrical contact between the probe and the MoS2 is deliberately is the charge transfer resistance between the MoS2 and solution, which decreases with increased concentration. C is the capacitance of the gold pads and MoS2, which is roughly static with respect to changes in solution. However, the data are not fit well by a single exponential, which may be due to variation in the charge transfer rate as a function of doping of the MoS2. Regardless, in lieu of plotting time constants, we plot the full width at half max of the decay time for each concentration measured (Fig. In the same experimental setup as in Fig. Using the PL signal from the MoS2 pixels, we calculate the velocity of the laminar and electroosmotic flows and plot the difference in velocity at a given position in the channel from the average velocity, depicting graphically the difference between laminar and electroosmotic flows as imaged by the MoS2. We demonstrate that our detection scheme also works for redox biomolecules in aqueous solution by measuring PL versus dopamine concentration in a pH buffered solution, shown in Fig. Without any dopamine in the solution, the MoS2 is in a bright state at pH 5. Adding dopamine dopes the MoS2 until the PL is off, as is expected since dopamine is an electron donor. The MoS2 pixels turn on in response to the ferrocenium, imaging motion of the molecules down the channel.