We make use of a custom-designed cryo-CMOS multiplexer (MUX) to enable multiple quantum devices to be characterized in a single cool-down of a dilution refrigerator. Combined with a packaging approach that integrates cryo-CMOS chips and a hot-swappable, parallel device test platform, we describe how this setup takes a standard wiring configuration as input and expands the capability for batch-characterization of quantum devices at milli-Kelvin temperatures and high magnetic fields. The architecture of the cryo-CMOS multiplexer is discussed and performance benchmarked using few-electron quantum dots and Hall mobility-mapping measurements. Developing large-scale quantum machines brings new and distinct challenges not apparent in earlydemonstration experiments with single devices or fewqubit systems Standard techniques for electrical test, such as the use of wafer-scale probe-stations, are challenging to implement in the deep-cryogenic environment. These difficulties are not fundamental barriers but rather technical, for instance, the challenge of connecting room temperature electronics to a large number of devices-under-test below 1 K. A brute force approach, in which each device is independently connected to test electronics via its own wiring, becomes problematic for large wire-counts due to the thermal leak of the wiring itself Overcoming the challenge of multiple cool-downs, the need to perform high-throughput characterization has motivated previous work in realizing multiplexing devices and circuits. These include approaches that directly integrate the multiplexing switches into the quantum device chip 7-9 using the same technology. Embedding the multi-plexer in this way however, increases the complexity and adds further steps to the fabrication process for quantum devices. Here we describe a platform that decouples the quantum device and multiplexing circuit, fabricating a largenumber of multiplexer chips via tape-out to a commercial CMOS foundry. This platform enables multiple quantum devices to be characterized in a single cool-down and with a standard cryostat wiring configuration. Our multiplexer (MUX) is based on custom cryo-CMOS technology and specifically designed for operation below 100 mK. In the particular implementation reported here, 16 independent 1:5 MUX switches per die are configured by a room temperature microcontroller. The switches are based on parallel NMOS and PMOS transistors connected in a transmission gate (TG) topology, allowing for full rail-torail voltage swing of both the inputs and outputs. Our design further allows ad-hoc reconfiguration and daisy chaining of the multiplexer to suit particular device characterization needs. Demonstrating both control of high-impedance bias lines and low-impedance transport measurements, we tune a GaAs quantum dot to the few electron regime via the Cryo-CMOS MUX, and measure the Hall mobility across a 2" InAs heterostructure. By making many parallel mobility measurements in a single cool-down we are able to map the variation in mobility across a wafer, enabling fast feedback between the growth of materials and device performance, an advantage for realizing and optimizing topological quantum devices. A schematic of the experimental setup is shown in Fig. A circuit block diagram of the CMOS MUX is shown in Fig. An optical micrograph of the die, shown in Fig. By appropriate choice of topology, MUX chips may be chained together arbitrarily with no increase in the number of control lines. This is facilitated by the chaining of shift registers between chips, since the CLKI and DI pins are buffered and brought off chip on the clock out (CLKO) and data out (DO) pins respectively (see Fig. where μ is carrier mobility, C ox is gate capacitance per unit area, W , L are transistor width and length, and V GS is gate to source voltage. The effect of V DS is negligible in the limit that V GS -V th V DS . At fixed temperature R on is a non-linear function of input voltage V in , and supply voltages V DD and V SS . Furthermore, the competing effect of increased V th and μ with cooling will cause R on to vary depending on operating temperature Here ∆V th,n(p) is defined as V th,n(p),4K -V th,n(p),300K . The operating temperature and corresponding transistor type is denotes in the symbol subscript. We measure μ p,4K to have increased by a factor of 2.4, whereas μ n,300K is measured to be 4 times higher compared to its room temperature value 14 . Lower μ together with higher V th will cause R on,p,4K to be much higher than R on,n,4K . To experimentally verify the performance of the Cryo-CMOS MUX chip at cryogenic temperatures, we wirebond the dies to a test PCB for measurement at T = 300 K and 4 K. The outputs of 13 pairs of switches were wirebonded in series to measure the performance of the switches through the cryostat. The supply voltages for the test were set to V DD = 3 V and V SS = 0 V respectively. In addition, a pair of lines were shorted directly on the PCB, and used to calibrate the fixed resistance and delay through the cryostat. A representative trace, showing the output voltage V out being pulled high as the switch is closed, is shown in Fig. Finally, we measure the on-state resistance, R on , of the switches in two ways. First, we directly measure the onstate resistance of the switches using conventional lock-in techniques, with a 100 μV excitation, through a shorted pairs of switches. To find the individual switch resistance, R on,DC , the previously calibrated resistance of the cryostat wiring is subtracted, and the result is divided by 2. Second, we extract the on-state resistance from the measurement of rise time across the 13 pairs, using the measured cable capacitance and known impedance of the measurement equipment, which we denote R on,est . The measured values across all switches is plotted in Fig. In order to determine the suitability of our multiplexer for quantum device characterization, we connect it to the gates and ohmic contacts of a quantum dot device and perform transport measurements. A typical quantum dot device will have charging energies of around 100 μeV In Figure Finally, we demonstrate the use of our multiplexer for performing batch materials characterization of InAs heterostructures, of interest for the purpose of realizing topological qubits In our demonstration the heterostructure consists of a InAlAs/InAs/InGaAs quantum well grown 10 nm below the surface on a 2" (100) InP substrate (Fig. Note: In the final stage of submitting this manuscript a preprint describing similar work using commercial offthe-shelf CMOS multiplexing circuits has appeared 