In this contribution to the J. Phys. memorial issue in honor of Sandro Massidda I reflect on a phenomenon Sandro had been a part of. While theoretical condensed matter physicists have made, over the years, exciting and most elegant contributions to the theory of superconductivity (which, in and by itself, is one of the most beautiful constructs in theoretical physics), some of them of utmost importance, they have had less success in predicting and explaining superconducting states and mechanisms in specific materials. More down-to-earth computational materials scientists, who often go by the moniker "band theorists", have been much more successful in applying (usually other people's) ideas in such circumstances. In this essay I give some examples, largely drawn from my own experience, and speculate on their meaning. The last several decades have witnessed impressive contributions of band theorists, now more often referred to as computational materials scentists, in the fields of conventional and unconventional superconductivity. While the former is amazing in terms of the accuracy and predictive power of such first principles calculations, it is less surprising than the latter, which is justly perceived to be a domain of "high-brow science", well beyond direct capability of first principles calculations. In my opinion, these two successes have quite different reasons, and I will dicuss them both in the following text. The first principles theory of (at that time conventional) superconductivity goes back to George Gaspari and Balazs Gyorrfy, who suggested the first, albeit rather approximate, technique for computing the electron-phonon coupling constant, λ, from ab initio band structure calculations The fact that superconductivity of the doped fullerenes was clarified in 1991 on the very basic level, as being related to intramolecular bond-length-changing phonon modes by three independent groups This perception would change definitively in 2001 after the discovery of a 40 K superconductivity in MgB 2 . Recognized gurus of strongly correlated matter, who had gained fame through high-Tc cuprates (we will get to this family later) proffered all sorts of theories to this effect, all of them, it turned out, spectacularly off mark. At the same time band theorists were able to identify both the essential physcs, aptly dubbed by Warren Pickett "doping of covalent bonds" (we will get back to this concept later) It is instructive at this point to go back twelve years and look at the paper by Len Mattheiss et al This example shows that the main advantage of computational material scientists over the model theories adepts is not, or, at least, mostly not, the access to accurate numbers cranked by a computer, but materialsensitive, chemistry-driven intuition developed through performing calculation and analyzing their results for many classes of materials. With time, more and more accurate calculations for more and more complex systems have become possible, together with considerable progress in computing crystallographic stability, eventually leading to excellent "brute force" predictions of entirely new superconductors. This development has recently culminated in two record-breaking discoveries, superconductivity in H 3 S at 200 and in LaH 10 at 250 K, both predicted theoretically as materials stable at high pressure and as hightemperature superconductors, and, in fact, both utilizing Pickett's concept of "doped covalent bonds". This is probably less surprising given that the theory of phonon-driven superconductivity is well established (as long as the key conditions are satisfied, namely, kT c ∼ ∆ ω ph ≪ E F ), and materials in question are satisfactorily described by the density dunctional theory, DFT, (which is, by nature, a static mean field theory). What is astonishing is that band theorists (if not the band theory directly) have provided over the years a lot of insight into the physics of unconventional superconductivity in unconventional materials. Historically, when it was first realized that the insulating state of the parent compounds of the high-Tc cuprates cannot be reproduced by DFT calculations, the first reaction was to deny the latter any relevance and utility. To lesser extent, similar fate was suffered by Eliashberg equations. This author was a part of a paper submitted originally to Phys. Rev. Lett. It is instructive to recall the state of experimental affairs in the field of superconducting cuprates at that time. Both the ARPES techique and the sample quality would undergo dramatic progress in the coming decade, but at that time it was not even able to detect the Fermi surface in the optimally doped cuprates. Superconductivity in alleged absence of a regular Fermi surface in the normal state led to a plethora of highly exotic theories, including such notions as, for instance, "pseudo Fermi surface" or anyon superconductivity. An idea that, at least in the optimally-and overdoped high-Tc superconductors, the concept of (renormalized) Fermi liquid may not be so out-of-touch with reality and the DFT Fermi surface may actually be meaninful was, at that time, advocated only by band theorists This said, it is quite clear that the essential physics of the high-Tc superconductivity is beyond the scope of DFT, which brings us to another important aspect of the latter. DFT is a quantitative theory, based on a welldefined set of approximations. It is in a unique position where both successes and failures of a theory add equally to our understanding of real physics in a particular system. Model calculations more often than not can be tuned (to avoid the word "massaged") to agree with essentially any experiment. DFT has relatively few knobs (although its extentions such as DFT+U or DFT+DMFT have more), and therefore its failure clearly outlines the applicability of its fundamental assumptions to a given material. Moreover, depending on the manner in which it fails one can extract invaluable information about the system. For instance, the fact that DFT underestimates the tendency to magnetism in cuprates tells us about the importance of local physicis and local correlations there. Conversely, the fact that DFT overestimates the tendency to magnetism in Fe-based superconductors suggests that magnetism there is largely itinerant and suppressed by long-range spin fluctuations. Let us continue our historical excursion. For decades, Cu-based superconductors occupied most of researchers' attention, however, there were interesting splashes time and again in the sea of superconducting materials. The first that comes to mind is A 3 C 60 (A =K,Rb,Cs). Superconductivity at a record at that time (not counting the cuprates) temperatures up to 40 K Fast forward ten years, and we have a bunch of discoveries that would have been sensational before the cuprates, but only attracted moderate attention in 2001. I am speaking of several new superconductors discovered, or declared in that year: MgCNi 3 , ZrZn 2 , ε-Fe, and, of course, MgB 2 . Among them we find, in this order, (i) a material with a very strong electron-phonon coupling, but with a rather modest critical temperature of 8 K In the second case, the original paper was aiming at triplet pairing, postulating a microscopic coexistance with ferromagnetism; DFT calculations, again, showed strong coupling with particular phonons, and the calculated electronic and magnetic properties did not look encouraging for triplet pairing -nothing explicit, just a general impression. Correspondingly, Ref. Finally, in the third case it was found that when Fe loses its ferromagnetism at pressures above 15 GPa it transforms into a hexagonal structure know as ε-Fe and becomes superconducting. The original paper was calling ε-Fe "non-magnetic" and referred to decades-old predictions (including one involving Sandro Massidda) Let us once again return to the fourth case, MgB 2 , which was, arguably, the most important discovery in superconductivity since the cuprates. The computational part, even while challenging at that time, was rather trivial, as was the much touted prediction of a twogap superconductivity An opposite idea, of the utility of soft modes, had been circulated in the community for decades, even though many theorists were warning that the classical soft modes are only soft at particular points in the Brillouin zone and thus do not have enough phase space to boost superconductivity. The soft mode concent was based on the mathematically correct statement that phonons with frequencies close to 2πT c are the most efficient in increasing the critical temperature Pickett's observation related to the dual character of the electron-phonon coupling: while indeed λ ≈ η/Φ, where η is an electronic factor characterizing the sensitivity of the electronic structure to ionic displacements, and Φ is some measure of the force constants, the force constants themselves depend on η, roughly as Φ ≈ Φ 0 -2η, where Φ 0 is the unscreened force constants parameter. Thus, η cannot be too large, because of the danger of the lattice becoming unstable. Doping covalent bonds is difficult to effect, but, if it can be done, it achieves two goals. First, the electronic structure strongly depends on ionic displacements modulating the covalent bond lengths (such are modes responsible for high T c in both A 3 C 60 and in MgB 2 ), providing for large η, and the unscreen force constants are hard for covalent bonds, that providing for a large Φ 0 . Taken together, one can have a large λ and a large ω. This is exactly what happens in MgB 2 . The E g modes, mainly responsible for superconductivity, have large Φ 0 , of the order of 10 7 a.m.u×cm -2 , which is reduced by a factor of three by the electron-phonon coupling -and still the phonon frequencies remain high, on the order of 500 cm -1 . The same physics appears to be crucial for the recently discovered record-temperature superconductors H 3 S Between 2001 and 2018 a number of interesting novel superconductors were discovered, and in explaining most, if not all of them, band theorists played an important and often a leading part. I will not dwell on those, having shown enough very diversified examples already. One milestone is however hard to pass over: Fe-based superconductors. These are the only truly high-Tc unconventional superconductors besides cuprates. The history of MgB 2 had repeated itself again, in the sense that outstanding theorists were suggesting all sort of highly exciting scenarios, but it was band theorists who came up with the basic idea (now understood to be a big oversimplification, but still covering the basic physics) of a novel pairing state dubbed s ± since then Which brings to the crucial question: what is the advantage that band therists, a.k.a. computational materials scientist, have? The author of this essay is of firm opinion that theorists doing model calculations are generally smarter than us, and have deeper knowledge of the theory of superconductivity. Despite that, their intuition as regards specific superconducting materials seems to work less well. A seemingly unrelated, but in reality quite similar question is, why solid state chemists, and not physicists, are responsible for a lion share of novel superconductors discovered in the last several decades? Materials-dependent intuition may be the key. Arguably, the most interesting question a theoretical physicst can ask is, what can happen, in principle? Answers to this question often lead to most interesting toeretical models, exciting possibilities, new concepts. An alternative question to ask is, what can happen in this specific material ? Generically, this question is more boring, but also more productive as regards understanding a concrete superconductor. A correct answer to this question requires both a profound understanding of the microscopic physics, specific features of electronic bands, phonon spectra, magnetic orders, and an intuitive feeling based on dozen, if not handreds previous calculations indicating what is possible in which material. Last but not least, in order to predict something one need not necessarily invent something new, but rather be aware of all hypotetical idea that had been floated around, sometimes decades ago, by smarter-than-us theorists. It is worth noting that the two gap superconductivity had been studied, as a purely theoretical concept, as early as the late 50s In conclusion, I would like to express my gratitude to my many brothers-in-arms, who over the years worked in the same field, applying band structure calculations to supercondutivity, as Sandro, for instance, did. I am also thankful to my senior colleagues, my teachers and role models: Ole Andersen, Warren Pickett, Phil Allen, as well as to those who initiated me into the theory of superconductivity: Eugene Maksimov, David Kirzhnits, Vitaly Ginzburg.