FeSe is classed as a Hund's metal, with a multiplicity of d bands near the Fermi level. Correlations in Hund's metals mostly originate from the exchange parameter J, which can drive a strong orbital selectivity in the correlations. The Fe-chalcogens are the most strongly correlated of the Fe-based superconductors, with dxy the most correlated orbital. Yet little is understood whether and how such correlations directly affect the superconducting instability in Hund's systems. By applying a recently developed high-fidelity ab initio theory, we show explicitly the connections between correlations in dxy and the superconducting critical temperature Tc. Starting from the ab initio results as a reference, we consider various kinds of excursions in parameter space around the reference to determine what controls Tc. We show small excursions in J can cause colossal changes in Tc. Additionally we consider changes in hopping by varying the Fe-Se bond length in bulk, in the free standing monolayer M-FeSe, and M-FeSe on a SrTiO3 substrate (M-FeSe/STO). The twin conditions of proximity of the dxy state to the Fermi energy, and the strength of J emerge as the primary criteria for incoherent spectral response and enhanced single-and two-particle scattering that in turn controls Tc. Using constrained RPA, we show further that FeSe in monolayer form (M-FeSe) provides a natural mechanism to enhance J. We explain why M-FeSe/STO has a high Tc, whereas M-FeSe in isolation should not. Our study opens a paradigm for a unified understanding what controls Tc in bulk, layers, and interfaces of Hund's metals by hole pocket and electron screening cloud engineering. Iron-pnictogen and iron-chalcogen based superconductors (IBS) are classed as Hund's metals, meaning correlations mostly originate from the Hund's exchange parameter J. In recent years a consensus has evolved that strong Hund's correlations drive the ubiquitous bad metallicity observed in their phase diagrams T c is a mere 9 K in bulk, but it has been observed to increase to ∼75 K when grown as a monolayer on SrTiO 3 In this work we calculate the superconducting instability using a new high fidelity, ab initio approach QSGW ++ has high fidelity because QSGW captures non-local dynamic correlation particularly well in the charge channel To isolate the effect of Hundness we make excursions about the ab initio reference point, by treating J as a free parameter. One of our primary conclusions is that intense and broad low energy spin fluctuations in the vicinity of an antiferromagnetic ordering vector is the primary glue for pairing and the controlling element for T c in several variants of FeSe (both bulk and layered); and that this in turn is controlled by J. We further show, using constrained RPA, that J can be tuned by varying the screening through, e.g. changes in the geometry such as the change from bulk to monolayer. We also consider excursions in Fe-Se bond length, and can find correlation can be enhanced or suppressed by changes in it. For Hund's coupling to be effective in driving T c it needs a certain 'universal' band feature: the Fe d xy state must be in close proximity to the Fermi energy. In the crystal, Se sits above and below the Fe plane with height h=1.463 Å and bond length l F e-Se =2.39 Å. cRPA yields U =3.4 eV and J =0.6 eV from the QSGW band structure. To assess the role of 'Hundness' we also consider how excursions in J between 0 and 1 eV affect the single-particle scattering rate Γ, and the inverse Z factor, a measure of mass or bandwidth renormalization. (The SM explains how each are obtained.) Γ is found to be insensitive to J for J < 0.4 eV, while for 0.4<J<0.7 eV it increases monotonically for all orbitals. Thus there is smooth transition from coherence to incoherence with increasing J. 1/Z increases from 1.33 at J=0, reaching a maximum of 4.5 in the d xy channel at J∼0.68 eV. Correlation increases for all states, but d xy is the heaviest and most incoherent, followed by d xz + d yz (see Fig. Small increases in J induce remarkable changes in the transverse spin susceptibility χ(q, ω). The peak near the antiferromagnetic nesting vector (1/2, 1/2) (in 2-Fe unit cell) and q z =0 becomes markedly more intense as shown in Fig. How do these striking changes in Im χ correlate with superconductivity? We compute the full two particle scattering amplitude in the particle-particle channel within our DMFT framework, and solve Eliashberg equations in the BCS low energy approximation We next consider how parametric changes in the onebody Hamiltonian alter the spectral function, χ and T c . We first vary the Fe-Se bond length l F e-Se . When it is reduced from its experimental value of 2.39 Å, the d xy band initially near E F at Γ, gets pushed down well below E F . It is particularly easy to see at the QSGW level (blue band in Fig. We next turn to a free standing monolayer of FeSe, M-FeSe. For this study we take the structural inputs from recent work by Mondal et al. At the QSGW level, the d xy band is pushed to E F -300 meV on the Γ-M line (band structure in Fig. c-RPA calculations yield U =4.3 eV and J=0.71 eV, the increase arising from reduced screening. 1/Z is found from QSGW +DMFT to be 1.5, 1.35, 1.3, 1.25 on xy, z 2 , yz+xz, x 2 -y 2 respectively (Fig. How does the effect of a SrTiO 3 substrate modify superconductivity in M-FeSe? M-FeSe/STO is a subject of intense debate, since as noted above, T c of M-FeSe/STO has been measured to be an order of magnitude higher than bulk FeSe. Many explanations have been put forward, e.g. that superconductivity is boosted by large electron-phonon coupling QSGW bands and QSGW +DMFT spectral functions are shown in Fig. A c-RPA calculation for M-FeSe/STO yields U =3.8 eV and J=0.67 eV. Using QSGW +DMFT, we extract the orbital dependent 1/Z (4, 3.3, 3.2 2.7 on xy, yz+xz, z 2 , x 2 -y 2 ) and Γ, which show significantly enhanced incoherence in the quasiparticle spectrum relative to M-FeSe (see Fig. To summarize, a unified picture of the origins of superconductivity in FeSe emerges from evidence drawn from several parametric studies of FeSe around a high-fidelity ab initio theory. Superconducting glue mainly originates from low-energy spin fluctuations concentrated in a region near the antiferromagnetic ordering vector. The instability and the single-and two-particle correlations characterized by the band renormalizations 1/Z, scattering rate Γ and Imχ(q, ω) are all closely linked. The Fe d xy orbital is the most strongly correlated and contributes maximally to the pairing glue as long as it is auspiciously near the Fermi level and further, that the Hund's J is sufficiently large to induce a high degree of 'bad metallic' behavior. Further, the superconducting instability is found to lie predominately in the d xy channel. Hund's coupling can be used as a parameter to tune T c , raising the possibility to enhance λ by nearly 15 times. A possible way to control J in real materials is to change the electron screening cloud. We presented two instances where a structural modification induced a change in J (M-FeSe and M-FeSe/STO). Controlling number of layers, applying pressure to tune Fe-chalcogenide bond length, doping and intercalation are some other possibilities. At the same time it is important to realize it is necessary to control both the screening and specific features of the single-particle spectrum. Our calculations show that one promising directions for reaching an optimized T c appears to be controlling number of layers and interfaces to simultaneously satisfy both conditions: lesser electron screening leading to a larger Hund's correlation and larger d xy contribution to the Fermiology. This work was supported by the Simons Many-Electron Collaboration. We acknowledge SuperMUC-NG at GCS@LRZ, Germany, Cambridge Tier-2 system operated by the University of Cambridge Research Computing Service funded by EPSRC Tier-2 capital grant EP/P020259/1. Here we provide structural parameters used for simulating different systems, the correlation parameters calculated using QSGW +contrained-RPA in table I. In table II we provide the superconducting eigenvalues computed for different systems for different correlation parameters. In table III we provide orbitally resolved m DM F T /m QSGW and scattering rates Γ for all compounds. We also show the Fermi surfaces computed from different methods in Fig. For electronic band structure for all materials over the relevant BZ paths, see QSGW band structure (see Fig. All DMFT and DMFT+BSE results presented in the main text are performed at 290 K. DMFT is solved for all five Fe-3d orbitals using a Continuous time Quantum Monte Carlo technique (CTQMC) We also show the single-particle QSGW +DMFT spectral functions A(k,ω) 7 and the imaginary part of dynamic and momentum resolved spin susceptibility Imχ(q, ω) 6 for all relevant directions along in the BZ. We also discuss in details the methods implemented for electron doping bulk-FeSe with uniform amount of charge, and the results in subsequent sections. To better establish the role of the d xy orbital in controlling the transition from bad-metal with superconductivity to a good metal without it, we parameterize the QSGW Hamiltonian around its ab initio point in a carefully controlled manner that targets the band center of this orbital keeping everything else nearly constant. We add an artificial Hubbard U to the QSGW Hamiltonian, on the Fe 3d states, using an artificial (fixed) density matrix n that shifts only the potential on the d xy partial wave. To compensate for the shift in E F caused by the shift in d xy , we simultaneously add a uniform background charge Q. The net effect is to shift states of d xy character while leaving all of the other states nearly unchanged. We performed this parameterization for two sets of (n, U , Q): the first inducing a shift ∆V = nU = -0.1 eV, compensated by 0.155e background charge, the second shifting d xy by ∆V = nU = -0.2 eV, compensated with 0.211e background charge. The QP band structures are shown in Fig. suppressed and diffused relative to the ab initio case (compare Fig. controlled by these two key parameters. For T c to be high, the d xy state must be close to E F , possibly crossing it. Once this favorable band structure emerges, large Hund's coupling can strongly enhance the single-particle incoherence and subsequently confine spin fluctuations to low energies and enhance the intensity in the vicinity of the antiferromagnetic q vector. In bulk FeSe, the position of d xy is favorable, but T c is only 9 K because J is sub-optimal.