Among iron-based superconductors, Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x is unique in their structural simplicity, consisting of only FeTe/Se layers, which is favorable for probing the mechanism of superconductivity. Recently, a topological surface superconductivity as well as the Majorana Fermions has been observed, which makes Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x the first high temperature topological superconductor. Thus, Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x is unique for study both the high temperature and topological superconductivities. Since large size single crystal of Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x can be easily grown, many researches have been performed. However, a large part of the reported results are under controversy, or different from groups, including those related to the basic properties like resistivity, susceptibility, Hall effect, gap structure, phase diagram, etc. These controversies are believed to come from the sample-dependent Fe nonstoichiometries, which originate from the partial occupation of the second Fe site (excess Fe site, expressed as y in the formula of Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x ) in the Te/Se layer. The excess Fe with valence near Fe + will provide electron doping into the system. Meanwhile, the excess Fe is also strongly magnetic, which provides local moments that interact with adjacent Fe layers. The magnetic moment from excess Fe will act as a paring breaker and also localize the charge carriers. Thus, the existence of excess Fe complicates the study of Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x from superconducting to normal state properties. Removing the excess Fe is essential to probe the intrinsic properties and mechanism of superconductivity, as well as to the applications of Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x compounds. In this topical review, we present an overview of the reported annealing methods, and propose the effective approaches to remove excess Fe in Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x . Furthermore, we discuss the mechanism of annealing based on the evolutions of structure, composition, and morphology with annealing. Moreover, we also review the annealing effects on the normal state and superconducting properties, including the magnetism, transport properties, band structure, T c , phase diagram, upper critical field, anisotropy, critical current density, gap structure, and superconducting pairing. This review presents not only the optimal way to prepare crystals without excess Fe, but also the intrinsic properties of Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x without the influence of excess Fe. As a member of the iron-based superconductors (IBSs), iron chalcogenide FeSe was first reported to be superconductors since 2008 by Hsu et al. Among iron chalcogenides, Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x is unique in structural simplicity, composing of only iron-chalcogenide layers, which is favorable for probing the mechanism of superconductivity. Band structure calculation In band structure, an extremely small Fermi energy is observed in Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x by ARPES measurements, which indicates that it is in the crossover regime from Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) to Bose-Einstein-condensation (BEC) Although many efforts have been done on both fundamental and application studies Review of annealing effects and superconductivity in Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x superconductors 3 of Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x , some fundamental properties are still under controversy. For the resistivity, both metallic and nonmetallic behaviors were reported, and the absolute value just above T c has a spread from 200 to 1500 μΩcm Unfortunately, the excess Fe is almost unavoidable in the current growth technique employing slow cooling. To probe the intrinsic properties of Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x , many groups have tried different methods to remove the excess Fe, including annealing in various atmospheres, deintercalating by immersing crystals in liquids, and the electro-chemical methods. Some methods are effective to totally remove the excess Fe, and induce bulk SC, while others only partially reduce the excess Fe or even invalid. Hence, the reported properties of the annealed (including the deintercalated and electro-chemical treated) crystals from different groups vary considerably. In this review, we first summarize all the reported annealing methods, and propose the most effective approaches to remove the excess Fe in Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x (section 2.1-2.2). We discuss the mechanism of annealing based on the evolutions of structure, composition, and morphology with annealing (section 2.3-2.4). Then, we systematically review the annealing effects based on the evolution of physical properties before and after annealing. In section 3, we discuss the annealing effect on the normal state properties, including the magnetism, transport properties, and the band structure. In section 4, we discuss the annealing effects on the superconducting properties, including the T c , phase diagram, upper critical field, anisotropy, critical current density, the gap structure, and superconducting pairing. Finally, we conclude this review with summary and perspective in section 5. FeTe 1-x Se x (x = 0 ∼ 0.4) single crystal can be successfully grown using standard melting techniques, including the self-flux method with slow cooling The first attempt to anneal Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x was made by Taen et al. For the O 2 annealing, as-grown single crystals were cut and cleaved into thin slices with dimensions about 2.0 × 1.0 × 0.05 mm 3 , weighed and loaded into a quartz tube with d ∼ 10 mm. The quartz tube was carefully baked and tested not to emit any gas under the same condition as the sample annealing. The quartz tube was carefully evacuated by a diffusion pump, and the pressure was detected by a diaphragm-type manometer with an accuracy better than 1 mTorr. After totally pumping out the gas, we filled Ar/O 2 (1%) mixed gas into the quartz tube and sealed it into the length of 100 mm. During the sealing process, the manometer monitored the pressure in the system in real-time to prevent gas leakage and control the O 2 pressure in the quartz tube. The annealing system is shown schematically in Fig. The O 2 annealing effect is demonstrated in Fig. Next we study the effect of annealing temperature and time. In this experiment, the crystals were annealed with the optimal amount of O 2 (ratio of oxygen to the nominal Fe is 1.5%) at different temperatures with increasing time. It should be noted that the total amount of O 2 reacted with the crystal is larger than 1.5% since we fix the amount of O 2 in all the annealing processes. A typical result of annealing at 200 • C is shown in Fig. The acid and alcoholic beverage effects were further improved to be a more controllable electrochemical reaction method performed by a standard three-electrode method Crystal structure change after removing the excess Fe was carefully studied by the powder neutron diffraction measurements on crystal annealed by iodine The amount of excess Fe usually depends on the growth condition, which was reported ranging from several percents to ∼ 15% depending on groups. Even in the same batch of crystals, the amount of excess Fe is not constant. It was reported that the crystals with nice mirror-like surface usually contains more excess Fe than the crystals with textured surface. However, the textured surface is associated with slight misorientation of grains due to strain effects that develop on cooling in the constrained cross section of the quartz tube The accurate determination of the amount of excess Fe in the annealed crystal is even more difficult, although many reports claimed that the excess Fe was reduced after annealing. Even though the excess Fe is removed after annealing, it should still remain in the crystal, mainly near the surface, in some form of oxides (This part will be discussed later). Thus, traditional compositional analysis methods like ICP, EDX, and EPMA can not reliably estimate the amount of excess Fe. Actually our ICP analyses on the O 2 -annealed crystal showed that the amount of excess Fe is not zero. To precisely determine the change in the number of excess Fe, we employed the scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) measurement, which has atomic resolution. The excess Fe occupies the interstitial site in the Te/Se layer, and the previous report proved that the cleaved Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x single crystal possesses only the termination layer of Te/Se Surface color change after annealing was reported in several publications In the O 2 -annealed single crystals, oxygen was reported to be detected by using electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) The reduction of excess Fe in the inner part of the crystal, and the formation of the FeO x surface layers indicate that the excess Fe reacts with O 2 and moves to the surface of the crystal. However, it is well known that the detection of oxygen is relatively difficult for the EPMA and EELS measurements. To confirm this point, we chose the crystals annealed in As atmosphere In the following, we study the spatial evolution of the annealing effect by monitoring the evolution of superconductivity in the crystal using the magneto-optical (MO) images. In this experiment, a thin crystal with perfect mirror-like surface, without cracks or damages, is used. Figs. In a short summary, based on the crystal structure, composition, and morphology change with the annealing, it is now clear that the excess Fe was removed after annealing in appropriate atmosphere. The excess Fe is somehow attracted to the surface, reacts with the atmosphere-elements, and forms the FeM x surface layers. Besides, the annealing effect mainly evolves from the edge of the crystal to the center. The magnetic properties of Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x are unique in IBSs. As first reported by Bao et al. The muon-spin rotation measurements on Fe y Te 0.75 Se 0.25 with different amount of excess Fe show that the magnetic transition temperature T N is gradually suppressed by reducing excess Fe, and the T c is enhanced (Fig. In the annealed crystal, the value of magnetic susceptibility does not show a systematic evolution and is irregular, which is caused by the magnetism from some Fe impurities. During the annealing, the excess Fe are removed from their original positions, and form some compounds like Fe 2 O 3 or FeTe 2 based on the discussion above. Although those impurities are mainly formed in the surface layers, and removed by polishing, small parts may still remain inside the crystals and disturb the magnetic susceptibility value because of their strong magnetism. However, we can still obtain some important information from the data regardless of the irregularity in the absolute value. As shown clearly in Fig. The magnetic moment from excess Fe will localize the charge carriers affecting the normal state transport properties as reported firstly by Liu et al. Resistivities for all the three crystals maintain a nearly constant value above 150 K. From 150 K down to the superconducting transition temperature, the as-grown sample shows a nonmetallic behavior (dρ/dT < 0), which is caused by the charge carrier localization induces by the excess Fe. This nonmetallic behavior was suppressed by removing the excess Fe and a flattened resistive behavior above T c was found in the half-annealed crystal. When the excess Fe is totally removed as in the fully-annealed crystal, resistivity manifests a metallic behavior (dρ/dT > 0). The inset shows the temperature dependences of ZFC and FZ magnetizations at 5 Oe for the three samples The dramatic change in the temperature dependence of resistivity and Hall coefficients after annealing were observed in all the Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x single crystals with different Se doping levels as shown in Fig. In a multiband system, the MR is usually described by the following expression [69], where σ i is the conductivity, τ i is the relaxation time and ω ci is the cyclotron frequency, which has opposite sign for electron and hole bands. In this case, the (ω ci τ i -ω cj τ j ) 2 term becomes larger because the ω ci τ i terms add up, which will results in a large positive MR. However, the MR of the as-grown crystal is just ∼ 0.03% at 16 K under 9 T as shown in the inset of Fig. field is very large and the difference between the zeroth and first Landau levels ∆ LL exceeds the Fermi energy E F and the thermal fluctuation k B T . However, the linear MR was identified in low field region in some materials hosting Dirac fermions with linear energy dispersion, such as graphene Characteristic field B * , defined as the crossover field between the semiclassical regime and the quantum linear regime, is marked by the arrow in Fig. for the Dirac fermions as shown in Fig. The large difference in Hall effects of the as-grown, half-annealed, and fully-annealed crystals indicates that the band structure should be also affected by the excess Fe, i.e. changing after annealing. Details about the band structure evolution with decreasing of excess Fe were observed by the ARPES measurement (see Figs. The annealing effect on T c has already been systematically studied (see Fig. Phase diagrams of Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x have been already reported by several groups Based on the description in the experimental part, the excess Fe was confirmed to be totally removed in our crystal after careful annealing. Thus, we established a dopingtemperature (x -T ) phase diagrams ((Figs. After removing the excess Fe by annealing, the phase diagram of Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x is dramatically changed. As shown in Fig. To study the effect of annealing on the upper critical filed, the resistive transitions measured in magnetic field up to 9 T for H c and H ab for both the asgrown and annealed Fe 1+y Te 0.6 Se 0.4 single crystals were compared in Fig. To get more information about the H c2 and γ at low temperatures, we also measured the resistive transitions under pulse magnetic field up to 50 T The excess Fe was also reported to affect the anisotropy in the ab-plane As discussed above, the excess Fe affects the superconductivity of Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x . Hence, it will also affect the J c of the crystal. Earlier studies on crystals with different amount of excess Fe reported a quite different values of J c at the same situation (such as 5 K, zero field), ranging from 10 4 A/cm 2 to over 10 5 A/cm 2 where ∆M is M down -M up , M up [emu/cm 3 ] and M down [emu/cm 3 ] are the magnetization when sweeping fields up and down, respectively, a [cm] and b [cm] are sample widths (a < b). Self-field J c at 2 K vs. the amount of O 2 are summarized in Fig. The above estimations of J c using the Bean model rely on the assumption that homogeneous currents flow within the sample. To examine this assumption, we took MO images on the annealed Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x (x = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, and 0.4) single crystals in the remanent state, which was prepared by applying 800 Oe along the c-axis for 1 s and removing it after zero-field cooling. Typical MO images for the four crystals are shown in Figs. The Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x contains a s-wave-like, multi-gap structure as already reported by the STM measurements Recently, the gap structure of FeSe was also reported to be affected by the Fe nonstoichiometry [101, In this topical review, we presented an overview of the reported annealing methods on Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x , and concluded that annealing in O 2 , S, Se, Te, P, As, Sb, and I atmospheres at appropriate temperatures (200 • C -400 • C) can totally remove the excess Fe, and introduce bulk SC. Immersing the crystals into acids or alcoholic beverages, and the electrochemical reaction method can partially remove the excess Fe, mainly on the surface layers, which will introduce weak and inhomogeneous SC. On the other hand, annealing in vacuum and N 2 has no effect to the excess Fe. The annealing effect of F 2 (provided by CaF 2 and SmF 3 ) and H 2 are also reported but need to be further tested. The annealing mechanism is that the excess Fe is attracted to the surface and reacts with the atmosphere-elements, and forms the FeM x surface layers. The annealing are still no evidence for bulk superconductivity and total removal of excess Fe, and the SC of Fe 1+y Te 1-x S x is still mainly on the surface. The effect of excess Fe seems to be stronger in the interstitial site of the Te/S layer than the Te/Se layer, which makes the annealing more difficult. The Fe 1+y Te 1-x S x may be another interesting system similar to the sister compounds Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x and FeSe. However, it has not been well studied due to the lack of high-quality single crystals. Appropriate annealing in the future to totally remove the excess Fe may open the door to the treasure of Fe 1+y Te 1-x S x .