The model of ideal fluid flow around a cylindrical obstacle exhibits a long-established physical picture where originally straight streamlines will be deflected over the whole space by the obstacle. As inspired by transformation optics and metamaterials, recent theories have proposed the concept of fluid cloaking able to recover the straight streamlines as if the obstacle does not exist. However, such a cloak, similar to all previous transformation-optics-based devices, relies on complex metamaterials, being difficult to implement. Here we deploy the theory of scattering cancellation and report on the experimental realization of a fluid-flow cloak without metamaterials. This cloak is realized by engineering the geometry of the fluid channel, which effectively cancels the dipole-like scattering of the obstacle. The cloaking effect is demonstrated via direct observation of the recovered straight streamlines in the fluid flow with injected dyes. Our work sheds new light on conventional fluid control and may find applications in microfluidic devices. Ideal fluid flow around a cylinder is a fundamental problem discussed in many textbooks of fluid mechanics Recently, with the inspiring development of transformation optics and metamaterials, substantial interests arose in constructing invisibility cloaking devices to hide an object from external physical fields . This kind of transformation-optics cloaking devices were firstly proposed and realized for electromagnetic waves heat flow In this Letter, we extend the previous scattering cancellation approach to fluid control, and construct a fluid-flow cloak to hide a cylindrical obstacle without disturbing the straight external streamlines (see the movie in Supplementary Material demonstrating the effectiveness of such a fluid cloak We shall firstly point out that the ideal fluid with zero viscosity in fact does not exist in nature (it is "dry water" as quoted from John von Neumann Let us start with Fig. which has the dipole strength vector 2 . Therefore, in the language of electromagnetics, the cylinder induces a "dipole field" of fluid flux, disturbing the flow at every location. The analogy to electromagnetics implies that it might be straightforward to construct a fluid cloak by applying the scattering cancellation. Indeed, we can consider a cloak as shown in Fig. . # 1 Here is the fluid density in the background, and is that inside the cloak shell. However, we still have two problems to tackle. Firstly, Eq. ( To tackle the problems mentioned above, we consider the creeping flow with low Reynold number (Re 1) in a narrow gap between two plates, which is known as Hele-Shaw flow. In this case, a viscous flow can be simplified into an ideal fluid flow satisfying Laplace's equation (2). The method we used to optimize will be discussed in a later section. Figure The height of the shell region measured from the top of the flowing channel to the bottom of the trough is represented by . During the experiment, an electrically driven piston pump was used to pump the fluid into the setup through a thick rubber tube. The fluid first filled up a sink, and then flowed into the channel uniformly. Glycerin was used in our demonstration due to its high viscosity (about 0.63 Pa s for 95% glycerin solution at room temperature) Here we introduce our optimization method for the height of the cloak shell. The initial value of = 9.85 mm is obtained from Eq. ( Note: In the final stage of submission, we found two publications reporting hydrodynamic cloaks The fundamental difference of our work lies in the scattering cancellation in fluid control and the absence of complex metamaterial design. 