The control of acidity influences the structural assembly of biopolymers that are essential for a wide range of applications. Its miniaturization can increase the speed and the possibilities of combinatorial throughput for their manipulation, similarly to the way that the miniaturization of transistors allows the high throughput of logical operations in microelectronics. Here we present a device containing multiplexed micro-reactors, each one enabling independent electrochemical control of the acidity in ~ 2.5 nL volumes, with a large acidity range in aqueous solutions from pH 3 to 7 and an accuracy of at least 0.4 pH units. The attained pH within each microreactor (with footprints of ~ 0.3 mm 2 for each spot) was kept constant for long retention times (~10 minutes) and over repeated cycles >100. The acidity is driven by redox proton exchange reactions, which can be driven at different rates that influence the efficiency of the device in order to achieve more charge exchange (larger acidity range) or better reversibility. By the performance in the acidity control the miniaturisation and the possibility to multiplex paves the way for the control of combinatorial chemistry through pH and acidity controlled reactions. Acidity is a parameter that can drive chemical reactions, its control is one of the most important strategies in processes as important as the assembly of DNA An alternative approach to generate the acid locally is to use electrochemical redox processes involving proton exchange reactions. Southern and Egeland Here we present a device able to produce large acidity contrasts in confined microreactors and maintain it for times much longer than what the diffusion of the protons in free space would allow. The new device contains four electrochemical cells with each containing a working, reference, counter electrode cells separated by diffusion barriers. The new reactors use less than 2.5 nL volumes in an area of ~ 0.3 mm 2 . In addition to the binary mode of pH actuation from 7 to 2.6, we also show the quantitative control of pH with an accuracy of ~ 0.4 pH units. Furthermore the multiplexed control of acidity in two of the reactors showing contrast pH changes are presented. The performance of the device in terms of the reversibility of the acidity control and the stability of attained pH are also reported. and consists of working, counter and reference electrodes which are confined in each of the different cells. The working principle of each cell is similar to the one in our previous publication The diffusion of protons along the channel was considered to be one dimensional and the barriers were designed so that the volume of the channel was much smaller than the volume of the electrode cells to avoid the change of acidity in each micro vessel during the diffusion time of protons. The diffusion time of the protons τ depends on the length of the barrier L and diffusion constant of protons (D=9•10 -5 cm 2 /s) and can be calculated as, τ=L 2 /π 2 D The chip was mounted on a custom-made microfluidic platform schematically represented in mounted under an optical microscope that allowed to monitor the pH using the fluorescence marker carboxy semi-napthorhodafluors (cSNARFs). We used 1 M concentration of Potassium chloride solution with 0.5 μM cSNARF as electrolyte. For pH control measurements, the microscope was moved to the respective electrode cells of the different microreactors to follow the changes in the spectra of the fluorescence marker that arises due to the redox active reactions at the electrode surface. Figure The acidity in the cells was controlled by the reversible redox reactions of the 4ATP that exchange protons with the electrolyte. The redox active states of 4ATP were created by polymerizing electrochemically the self-assembled monolayer In our CV experiment we started with the electrolyte that was prepared with KCl at pH 7. The minimum pH beyond the range of the SNARF marker (figure 2 (e)) could be estimated calculating the total charge exchanged by the electrons in the cell (Q) and attributing that charge exchange to redox reactions producing only protons. As the pH change is more than two units, as monitored by the SNARF, the final concentration exceeds largely the initial one at neutral pH, and as the measuring time is much smaller than the diffusion time of protons through the diffusion barriers The pH could be calculated converting Q into number of protons and retrieving the concentration using the volume in the cell: where F is the Faraday constant and Vcell is the volume of the working electrode cell (~ 2.5 nL). The charge Q was obtained from the integrated area under the oxidation peak and the scan rate. In figure An accurate control of the acidity in the cell would allow the possibility to orthogonally control chemical reactions specific to different pH values. In our device we tested quantitative control of the acidity by using pulse voltammetry as shown in Figure We tested the stability in terms of retention time of the attained pH in the electrode cell by applying a voltage pulse from -0.15 V to 1.2 V for 3 cycles to observe a reversible pH actuation and then we opened the circuit at 1.2 V. The change in the fluorescence intensity was monitored for 10 minutes, which is similar to the calculated diffusion time of the protons through the barrier (11 minutes). Figure We studied the reversibility of acid control monitoring the CV during 100 cycles with the fluorescence marker. The voltage was swept from -0.6 V to 0.7 V at a scan rate of 100 mV/s and the fluorescence spectra were recorded with integration times of 1 second each. Figure The kinetics of the redox reactions was also monitored with CV cycles at different scan rates from 10 mV/s to 70 mV/s. We observed a shift in oxidation peak potential. In Figure The chip with multiple cells was designed to allow simultaneous control of acidity in different cells. To control this feature two channels of the potentiostat were connected and we adjusted the CV cycles to apply the voltage out of phase introducing delay time at the start of the CV of channel 2. We used a voltage range of -0.3 V to 0.7 V at a scan rate of 20 mV/s in both channels. To measure the fluorescence signal in each cell using our single channel spectrometer we alternated the position of the cells two times in each cell every 5 cycles to complete twenty We fabricated a miniaturized device that holds four microreactors to control the acidity in miniaturized cells. The control of pH was demonstrated using the electrochemical reactions of redox active molecules functionalized on the surface of the electrodes. The microreactor was designed to confine the protons in electrode cells while the reduction during negative biases was avoided using diffusion barriers separating working and counter electrodes. A fluorescence marker in the electrolyte was used to track the pH. We were able to control the acidity in the individual microreactor from pH 7 to complete quenching of the marker at 5. The minimum pH attained in the cell was 2.6 as was calculated from the charge transfer of the polymerized 4ATP molecules. We demonstrated that regardless the miniaturization, the pH was controlled similarly to our previous article, which demonstrates that the acidity control is independent of the footprint of the microreactors. Further miniaturization of the device would be possible thanks to our design. We showed a quantitative control of pH with an accuracy 0.4 pH units varying the amplitude of the applied potential pulses. The microreactor retains a stable pH in the electrode cell for 10 minutes by the confinement of protons, thanks to the tailored diffusion barriers. This time control would allow to drive chemical reactions such as synthesis of biopolymers, that we expect to occur faster than in macroscopic vessels because the diffusion of reagents within this cell is limited with the miniaturized volumes. The reversibility of the acidity control was tested over 100 cycles. The minimum pH corresponding to the 100 th cycle was still under <5. This shows that the system has good control over the reversibility providing a dynamic acidity control and well suited for combinatorial chemistry applications that allows the assembly of molecules on the same spot. For example one of the current challenges of combinatorial chemistry is the peptide synthesis. Current methods use 50 % concentration of triflouroacetic acid to remove the protecting groups in macroscale reactors. The pH corresponding to this concentration is ~ 5.9 (more information is provided in the supporting information). As the generation of acid through the redox reactions of 4Aminothiolphenol occur also in organic solvents (data not shown), our device has the potential to implement electrochemically controlled synthesis. The multiplexed control of acidity was demonstrated in two cells on the same chip using simultaneous CV measurement that are out of phase to maintain different pHs without any crosstalk. This shows that our device could be used for combinatorial chemistry applications where the regulation of the large acidity range would enhance the throughput and the yield of chemical reactions. In summary, we have demonstrated to the best to our knowledge, the largest control of the acidity in terms of acidity range and retention time, driven by electrochemical means in cells miniaturized in the range of hundred microns. We also showed that the pH could be independently activated in different cells. We believe that the key features of our device large pH range, quantitative control, reversibility and multiplexing could be used to control chemical reactions with increased throughput assuring stability of acid contrast between nearby spots. The chip was fabricated using optical lithography. A maskless aligner -MLA 150 from Heidelberg Instruments was used to pattern the designs. The series of experimental steps involved in the fabrication process are detailed in the supporting information. The substrate was spincoated with optical resist and design of electrodes with contact pads are exposed and developed. Later 5 nm of Titanium and 50 nm of Gold was evaporated using a e-beam evaporator. The chip was placed in acetone for lift-off. Then the chip was spin coated with SU8 3010 epoxy resist to make the second layer. The design of the diffusion barriers and the electrodes are exposed on the chip using the maskless aligner. The chip was then developed and hard baked for 10 minutes. The electrodes are electrochemically platinized [17]. The chip was later cleaned in a UV ozone cleaner for 30 minutes and functionalized with 0.5 mM concentration of 4 Aminothiolphenol in absolute ethanol for 24 hours.