We theoretically expanded the capabilities of optical sensing based on surface plasmon resonance in a prism-coupled configuration by incorporating artificial neural networks (ANNs). We used calculations modeling the situation in which an index-matched substrate with a metal thin film and a porous chiral sculptured thin film (CSTF) deposited successively on it is affixed to the base of a triangular prism. When a fluid is brought in contact with the exposed face of the CSTF, the latter is infiltrated. As a result of infiltration, the traversal of light entering one slanted face of the prism and exiting the other slanted face of the prism is affected. We trained two ANNs with differing structures using reflectance data generated from simulations to predict the refractive index of the infiltrant fluid. The best predictions were a result of training the ANN with simpler structure. With realistic simulated-noise, the performance of this ANN is robust. The ability to accurately detect small concentrations of chemicals and biochemicals, whether toxic or benign, is highly prized in chemical, pharmaceutical, medical, environmental, and food industries Sensors of chemicals and biosensors are designed to operate on the basis of several different phenomena, including electrochemical One commonly used optical-sensing technique relies on surface plasmon resonance (SPR) which can occur when light interacts with free electrons at a metal/dielectric interface where k 0 is the free-space wavenumber. This SPP wave is p polarized In order to evoke SPR in practice, many geometric configurations have been devised to couple incident light to the SPP wave guided by the metal/delectric interface. The most commonly implemented configuration is a prism-coupled configuration called the Turbadar-Kreschmann-Raether (TKR) configuration The angle θ SPP changes with n diel . This is the principle of SPR-based sensing, with the partnering dielectric material being the material whose refractive index is the quantity sensed. Only one dip indicating SPR appears at a fixed free-space wavelength λ 0 = 2π/k 0 , because the chosen metal/dielectric interface can guide just one SPP wave. Only one SPP wave can be excited at a fixed λ 0 even if the partnering dielectric material is anisotropic Theory In addition to SPP-wave modes, waveguide modes There could even exist signatures of undiscovered phenomena in the graph of R vs. θ. Therefore, when deducing what n inf generated a specific graph of R vs. θ, it is best to make use of all the features of the graph. This calls for the use of artificial neural networks (ANNs), which do not require understanding of the various underlying phenomena to discern a complicated quantitative relationship between them Currently, ANNs and other machine-learning algorithms are being applied to a multitude of tasks in engineering and medicine The plan of this paper is as follows. Section 2 provides brief introductions to: (i) the calculation of reflectances when a porous chiral sculptured thin film (CSTF) Suppose that a CSTF of thickness L diel is used as the partnering dielectric material in the TKR configuration and the planar metal/prism interface is identified as the plane z = 0. The CSTF comprises closely nested nanohelixes of a dielectric material that were grown parallel to each other by the process of physical vapor deposition. The CSTF is infiltrated by a fluid of refractive index n inf which also fills the half space z > L met + L diel . The prism material is taken to fill the half space z < 0. A schematic is provided in Fig. Here, the local relative permittivity dyadic in the material frame captures the local orthorhombicity of the CSTF; the dyadic captures the rotation of the local relative permittivity dyadic in the laboratory frame about the z axis, with h ∈ {-1, 1} denoting the structural handedness and 2Ω the period; and the dyadic S y (χ) = ûy ûy + (û represents the locally aciculate morphology of the CSTF, with χ > 0 deg being the rise angle with respect to the xy plane. Both ε ref and ε o ref have the same eigenvalues-denoted by ε a , ε b , and ε c -but their eigenvectors differ. All three parameters ε a,b,c of the fluid-infiltrated CSTF depend not only on λ 0 but also on n inf (which is itself dependent on λ 0 ) The electric field phasor of the plane wave incident on the prism/metal interface can be written as where i = √ -1, a s is the amplitude of the s-polarized component and a p of the p-polarized component. The incidence direction is specified by the angles θ ∈ [0 • , 90 • ) and ψ ∈ [0 • , 360 • ). The electric field phasor of the reflected plane wave can be written as where r s is the amplitude of the s-polarized component and r p of the p-polarized component. The reflectance is defined as The procedure to compute r s and r p , and therefore R, from a s and a p as functions of λ 0 , θ, and ψ is available in detail elsewhere ANNs are machine-learning algorithms of a specific type ANNs require training and testing before implementation. An ANN is trained on a data set R of column vectors denoted by In addition, there are label vectors n j , each consisting of L scalars n j , ∈ [1, L]. Every R j is accompanied by a unique n j , but some of the labels may share the same value when considering noisy data. As an example, two different sensor chips employed in the TKR configuration may produce slightly different reflectance signatures given the same infiltrating liquid, due to differences in sensor-chip quality from the fabrication process. For a specific j = j , R j is fed into the input layer, R j k being fed to the node labeled k in that layer. With the weights randomized, the label vector n j is predicted by the ANN and an error value is calculated based on some predefined error function of n j and n j . In general, n j = n j . This error function can be expressed as a function of the weights, since n j is a function of the weights. Typically, an ANN uses a gradient-descent method In this paper, every testing vector and its elements are identified by the addition of an overbar to the symbol for the corresponding training vector and its elements. In addition, we use R a b with a and b as placeholders to denote the polarization state (represented by the ratio of a s to a p ) and the angle ψ, respectively, of the incident plane wave for which the reflectance data are obtained. This notation is explained in Tables Theorems of machine learning suggest that an algorithm tailored to the needs of the specific application must be sought After fixing λ 0 = 635 nm, various R were calculated using a CSTF with half-period Ω = 200 nm and thickness L diel = 1200 nm made of titanium oxide. When n inf = 1, we set ε a = 2.1395, ε b = 3.6690, and ε c = 2.8257, corresponding to χ = 37.6745 • , as provided by actual measurements on columnar thin films SPP-wave modes are capable of being excited by incident light of an arbitrary polarization state in the prism-coupled configuration when a periodically nonhomogeneous dielectric material is partnering a metal thin film of sensitivity, where n inf , ∈ {1, 2}, is the refractive index of an infiltrant fluid labeled and θ SPP (n inf ) is the value of θ SPP for n inf . One might then infer that R from p-polarized incident light will yield better training for an ANN. However, since ρ is focused on SPP-wave modes but not on waveguide modes and other phenomena, as mentioned in Sec. 1, we conjectured that s-polarized incident light as well as incident light of other polarization states may also be useful for ANN training. Therefore, our first group of simulations used R calculated for six different polarization states of incident light with ψ = 0 • . Consistently with Tables Even if one polarization state is more effective than the others, the ANN still may benefit from the inclusion of reflectance data from the other polarization states. We use the notation R 1:c b to mean reflectance data that includes polarization states labeled a ∈ {1, 2, ...., c}; thus, R 1: , and R 1:6 1 , we have J = 10 and K = 250, 500, 750, 1000, 1250, and 1500, respectively. Whereas J = 200 for R 1:c 1 , K = 250, 500, 750, 1000, 1250, and 1500 for c = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, respectively. With similar reasoning as in Sec. 3.1.3, we write R a 1:c to mean reflectance data that includes values of ψ corresponding to b ∈ {1, 2, ...., c}; thus, R a Fixing our attention only on incident p-polarized light, we focused on R 1 1:5 , and R 1 1:6 , J = 10 and and K = 250, 500, 750, 1000, 1250, and 1500, respectively. The testing data set R 1 1:c was constituted with J = 200 and K = 250, 500, 750, 1000, 1250, and 1500 for c = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, respectively. Of the multitude of reflectance data sets that can be determined for combinations of polarization states and ψ, we only investigated For this training data set, J = 10 and K = 9000. For the corresponding testing data set R 1:6 1:6 , J = 200 and K = 9000. For the data set that yielded the best ANN performance, noise was added to that set to simulate experimental data. The corresponding noisy data set is denoted by R with the specific superscript and subscript of the set that yielded the best performance. As shown in Sec. 4, the best-performance set was R 1 6 . The noise was Figure simulated as a random number between -0.025 and 0.025 added to each element R jk ∈ R j ∈ R 1 6 for 10 different instances. The upper and lower bounds of the random numbers were chosen based on the average absolute difference of reflectance data between four different 30-nm-thick aluminum films implemented in a specific TKR apparatus, as shown in Fig. Up until this stage, each training and testing data set has included reflectance data from θ ranging from about 30 • to about 60 • . With inspiration from conventional SPR occurring at the interface of a metal and a homogeneous dielectric material, we devised a data set denoted by R SP R with θ ranging between 0 • and 70 • in steps of 0.1 • , with a = 1, b = 1, J = 10, K = 701, and with no noise added. In order to ensure that only the occurrences of SPR were captured in R SP R , the reflectances were calculated with L diel = 1200 nm and L diel = 1600 nm, and only those dips that differed by less than 0.5 • for the two values of L diel were retained All training and testing was done using MATLAB R running on a laptop computer with a 4-core 2.4-GHz processor and 16 GB of RAM. In all, training took no more than a day. Each training data set was used for two separate ANN structures. The first type of ANN structure, denoted by ANN 1 , consisted of three layers: an input layer, one hidden layer, and an output layer. The hidden layer contained 100 nodes with no activation function (linear neurons) and the output layer contained one node. The second ANN structure, denoted by ANN 2 consisted of four layers: an input layer, two hidden layers, and an output layer. The two hidden layers each contained 100 nodes with rectifier activation functions, and the output layer contained one node. The input layer for both ANN 1 and ANN 2 consisted of one vector. The size of this vector was either 250, 500, 750, 1000, 1250, 1500, 9000, or 701 depending on the specific data set being used for training. The stochastic gradient-descent with momentum method Values of all five performance measures for every training data set for ANN 1 are listed in Table . Within each of the first four blocks, those training sets which yielded the lowest value for each performance measure are highlighted by a colored background. In addition, the overall lowest value for each performance measure is identified in boldface. Table Training of ANN 2 for each R provided a non-linear function to predict n inf . By having 4 out of 5 performance measures being the lowest, we may define R When noise consistent with actual experimental data was added, we found that the performance of a simple ANN with a small number of training examples yielded no more than a 0.0037 difference between the actual and predicted n inf based on the fact that M = 36.9478 × 10 -4 for ANN 1 trained with R 1 6 . Thus, use of ANNs provides a level of immunity to measurement noise. A typical method for sensing is via SPR using the TKR configuration. We have simulated reflectance data from a liquid-infiltrated CSTF partnering a metal thin-film in the TKR configuration and used this data to train two ANNs with differing structures. The performance measures of the ANNs for many training instance were compared. The various training data sets contained reflectance data calculated for various combinations of the polarization state and the angle ψ. Some of this training data was complicated by realistic noise. We stress here that our work pertains directly to the sensing of n inf and only indirectly to the identification of the infiltrant fluid, functionalization One main conclusion we have shown is that n inf can best be predicted from p-polarized light with ψ = 90 • , with an ANN having no activation function. This instance represents a best-case scenario. It will require the use of either a triangular prism with a very broad base or a hemispherical prism because the value of ψ is very high. Another main conclusion of this paper is that the inclusion of other reflectance data in addition to SPR data greatly improves the performance of an ANN. Given the simplicity and heuristic choice of the ANN 1 structure and the relative small number of training examples compared to the testing examples used for this work, we are optimistic that significant improvement in the performance can be achieved in the future by adding more training examples and refining the ANN 1 structure. Eventually, the application of ANNs may engender an era of simultaneous multianalyte sensing 