We develop a means for speckle-based phase imaging of the projected thickness of a single-material object, under the assumption of illumination by spatially random time-independent x-ray speckles. These speckles are generated by passing x rays through a suitable spatially random mask. The method makes use of a single image obtained in the presence of the object, which serves to deform the illuminating speckle field relative to a reference speckle field (which only needs to be measured once) obtained in the presence of the mask and the absence of the object. The method implicitly rather than explicitly tracks speckles, and utilizes the transport-of-intensity equation to give a closed-form solution to the inverse problem of determining the complex transmission function of the object. Implementation using x-ray synchrotron data shows the method to be robust and efficient with respect to noise. Applications include x-ray phase-amplitude radiography and tomography, as well as time-dependent imaging of dynamic and radiation-sensitive samples using low-flux sources. X-ray Phase Contrast Imaging (PCI) (see e.g. Paganin To detect the refraction of x rays due to their passage through a sample, the speckle technique has been primarily based on tracking transverse speckle displacement We close this introduction with a brief overview of the remainder of the paper. Section II is dedicated to the theoretical development of our method for single-shot x-ray speckle-based imaging of a single-material object. Section III describes the x-ray synchrotron experiment, used to obtain data to implement our method for x-ray phase imaging in both two and three spatial dimensions. The results of applying our theory to these data are given in Sec. IV. We discuss some broader implications of our work, together with possible future extensions and applications, in Sec. V. We conclude with a summary in Sec. VI. Consider unit-intensity monochromatic x-ray scalar plane waves, incident on a spatially random mask, which produce a speckle image downstream-see Fig. We assume that the transport-of-intensity equation (TIE) where φ(x, y) is the phase profile of the wave-field just after the object, (x, y) are Cartesian coordinates in planes perpendicular to z and ∇ ⊥ = (∂/∂x, ∂/∂y). Here, the phase shift φ(x, y) is caused by both the object (as indicated by the "ob" subscript) and the mask (subscript "m"): For large Fresnel numbers Here I z1+z2 (x, y) is the 2D intensity distribution after the wave-field propagates the distance z 2 from the object towards the detector. Let us rewrite Eq. ( In writing the final line of the above equation, we have combined two terms on the right-hand side and neglected higher order terms; note also that we have introduced the notation (x, y) ≡ r ⊥ . Similar reasoning leads to: Here Ĩz1 (x, y) is the 2D intensity distribution just before the object (see Fig. where I ob (r ⊥ ) describes the attenuation caused by the object. We can also write an expression similar to Eq. ( Equations ( The uncompensated free-space propagation term in brackets in Eq. ( The result shown in Eq. ( As we have assumed that the object is monomorphous, its complex index of refraction n obeys Here, the real numbers ∆, β respectively denote the refractive index decrement and the imaginary (absorptive) part of the complex refractive index. The value of γ is considered known from tables or can be experimentally adjusted by trial and error to match the sample composition and density (see e.g., Sanchez del Rio and Dejus and the object's absorption term Then Eq. ( In the case of a weakly-attenuating-object approximation, which is relevant to the experimental data used in this paper, we may write exp(-2kβ t(r ⊥ )) ≈ 1 -2kβ t(r ⊥ ) and hence obtain: This is surprising insofar as the data function defined by the left-hand side of Eq. ( Here, the linear attenuation coefficient μ is given by F denotes Fourier transformation with respect to x and y, (u, v) are Fourier coordinates dual to (x, y), F -1 denotes inverse Fourier transformation with respect to u and v, and LFF is a optional high-pass filter. The projected thickness in the case of a relatively highly attenuating monomorphous (HAM) object is: If the single-material object is embedded in another material with complex refractive index n = 1-∆ emb +iβ emb , the effective values of should be used (cf. Gureyev et al. We close this section by considering how the blurring effects of finite source size and detector-based smearing may be taken into account in the reconstruction. Following Subbarao et al. may be used to approximate the operation of convolving an image with a normalized rotationally symmetric Gaussian point spread function having a standard deviation of σ. Thus L σ is a diffusion-type linear operator that blurs over a transverse length scale of σ. It may therefore be used to approximately model the effects of image smearing due to both finite source size and detectorinduced blur. Applying this blurring operator L σ to the right side of Eq. ( Since this differs from Eq. ( Interestingly, if the blurring is such that the effects of blurring exactly compensate the phase contrast, hence in this particular case the denominator in Eq. ( We emphasize that the preceding calculations, which are applied in the present context of our implicit approach to x-ray speckle imaging which does not rely on the use of correlation windows, are more broadly applicable. In particular, the above calculations and their evident Fokker-Planck-type generalizations Two distinct x-ray experiments, one of which employed monochromated radiation and the other of which employed broad-band polychromatic radiation, were conducted at the ID17 Biomedical Beamline of the European Synchrotron (ESRF). The first experiment aimed at testing the method under ideal conditions, i.e. with a quasi monochromatic collimated beam. A double Si(111) crystal system in a Laue-Laue configuration was used to select x-ray photons from the synchrotron light source with an energy E = 52 keV and a monochromaticity defined by the relative energy spread ∆E/E 10 -4 . Collimation was defined by the natural divergence of the 21-pole wiggler source which was less than ∼1 mrad horizontally and ∼0.1 mrad vertically. The photons had first to pass through the speckle-generator membrane before traversing the sample located z 1 = 900 mm further away as sketched in Fig. To investigate further the potential applicability of the methodology to more polychromatic beams, another experiment was carried out using a pink beam tomographic configuration. After filtration of the white synchrotron beam by 0.5 mm of Al and 0.35 mm of Cu, the resulting utilized beam exhibited a peak with a mean energy of E = 37.3 keV and a spectral bandwidth of approximately 20 keV (∆E/E 0.5). This second experiment aimed at testing the methodology by imaging in 3D a healthy mouse knee. Such a sample is composed of different tissue types with strongly varying refraction and absorption indices, and may therefore test under real-life conditions the efficacy of the algorithm, even for samples that are not truly weakly absorbing single-material objects. One can recall for instance the method of Paganin et al. The detector system used to image the mouse knee was equivalent to that which was employed for the first experiment, but this time configured with more strongly magnifying optics which provided a resulting pixel size of 3 μm. Overall, the setup layout was also equivalent to the one employed during the first experiment and sketched in Fig. Figure Results of the tomography experiments, obtained using the broad-band polychromatic beam with mean energy E = 37.3 keV and energy spread ∆E/E 0.5, are presented in Figs. Figure The yellow square in Fig. The x-ray speckle-tracking method may be viewed as a form of x-ray Hartmann-Shack sensor Interestingly, the Fourier filtration in Eq. ( While the reconstructions in the present paper were of sufficient quality to not necessitate further refinement, it is also important to note in very-low-flux contexts that our algorithm could be used as an initial estimate to seed iterative refinement engines, thus enabling improved reconstructions that explicitly leverage relevant a priori knowledge such as real-space sparsity, Fourier-space sparsity etc. This is aligned with the usual trade-off that can be made where appropriate, in which an increase in suitable a priori knowledge may be traded off against the amount of data that one obtains (and therefore the dose incurred): more a priori knowledge allows one to make use of less data at the price of reduced generality, whereas less a priori knowledge requires more data to achieve reconstructions that are valid under more-general conditions. Recent achievements in phase-retrieval utilizing both compressive sensing and neural networks It is also interesting to note that our method overcomes a key issue for TIE imaging for x rays without the assumption of a single-material object, namely the need to acquire images in parallel planes for different z values along the optical axis in order to retrieve quantitative sample information. While methods exist for single-plane x-ray TIE imaging, based e.g. on measurements taken at different energies We close this discussion by noting that source code used for all analyses in this paper is freely available at: https://github.com/labrieth/spytlab. We have developed and tested a means for x-ray speckle-tracking phase imaging, which extends our previous work approaching the problem using the concept of geometric flow 