Different studies in x-ray microscopy have arrived at conflicting conclusions about the dose efficiency of imaging modes involving the recording of intensity distributions in the near (Fresnel regime) or far (Fraunhofer regime) field downstream of a specimen. We present here a numerical study on the dose efficiency of near-field holography (NFH), near-field ptychography (NFP), and far-field ptychography (FFP), where ptychography involves multiple overlapping finite-sized illumination positions. Unlike what has been reported for coherent diffraction imaging (CDI), which involves recording a single far-field diffraction pattern, we find that all three methods offer similar image quality when using the same fluence on the specimen, with far-field ptychography offering slightly better spatial resolution and lower mean error. These results support the concept that (if the experiment and image reconstruction are done properly) the sample can be near, or far; wherever you are, photon fluence on the specimen sets one limit to spatial resolution. X-ray microscopy provides a unique combination of short wavelength radiation (with the potential for nanoscale imaging), with high penetration. However, X rays ionize atoms, so radiation damage often sets a limit on the achievable resolution, especially when studying soft or biological materials One of the methods for low-fluence and low-dose x-ray imaging is to use phase contrast. That is because While the phase of an x-ray wave cannot be measured directly, it can be inferred by mixing with a reference wave so that phase changes are encoded as intensity differences. This can be done using the Zernike method with x-ray zone plates Are there fundamental differences in photon exposure requirements depending on whether one mixes the specimen wave with a reference to get intensities, or measures the specimen wave diffraction intensities alone? One might think that by mixing a strong reference wave R with a weak specimen wave S one might have a multiplying effect due to the net intensity recording being |R| 2 + RS † + R † S + |S| 2 , and indeed it has been suggested that near-field x-ray holography (NFH) might be an especially dose-efficient imaging method One could argue that the act of recovering phases from far-field diffraction patterns can introduce extra noise. Indeed, Henderson followed the comments above A slightly different approach to compare the signal to noise ratio for various imaging methods is to consider the strength of the signal scattered by a Gaussian-shaped feature characterized by a width σ f , relative to the signal from the total illuminated area (the field of view or FOV) where B = p s /f w is the ratio of pixel size p s over source size f w (B = 1 for coherent plane wave illumination from a distant source in near-field holography or NFH). Analysis of coherent diffraction imaging (CDI) coherent diffraction imaging (CDI; Eq. 9 of The field of view (FOV) of CDI in Eq. 2 can be reinterpreted as the probe size in far-field ptychography (FFP). For a Gaussian probe, a reasonable way to define the probe size would be to consider a sharp-edged disk concentric with the probe, and having the same height (1) as the probe's magnitude distribution. For the disk to have the same integral area as the probe, its diameter needs to be 2 √ 2 times the Gaussian probe's standard deviation σ f . With this assumption, and expressing the field of view (FOV) as (512 pixels) for NFH and (2 2) pixels) for FFP, the SNR ratio between far-field ptychography (FFP) and near-field holography (NFH) becomes suggesting that far-field ptychography (FFP) has a slight advantage over near-field holography. In spite of Eq. 3, we hypothesize that the fluence n ph on the object sets the main limit on achievable resolution, rather than the use of near-field versus far-field imaging methods (assuming both methods are implemented in a way that allows a specific spatial resolution target to be reached). This hypothesis is supported by a previous simulation study of binary objects using propagation with different Fresnel numbers The problems noted above for standard CDI are greatly mitigated in FFP, where the finite coherent illumination spot provides several benefits. Ptychography allows one to accurately determine the equivalent of a finite support due not to the characteristics of the object, but instead due to the characteristics of the limited-size probe function, which can be recovered from the data. Object subregions that are present in the overlap between two probe positions provide a sort of holographic reference between the two resulting diffraction patterns In order to compare different imaging methods for non-binary objects, we have chosen to use the same optimization-based reconstruction method for the three imaging approaches, so as reveal only the inherent differences between them. The work of Hagemann and Salditt Our approach is to minimize the cost function C by adjusting the object function n which contains the complex refractive index of the sample. For x-ray imaging, we used a 2D grid of the x-ray refractive index n(x, y) = 1 -δ(x, y) -iβ(x, y) distribution multiplied by the projection object thickness t(x, y) to yield an optical modulation of exp {k[iδ(x, y) -β(x, y)]t(x, y)} in the sign convention where forward propagation is exp[-ikz]. In our case, we used the same 512 × 512 pixel pure-phase cell phantom (shown here in Fig. a variance of σ φ = 0.037 radians, and a bound of 0 to 1 radians (this object phase contrast is representative of what one might have in soft x-ray imaging; the contrast is usually lower in hard x-ray imaging). The cost function C is the mean squared difference between the modulus of the wave at the detector plane as predicted by the forward model f (n, k, d) for the present guess n of the object, and the "measured" intensity where d is the free-space propagation distance z in terms of a Fresnel number for an object pixel size ∆ (so that far-field diffraction has d = 0). Fresnel propagation f (n, k, d) of the wavefield leaving the specimen to the detector plane was accomplished via convolution with a propagator function in the Fourier domain where N p represents the number of pixels in the detector, and N k represents the number of illumination spots k (N k = 1 for the single, full-area illumination in holography). The formulation of the cost function in Eq. 7 is straightforward: by minimizing the cost function, we update the object function n so that the Euclidean distance between the diffraction images generated by n and the actual measurements is reduced. A least square (LSQ) cost function like this is more appropriate for images containing Gaussian noise which is generally applicable at relatively high photon fluences Eq. 8 is also known as the Poisson likelihood function, and the true object function should be one that maximizes the likelihood. In practice, the negative logarithm of Eq. 8 is often taken, so that the maximization of a serial product can be turned into the more tractable problem of minimizing a sum. In this way, the Poisson cost function is written as In NFP and FFP, the lack of scattering that takes place when the illuminating probe function is outside the object's boundary means that it is quite natural for a reconstruction algorithm to seek solutions for such regions that are empty, even under conditions of limited illumination. To add a similar constraint redonly to NFH reconstructions, we added to the cost function of Eq. 7 a regularizer consisting of a finite support mask S. This yields an update n to the object of subject to n w = 0 for n w ∈ S and n ≥ 0 for n ∈ S where j ∈ {LSQ, Poisson}. A finite support constraint also suppresses the twin-image in in-line holography For direct comparison with prior work For our complementary study on NFP, the setup is assumed to be for a point-projection imaging, where a point source is used for illumination. The high spatial resolution of a point-projection microscope is achieved by the geometrical magnification effect of the spherical wave that the point source emits. As the Fresnel scaling theorem (Appendix B of X-ray microscopes use ionizing radiation, so it is important with many specimen types to limit the photon fluence n ph (average number of incident photons that hit each pixel containing the sample) and consequent radiation dose that the specimen receives. However, one must supply sufficient fluence in order to successfully image small, low contrast features. For phase contrast imaging of a non-absorbing, low-contrast specimen with thickness t f and phase-shifting part of the refractive index δ f for feature-containing pixels and δ b for background (feature-free) pixels, one can estimate that the fluence required to obtain an image with a signal to noise ratio of SNR is given by Eq. 39 of where k ≡ 2π/λ is the wavenumber. Since k|δ f -δ b |t f is the mean phase shift within the object compared to the object-free region, we can substitute this with φ = 0.643 radians from Eq. 4 and obtain an estimate that we require a fluence of Given that the variance about the mean phase within the object was σ φ = 0.037 radians, we would expect that a signal to noise ratio of about | φ|/σ φ = 17.4 would begin to give very faithful, low noise representations of the true object, which corresponds to a fluence estimate of n ph = 350 photons per pixel (with higher fluences giving increasing image fidelity). We therefore carried out simulations with values of n ph that bracketed a value of n ph = 350/pixel on an approximately logarithmic scale. Starting from the noise-free "recorded" intensities y k of Eq. 5, we incorporated Poisson noise to y k for a specified total fluence n ph in photons per pixel on the specimen (to save computational time, NFP was tested on a subset of the photon fluence values used for NFH and FFP). Because we expect n ph = 350/pixel to be the nominal dividing line between "high-dose" and "low-dose" regimes, datasets with n ph beyond that were reconstructed using the LSQ cost function which approximates photon noise using a quasi-Gaussian model that works well at high photon fluence. On the other hand, data with n ph below 350/pixel were reconstructed using both the LSQ and the Poisson cost function. Two separate, independent random noise datasets were generated for each experiment type, fluence, and loss function type; reconstructed images from one of these two instances are shown in Fig. For NFP, using a Poisson cost function improves the contrast of the reconstructed images to some extent. However, it was observed exclusively in NFP that almost all results obtained from noisy data, even with n ph = 20000 where NFH and FFP yield nearly identical results to the ground truth, contain highfrequency artifacts. When the input data are noise-free, then NFP is able to reconstruct the image without artifacts, as shown in the insets in Fig. In order to better quantify the reconstruction quality, we now consider metrics one can obtain from noisy images. If one has two images I 1 and I 2 of the same object with two different instances of noise, one can calculate an overall image correlation coefficient r of One can then use this correlation coefficient to calculate an overall image signal-to-noise ratio where the expression of Eq. 14 is correct for intensity images I 1 and I 2 , as confirmed by the as-expected scaling of SNR ∝ √ n ph Since the phantom cell is a pure phase object with a well-defined support S (which was used in the NFH reconstruction to suppress the twin image), another whole-image metric we can use is the within-support mean squared error (SMSE) on the phase of where n is a pixel index. This is the same 2 -norm metric defined by Eq. 9 in prior work Although whole-image SNR measurements show that FFP slightly outperforms NFH (and largely outperforms NFP) at low photon fluence, they also seem to indicate improved results for FFP when using the LSQ cost function (Eq. 7) instead of the Poisson cost function (Eq. 9) at low fluence, which seems to contradict the visual appearance of the reconstructed images shown in Fig. Another important metric for evaluating two separate instances of equally noisy images is to examine the correlation of their Fourier transforms as a function of radial spatial frequency u r , leading to the Fourier Also shown on the plot is the 1/2-bit threshold curve that is commonly used to define the achieved spatial resolution based on the spatial frequency of the crossing with the experimental FRC curve shell correlation for 3D images or the Fourier ring correlation (FRC) for 2D images High resolution, low noise images will show strong correlation at high spatial frequencies, while lower resolution, noisier images will show poorer correlation at high spatial frequencies. It is common to assign a spatial resolution value based on the crossing of the FRC with a half-bit threshold value Overall, the above analyses and discussions suggest similar performance between far-field ptychography Figure (FFP) and near-field holography (NFH) over a wide range of fluence, although FFP performs slightly better in terms of SNR (especially at low photon fluence). However, it should also be noted that FFP has certain extra requirements: it requires a high degree of coherence over the entire beam used, while NFH requires high coherence within the region of Fresnel fringes from a feature in a specimen but not over the entire illumination field. (As an example, with Fresnel fringes extending to 20 μm, one could use a 200 μm wide beam with 20 μm coherence width to image a larger field of view with higher flux if using a partially coherent source). FFP also requires accurate movement of a probe beam relative to the sample (though computational probe position refinement can also help correct for errors We have considered a variety of coherent imaging methods and how they can perform with varying x-ray fluence. While the brightness (and thus coherent flux) of synchrotron light sources has been increasing dramatically (with the next advance being provided by diffraction-limited storage rings We conclude that the imaging method used does play some role in the quality of an image that one can obtain from a given fluence on the specimen. (We also note that if an optic were to be used to record a direct image with no reconstruction algorithm required, one would need to increase the fluence to account for the focusing efficiency of the optic 