O2-plasma-based digital etching of Al0.25Ga0.75N with a 0.8 nm AlN spacer on GaN was investigated. At 40 W RF bias power and 40 sccm oxygen flow, the etch depth of Al0.25Ga0.75N was 5.7 nm per cycle. The 0.8 nm AlN spacer layer acted as an etch-stop layer in 3 cycles. The surface roughness improved to 0.33 nm after 7 digital etch cycles. Compared to the dry etch only approach, this technique causes less damages. Compared to the selective thermal oxidation with a wet etch approach, this method is less demanding on the epitaxial growth and saves the oxidation process. It was shown to be effective in precisely controlling the AlGaN etch depth required for recessed-AlGaN HEMTs. Wide bandgap GaN-based high electron mobility transistors (HEMTs) and fieldeffect transistors (FETs) are able to provide higher breakdown voltage and higher electron mobility than conventional Si-based high power devices 1-3 . Normally-off GaN HEMTs are greatly needed to lower power and to simplify circuit and system architecture, which is one of the major challenges in GaN HEMT technology Due to the high requirements on the gate dielectric thickness, uniformity, quality and surface morphology, recess etch is a very critical step in the fabrication of GaN HEMT Reactive ion etching (RIE) with chlorine (Cl2) or boron trichloride (BCl3) plasma gives high selectivity between AlGaN and GaN. However, they cause damages to AlGaN Therefore, Cl2 and BCl3 etching recipes are not suitable for the very shallow recess etch Oxygen plasma based digital etching is the third etch option. A cycle of digital etching includes a plasma oxidation step and a wet etching step to oxidize the target material and to remove the oxidation products. Compared to the Cl2 or BCl3 plasma etch, it produces better surface quality. Also, it does not require very complicated epitaxy as the second recess etch method discussed above. Theoretically, the oxygen penetration depth depends on the radio frequency (RF) bias power of the plasma. Therefore, the thickness of oxidation and the amount etched in one cycle saturate with the oxidation time at a certain temperature and plasma power A digital etching recipe containing oxygen (O2) plasma was first shown by S. D. Previous studies used cyclical O2 and Cl2/BCl3 plasma This work was designed to study the digital etching of AlGaN with an AlN spacer/etch-stop layer, which is helpful for better controlling the AlGaN recess depth. Meanwhile, improved surface roughness was observed using this method. In this work, oxygen plasma in an inductively coupled plasma (ICP) tool was used as the oxidant. The AlGaN/GaN/Si substrates used in our work were grown and provided by Enkris Semiconductor Inc.. From top to bottom, the epitaxial layers on Si are a 2.5 nm GaN cap layer, a 19 nm Al0.25Ga0.75N barrier layer, a 0.8 nm AlN spacer layer and a 700 nm intrinsic GaN, and buffer layers. As seen in Fig. Therefore, the etching depth continued to increase after the 6 th cycle. The surface morphology of the AlGaN/GaN samples after 3 and 7 cycles of digital etching process was compared in Fig. In summary, O2-plasma-based digital etching of Al0.25Ga0.75N with 0.8 nm AlN spacer on GaN was investigated using an ICP etcher. At 40 W RF bias power and 40 sccm oxygen flow, the etch depth of Al0.25Ga0.75N was 5.7 nm per cycle. The 0.8 nm AlN spacer layer acted as an etch-stop layer for AlGaN recess. The surface roughness improved after the digital etch cycles to 0.330 nm. Compared to the dry etch only approach, this technique causes less damages. Compared to the selective oxidation with a wet etch approach, this method is less demanding on the epitaxial growth and saves the oxidation process. The presence of AlN as an etch-stop layer for the digital etch guarantees the better recess control for the preparation of gate-recessed HEMT. K. Yusuke, U. Keisuke, S. Taketomo, H. Tamotsu, Journal of Applied Physics, 121, pp. K. Chen, and C. Zhou, Phys. Status Solidi A, 208 (2), pp. 434-438 (2011). R. Sporken, C. Silien, F. Malengreau, K. Grigorov, and R. Caudano, MRS Internet journal of nitride semiconductor research, 2, (1997).