Pressure-stabilized hydrides are a new rapidly growing class of high-temperature superconductors which is believed to be described within the conventional phonon-mediated mechanism of coupling. Here we report the synthesis of yttrium hexahydride Im3 ̅ m-YH6 that demonstrates the superconducting transition with TC ~ 224 K at 166 GPa, much lower than the theoretically predicted (>270 K). The measured upper critical magnetic field Bc2(0) of YH6 was found to be 116-158 T, which is 2-2.5 times larger than the calculated value. A pronounced shift of TC in yttrium deuteride YD6 with the isotope coefficient 0.4 supports the phonon-assisted superconductivity. Current-voltage measurements showed that the critical current IC and its density JC may exceed 1.75 A and 3500 A/mm 2 at 0 K, respectively, which is comparable with the parameters of commercial superconductors, such as NbTi and YBCO. The superconducting density functional theory (SCDFT) and anharmonic calculations suggest unusually large impact of the Coulomb repulsion in this compound. The results indicate notable departures of the superconducting properties of the discovered YH6 from the conventional Migdal-Eliashberg and Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theories. Room-temperature superconductivity has been an unattainable dream and subject of speculative discussions for a long time, but times change. The theoretical prediction of record high-temperature superconductor LaH10 1 followed by the experimental confirmation of its critical temperature TC ~ 250-260 K Following the theoretical predictions, in this work we report experimental study of the superconducting properties of yttrium hexahydride Im3 ̅ m-YH6, synthesized together with YH7 and YH4, after laser heating yttrium samples compressed to 166-172 GPa in the ammonia borane (NH3BH3) medium in the diamond anvil cells. In the first part of this work we focused on the experimental verification of stability and superconductivity of Im3 ̅ m-YH6 and on the calculation of some physical properties that have not been analyzed before. The high-pressure synthesis was carried out with ammonia borane as a source of hydrogen, following the technique that has shown good results in previous studies. The results of the synthesis are strongly dependent on pressure and temperature conditions. In DACs K1 and M1 (the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns are shown in Figure Pressure, GPa a, Å V, Å At 150 GPa and 0 K, with the ZPE contribution taken into account, the only stable hydrides are Fm3 ̅ m-YH and YH3, I4/mmm-YH4, P1-YH7 (Imm2-YH7 is a bit less stable), and pseudohexagonal P1 ̅ -YH9, whereas Im3 ̅ m-YH6 is metastable, lying 30 meV/atom above the convex hull (Figure It is interesting that Fm3 ̅ m-YH10 is thermodynamically metastable at 200-250 GPa and 0-2000 K, with the Gibbs free energy of formation at least 18 meV/atom above the convex hull because of the existence of YH9 (Supplementary Figure The composite gaskets consisting of a tungsten ring and a CaF2/epoxy mixture were used to isolate the electrical leads. To measure the isotope effect in YD6, a similar cell loaded with ND3BD3 was prepared. An yttrium sample with a thickness of ~1-2 μm was sandwiched between the electrodes and ammonia borane in the gasket hole with a diameter of 20 μm. In the DAC M3, the electrodes were in short-circuit with the tungsten gasket, therefore no resistivity measurements were made. The temperature dependence of the resistance is shown in Figure The analysis of the electronic and superconducting properties of the tetragonal YH4 and pseudocubic Imm2-YH7 shows that the I4/mmm-YH4 is a metal with a significantly lower calculated critical temperature (≤94 K) compared with YH6. Another possible product of the synthesis in DAC M1, Imm2-YH7, has a pronounced pseudogap in the electronic density of states N(E), leading to a quite low density of states at the Fermi level N(EF), and, as a result, low predicted ТС of 32-43 K (Supplementary Table In YH6, the dependence of the TC (YH6) on the magnetic induction B = μ0H was measured at 183 GPa in the range of 0-16 T (Figure One of distinguishing features of superconductors is the existence of an upper limit of the current density (JC) at which superconductivity disappears. The critical currents and the voltage-current (V-I) characteristics for the YH6 sample were investigated in the range of 10 -4 -10 -2 A in external magnetic fields after further compression to 196 GPa (Figure Analysis of the pinning force (Fp = B•IC) dependence on magnetic field (Supplementary Fig. Numerical solution of the isotropic Migdal-Eliashberg equations At a pressure of 165 GPa, the calculations with the anharmonic α 2 F(ω) show a decrease in the EPC coefficient of YH6 from 2.24 to 1.71 and an increase of ωlog from 929 to 1333 K due to hardening of the optical phonon modes. The overall influence of anharmonicity on the critical temperature is a decrease by 25 K, and resulting TC is 236-247 K, which is still higher than the experimental values. To match the experimental data, including isotope coefficient αexp = 0.4, unusually high values of the Coulomb pseudopotential μ*(6 Ry) = 0.19-0.22 are necessary. Estimations for YH6 on the basis of DFT-calculated N(EF), λ, and ωlog give an expected upper critical magnetic field μ0HC(0) ~ 60 T, a superconducting gap of 48 meV, a coherence length ξ BCS = 0.5√h/πeH c2 = 23 Å, and N(E F )(1 + λ) = 1.92 (Supplementary Table The experimentally found upper critical magnetic field μ0Hc2(0) exceeds 110 Т (and can reach 158 T in the WHH model), which is more than 2-2.5 times higher than the value predicted within the BCS theory. In other words, the term N(E F )(1 + λ), related to the Sommerfeld constant, is at least 4 times higher than follows from DFT calculations, and ξ exp is 14-17 Å. In this regard, it is curious that possible deviation from the BCS theory of superconductivity in YH6 was recently noted in Ref. The SCDFT calculations, which incorporate the phonon-mediated pairing, mass renormalization and pair-breaking Coulomb repulsion under the retardation effect without empirical parameters, such as μ* in the Migdal-Eliashberg equations, reveal another anomaly of YH6. Solving the SCDFT gap equation with the anharmonic α 2 F(ω) (Supplementary Information equation (S1)) at 165 GPa yields TС = 160 K and Coulomb potential μ = 0.187, with an error bar of ~2.5% originating from the random sampling step in solving the equation. Within the conventional mechanism, we can try to explain the discrepancy using at least two hypotheses. First, it could be achieved in the fully anisotropic Eliashberg equation. In this research, the novel high-TC superconductor Im3 ̅ m-YH6 was discovered together with I4/mmm-YH4 and YH7 at pressures of 160-196 GPa, confirming theoretical predictions. Anharmonic effects in Im3 ̅ m-YH6 lead to a decrease in the EPC coefficient from 2.24 to 1.71 and lowering the critical temperature by 25 K. An anomalously large impact of the Coulomb repulsion was found in yttrium hexahydride within both the Migdal-Eliashberg and the SCDFT approaches. The calculated TC agreed with the experimental critical temperature and the isotope coefficient only when the Coulomb pseudopotential μ*(6 Ry) was equal to 0.19-0.22 and anharmonicity is included in the calculations. The parameter-free SCDFT calculations for YH6 give substantially lower TC = 160 K which implies importance of effects missing in the conventional Migdal-Eliashberg theory. and R.B. acknowledge support from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement no. 802533). The computational predictions of the thermodynamic stability of the Y-H phase at 150, 200, and 250 GPa were carried out using the variable-composition evolutionary algorithm USPEX. The calculations of the Eliashberg function of Im3 ̅ m-YH6 were performed using 6×6×6 q-points and 60×60×60 k-points meshes. TC was calculated by solving the isotropic Eliashberg equations 29 using the iterative self-consistent method for the imaginary part of the order parameter Δ(T, ω) (superconducting gap) and the renormalization wave function Z(T, ω) assuming that the Coulomb repulsion between the electrons can be parametrized with the μ*. More approximate estimates of TC were made using the Allen-Dynes formula. Solving this equation for different temperatures  = 1/T, we see that the order parameter Δ n ′ k ′ has a nonzero solution below any threshold temperature, which is identified as Tc. Labels n, n', k, and k' indicate the Kohn-Sham band and crystal wave number indices, respectively. ξ nk is the energy eigenvalue of state nk from the Fermi level, as calculated using the standard Kohn-Sham equation for the normal state. The kernels of the gap equation Z nk (T) and K nkn ′ k ′ (T) represent the electron-phonon and electron-electron Coulomb interaction effects, the formulas for which (a study by Kruglov et al. Table Table Table To calculate the isotopic coefficient β, the Allen-Dynes interpolation formulas were used: where the last two correction terms are usually small (~0.01). The Sommerfeld constant was found as and was applied to estimate the upper critical magnetic field and the superconductive gap in yttrium hydrides by well-known semiempirical equations of the BCS theory (Ref. The lower critical magnetic field was calculated according to the Ginzburg-Landau theory: 47 where λL is the London penetration depth: Here c is the speed of light, e is the electron charge, me is the electron mass, and ne is an effective concentration of charge carriers, evaluated from the average Fermi velocity (VF) in the Fermi gas model: The coherence length ξ was found as ξ = √ħ 2e(μ 0 H C2 ) ⁄ and was used to estimate the average Fermi velocity: The average Fermi velocity was also calculated directly from the band structure of cI4-YH6 using where dEi/dk (k = -π/a ... π/a) were replaced by dEi/dt (t = -1 ... 1). In this case the first Brillouin zone was sampled by the very dense k-points mesh with a resolution of 2π×0.005 Å -1 . The obtained values of VF of YH6 are 9.1×10 5 , 9.3×10 5 and 9.4×10 5 m/s at 150, 165, and 180 GPa, respectively. Electron band mass was found to be m* = 0.82me for YH6 at 150 GPa (0.69me in the vicinity of the Г-point), which is compatible the electron band mass in H3S The calculations within the Migdal-Eliashberg approach were made using the following equations (on the imaginary axis): 29 where Δn is the order parameter function, Zn is the wave function renormalization factor, θ(x) is the Heaviside function, ωn = πkBT(2n -1) is the nth Matsubara frequency, β = kBT, μ * is the Coulomb pseudopotential, λ(z) is the electron-phonon pairing kernel, and ωc is the cutoff energy. We used ωc = 6 Ry with the appropriate number of the Matsubara frequencies. Electronic and phonon properties of yttrium hydrides The elastic tensors of YH4, YH6 and YH7 were calculated using the stress-strain relations: where σi is the i th component of the stress tensor, ηj is the j th component of the strain tensor. The bulk (B) and shear (G) moduli and Young's modulus (E) were calculated in GPa via Voigt-Reuss-Hill averaging. 