Laser Shock Peening (LSP) of stainless-steel 316 and 316L was studied using Ti: Sapphire laser pulses of about 2 ps duration, maximum energy of about 1mJ and pulse repetition rate of 5kHz in different liquid confinement media of Ethanol, Deionized water and separate aqueous solutions of NaCl and Glycerol. It is found that the laser fluence and/or energy attenuating mechanisms like self-focusing, filamentation, plasma breakdown in the confinement media are less significant with ps laser pulses than those with sub-ps or fs pulse durations. It is shown that the resulting surface hardness of the peened steel as a function of laser fluence depends significantly on the confinement media and the relative increase in the hardness increases monotonically with the acoustic impedance of the liquid of the confinement medium used during LSP. Laser shock peening (LSP) in the ultra-short pulse durations regime of pico-second (ps) to femto-second (fs) is a potentially important area of research for surface enhancement of engineering components of different metals and alloys even though this area is still in its infancy. This is because in this time regime the pressure of the shock waves generated is correspondingly orders of magnitude higher than that generated for example in nano-second or micro-second time regimes and the depth of the residual compressive strength is much finer The end result of these initial processes is the generation of sharp shock-wave Mostly LSP is carried out by applying a sacrificial layer on the metal or alloy surface and an overlayer of confinement medium, generally water Choice of a good confinement medium depends on its optical transparency for the laser wavelength, chemical inertness to sample material and sacrificial layer, high acoustic impedance and ease of usability. The layer of the confinement medium should also have an optimum thickness. If the confinement layer is very thin, it makes the processing difficult particularly at high laser intensities because it remains ineffective for confinement of the ablation plume produced. And if the confinement layer is too thick, it absorbs, distorts the pulsed laser beam that passes through this layer and attenuates the incident laser energy due to filamentation particularly at shorter pulse durations and higher intensities To the best of our knowledge, N. C. Anderholm was the first to present the technique of confined laser produced ablation They found that the shock pressure generated due to the laser ablated plume / plasma under a confinement layer depends on the square root of the combined acoustic impedance of the confinement medium and the target material Followed by these studies numerous researchers have studied the conventional LSP under different confinement media in long and short pulse duration regimes. However, to the best of our knowledge, a systematic study on the influence of different confinement media used during LSP in ultra-short laser pulse duration regime of ps -fs is not yet reported in the pertinent literature. We carried out such a study on the role of different confinement media on the mechanical properties of stainless steel subjected to LSP in the ps time regime. We choose four confinement media for this study viz. Ethanol, Deionized water, aqueous solutions of NaCl and Glycerol separately. Since pure glycerol is highly viscous, the confinement media in this case was prepared by mixing water in it so that we could flow it over the target sample to remove the ablation debris and bubbles etc. at the high repetition rate of the peening laser pulses. Using these confinement media for ps LSP we first investigated the problems of laser induced non-linear effects like self-focusing, filamentation and plasma breakdown etc. in the confinement media, which attenuate the laser energy that can be delivered to the surface of the sacrificial layer. Followed by that, under the optimized conditions of LSP, we studied the surface hardness of the steel subjected to ps LSP under different confinement media. The results of these studies are presented and discussed in this paper. This study was carried out in two parts. Part one was to study the laser energy attenuating processes at ultra-short durations of the sub-ps and ps of the laser pulses used for the LSP such as non-linear effects of self-focusing, plasma breakdown and filamentation in different confinement media. Schematic of the experimental set-up for investigating the energy attenuation due to filamentation in different confinement media is shown in figure The ultrashort laser pulses of duration of ∼ 100 fs to 5 ps, wavelength of 800 nm ±30 nm and pulse energy of about 1 mJ was focused by a plano-convex spherical lens of focal length of ∼ 100 mm into a test cuvette made of BK7 glass containing the confining liquid under investigation. The focal spot size of the laser beam in water, determined by ablation experiments was ∼ 20μm. A sharp metal blade was inserted incrementally into the beam path from top to bottom of the cuvette in the focal plane of the laser beam and after the light filament and white-light generation began as shown in Fig. Part two of our study was to find the effect of different confinement media on the ultrashort pulsed laser shock peening of stainless steel 316 and 316L. The experimental set-up for studying this part is shown in figure Processing of the samples was carried out at different laser fluences controlled by a λ/2 wave plate and a polarizing beam splitter. The average laser power was measured prior to the processing using a power meter aligned in the laser beam path as shown in figure As stated earlier, we first investigated the laser pulse energy attenuation processes due to combined thermal and non-linear effects of the laser beam passing through the confinement media used for the peening. Using the experimental setup shown in figure One of the most important issues is the optimization of the confining media thickness. Figure In our experimental studies we have also investigated the surface morphologies and contamination mainly due to oxidation and carbonization. Our general finding was that there were no significant differences in these aspects due to the different confinement media as long as the laser beam interacted with the sacrificial layer and it was not allowed to interact with the metal surface directly. As stated earlier, different confinement media used in this study were Ethanol, Deionized water, aqueous solution of NaCl at 20% wt./v and glycerol at 60% concentration also in water. The pertinent physical properties of these confinement media are summarized in table I. Deionized water was preferred over the normal water, to avoid any mineral deposition in the chamber and on the samples usually caused by the normal water. To study the effect of different confinement media we used two different samples of steel and measured the surface hardness on Vickers scale at different fluences of the 2 ps laser pulses used for the peening. The reference hardness in the following figures refers to the hardness of the untreated steel samples and the experimental points are the hardness relative to this reference. Throughout this work untreated reference hardness (HV) value was taken as 160 HV for grade SUS316L and 290 HV for SUS316, both measured using Vickers hardness testing equipment. In these experiments the sample surface was covered by overlapping laser pulses. The repetition rate of the laser was 5 kHz, the scanning velocity 10 mm/s, corresponding to 2 micrometer shift between the centers of two consecutive pulses. Figure Experimentally measured hardness of the SUS316L stainless-steel as a function of the peening laser fluence in the confinement medium of Deionized water is shown in figure In contrast to the case of Ethanol stated above, in Deionized water, the surface hardness shows a little decrease in its value with increasing fluence in the beginning before a drastic increase in the hardness with the fluence preceding the final fall due to onset of the complete ablation of the sacrificial layer on the surface of the target sample. Complete ablation of the sacrificial layer at the laser fluence of about 3250 J/cm 2 was confirmed by visual inspection of the sacrificial layer and onset of Laser Induced Periodic Surface Structures (LIPSS) on the target metal observed under high magnification of SEM. Earlier we had shown that followed by the complete ablation of the sacrificial layer, whenever there is direct interaction between the laser pulses and the metal surface, LIPSS formation is inevitable 2 . Formation of LIPSS, oxidation of the exposed surface of the target metal and partial ablation at the surface collectively seem to be responsible for the drastic decrease in hardness beyond the laser fluence of 3250 J/cm 2 , where complete ablation of the sacrificial black tape occurred. Reason for the initial gentle decrease in the hardness is not clear to us at this stage and this could also be due to the fluctuations in the experimental conditions and/or errors in the measurements. Dependence of the surface hardness on laser fluence in the confinement medium of aqueous solution of 20% NaCl is shown in figure To compare the effectiveness of all the confinement media used in the present study, we have plotted the relative increase in the maximal measured hardness of the stainless steels as a function of the acoustic impedance of the confinement medium, which is shown in figure Since acoustic impedance is a product of the density and corresponding speed of sound in that medium it is therefore a very relevant parameter for the confinement effects of the medium. As can be seen in figure Two important inferences can be drawn from this experimental study on the fundamental role of the confinement media used during the LSP in the ultra-short laser pulse durations regime. First, in this ultra-short pulse duration regime of LSP, the non-linear mechanisms like self-focusing, filamentation, plasma breakdown and bubble formation at high repetition rate in the confinement media can significantly attenuate the input energy of the laser pulses. It is therefore of paramount importance to characterize these adverse effects comprehensively so that their influence is minimized while carrying out the LSP in ps -fs pulse regime. Second, it is found that the resulting surface hardness of the peened metal as a function of laser fluence depends significantly on the confinement media and the relative increase in the hardness increases monotonically with the acoustic impedance of the liquid 