Spin waves are excitations in ferromagnetic media that have been proposed as information carriers in hybrid spintronic devices with much lower operation power than conventional charge-based electronics. Their wave nature can be exploited in majority gates by using interference for computation. However, a scalable spin-wave majority gate that can be co-integrated alongside conventional electronics is still lacking. Here, we demonstrate a sub-μm inline spin-wave majority gate with fan-out. Time-resolved imaging of the magnetization dynamics by scanning transmission x-ray microscopy illustrates the device operation. All-electrical spin-wave spectroscopy further demonstrates majority gates with sub-μm dimensions, reconfigurable input and output ports, and frequency-division multiplexing. Challenges for hybrid spintronic computing systems based on spin-wave majority gates are discussed. Spin waves are dynamic excitations in ferromagnetic media with characteristic wavelengths from nm to μm scales and frequencies from GHz to THz. Due to their low intrinsic energy, they have received increasing interest as information carriers in spintronic computation and communication schemes Spin waves are particularly suited for the realization of compact interference-based majority gates Moreover, the previous mm-scale experimental demonstration has relied on single-crystal Y3Fe5O12 (YIG), resulting in low spin-wave group velocities below 1 μm/ns in nm-thin films, long spin-wave lifetimes, and low computational throughput (see The basic structure and the operation principle of our inline SWMG are depicted in Fig. Miniaturizing SWMGs to nm dimensions allows for the usage of ferromagnetic waveguide materials with moderate Gilbert damping (and thus shorter spin-wave attenuation lengths) than ultralow-damping single-crystal YIG that has been used for mm-size trident-based SWMG realizations Our implementation will thus be based on Co40Fe40B20 and permalloy waveguides with widths down to 850 nm (Fig. In hybrid spin-wave-CMOS systems, transducers play an important role as they transform signals between spin-wave and charge domains. Different approaches for transducers that couple spin-wave and microwave signals have been reported in the literature The operation of an inline SWMG can be visualized by imaging the magnetization dynamics in the waveguide by time-resolved scanning transmission x-ray microscopy. In these experiments, spin waves are excited in a 2.0 μm wide permalloy waveguide by microwave currents in three input antennas P1, P2, and P3, each separated by distances of 2F = 2.5 μm. Binary logical signals 0 and 1 are encoded as spin-wave phases of 0 (reference) and π, respectively. The logical output signal is determined by extracting the phase of the resulting spin wave at position O, about 2.2 μm away from P1, from the measured time dependence of the magnetization dynamics. An operation frequency of 8.6 GHz and an external magnetic bias field of μ0Hext = 80 mT lead to a measured spin-wave wavelength of 2.4 μm, which is very close to the interport distance. Thus, resonant operation conditions are approximately realized with N = 1. The phase maps of the magnetization dynamics at position O in Fig. Figure Building spintronic logic gates based on interference requires the quantitative assessment of the spin-wave properties such as their dispersion relation and their propagation loss to allow for the control of both the amplitude and the phase of the spin waves at the output port. This can be achieved by a series of all-electrical two-port microwave measurements, in which spin waves are excited at an input port and, after propagation, analyzed with phase sensitivity at the output port. The phase-sensitive spin-wave transmission can then be inferred from the bias-field derivative of the microwave S21-parameter, dS21/dHext, as shown in Fig. Spin waves attenuate during propagation due to their finite spin-wave lifetime (typically 1 to 1.5 ns for permalloy and Co40Fe40B20 waveguides in the experimental frequency range), leading to a decay of the spin-wave intensity with propagation distance. Typical spin-wave group velocities in such waveguides in the studied frequency range are 5-10 μm/ns, resulting in decay lengths of the order of 10 μm, larger than characteristic propagation distances in the studied devices. The envelope of the frequency dependence of the spin-wave response is determined mostly by the k-dependent coupling efficiency of the antennas. A one-dimensional model that takes into account the dispersion relation The two-port all-electrical microwave measurements also provide information about the signal levels that can be obtained with our setup. Since spin waves are low-energy excitation of the ferromagnets, the power transmission is rather weak (see supplementary information). For logic applications and interfacing with CMOS circuits, voltage signal levels are however more appropriate. Figure Furthermore, an optimization of the matching conditions in microwave periphery may also increase signal transmission levels. However, since this would also reduce the available bandwidth, it was not implemented in our wide-band experiments. Ultimately, magnetoelectric transducers promise to increase the voltage transmission ratios even further To design scalable SWMGs, three different dimensions need to be considered: the waveguide width, the interport spacing, and the spin-wave wavelength. We first consider an 850 nm wide Co40Fe40B20 waveguide with U-shaped antennas and an interport spacing of 2F = 2.3 μm. Selecting a spin-wave wavelength of λ = 1.15 μm, i.e. resonant conditions with N = 2, leads to higher spin-wave excitation and detection efficiency by the U-shape antennas in this wavelength range with respect to N = 1 and is therefore favorable. At the corresponding frequency of 13.86 GHz (at a transverse magnetic bias field of μ0Hext = 90 mT, see Fig. Due to its symmetry, the inline SWMG can be used in a flexible way and any port can be chosen to be the output. Figures However, as mentioned before, this issue can be avoided by using other types of spin waves, such as forward-volume spin waves, or nonchiral spin-wave transducers. The usage of waves for computation allows for frequency-division multiplexing and parallel computation in a majority gate with fixed geometry, enabling a larger computational throughout Additional higher harmonics with shorter wavelengths are outside the frequency range of the experimental set-up. However, lowering the magnetic bias field to μ0Hext = 12 mT brings spin waves with sub-μm wavelengths into the accessible frequency range (Fig. The operation speed of an inline SWMG is determined by several factors. The propagation time of spin waves from the inputs to the output is one of the contributions to the time required for a computation. For Co40Fe40B20, the group velocity of spin waves with wavelengths of the order 1 μm is about 5 μm/ns (see Table Different computations with different logic input values require also the change of the phase of the input microwave signals. Spin waves do not instantaneously follow the change of an input signal phase but require some time for phase resynchronization. The resynchronization time can be assessed by micromagnetic simulations (Fig. These results indicate that spin waves resynchronize with external signals in less than 500 ps and demonstrate the potential of scaled SWMGs to operate at phase modulation frequencies of 2 GHz and above. These results indicate that SWMGs can be key elements of a future hybrid spin-wave-CMOS computing platform To obtain a functionally complete set of logic spin-wave gates to design the spin-wave circuits at the heart of hybrid spin-wave-CMOS systems, SWMGs must be complemented by another wavebased logic gate. Inverters (logic NOT) provide a highly appealing solution since their implementation in phase-coded wave-based computing corresponds to a simple phase shift by π. In contrast to CMOS technology, wave-based inverters do not need to be separate logic gates but can be integrated in the majority gate design. Physical implementations can be based on a spin-wave delay line with a length of (i -1/2) × λ , with i = 1, 2, 3, ... an integer and λ the spin-wave wavelength, which can be e.g. realized by shifting input or output ports away from their equally-spaced positions. In addition, shifting the phase or reverting the polarity (signal vs. ground) of an input or output port can also be used to invert the logic signal. These implementations lead to little or no increase in device area, and, in the second case, to no additional restrictions on operating conditions. The timeresolved scanning transmission x-ray microscopy imaging of SWMG operation visualizes this possibility to integrate inverters in the device since it shows that the phase of the output wave oscillates in space. The demonstration of the calculation of the minority (inverted majority) and the majority function in the same device by adjusting input phases is also demonstrated in the supplementary material (Fig. By combining majority gates and inverters, every logic circuit can be synthesized. The demonstration of electrically driven scalable SWMGs and inverters at the sub-μm scale with a large operational window that can be manufactured using CMOS-compatible techniques establishes a proof-of-concept of spin-wave computing. Reaching device areas that are competitive with CMOS requires the scaling of the devices to dimensions of the order of 100 nm Achieving much lower computation power than current CMOS technology will also require the usage of spin-wave transducers with higher signal transfer efficiency. While the used inductive antennas are highly mature and robust and allow for broadband excitation and detection of spin waves, alternative concepts may be required, such as magnetoelectric transducers The devices consisted of ferromagnetic waveguides with widths between 850 nm and 4.7 μm. Waveguide lengths were typically about 30 μm, sufficiently long to avoid the influence of spin-wave reflection at the waveguide ends on the device behavior. Ta/Ni80Fe20/Ta, (Ni80Fe20 = permalloy, 3 nm/30 nm/3 nm) waveguides were used for the scanning transmission x-ray microscopy measurements whereas Ta/Co40Fe40B20/Ta (3 nm/30 nm/3 nm) was used in all-electrical microwave experiments. Spin waves were excited and detected by inductive antennas made from Al for scanning transmission x-ray microscopy and Au for microwave measurements, electrically connected to coplanar microwave waveguides. The saturation magnetization of the films was determined by vibrating-sample magnetometry and was 0.8 MA/m and 1.36 MA/m for Ni80Fe20 and Co40Fe40B20, respectively. Gilbert damping parameters were determined by ferromagnetic resonance measurements to be α = 7×10 -3 for Ta/Ni80Fe20/Ta and α = 4×10 -3 for Ta/Co40Fe40B20/Ta. The devices for time-resolved scanning transmission x-ray microscopy have been fabricated on commercially available 100 nm thick square SiNx membranes (area of 100×100 μm 2 ) fabricated on SiNx/Si (100). A combination of e-beam lithography and lift-off processing was used to pattern a sputtered Ta/Ni80Fe20/Ta (3 nm/30 nm/3 nm) ferromagnetic waveguide on top of the membrane. Subsequently, a 60 nm SiO2 insulating layer was sputtered over the wafer, then e-beam lithography and lift-off were used to pattern Ti/Al (10 nm/100 nm) inductive microwave single-wire antennas and coplanar waveguides for electrical contact. Al metallization was chosen to avoid strong x-ray absorption during the measurements so that spin waves could be detected also underneath the antennas. Devices for all-electrical characterization were processed on SiO2/Si substrates. A Ta/Co40Fe40B20/Ta (3 nm/30 nm/3 nm) stack was sputter deposited and subsequently annealed at 300°C for 10 minutes in an N2 environment. Next, a sputtered 60 nm thick SiO2 layer was deposited as an electrical insulation for the antennas and as a hard mask for the patterning process. E-beam lithography and inductively coupled plasma etching were then used to define the waveguide in the hard mask layer, which was finally transferred into the ferromagnetic Ta/Co40Fe40B20/Ta stack by ion beam etching. Subsequently, an about 300 nm thick planarization layer (spin-on-carbon) was spun on the structure and recessed by inductively coupled plasma etching to reduce the step height after etching, followed by a 30 nm thick sputtered SiO2 layer to improve the electrical insulation. E-beam lithography and lift-off were finally used to fabricate Ti/Au (10 nm/100 nm) coplanar waveguides (for electrical contact) and U-shaped microwave antennas. The gap of the U-shaped antennas was defined by additional e-beam lithography and ion beam etching steps to reduce the risk of shorting. Time-resolved scanning transmission x-ray microscopy. Time-resolved scanning transmission xray microscopy measurements were carried out at the MAXYMUS end station at the UE46-PGM2 beamline at the Bessy II synchrotron within the Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin. The samples were illuminated under perpendicular incidence by circularly polarized light in an external in-plane magnetic bias field of up to μ0Hext = 240 mT that was generated by a set of four rotatable permanent magnets The photon energy was set to the absorption maximum of the Fe L3 edge to get optimal contrast for imaging. A lock-in-like detection scheme allowed for the measurement of the magnetization dynamicsand in particular spin waves-excited at microwave frequencies with a time resolution of 50 ps using all photons emitted by the synchrotron. Input signals were provided by an arbitrary waveform generator, allowing for the independent control of both amplitude and phase of multiple microwave excitation channels. Further details on the detection and data analysis scheme can be found in All-electrical microwave measurements. All-electrical measurements of SWMGs were performed using a two-port Vector Network Analyzer (VNA). The signal from port 1 of the VNA was split into three separated lines connected to three ground-signal-ground microwave probes connected to the three input coplanar waveguides attached to the input antennas, P1, P2, and P3, of the SWMG. Two power splitters were used as schematically depicted in Fig. GHz. During all-electrical measurements, the power delivered to individual antennas was -6 dBm (~0.25 mW). Considering the measured antenna impedances, this corresponded to an input voltage of about 120 mV. Micromagnetic simulations. Micromagnetic simulations have been performed using the objectoriented micromagnetic framework (OOMMF) software package The saturation magnetization was assumed to be 1.36 MA/m, the exchange stiffness constant was 18.6 pJ/m, the Landé g-factor was 2.07 Fig. 