In miniaturising electrical devices down to nanoscales, heat transfer has turned into a serious obstacle but also potential resource for future developments, both for conventional and quantum computing architectures Controlling heat transport in superconducting circuits has thus received increasing attention in engineering microwave environments for circuit quantum electrodynamics (cQED) A rectifier is a device in which the transport is directionally impeded, optimally to allow it only in one direction. In the charge regime, the ubiquitous rectifier, or diode, is one of the most fundamental components in electronic circuits, and can be realised relatively simplistically, for example as a device exploiting the depletion zone between electrons and holes in a semiconductor p-type/n-type junction. The implementation of devices for manipulating charge current is enabled by the discrete and polarised nature of the carrier, and their interaction with electromagnetic fields. Heat currents do not have this quality, and manipulating their flow usually relies on precise control of the energy population distributions of the various materials involved in the device. In the superconducting regime, it is provided by the superconducting/semiconducting gap in one direction, and/or asymmetric couplings of the heat baths to quasiparticle heat carriers, for example by using metals with differing electron-phonon couplings. The two-level system of a transmon-type qubit coupled to two unequal resonators is a well-placed tool for studying asymmetric photonic transport, each element having engineered resonances and couplings to each other that can be designed for various modes of operation where the plasma frequency ω p (Φ) = 8E C E J (Φ)/ . The n-dependence in Eq. ( Any value R = 1 corresponds to heat rectification while R = 1 describes completely symmetric heat flux. By introducing the asymmetry in coupling factors δ = 1g 1 /g 2 , this expression can be simplified for |δ| 1 to read In contrast, if one considers a scheme in which the superconducting qubit is replaced by a harmonic oscillator or with a single-level quantum dot, the linearity or fermionic nature of such a device instead does not lead to rectification (see supplementary material). Figure The SQUID of the transmon qubit is shown on the right inset, utilising a similar fabrication procedure. A simple diagrammatic model for understanding the system is also presented, with the role of the resonator-qubit-resonator structure represented by a diode. Due to the definition of resistance being dissipative, normal metal baths used in this way as terminations to superconducting resonators lead to a substantial decrease in the quality factor of the resonator, from an intrinsic value in the range 10 4 , to a value of order 10, as verified in the measurement in Ref. Temperature differences between the normal metal baths can be controllably achieved by local Joule heating of each bath independently, with the tendency to thermally populate their corresponding resonator. We define the "forward" to be the direction from the low frequency (2.8 GHz) to high frequency (6.7 GHz) resonator, and declare the heated bath to be the source with the heat flowing to the target bath. Identical but opposite temperature bias can be applied in the "reverse" direction. The measured power on the target bath is shown in Figure We observe qualitatively different magnetic flux-dependences of the heat transport based upon the directionality. Domains of strong differences between forward and backward heat transfer with pronounced sub-structures alternate with those of weak discrepancies and relatively smooth traces. To better understand this directionality, one can extract the rectification by extracting the ratio of transmitted power in the forward direction to the reverse direction, see Figure Apparently, rectification appears to be almost independent of applied power (temperature gradient) but strongly depending on magnetic flux. The first behavior can be understood from the simple two state model discussed above. Equation (3) tells us that changes in the rectification coefficient between two different temperature gradients T and T + ∆T with ∆T T 1 are suppressed at low temperatures, namely, R(T )/R(T + ∆T ) ≈ 1 -∆T T δβ ω 01 e -β ω 01 . This argument also applies to more complex structures. The flux dependence is directly related to the energy levels of the resonator-qubit-resonator compound due to the prevailing resonator-qubit coupling compared to the resonator-bath interaction. Figure The latter appear at half-integer values of Φ/Φ 0 . Consequently, we expect to observe a weak flux dependence of rectification away from these domains. The strong flux dependence near these degeneracies can be directly attributed to the fast varying transition spectrum of the transmon. Physically, heat transfer occurs via photon transfer between hot and cold reservoirs with the resonator-qubit-resonator structure acting as nonlinear medium. More specifically, since the resonators' frequencies are strongly de-tuned far beyond their respective linewidths, finite transmission is favoured if ω 01 is tuned inbetween ω 1 and ω 2 . In this situation, heat rectification is extremely sensitive to the transmon's level structure. While the first transition frequency Eq. ( ure In conclusion, we present wireless flux-tunable thermal rectification up to 10% via the photon channel in a superconducting artificial atom. This phenomenon arises due to the anharmonicity of the system and its asymmetric coupling to two microwave resonators, thermally populated by mesoscopic resistive baths. The device can be integrated with existing superconducting circuit architectures, in particular with superconducting qubits and Josephson logic, with potential applications in directionally manipulating heat flow in superconducting devices, for example in the fast initialisation of a qubit. Additionally, this device may be used as a platform for exploring coherent caloritronics, and the frontiers of quantum thermodynamics. These devices are fabricated on a high resistivity silicon wafer, upon which a 20 nm-thick alumimina film has been grown by atomic layer deposition, followed by a susbsequently sputtered 200 nm-thick niobium film. Larger features, namely the microwave resonators (measured spectroscopically at 2.8 GHz and 6.7 GHz, see Figure The measurements are performed in a custom-made plastic dilution refrigerator with the cooling stage set at 150 mK for these measurements. The bonded chip is enclosed by two brass Faraday shields, and is readout at room-temperature via 1 m of Thermocoax filtered cryogenic lines, resulting in an effective signal bandwidth of 0 -10 kHz, for low-impedance loads. The magnetic-flux-tuning of the energy level spacing of the transmon is achieved by a superconducting solenoid encompassing the entire sample stage assembly, inside of a high-permeability magnetic shield. It is mounted inside the refrigerator at a temperature of 4 K. Electronic characterisation is applied by programmable function generators at room temperature and measured by a low noise amplification chain (room-temperature lownoise amplifiers FEMTO Messtechnik GmbH DLPVA-100) into a DC multimeter (for DC measurements), and additionally into a lock-in amplifier synchronised to the square-wave modulation (22 Hz) of the voltage bias of the heated thermal reservoir, in the configuration shown in Figure The inset of Fig. Consider n-level system with constant energy spacing ω q . In the limit of n → ∞ it represents a linear harmonic oscillator as shown in Fig. Here i = 1, 2 refers to the baths, Q = i 2Z0 (â †â) and S i (ω) = 2R i ω 1-e -β i ω are charge operator and voltage noise when applied to a circuit, respectively. Here, Z 0 is a characteristic impedance of the system, â (â † ) is annihilation (creation) operator of the ladder of the system, and R i is the resistance of the bath. In this case only the transitions between the nearest levels are allowed according to The steady state population of each level reads ρ i = S i /S, where where 1 ≤ j ≤ n -1 and Γ k→k±1 = Γ (1) k→k±1 . The expression of power to bath i is then given by As seen in Fig. , a = ωR-ωL ω0 , γ = g ω0 , γ = g ω0 , and r = ωq ω0 . Here ω L = 2π × 2.8 GHz and ω R = 2π × 6.5 GHz are constant, and ω q = 8E J E C | cos(πΦ/Φ 0 )| -E C like in the anharmonic Josephson potential. Rectification (in a two-level system) depends on the statistics of transition rates. In particular let us consider fermions vs bosons. The latter case was discussed earlier in this Supplementary Material. We may write the transition rate into the system via contact i for fermions (+) and bosons (-) as For fermions, we may take a single level quantum dot, where g i is determined by the barrier, and E is the energy level position of the dot with respect to the fermi level, controlled by gate as shown in Fig. Steady-state occupation on the excited state of the system is given by Let us assume for simplicity that bath 1 has inverse temperature β and bath 2 is at zero temperature. Then we find the power to bath 2 as out . For fermions we find where f (E) = 1/(e βE + 1). Due to the symmetry with respect to indices 1 and 2, this system does not rectify heat. On the contrary, as we saw already earlier, for bosons the situation is different, and we obtain where n(E) = 1/(e βE -1). This expression yields rectification when g 1 = g 2 . Γ in Γ out (1) Γ out Figure 