The fabrication of three-dimensional (3D) nanostructures is of great interest to many areas of nanotechnology currently challenged by fundamental limitations of conventional lithography. One of the most promising direct-write methods for 3D nanofabrication is focused electron beam-induced deposition (FEBID), owing to its high spatial resolution and versatility. Here we extend FEBID to the growth of complex-shaped 3D nanostructures by combining the layer-by-layer approach of conventional macroscopic 3D printers and the proximity effect correction of electron beam lithography. This framework is based on the continuum FEBID model and is capable of adjusting for a wide range of effects present during deposition, including beam-induced heating, defocussing and gas flux anisotropies. We demonstrate the capabilities of our platform by fabricating free-standing nanowires, surfaces with varying curvatures and topologies, and general 3D objects, directly from standard stereolithography (STL) files and using different precursors. Real 3D nanoprinting as demonstrated here opens up exciting avenues for the study and exploitation of 3D nanoscale phenomena. The realization of three-dimensional (3D) nanoscale systems is expected to play a key role for the future progress in many areas of nanotechnology such as biology, 1 nanomagnetism, 2 metamaterials, In this article, we have developed a general layer-by-layer framework for the additive manufacturing of 3D nanoscale objects by focused electron beams based on the FEBID continuum model, offering a new level of control over the fabrication of three-dimensional nanosystems. We present an algorithm capable of creating beam scanning patterns adjusted for proximity effects directly from conventional 3D printing stereolithography (STL) file formats. We further show that the model can take account of a range of phenomena, including beam-induced heating, defocussing and gas flux anisotropy. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the model by fabricating geometrically complex 3D structures with high fidelity and with different precursors. This work represents a significant step forward in the capabilities for 3D fabrication at the nanoscale, as well as in the simplification of the nanostructure-design process. FEBID deposition is inherently a stochastic process where each electron beam dwell induces the deposition of a small number of precursor molecules. However, when averaged over the characteristic deposition times (usually in the order of a few seconds to tens of minutes), a good approximation can be achieved by describing the height h of the evolving deposit as a continuous function of dwell time t and radial distance r from the beam center h(t, r). We develop a framework where, similar to conventional 3D printing, structures are grown via the deposition of thin slices/layers. In each layer, a series of deposits i is made at beam scanning positions r i with dwell times t i , creating deposits h i (t i , rr i ) (see Figure Provided that the lateral separation between layers is low and that the individual deposits are small and closely spaced, the total height increment at any r i is the sum over all neighboring deposits. For consistent growth, this needs to be equal to the height of a layer l, ∆z l , resulting in a set of equations for each layer depending on the inter-point distances and dwell times: where N i is the set of all deposits of a layer l in the proximity of r i (referred to as neighboring points), and t j is the dwell time associated to each point of the layer. In general, these equations form a non-linear optimization problem which is computationally expensive to solve. However, under the assumption that the deposit evolution can be well approximated by a separable function of time and space h(t, r) = s(r)f (t), we can reduce Equation 1 to a matrix equation that is numerically efficiently solvable: where s ij = s( r j -r i ) is a symmetric matrix, here referred to as the intra-layer proximity ma-trix. The dwell time values needed for consistent growth can then be calculated numerically by solving this matrix equation and inverting f . This framework allows us to adjust for interdeposit proximity effects within a layer of a 3D object, similarly to "self-consistent" dose correction algorithms employed in electron beam lithography. To use the above framework for the realistic modeling of a FEBID deposition, an accurate expression for h(t, r) is needed. In the following, we determine this function for the Langmuir FEBID model under equilibrium conditions. The corresponding growth rate (GR) is proportional to the amount of gas present and the electron dissociation frequency: Equations 3 and 4 can be solved analytically, describing the depletion of gas coverage under electron beam dissociation, and subsequent growth of the induced deposit (see Supporting Information S1.1). where σ is the effective standard deviation, and ν 0 el the dissociation frequency in the center of the beam. In general, the surface coverage will evolve during the beam dwell time, converging to an equilibrium distribution on the gas dynamics time scale (see Supporting Information S1.1): However, when growing either under electron limited conditions where the precursor depletion is small (ν el ν GAS + ν d ), or in the case when the characteristic dwell time (usually on the order of 1ms) is much longer than the time-scale for convergence to equilibrium (t dwell τ dyn ), we can assume that the system is at equilibrium at all times during the growth. This simplifies the expression for h(t, r) to: In this form, h is written as a separable function with no further approximations. We follow this approach in our experiments as discussed below. To allow for an analytical solution, in the above analysis we did not consider the effect of diffusion, which may become important in FEBID under mass-transport limited conditions. For the effective implementation of the model described above, a good approximation for s(r) needs to be determined. In the following, we focus on the standard Pt-based precursor. A generalization to other precursors is discussed later. To apply our model experimentally, key deposition parameters need to be determined for the given experimental conditions. Although in recent years a significant effort has been made towards determining these both through experiment 20,21,49-52 and simulations, We measure the growth parameters by building a set of standardized structures, isolating the dependence of the growth rate to particu-lar factors. Firstly, to determine growth rate at the center of the beam, a set of spot depositions is built in parallel with different total deposition times (Figure Under the experimental conditions used in this paper (see Experimental), we have observed no more than 7% variation in the average growth rate when varying the dwell and refresh times used in 3D FEBID deposition (see Supporting Information S3). Therefore, we can safely assume that Equation 7 provides a good approximation of the deposition. The sublinear dependence of nanowire length on the deposition times can thus be understood via the enhancement of thermal desorption due to beam-induced heating ν d . where ν 0 is the desorption attempt frequency, T 0 is the base deposition temperature, T el T 0 is the change in temperature due to electron beam heating, ν 0 d is the desorption at T 0 , and ). The significant effect of local temperature, together with low equilibrium precursor coverage in Pt FEBID, Under the assumption that the incident beam heating rate is the same at all dwell points and that the characteristic thermal transport time scale is expected to be short relative to the dwell times, 55 a quasi-steady-state temperature can be assumed for every dwell. Hence, the temperature variation during deposition is fully captured by a geometrical factor R T , giv-ing account for the resistance of the 3D structure to heat transport at the point of scanning (T el ∝ R T ). where the growth rate in the center of the beam at a base deposition temperature GR 0 , thermal resistance scaling factor k, and the standard deviation of the deposit σ are parameters that need to be determined. The exponential temperature dependence for desorption (Equation 8) is expressed here through the geometrydependent factor e -kR T . For details about the implementation of the resistance model and the derivation of Equation 9 can be found in Supporting Information S4.2. This experiment, involving vertical deposits, allows us to remove the potential influence of the geometry of the structure and proximity effects on the resulting growth. We extract the expected dependence of lengths L(t) on deposition times t based on Equation A second experiment (Figure This two-step calibration procedure allows us to uniquely determine all growth parameters required for implementing an algorithm to pattern 3D complex structures. We further tested the validity of the calibration protocol by growing two sets of additional test structures: nanowires with constant out-of-plane angle and variable controllable width (Figure We have implemented the layer-by-layer growth model explained above in a three-step algorithm designed to generate beam scanning patterns for FEBID deposition of 3D arbitrary geometries. The algorithm creates deposition sequences directly from STL files that can be designed in any standard 3D CAD software, the same approach followed by standard 3D printers. This approach, in combination with the model described above, is a significant improvement with respect to recent FEBID works, The workflow of the algorithm is described using the example of a free-standing concave surface (Figure Thirdly, we implement the per-layer dwell time solver. Inter-point distances are computed and, together with the growth model, result in the intra-layer proximity matrix s ij . The optimization problem for finding the appropriate dwell times at each point (as per Equation Finally, the beam scanning pattern is generated out of the computed dwells. In each layer, the beam is set to make multiple passes, reversing its direction from layer to layer in a "serpentine" pattern, We note though, that the thickening of some features is observed for the built structure with respect to the model, e.g. the hand (Figure Another point to remark is that the model has been primarily developed using the standard Pt precursor due to its fast growth rate (of the order of 100nms -1 ), low dependence on refresh times, and a well-known mechanism for decomposition under focused electron beams. to capture the effective average of deposition and give satisfactory first-order results for most regimes. This is especially true for wide structures (as opposed to single-pixel nanowires) because scanning along their width introduces a natural refresh rate. Moreover, beam heating effects are greatly reduced due to the higher heat conductivity provided by a larger volume, leading to more consistent growth rates (see Supporting Information S4.2). We present a framework that makes possible high-fidelity layer-by-layer growth of complexshaped 3D nanostructures using focused electron beams. Based on a layer-by-layer growth implemented in combination with the FEBID continuum model and proximity effect corrections, we can effectively account for a variety of effects, including beam-induced heating, defocussing, and gas anisotropy. These effects have been studied for the Pt precursor, where we demonstrate how a large number of fundamental parameters can be reduced to only three, which are capable of effectively modeling the 3D deposition process. The framework has been implemented computationally to generate beam scanning patterns from STL files created by any standard 3D CAD software. Using this approach, a wide range of nanogeometries which were until now inaccessible has been fabricated. These include surfaces with curvature along arbitrary directions, a Möbius strip and a replica of a human hand. We have successfully tested our platform in three SEM systems and using two precursors with different physical and chemical properties, thus demonstrating the robustness and applicability of the technique. This work paves the way for the advanced nano-manufacturing of 3D objects in a wide range of nanotechnology areas, making a fundamental step towards the study of advanced effects and their future exploitation. 