The growing demand for storage, due to big data applications, cannot be met by hard disk drives. Domain wall (DW) memory devices such as racetrack memory offer an alternative route to achieve high capacity storage. In DW memory, control of domain wall positions and their motion using spin-transfer torque are important challenges. In this paper, we demonstrate controlled domain wall motion using spin-transfer torque in staggered magnetic nanowires. The devices, fabricated using electron-beam lithography, were tested using a magneto-optical Kerr microscopy and electrical transport measurements. The depinning current, pinning potential and thermal stability were found to depend on the device dimensions of the staggering nanowires. Thus, the proposed staggering configuration helps to fine-tune the properties of domain wall devices for memory applications. Spin transfer torque (STT) has been intensively investigated as a tool to reverse the magnetization in a nanoscopic magnet [115], generate highfrequency waves in nano-oscillators [1625] and to move domain wall in magnetic wires to the reversal of magnetization in magnetic materials by STT effect for random access memory application, the storage capacity remains a serious challenge. Proposed schemes like multi-bit per cell MRAM Race-track type domain wall memory (DWM) has the potential to combine the best performance of conventional MRAM in addition to the storage capacity. One of the major problems for adopting magnetic domain wall memory is the accuracy of moving domain wall (DW) in precise positions. When recording each fresh bit of information onto a racetrack, there is considerable uncertainty about where each magnetic domain starts and ends, and an incorrectly-written bit can easily lead to the corruption of all subsequent bits on the racetrack. To overcome these challenges, several ideas were proposed and tested; such as relying on natural defect [5052] and creating physically notches In our previous study, we demonstrated the possibility to stabilize a domain wall in welldefined positions made in stepped nanowires However, the motion of DW was investigated in materials with in-plane anisotropy using a magnetic field and without electric current. However, the displacement of DW by STT effect is a better approach for the practical implementation of devices for commercial use. In this study, we demonstrate that one can accurately move DW by a polarized current in (Co/Ni) multilayer with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy. These materials have much higher magnetic anisotropy energy than in-plane type such as NiFe or CoFe alloys ferromagnets and consequently, have better thermal stability. The magnetic stack consisting of [Co(0.3 nm)/Ni(0.6 nm] multilayer with 12 repeats was deposited on a thermally oxidized Si substrate. Prior to (Co/Ni) multilayer, a seed layer of Ta (4 nm) and Pt (5 nm) were deposited for better growth which was confirmed by x-rays diffractometer and magnetometry measurements. The whole stack was capped with a Pt (2nm) and Ta (2 nm) in order to maintain the perpendicular anisotropy and avoid corrosion. The magnetic nanowire devices were fabricated using two lithography systems namely electron beam lithography (EBL) and direct-write laser (DWL) lithography. The EBL system was used to pattern nanowires along with nucleation pads on one end, and the DWL system was used to pattern Au electrodes onto the ends of the nanowires (Fig. investigated as thin films by physical property magnetometry system (PPMS) in out-of-plane geometry. In a prior study on (Co/Ni) multilayers, it was reported that there is a change of the shape of the hysteresis loop as the number of bilayer increases The tail in the hysteresis loop shown in Fig. To get a better fit and extract some valuable information on thermal stability of DW, Eq. ( where f0 is the attempt frequency, the parameters H0 