Experiments with superconducting circuits require careful calibration of the applied pulses and fields over a large frequency range. This remains an ongoing challenge as commercial semiconductor electronics are not able to probe signals arriving at the chip due to its cryogenic environment. Here, we demonstrate how the on-chip amplitude and frequency of a microwave signal can be inferred from the ac Stark shifts of higher transmon levels. In our time-resolved measurements we employ Ramsey fringes, allowing us to detect the amplitude of the systems transfer function over a range of several hundreds of MHz with an energy sensitivity on the order of 10 -4 . Combined with similar measurements for the phase of the transfer function, our sensing method can facilitate pulse correction for high fidelity quantum gates in superconducting circuits. Additionally, the potential to characterize arbitrary microwave fields promotes applications in related areas of research, such as quantum optics or hybrid microwave systems including photonic, mechanical or magnonic subsystems. Implementing a fault-tolerant quantum processor requires gate fidelities far exceeding a threshold of 99% The collective response of all microwave components to an incident signal is described by the transfer function of the system. If the transfer function is known, digital signal processing techniques allow for full control over the shape of applied pulses. However, since superconducting circuits are embedded in a cryogenic environment operated at millikelvin temperatures, the transfer function from pulse source to sample is not accessible with conventional network analyzers. In the past, this problem has been tackled by different calibration methods, which are usually limited to specific pulse shapes In recent years, the growing interest in quantum sensors In this work, we investigate the potential of the type of sensor used in Ref. The sensor we use in our experiments is a non-tunable superconducting transmon (ω 1 /2π = 4.685 GHz) with a concentric design dipole moment, which increases the sensitivity to local ac fields where the anharmonic annihilation and creation operators b and b † take the different coupling strengths to the transmon levels into account, which are expressed in their Eigenbasis |i . The Eigenenergies E i are calculated from the exact solution of the Transmon Hamiltonian and their associated parameters with identical indices. To detect the amplitude and frequency of an on-chip microwave field we determine the ac Stark shift ∆ i that it induces in the first and second qudit transition (i = 1, 2). A simple but precise way to measure those shifts are Ramsey fringes can then be calculated from the oscillation frequency ω R,i corresponding to the respective Ramsey fringes, as long as the unperturbed qudit frequencies ω i are known. Figure the maximum Ramsey delay time ∆t used in our experiments (see Supplementary Information for details). Lacking a closed analytical solution, the ac Stark shifts ∆ i calculated from ω R,i are then evaluated with a pair of lookup tables. Each lookup table contains the expected shifts of the respective qudit transition for various microwave fields. Searching both lookup tables simultaneously for the entries that are closest to our measurement data yields an unambiguous result for the frequency and amplitude of the detected field. In Ref. The last plot in Fig. The full sensing scheme proposed in this work can be summarized as a three step process. After measuring the shift of the first and second qudit transition using Ramsey fringes, the field parameters are extracted from the measurement data with the help of pre-calculated lookup tables. To verify the scheme, we apply a well known microwave signal with constant power and gradually increase the frequency over a range of 450 MHz. We probe the field arriving on-chip with our sensor and plot the extracted ω F,ex over the applied frequencies ω F,apl (Fig. Shaded areas in Fig. Another potential source of noise, which has not been considered in the calculation above, are temporal fluctuations of the qudit transition frequencies ∆ i due to unstable two-level systems (TLS) shifting by ∆ω 1 = 20 kHz In the following, we address the limits of our sensor (see Supplementary Information for an extended analysis). As discussed in Ref. When operating the sensor with gate pulses that are on resonance with the unperturbed qudit frequency, Eq. ( for N R = 80 and ∆t max = 800 ns. Together with T rep = 240 μs and N avg = 3000, all parameters amount to a total measurement time of ∼ 1 min. Note that the lower limit in Eq. ( We have successfully implemented a sensor for microwave fields based on time-resolved measurements of the ac Stark shift. Employing Ramsey fringes, we harness the high sensitivity of the qudit phase on the frequencies of the first and second qudit transition. Evaluating the measured shifts with numerically generated lookup tables yields the amplitude and frequency of the applied microwave field. Using this sensing scheme, we measure the amplitude of the transfer function over a range of several hundreds of MHz. The results were validated by comparing the frequencies of the applied microwave tone with the sensor output. In comparison to the previous implementation by Schneider et al. In the future, employing parametric amplifiers We use a standard cQED setup consisting of a transmon qudit (ω 1 /2π = 4.685 GHz and ω 2 /2π = 4.405 GHz) capacitively coupled to a λ/2-wavelength coplanar waveguide resonator (ω r /2π = 6.878 GHz). To fabricate the resonator and the large-scale components of the transmon, thin-film NbTiN is used, whereas the Josephson tunnel junction consists of a conventional Al/AlO x /Al stack The microwave gate pulses for the Ramsey sequence are generated in a single-sideband mixing scheme, using local oscillators and arbitrary waveform generators (AWG). Combined with the permanent microwave tone generating the on-chip field, these pulses are repeatedly attenuated on different temperature stages of the cryostat before reaching the sample. We use the resonator to dispersively readout the state of the qudit The readout signal is downconverted, digitized, and interpreted by our measurement software (git.io/qkit). Based on the full system Hamiltonian in Eq. ( for the first and second qudit transition. b Dispersive shift of our readout resonator (χ/κ = 0.08). The separation between |0 and |1 , which is one indicator for the SNR, is at maximum for the readout frequency ωr. c Difference between simulation results using the measured qudit frequency and the mean value of all results obtained when varying these frequencies in the simulations by ±σR,1(σR,2). Error bars indicate the maximum spread of all simulation results. Above the noise floor (N avg < 10 5 ), the precision of our sensor depends mainly on the signal to noise ratio (SNR) of our readout signal, which can quantitatively be written as SNR i = 1/σ R,i ≈ N avg /a i (with a 1 = 355 kHz, a 2 = 537 kHz). In the dispersive limit, the prefactor a i represents the ability to distinguish the frequencies of the resonator for different qudit states Spurious shifts caused by thermal photon population in the readout resonator (w r = 6.878 GHz) are a well known noise source in cQED systems. For our setup, assuming a on-chip temperature of 75 mK, Bose-Einstein statistics yields a mean photon number of n = 0.985, which manifests as a constant offset of n • χ = 230.4 kHz to the qudit frequency. While the offset will also slightly fluctuate due to the discrete nature of n, these fluctuations only happen with respect to individual data points and are thus included in the error estimation presented in the main text. While our numerical simulations are in theory arbitrarily precise when taking enough qudit levels into account, they are still limited by the precision of the input parameter, i.e., the frequencies of the first and second qudit transition (ω 1 , ω 2 ). To quantitatively estimate this effect, we perform numerical simulations of the expected frequency shifts for a fixed set of drive parameters (ω F,apl /2π = 4.985 GHz, A F,apl /2π = 0.07 GHz) while varying ω 1 (ω 2 ) by ±σ 1 (σ 2 ). The results are depicted in Fig. It is well known that microwave fields with very high powers, both off and on resonance, can eventually excite higher levels in transmons 2. For A F,apl /2π = 0.75 GHz, this probability increases to 22.7 %, making a coherent manipulation of the qudit challenging. In this parameter range, it might be more reasonable to use the spectroscopic measurement scheme presented in Ref. 3. For A F,apl /2π = 1.5 GHz, there is a 2.25 % probability to excite the qudit beyond the Josephson potential (here: |6 state), where all nonlinearities are lost. In order to use our sensor results for the proper calibration of microwave manipulation pulses, the phase of the transfer function is required. Here, we present theoretical considerations for a measurement scheme that could allow for phase detection with our sensor. The scheme consist of two consecutive π/2-pulses (denoted a and b), where the first pulse is on resonance with the first qudit transition ω a = ω 1 and the second pulse is slightly detuned from it ω b = ω 1 + ∆ b . Applying the rotating wave approximation, the Hamiltonians of these pulses can be written in the rotating frame where Ω a,b is the Rabi frequency (amplitude) of the respective pulse. Note that pulses a and b have the same phase at room temperature, but due to the systems phase response varying with frequency, the pulses reach the qudit with a relative phase difference φ = φ(∆ b ). To demonstrate how this phase can become experimentally accessible, we introduce the generalized Rabi frequency for the detuned pulse Ωb = Ω 2 b + ∆ 2 b and then choose our pulse parameters such that Ω a t = Ωb t = π/2. While the resonant π/2-pulses can easily be calibrated with a standard Rabi sequence, the proper pulse length for the detuned pulse can also be determined from the amplitude of the transfer function initially measured with our sensor. Taking these relations into account, the unitary time evolution operator can be simplified to U a (0, t) = exp(- and Turning back to the laboratory frame, we can calculate the probability to find the qudit in the excited state One can see that the final state probability depends on the phase difference between the pulses. This way, the frequency dependent phase of the transfer function can be measured relative to ω 1 . However, since p 1 vanishes for large ∆ b , this method only allows probing the phase in a limited frequency window around ω 1 . While for our Rabi frequency Ω a = 30 MHz an achievable sensor range of ∼ 100 MHz is realistic, this would still be sufficient to cover the spectral width of typical manipulation pulses with a length of 100 ns. UNPROCESSED SENSOR DATA AND LOOKUP TABLES Figure 