We find relation between structure of Al-Cu-Fe melts, their structural sensitive properties and tendency to form icophase • Isotherms of viscosity and undercoolability of Al-Cu-Fe melts develop minima at ico-phase stoichiometry • Short-range order in Al-Cu-Fe melts is polytetrahedral and presented by distorted Kasper polyhedra • Local icosahedra in Al-Cu-Fe quasicrystal phase are destroyed by melting but pair and angular correlations survive • Chemical short-range order of Al-Cu-Fe melts changes in the vicinity of i-phase stoichiometry ab initio: Structural heredity relating properties of liquid and solid phases is one of the topical issues in modern material science It is known that metallic alloys, especially Al-based ones, can demonstrate complex structure in liquid state Al-Cu-Fe quasicrystalline alloys are one the most promising quasicrystal metal materials for practical use The structure of Al-Cu-Fe melts is satisfactorily investigated in only the vicinity of i-phase stoichiometry Viscosity is one of the main structural-sensitive properties of a fluid. For metal melts, it is also of practical importance because the viscosity value affects significantly the casting process. Moreover, the analysis of the viscosity allows estimating qualitatively how the interatomic interaction in a melt varies with a change of temperature or atomic concentration Here we study Al-Cu-Fe melts in a wide range of compositions. We consider the following two concentration crosssections: Al 57.0+ Cu 30.5-Fe 12.5 and Al 52.0+ Cu 25.5 Fe 22.5-, (where = 0 -20 at.%), containing i-phase stoichiometry composition. For these alloys, we study experimentally two structural-sensitive properties of the liquid -viscosity and undercoolability -and compare results with ab initio investigations of SRO. Samples were obtained by fusing of Al-Fe master alloy (either Al 80.6 Fe 19.4 or Al 69.8 Fe 30.2 depending on the melted composition), electrolytic aluminum and cathode copper in a viscosimeter furnace in an inert atmosphere of He (after preliminary pumping to 10-2Pa) at temperature 1400 • C for 1 hour. Kinematic viscosity was measured by the method of damped torsional vibrations of a corundum crucible with a melt where is a pre-exponential factor, is the activation energy, is the universal gas constant, is the absolute temperature. To construct concentration dependencies of the viscosity for each alloy, we fit the viscosity data obtained in two subsequent heating/cooling cycles by common exponential dependence. The corresponding parameters of the equation (1) for the studied alloys are presented in Table For a confidence probability of 0.95, the most probable error in determining the absolute values of the viscosity of Al-Cu-Fe melts in a single experiment is 2.5% with a total error of no more than 5%. Both the melting point and the undercoolability of the alloys were determined by using a high-temperature thermal analyzer In the process of melt crystallization in a container, the undercoolability value is influenced by different factors, such as cooling rate, the temperature of the molten alloys and the number of melting-crystallization cycles The structural characteristics of the melts were determined by using ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations. The calculations were performed by using the opensource CP2K software package The experimentally obtained viscosity isotherms along two concentration cross-sections at Fe = 12.5 at.% and Cu = 25.5 at.% are shown in Fig. Fig. It can be seen from the Fig. At Fe = 12.5, Δ ( Cu ) develops a minimum at Cu = 25 that agrees well with both ( ) and ( ) behaviour (Fig. By using RDFs, one can determine useful structural characteristics, such as distance between nearest neighbors - and coordination number -. The former is determined from the positions of the first peaks of partial RDFs, and the latter is calculated by integrating the partial RDFs to their first minima; the area under the first peak of total RDF is equal to the number of nearest neighbors in the first coordination sphere. The values of these characteristics for simulated alloys are presented in Table We remind that the number of atoms at a distance between and + from a given atom, where is the total number of atoms, is the volume and ( ) is the total RDF. The partial RDF between the chemical species , may be computed: where is the concentration of atomic species and -( ) is the partial coordinate dependent coordination number. We see from the Table In order to analyse chemical SRO, we calculate Warren-Cowley parameters Here -total and -are respectively the total and partial coordination numbers, is the atom concentration. For a random atom distribution, -are equal to zero. The negative -means effective attraction between and species, while the positive -reflects repulsion. Calculated - values for Al-Cu-Fe melts are presented in Tab. 3; Fig. As seen from Tab. 3 and Fig. Important structural information beyond pair distribution can be extracted from bond-angle distribution function (BADF), which defines probability distribution ( ) for the angle between a chosen particle and its two nearest neighbours. The BADF for Al-Cu-Fe alloys, extracted from AIMD data, are shown in Fig. As suggested in To study the possible correlation between the structure of i-phase and SRO of its melt, we perform Voronoi analy-sis The results of Voronoi analysis suggest that there is no clear relation between the local structure in a solid phase and topology of Voronoi polyhedra in the corresponding melt. To validate this results, we study local orientational order in the melts by using bond orientational order parameters The system at = 1000 (deep undercooling condition) was cooled from 1600 K for 10000 fs and then relaxed at = 1000 for 5000 fs. This is not enough for equilibration under such undercooling but the tendency is already seen -local icosahedral order becomes much more pronounced than at 1600K. (BOOPs), which are widely used in structural analysis of condensed matter systems Thus, we observe that the melt of locally icosahedral quasicrystal phase does not contain topological icosahedra due to strong thermal fluctuations, which smear fine structural properties of local polyhedra. It can be expected that a noticeable amount of icosahedral clusters in Al-Cu-Fe liquid will occur in the supercooled state where local order is much more pronounced. However, investigation of deeply super-cooled liquids by AIMD is an extremely difficult task due to much time needed to form an equilibrated structure As we have shown above, orientational order of the nearest neighbors in the solid state is essentially destroyed in the melt. However, some correlation between the structure of solid and liquid phases can be extracted from more rough structural characteristics, such as RDF and BADF, which are more stable against thermal fluctuations. Indeed, analysis of chemical SRO performed with both RDF and BADF reveals that the main features of interatomic interactions in solid Al-Cu-Fe alloys are the same as for their melts. First, there is pronounced repulsion between Cu and Fe atoms, which is practically concentration-independent (see Tab. 3). Second, strong chemical interaction between Fe and Al takes place (see Fig. Peculiarities of SRO discussed above allow understanding concentration variations of viscosity in Al-Cu-Fe melts. When describing the mechanisms of viscosity in metal melts, two factors are usually considered: kinetic factor and that associated with the breaking of interatomic bonds However, we reveal some properties of the viscosity in the triple system, which are not observed in corresponding binary alloys. First, high viscosity values in Al-Cu-Fe melts near the liquidus (compared to those in binary systems) are observed for the compositions in the vicinity of i-phase stoichiometry (Fig. We present a detailed study of the structure of Al-Cu-Fe melts and its structural-sensitive properties, such as viscosity and undercoolability. We focus on two concentration crosssections Al 57+ Cu 30.5-Fe 12.5 and Al 52+ Cu 25.5 Fe 22.5-, ( = 0 -20 at.%), which both contain the stoichiometry composition of icosahedral quasicrystal phase. We observe that, along the cross-sections studied, the concentration dependencies of the viscosity are close to those in binary Al-Cu and Al-Fe melts. The maximal value of the viscosity is observed in the vicinity of i-phase stoichiometry. We experimentally observe that concentration dependencies of the viscosity, concentration lines of equal viscosity and concentration dependencies of the temperatures of the first stage of crystallization reproduce qualitatively the liquidus line. All of these characteristics develop minima at concentration corresponding to i-phase stoichiometry. Using AIMD simulations we also study the structure of the Al-Cu-Fe melts at temperatures which are slightly above the liquidus line. We show that SRO in Al-Cu-Fe melts is mainly presented by distorted polytetrahedral Kasper poly-hedra with the number of nearest neighbors close to that in closed packed systems ( = 12). However, topologically perfect icosahedra are almost absent an even i-phase stoichiometry that suggests the topological structure of local polyhedra does not survive upon melting. However, structural characteristics extracted from radial distribution function and bond-angle distribution function are more stable against thermal fluctuation and thus allow detecting structural heredity between solid and liquid phases. In particular, by analysing the Warren-Cowly Warren-Cowley parameters, we show that the main features of effective interatomic interaction in Al-Cu-Fe system are the same for both liquid and solid states. For example, there is a pronounced repulsion between Cu and Fe atoms, which is almost independent of the concentration of the components in the melt. Moreover, the chemical SRO of the melts changes qualitatively in the vicinity of i-phase stoichiometry. The results obtained demonstrate a relation between the structure of Al-Cu-Fe melt, its structural sensitive properties and the tendency to form icosahedral phase. , 6 as the the most informative ones; their values for a number of close-packed structures are presented in Table4.