Recent experiments have shown that defect-free monolayers of graphene and hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) are surprisingly permeable to thermal protons despite the two-dimensional (2D) materials are completely impenetrable to all gases. Even individual atomic-scale defects such as, e.g., vacancies caused notable permeation of small atoms and molecules and could be detected. However, it remains untested whether or not small ions can permeate through pristine 2D crystals. Here we show that mechanically-exfoliated graphene and hBN exhibit perfect Nernst selectivity: Only protons can permeate through these crystals, with no detectable flow of counterions. Using electrical measurements, we studied ion transport through suspended 2D membranes that had few if any atomic-scale defects as shown by gas permeation tests. The 2D crystals were then used to separate reservoirs filled with hydrochloric acid solutions. Protons accounted for all the detected current with chloride ions being blocked. These results corroborate the previous conclusion that only thermal protons are able to pierce defect-free 2D crystals. Besides the fundamental importance for understanding of the mechanism of proton transport through atomically-thin crystals, our results are also of interest for research on various separation technologies based on 2D materials. Proton transport through 2D crystals has recently been studied both experimentally and theoretically 1-9 . As for experiment, it was found that proton permeation through mechanicallyexfoliated crystals was thermally activated with energy barriers of ≈0.8 eV for graphene and ≈0.3 eV for monolayer hBN 1 . Further measurements using deuterons, nuclei of hydrogen's isotope deuterium, showed that quantum oscillations raised the energy of incoming protons by 0.2 eV 2 . This correction yielded total barriers of ≈0.5 eV for monolayer hBN and ≈1 eV for graphene. From the theory perspective, the latter value is notably lower (by at least 30% but typically a factor of 2) than that found in density-functional calculations for graphene [3][4][5][6][7] . To account for the difference, a recent theory suggested that graphene can be partially hydrogenated during the measurements, which makes its lattice slightly sparser, thus more permeable to protons Whereas it is plausible that vacancies and similar defects played a dominant role in experiments using CVD graphene The investigated devices were fabricated using monolayer graphene and mono-and bi-layer hBN crystals that were isolated by micromechanical cleavage The chips containing the individual 2D membranes (Supplementary Fig. Because monolayer hBN exhibited the highest conductivity, we focus our discussion below on this particular 2D material, as it allowed the most accurate ion-selectivity measurements (results for graphene are presented in Supplementary Information). Fig. The force pushing ions across the membrane, due to the concentration gradient, can be counteracted by applying voltage V. The value V0 at which the current becomes zero is known as the membrane or reversal potential and is given by the Nernst equation 21 where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature and e is the elementary charge. If one of the transport numbers is unity, the other must be zero and, then, it is said that a membrane displays perfect Nernst selectivity. Fig. Finally, it is instructive to compare our results with those obtained previously in conceptually similar experiments but using CVD graphene All this shows that the ion transport properties of exfoliated 2D crystals are radically different from those of CVD films where atomic-scale defects and, possibly, even macroscopic ones 11 dominate ion transport. This conclusion is consistent with all the other evidence for intrinsic proton transport through 2D crystals, which was reported previously In conclusion, our experiments clearly demonstrate that mechanically-exfoliated, defect-free 2D crystals allow only proton transport and block even small ions such as chlorine that has one of the smallest hydrated diameters Supplementary Figure To measure the membrane potential for our membrane devices, they were placed to separate two reservoirs filled with HCl solutions at different concentrations. The membrane potential was measured by recording I-V characteristics and finding their intersection with the x-axis. Such intersection is known as the zero current or cell potential (Vcell) and has two components: the redox potential (Vredox) and the membrane potential (Vo): The redox potential appears due the electrodes' material and is independent of the studied membrane. Its value is well known for Ag/AgCl electrodes. For this reason, it is customary to remove this fixed contribution and report only V0. We followed this convention. Nevertheless, to double-check 