Irreproducibility is a serious issue in thin film organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices, as smallest local inhomogeneities can change the entire behaviour of identically built devices without showing obvious failure. Inhomogeneities can occur at various steps of device preparation and appear in all layers with different length scales and impact. The hole-transport interlayer (HTL) in OPV devices blocks unwanted electron diffusion to the anode and corrects energetic mismatch between oxide electrode and organic semiconductor. Most commonly used is commercial ink based on poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) colloidal particles. However, exactly these are suspected to cause microscopic inhomogeneities, causing known irreproducibility of device characteristics. Considering PEDOT:PSS' acidity-caused electrode corrosion, it is questionable how much impact colloids have on device homogeneity. In this report, we give proof that a colloidal HTL does not necessarily cause device inhomogeneity and decreased efficiency, by comparing OPV devices with different HTLs, namely from commercial PEDOT:PSS ink and from MoO3, obtained from two liquid precursors, leading to quasi-continuous or colloidal layers. With a combination of X-ray diffraction, atomic force and Kelvin probe microscopy, photoelectron and ambient air photoemission spectroscopy, we discuss the layers' properties from nano-to macroscale and demonstrate their impact upon implementation into OPV devices, via spatially-resolved characterization. Organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells have received considerable attention as a potential source of renewable energy due to their advantages of easy fabrication, light weight, low manufacturing cost and mechanical flexibility. Typically, an OPV device consists of a transparent conductive indium tin oxide (ITO) anode, a donor-acceptor bulk-heterojunction photoactive layer and a low-work-function metallic cathode However, despite the fact that this type of devices reaches good efficiencies (presently best known 11% Fact is that the physics of thin film diodes is naturally highly sensitive to smallest variations due to their limited lateral extension. These can be e.g. subtle differences in height, local composition, interface or contact properties, and the presence of impurities or grain boundaries. Such effects have been widely shown in the past for inorganic thin film solar cells. However, while organic devices are extensively studied on the nanoscale regarding their crucial donor-acceptor domain morphology, other rather microscopic variations originating from inhomogeneities of the electrode are often neglected. The few publications on this topic show its relevance, as the extensive study on organic solar cell degradation published by Hoppe et al. Additionally, originating from synthesizing the insoluble PEDOT in presence of water-soluble PSS for better handling, Here, we suggest that the local microscopic inhomogeneities in solar cells caused by the PEDOT:PSS hole-conducting interlayer are independent of the colloidal film morphology. This is demonstrated by comparison of microscopic spatial characteristics in thin film OPV devices comprising HTLs of PEDOT:PSS and of sol-gel processed MoO3 with either colloidal form comparable to PEDOT:PSS or a quasi-continuous featureless layer. It has been demonstrated in the past that high work-function metal-oxides, such as NiO Herein, we use a blend of poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) and Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) was supplied by Rieke Metals Inc. (MW 50000-70000 g mol -1 , regioregularity 91-94%). Isopropanol was purchased from VWR International LLC. All the materials were used as received. ITO substrates (20 Ω/square, Ossila) were cleaned by sonication in acetone and isopropanol and followed by O2-plasma etching (100 W for 30 min) briefly before use. Two different MoO3 precursor formulations were used. The precursor leading to continuous films (MoO3-1) was sythesized as follows: MoO3 solution was prepared according to the procedure reported by K. Zilberberg et al. Solar cells with P3HT:PCBM active layer according to the architecture in Fig. Material structure and film morphologies were analyzed by atomic force microscopy (AFM) using two systems: For 1μm x 1μm a Nanosurf, EasyScan2, and for 3μm x 3μm and 100μm x 100μm a MFP 3D AFM System from Asylum Research. The images with the EasyScan2 were taken in tapping mode using a Tap190 cantilever (Budgetsensors, Bulgaria) with a nominal frequency of 190 kHz. The MFP 3D AFM was operated in intermittent contact mode using SSS NCHR AFM probes from APPNano with typical tip radii below 2 nm. Local contact potential difference (CPD) maps of 3μm× 3μm areas were measured by Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) using the MFP3D system with Pt coated ACCESS EFM probes from APPNano. The AFM topography, according particle size distribution and contact potential difference (CPD) data were visualized and analyzed using the Gwyddion 2.40 software. Surface CPD distribution maps of complete solar cell pixels (4mm x 1.5mm) area were examined by the SKP5050 Scanning Kelvin probe (KP Technology Ltd.). Work function results were obtained by Ambient Pressure Photoemission Spectroscopy System (APS) (APS02, KP Technology Ltd.) To study the pure colloidal effects of the hole-transport interlayer on the OPV device homogeneity and performance, commercial PEDOT:PSS was compared with two different types of hydrothermally grown MoO3 particles, MoO3-1 as a continuous layer and MoO3-2 as a nanoparticle layer with a particle size comparable with PEDOT:PSS. XRD diffraction patterns of both MoO3 films (see Fig. The intensity distribution is not completely in agreement with the expected powder pattern according to the reference and also varies between the two film types. It can be assumed that there might be a small degree of preferential orientation in the films. Only two peaks, at 2θ = 32.8° and 40.0°, merely occurring in the continuous film MoO3-1, could not be assigned to this MoO3 phase, nor identified as another or precursor residues. X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) measurements were performed to confirm that both MoO3 films have comparable surface chemistry. Al The appearance of these structures on a larger scale, when applied on the transparent ITO electrode can be seen from Fig. Thereby the photocurrent density (J) amplitude changes by 12% across the pixel area. When PEDOT: PSS is used as HTL (Fig. In consequence, the photocurrent distribution of the according solar cells is much more uniform, showing a large almost homogenous area of reasonable but not extremely high output, with few negligible pixel edge effects, with changes in current amplitude of only 5%. However, there are clearly no high output areas on the PEDOT:PSS cell. The MoO3-HTLs samples draw a different picture. ITO/MoO3-1 (Fig. Thereby the minor defects (spots of low output), probably caused by aforementioned pin holes, were neglected. The MoO3-2 cell, shows equal behavior, but without defects, showing one large homogeneous area of high to very high current output, again with a maximum change in amplitude of 2%. The integrated solar cell characteristics of P3HT:PCBM devices with the different electrode/HTL configurations ITO, ITO/PEDOT:PSS, ITO/MoO3-1 and ITO/MoO3-2, have been determined by standard methods, to confirm the findings from the area sensitive characterization. Fig. It is obvious that the PV performance of a conventional organic solar cell is generally greatly improved by presence of a HTL, indicated by the fact that lower work function of ITO and direct contact between ITO and the organic semiconductor layer P3HT: PCBM cause charge blocking at the interface and large leakage currents within the cell. Comparing the colloidal PEDOT:PSS as HTL with two different MoO3-HTLs of identical physical and morphological material properties, except for their form, continuous vs. nanoparticle colloidal layer, interesting observations: Despite the fact that a continuous layer with pin holes and a thin colloidal layer with potential voids both should show some sort of "porosity" allowing effects from the underlying ITO to shine through to the surface, the MoO3-2 nanoparticle HTL samples show most homogeneous surface potential and photocurrent distribution on small length scales, highest and most homogeneous photocurrent on the full device area, best integral device performance. The continuous MoO3-1 HTL configuration delivered also homogeneous potential and output, except for the regions with pin holes, visualized as localized spots of potential drops and low photocurrent output and in consequence slightly lower overall performance. PEDOT:PSS on the other hand, the long-term favorite among OPV HTLs, shows inhomogeneities in surface potential even on a very small scale, despite the fact that the thicker layer (of 40 nm) is efficiently padding the rough ITO surface (RMS 3.5 nm → 1.1 nm), indicating the variations arising from the material properties itself, e.g. aggregation, degradation (with In migration) or excess PSS segregation at the film surface We compared the surface and device inhomogeneity of P3HT: PCBM bulk heterojunction PV cells influenced by three different solution-processed colloidal HTLs, one PEDOT:PSS, one continuous MoO3 and one nanoparticle MoO3 film, and compared them with ITO only devices. This was supported by the comparison of the morphology and contact potential difference distribution of HTL layers and spatial photocurrent distribution of the OPV devices at different resolutions from the nano-to the micrometer scale. This has been discussed in relation to the difference in integral device characteristics and performance between those different OPV cells. The results showed anode film homogeneity and device performance greatly improved by presence of any HTL. Regardless of continuous or nanoparticle layers, MoO3 HTLs lead to entirely identical performance excluding the pin-hole effect, which induced slightly lower performance and uniformity. In contrast to the MoO3 HTLs, PEDOT:PSS HTL showed spatial inhomogeneities and device charge transfer barriers, which may be caused by its chemical chracteristics. Independent of colloidal or continuous form, MoO3 proves as a better candidate for anode buffer layers, leading to higher performance, higher homogeneity, and also lower cost, in solution-processed organic solar cells. Table 