Hybrid ferromagnetic/superconducting systems are well known for hosting intriguing phenomena such as emergent triplet superconductivity at their interfaces and the appearance of in-gap, spin polarized Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) states bound to magnetic impurities on a superconducting surface. In this work we demonstrate that similar phenomena can be induced on a surface of a conventional superconductor by chemisorbing non-magnetic chiral molecules. Conductance spectra measured on NbSe2 flakes over which chiral alpha helix polyalanine molecules were adsorbed, exhibit, in some cases, in-gap states nearly symmetrically positioned around zero bias that shift with magnetic field, akin to YSR states, as corroborated by theoretical simulations. Other samples show evidence for a collective phenomenon of hybridized YSR-like states giving rise to unconventional, possibly triplet superconductivity, manifested in the conductance spectra by the appearance of a zero bias conductance that diminishes, but does not split, with magnetic field. The transition between these two scenarios appears to be governed by the density of adsorbed molecules. It is well established by now, both theoretically The nucleation of YSR states was achieved so far by either utilizing magnetic atoms or magnetic molecules containing one or more magnetic atoms. The transition between these two regimes may be governed by the density and/or orientation uniformity of the adsorbed molecules, akin to the case of magnetic impurities discussed in Ref We have first characterized the electrical properties of the two types of junctions. The normal resistance of the NbSe2/Au junctions largely varied, most of them were in the range 1-250 Ω, but some showed higher resistance up to 70 kΩ (see Supporting Information, Fig. We first describe the effects of chiral molecules adsorption on NbSe2/Au junctions, starting with a low normal-resistance junction, RN = 120  (see Fig. T), suggesting that it is associated with a sub-dominant order parameter. Another measurement performed on a low-resistance (25 ) junction is presented in the Supporting Information, Fig. A markedly different effect of chiral molecules adsorption is shown in Fig. The energetic shifts can be fitted with g-factor of 2  0.1, with one exception -the band corresponding to the lowest bias shown in Fig. We now turn to address the NbSe2/ChMol/Au junctions. As expected, these junctions exhibited, in general, much higher normal resistances compared to the "direct" NbSe2/Au ones, ranging between a few hundred Ohms to Gs and more. Recalling that before adsorbing chiral molecules on top of the NbSe2 flake, only (hard or soft) gaps were observed, free of in-gap states. This stands in contrast to the spectra measured following adsorption. Here, about 10% of the junctions exhibit clear in-gap states, such as the one portrayed in Fig. One can draw the following conclusions from our experimental results delineated above. First, that chemical bonding of the chiral alpha helix polyalanine molecules to the NbSe2 surface is required for the in-gap states to emerge, and not the mere passing current through the molecules. Second, that these molecules appear to act as magnetic-like impurities when adsorbed on the surface, giving rise to either YSR-like states or emergence of unconventional order parameter symmetry consistent with triplet-pairing superconductivity. In the following, we suggest a possible mechanism by which chiral-helical molecules can act as magnetic impurities on the NbSe2 surface upon chemisorption, and also an explanation for the transition from the discrete YSR-like state to the unconventional, triplet-pairing, superconductivity regimes. So far, theoretical and experimental works showed that YSR states can be induced by magnetic adatoms or magnetic molecules (molecules containing one or more magnetic atoms) physisorbed on s-wave superconductors. The conduction response to applied magnetic field shown in Figs. Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations on a two-dimensional lattice with a homogeneous order parameter and spin-orbit interaction. Classical magnetic impurities were distributed with a separation of a few lattice constants. Differential conductance of the sample was derived from the S-matrix which describes the scattering between two normal leads, assuming a finite life-time for the quasiparticle excitations. The form of the bands in Fig. The results in Fig. We would like to emphasize that even under these adsorption conditions the helical chiral alphahelix polyalanine molecules used here were found able to polarize ferromagentic layers and modify the order-parameter symmetry of s-wave superconductors. The axis of the alpha-helix molecule breaks the spherical spin symmetry and induces a favorable direction for spin alignment at the instant of adsorption. Therefore, the orientation of each molecule is likely to be closely related to the direction of the induced magnetic moment upon adsorption. Hence, we believe that our system is similar to incorporating non-ordered magnetic moments on the superconductor surface. This system is described as a Shiba glass, One question that still remains is why we observe in some cases YSR-like states and in other cases spectra that conform to unconventional superconductivity. This may be due to the effect of chemisorbed molecular density and uniformity over the surface, probably governed by the nonhomogenous surface oxidation distribution, as revealed by XPS. As shown in Ref. In summary, we measured the conductance spectra of NbSe2/Au and NbSe2/ChMol/Au junctions coated with a layer of alpha-helix polyalanine molecules and found in some cases that chemically adsorbed chiral molecules induce a magnetic like state behavior that is consistent with YSR states formed by magnetic impurities on a superconducting surface. Specifically, in-gap states appeared upon adsorption, nearly symmetrically positioned around zero bias, shifting to higher energies with the application of magnetic field. Model simulations showing the formation of YSR-like bands from interacting YSR states randomly dispersed on the superconducting surface qualitatively reproduced these results. In other cases, we observed the emergence of a strong robust ZBCP, which points towards the emergence of topological triplet p-wave superconductivity. In this case it is reasonable to assume that the adsorbed disorder layer acts as a Shiba glass due to the spherical symmetry breaking of the adsorbed layer while the helicity of the molecule favors a given spin. Importantly, our present work provides further strong evidence that chiral helical molecules act, upon chemisorption to a superconductor surface as magnetic impurities, opening possibilities for their use in superconducting-spintronic Additional conductance spectra, XPS, STEM and EDS results, junction resistance statistics and details of model calculation. XPS measurements were performed on a Kratos AXIS Ultra DLD spectrometer, using a monochromatic Al k source at low power, 15-75 W, and detection pass energies of 20-80 eV. The base pressure in the chamber was 5•10 -10 torr. Due to differential charging artifacts encountered with these samples, controlled surface charging (CSC) Throughout this work results from three types of samples sample are presented: Bare NbSe2 flakes on SiO2 substrate, NbSe2 flakes on SiO2 covered molecules using two adsorption methods: drop cast and submersion in a molecules solution. The drop cast method guaranties a thick molecular layer even without any chemical bonding, while the submersion method entails repeated rinsing of the sample after molecules deposition which would leave mainly bonded molecules and so supports the formation of a molecular monolayer. The evolution of damage under the x-ray beam was carefully inspected, starting with fast scans at low x-ray flux and, gradually, improving statistics by increased exposures. We found the inspected polyalanine molecules to be sensitive to the irradiation, showing mainly degradation in the amide C 1s peak. This effect, demonstrated in Fig. Fig. Analysis of the C 1s and N 1s lines directly verifies the presence of polyalanine molecules and, importantly, the preservation of their chiral structure. As demonstrated in Fig. ["Towards designing material properties of protein nanofibrils via hydrogen bonds", in preparation], where the assembly of peptides at various length scales could be correlated with their efficiency to form hydrogen bonds between neighboring molecules. Here, in contrast to the latter, the hydrogen bonds are formed within the molecule, thus stabilizing its helical shape. Accordingly, the magnitude of the related component in the C 1s line is quantitatively very close to the theoretical value, see Table In this respect, it should be noted that only limited stability of these molecules under the x-ray irradiation is found and, most pronounced, gradual degradation was observed in the characteristic amide line, Fig. A second central difficulty in the XPS analysis of these samples regards the emergence of differential charging under the x-ray beam: domains that are electrically different undergo different charging magnitudes and, thus, introduce complication to the chemical analysis. To overcome this difficulty, such as to get 'the correct' chemical analysis, we performed scans at different charging conditions, following the controlled surface charging (CSC) technique. N/C(am) 'H'/C(am)