Materials' microstructure strongly influences its performance and is thus a critical aspect in design of functional materials. Previous efforts on microstructure mediated design mostly assume isotropy, which is not ideal when material performance is dependent on an underlying transport phenomenon. In this article, we propose an anisotropic microstructure design strategy that leverages Spectral Density Function (SDF) for rapid reconstruction of high resolution, two phase, isotropic or anisotropic microstructures in 2D and 3D. We demonstrate that SDF microstructure representation provides an intuitive method for quantifying anisotropy through a dimensionless scalar variable termed anisotropy index. The computational efficiency and low dimensional microstructure representation enabled by our method is demonstrated through an active layer design case study for Bulk Heterojunction Organic Photovoltaic Cells (OPVCs). Results indicate that optimized design, exhibiting strong anisotropy, outperforms isotropic active layer designs. Further, we show that Cross-sectional Scanning Tunneling Microscopy and Spectroscopy (XSTM/S) is as an effective tool for characterization of anisotropic microstructures. Recognizing the pivotal role of microstructure in advanced material systems, microstructure sensitive design Microstructure Characterization and Reconstruction (MCR) aims to capture salient microstructural features and subsequently generate statistically equivalent reconstructions. Bostanabad et al. However, training networks that can be generalized requires several hundred images; which is not readily available for most material systems. Work by Sundararaghavan et al. OPVCs are promising alternatives to traditional Silicon based solar cells due to several advantages lightweight, flexibility, low production cost, short payback period In our previous effort The method enables reconstruction of anisotropic microstructures without modification. Further, an SDF based anisotropy index is defined to quantify anisotropy and serve as an additional descriptor in the design of strongly anisotropic OPVC active layer that outperforms isotropic designs. Fast Microstructures Reconstruction using Spectral Density Function SDF based MCR is best suited for quasi-random microstructures that exhibit a seemingly random material distribution but governed by an underlying correlation function. SDF represents spatial correlation in the spatial frequency domain, providing a simplified and physics aware representation of microstructure. Mathematically, SDF (ρ) is the squared magnitude of Fourier Transform of a microstructure M: where F[. ] represents the Fourier Transform operator and k is a vector representing spatial frequency. A homogeneous microstructure can be described as a realization of an underlying stationary random field and reconstruction involves finding the random field with a prescribed SDF. Towards this end, we propose casting the reconstruction process as a Linear Time Invariant (LTI) system that takes in a random white noise image and transform it into an image (microstructure) with desired SDF using the relationship: where . represents point-wise multiplication, subscripts R, T and W denote the SDF of reconstructed, target and white noise images. Note that the white noise image and target image must have the same resolution. SDF is the squared magnitude of Fourier transform and hence, we can recover the reconstructed microstructure from equation ( Here, subscripts R, T and W denote reconstructed, target and white noise microstructures (M) respectively. Since a white noise image contains all frequencies in equal measure, equation ( Analogously, reconstruction is a convolution between a white noise image and target image. Fig. SDF based reconstruction using equation (3) has two primary advantages as compared to existing methods. First, the reconstruction process only involves Fourier transform and Inverse Fourier Transform, which can be accomplished very efficiently using Fast Fourier Transform available in any computational software package. This is highly significant in terms of generating high resolution 3D microstructures such as those required for investigating OPVCs and performance optimization which will require evaluation of structure-performance model at each iteration. Table processor with 24GB RAM. It is quite evident that our method is significantly more efficient than existing methods. The second advantage of the proposed method is that no modifications are required for reconstruction of anisotropic microstructures using equation (3) since it is valid for any homogeneous microstructure. This is elaborated in following section. Unlike isotropy, which is an absolute state, anisotropy is a relative state and necessitates an appropriate quantitative measure. We define an SDF based anisotropy index with the observation that dominant structural features in spatial domain manifest as non-zero values of frequency components. The pattern formed by these dominant frequencies depends on the microstructural features. Here we discuss two such patternsring and disk type SDFs but the concept can be easily generalized to other patterns. For ring type SDF, we define anisotropy index α as the sine of polar angle ω subtended by the non-zero frequency component on the axis of anisotropy. , where 0 and 1 represent isotropy and absolute anisotropy respectively and facilitates its usage as a bounded design variable in the optimization case study presented in the following section. Anisotropy Index is, in general, a measure of skewness in SDF pattern and can be extended beyond ring type SDFs shown in Fig. As noted earlier, anisotropic active layer can enhance OPVC performance but, realizing such designs has been a challenge hitherto. Here we demonstrate how the SDF based anisotropic microstructure design strategy addresses this challenge. Given the vast space of possible active layer morphologies, microstructure optimization is necessary to identify active layer designs that maximize Incident photon to Converted electron (IPCE) ratio. The IPCE ratio encapsulates the efficiencies of charge conversion and transport processes which are strongly influenced by active layer microstructure. Ideally, we desire an active layer that maximizes interfacial area and provides short, well-connected pathways for charge transport; but realizing both objectives simultaneously is a challenging task. The low-dimensional microstructure representation enabled by SDF is leveraged to formulate the active layer design as follows: M: microstructures with 0% ≤ VF PCBM ≤ 100%, 0.01nm -1 ≤ k i ≤ 2.23nm -1 , 0 ≤ α ≤ 1 Fig. These features contribute to a significant reduction in distance traversed by charges to respective electrodes and compensates the reduction in interfacial area. In contrast, the optimized isotropic design maximizes interfacial area, but its effect is subdued by tortuous paths for charge transport, leading to lower IPCE. In a P3HT:PCBM mixture, P3HT is the polar molecule. Thus, under the application of electric field the orientations of P3HT-rich domains are affected, leading to elongation of domains. So far, the electric field treatment during the OPVC synthesis processes has only been discussed regarding the better polar molecule crystallinity and change of surface roughness for better contact with electrodes The new SDF based microstructure reconstruction methodology proposed is capable of fast reconstructing high resolution, isotropic/anisotropic microstructures which enables computational microstructure design in a wide range of materials systems. The representation is physics-aware and highly flexible for both isotropic and anisotropic microstructures with a small set of parameters that can serve as design variables in microstructure design. To quantify the level of anisotropy, we The design strategy for anisotropic microstructures proposed in this article can be extended to design any material systems where anisotropy could potentially enhance performance. Challenges in fabrication of strongly anisotropic morphologies with desired domain size and distribution represent opportunities for future work. In this regard, recent work by Jiali et al. In OPVCs, the energy conversion is accomplished in four main processes: (1) exciton creation by light absorption; (2) diffusion of these excitons; (3) separation of charge at interface; (4) diffusion of charge and its collection at the electrodes. The efficiency of this process is denoted Incident Photon to Converted Electron (IPCE) ratio. Given the active layer microstructure, IPCE can be evaluated using the following expression ∑ ( e -(t-z)α(λ) ∆x∆y(1 -e -α(λ) Δz )) ( e The four parenthesis in above equation represent the four processes mentioned above, where the summation collects contribution of each voxel of the 3D structure; t is the thickness of the active layer (100nm in our case); z is the height of the specific voxel; α(λ) is the absorption coefficient of active layer as function of the light wavelength, λ; P refers to probability for charge separation (sep), and for charge collection (col); d is the distance to the nearest interface from the location of the exciton creation; ξ the diffusion lengths of exciton (ex); of hole (h); and of electron (e); S A is the shortest distance to anode through the donor phase; and S C to cathode through the acceptor phase. For implementation purposes, we make the following assumptions: (i) incident light is along the Z-axis (see Fig. Scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy (STM/S) is a special technique based upon quantum tunneling that obtain topographic images and dI/dV mapping 