Partially Fe filled multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) were grown by chemical vapor deposition with propane at 850 oC using a simple mixture of iron (III) acetylacetonate (Fe(acac)3) powder and conventional photoresist. Scanning electron microscopy revealed that catalytic nanoparticles with an average diameter of 70 nm are formed on the Si substrate which governs the diameter of the MWCNTs. Transmission electron microscopy shows that the nanotubes have a multi-walled structure with partial Fe filling. A site-selective growth of partially Fe filled MWCNTs is achieved by a simple photolithographic route. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) exhibit a unique combination of electronic, thermal, mechanical and chemical properties, which promise a wide range of potential applications in key industrial sectors. In the last few years, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) has been the preferred method among different CNT growth methods because of its potential advantage to produce a large amount of CNTs growing directly on a desired substrate with high purity, large yield and controlled alignment. The CVD synthesis of CNTs on plain substrates gener-ally requires catalyst metal deposition over the substrate, which is time consuming and the deposited area is also finite. These limitations can be easily overcome by employing the spin-coating of the catalyst material on the desired substrate. Moreover, in recent times, magnetic metal encapsulated CNTs are of huge interest as it has demonstrated widespread applications in magnetic force microscopy 706 mg of Fe(acac)3 was mixed with 10 ml of HPR 504 to obtain a modified photoresist (Mod-PR) solution of concentration 0.2 M. Then the Mod-PR solution of concentration 0.2 M was spin-coated with a rotation speed of 4000 rpm for 20 s on the Si(1 1 1) substrate to get a thin layer of the Mod-PR. The thin Mod-PR film was annealed in air for 10 min at 200 oC to improve the adhesion to the substrate. The substrates were then loaded into a quartz tube furnace (ELEC-TROHEAT EN345T), pumped down to 10 -2 Torr and backfilled with flowing argon to atmospheric pressure. Afterwards, the samples were heated in argon up to 900 oC following which the argon was replaced with hydrogen. Subsequently, the samples were annealed in hydrogen atmosphere for 10 min. Finally, the reactor temperature was brought down to 850 oC and the hydrogen was turned off, thereafter propane was introduced into the gas stream at a flow rate of 200 sccm for 1 h for CNT synthesis. For lithographically selective growth of CNTs, after performing the spin-coating of Mod-PR the samples were baked at 90 oC for 15 min followed by an exposure step with a mask aligner to make an array of patterns. The exposed specimens were developed in the developer solution for 60 s and rinsed in distilled water. Thereafter, the synthesis of CNT was carried out on the pattern areas following the same procedure as described earlier. Fig. Fig. 