Broadband electrochromism from visible to infrared wavelengths is attractive for applications like smart windows, thermal-camouflage, and temperature control. In this work, the broadband electrochromic properties of Li4Ti5O12 (LTO) and its suitability for infraredcamouflage and thermoregulation are investigated. Upon Li + intercalation, LTO changes from a wide band-gap semiconductor to a metal, causing LTO nanoparticles on metal to transition from a super-broadband optical reflector to a solar absorber and thermal emitter. Large tunabilities of 0.74, 0.68 and 0.30 are observed for the solar reflectance, mid-wave infrared (MWIR) emittance and long-wave infrared (LWIR) emittance respectively, with a tunability of 0.43 observed for a wavelength of 10 μm. The values exceed, or are comparable to notable performances in the literature. A promising cycling stability is also observed. MWIR and LWIR thermography reveal that the emittance of LTO-based electrodes can be electrochemically tuned to conceal them amidst their environment. Moreover, under different sky conditions, LTO shows promising solar heating and sub-ambient radiative cooling capabilities depending on the degree of lithiation and device design. The demonstrated capabilities of LTO make LTO-based electrochromic devices highly promising for infrared-camouflage applications in the defense sector, and for thermoregulation in space and terrestrial environments. Electrochromisma phenomenon in which certain materials reversibly switch colors with their redox stateis an increasingly familiar occurrence in today's world. For example, tunable emittances in the mid-wave infrared (MWIR, wavelength (λ) ~ 3-5 μm) and longwave infrared (LWIR, λ ~ 8-13 μm) atmospheric transmission windows (ATWs) can be used for infrared-camouflage. Research over recent decades has yielded several materials with visible-to-infrared electrochromic properties, such as poly(aniline) and WO3. Here, the authors report the electrochromic properties of Li4Ti5O12 (LTO), a zero-strain material with highly reversible lithium ion (Li + ) intercalation, which exhibits tunable emissivity or reflectivity from visible to infrared wavelengths. LTO nanoparticles coated on aluminum (Al) are found to have an emittance that is electrochemically tunable by up to ~ 0.78 in the solar wavelengths (0.4-2.5 μm), and ~ 0.68 and ~ 0.30 in the MWIR and LWIR ATWs respectively, and show steady electrochromic behavior over a large number of cycles. The large tunability, along with its excellent cycle-life, LTO has been explored extensively as an anode material for Li-ion batteries due to its excellent cycle life, structural stability and fast charging/discharging rates as high as 100 C (corresponding to 36 s). To quantify the broadband electrochromic performance of LTO on Al, the solar reflectance R solar and MWIR and LWIR thermal emittances ε MWIR and ε LWIR are calculated from R(λ) (Supporting Information, Section 1) for L and DL states. High tunabilities of the reflectance or emittance -ΔR solar ~ 0.74, Δε MWIR ~ 0.68 and Δε LWIR ~ 0.30are observed between states. Δε LWIR is comparable to or better than those of WO3-based devices, The super-broadband electrochromic behavior of LTO can be harnessed for thermal and optical applications by suitably designed electrochemical cells. In such a cell, the LTO-on-metal electrode faces 'outwards' for its electrochromism to be apparent (Figure The electrochromic performance of LTO depends on multiple factors, such as the type of cover, massloading of the LTO nanoparticle layer, radiative incidence or emittance angle (θ), charging/discharging rate and number of electrochemical cycles. To provide a basis for device design, the authors investigate the effects of these parameters on the performance of LTO nanoparticles electrode-coated onto Al foil (Figure Mass-loading of LTO on Al has a large impact on R solar , ε MWIR and ε LWIR , making it an important determinant of the performance of LTO electrodes. As evident from Figure Consequently, a maximum ΔR solar of 0.78 is observed for the highest mass loading. For ε MWIR and ε LWIR , an increase with mass loading is observed for both L and DL states. This is because the intrinsic emissivity of the LTO (small for DL state and large for L state) and the PVdF binder leads to higher ε as the amount of LTO increases. For the high mass loading of 4.4 mg cm -2 , even the DL state is quite emissive, causing Δε MWIR and Δε LWIR to drop. Peak values of Δε MWIR ~ 0.68 and Δε LWIR ~ 0.30 are observed for a mass loading of 2 mg cm -2 . Δε is smaller in the LWIR due the phonon modes which raise ε LWIR for both L and DL states. Since the 2 mg cm -2 mass loading yields high values of ΔR solar (0.74), Δε MWIR (0.68) and Δε LWIR (0.30) for super-broadband electrochromic applications, it is used henceforth, unless mentioned otherwise. LTO also retains good optical performance during electrochemical cycling tests. For charge/discharge rates of C/5, 1C and 10C (1C= 175 mA g -1 ), respective capacities of 168 mAh g -1 , 147 mAh g -1 and 44 mAh g -1 are observed (Supporting Information, Figure For practical use, an electrochromic device should also show optical tunability regardless of the viewing angle. For LTO on Al, angular measurements (Figure The high, wide-angle Δε MWIR and Δε LWIR of the LTO-based electrodes make them appealing for thermal camouflaging applications. To demonstrate the suitability of LTO for thermal camouflage, MWIR and LWIR thermographs of LTO on Al with BaF2 and PE covers are presented in Figure (1), where T LTO is the real temperature of the LTO-based electrode, T env,rad is the effective radiative temperature of the environment (Supporting Information, Section 6), ε LTO is the emittance of the electrode, and R LTO = (1 -ε LTO ) is its reflectance (Figure The super-broadband electrochromism of LTO also makes it promising for radiative thermoregulation. In this regard, the solar and LWIR wavelengths are important. For instance, a high R solar can lead to a lowered heating by the sun, while a high ε LWIR can lead to a higher radiative heat loss from objects in everyday situations. Furthermore, solar intensities (~ 900 W m -2 at noon) usually exceed LWIR irradiances (< 300 W m -2 ) from everyday objects (temperature < 75°C) (Supporting Information, Section 7). Therefore, during the day, heating or cooling can be achieved by tuning R solar . For example, under a solar intensity I ~ 788 Wm -2 , black L and white DL states of LTO (Figure Besides the super-broadband optical tunability of LTO, device design is also important for a functional electrochromic device. Effective designs for infrared electrochromism with metal substrates have previously been reported in the literature. In summary, the authors demonstrate Li4Ti5O12 (LTO), which changes from a wide band-gap semiconductor to metal upon lithium intercalation, as a potential visible-to-infrared super-broadband electrochromic material for optical and thermal management. Lithiated (Li7Ti5O12) and delithiated (Li4Ti5O12) states of LTO-nanoparticles on Al exhibit high Δε or ΔR of 0.74, 0.68 and 0.30 in the solar, MWIR and LWIR wavelengths respectively. The optical performance holds from near-normal to grazing incidence angles of light, and is tunable by changing the mass-loading and degree of lithiation of LTO. Moreover, LTO show steady electrochromic performances under different electrochemical cycling tests. The range of ε attained by LTO on Al allows them to camouflage themselves by reflecting their environment's temperature and thermal features, and makes them appealing for thermal camouflaging applications. Furthermore, under different daytime and nighttime skies, LTO shows both solar heating and radiative cooling capabilities. The large tunable temperature range (18°C) and sub-ambient (by ~4°C) temperatures attained by LTO under sunlight make it attractive for energy-efficient thermoregulation in space and terrestrial settings. Li4Ti5O12 is thus promising for infrared camouflage and thermoregulation. Fabrication of the LTO-based electrodes for device optimization: Li4Ti5O12 nanoparticles from Hydroquebec were ground with poly(vinylidene fluoride) powder (Arkema Kynar HSV900) in a 98:2 weight ratio, and then added to 1-methyl-2-pyrolidinone (NMP) to form slurries. Applicators were then used to make Li4Ti5O12 nanoparticle layers on aluminum foil. Depending on their use, the layers were coated with BaF2 or PE straightaway or after electrochemical processing. Cell assembly, electrochemical processing and disassembly: LTO-based electrodes were put in pouch cells in a Li | electrolyte (Gotion LP40) | Li4Ti5O12 configuration in an inert atmosphere. The cells were then charged under constant-current-constant-voltage regimes to yield Li7Ti5O12, or cycled at different rates and for different number of cycles, using a potentiostat (Bio-logic, Model VMP3). Afterwards, the cells were disassembled, and the LTO-based electrodes structures were cleaned in diethylene carbonate, heated dry, and then covered with BaF2 or PE. Optical characterization: Spectral reflectance R(T, λ) of LTO nanoparticles on Al was separately measured in the visible to near-infrared (0.41-1.05 μm) and near-infrared to mid-infrared (1.06-14 μm) wavelength ranges. For the first case, a supercontinuum laser (SuperK Extreme, NKT Photonics) coupled to a tunable filter (Fianium LLTF contrast) was used to shine specific wavelengths into an integrating sphere (Model IS200, Thorlabs). The samples were then inserted into the integrating sphere to intercept the light at angles between 15° and 70°, and had their reflectances measured at 5 nm wavelength intervals by a silicon detector. A patch of the standard white material of the integrating sphere was used as reference. For the 1.06-14 μm range, a Fourier Transform Infrared spectrometer (Vertex 70v, Bruker), gold-coated aluminum foil references, and a gold integrating sphere (Model 4P-GPS-020-SL, Labsphere) along with a mercury-cadmium telluride detector were likewise used. The obtained spectra were then patched, and ε(λ 1 , λ 2 ) and R(λ 1 , λ 2 ) were calculated from the resultant spectrum using Equation 1 of the Supporting Information. Thermography to demonstrate infrared camouflaging: MWIR and LWIR thermographs of samples were taken using FLIR SC6000 and T640 thermal cameras respectively. SEM characterization: Li4Ti5O12 nanoparticles on Al foil were imaged with a Zeiss Sigma VP scanning electron microscope.