Determining the dimensions of nanostructures is critical to ensuring the maximum performance of many geometry-sensitive nanoscale functional devices. However, accurate metrology at the nanoscale is difficult using optics-based methods due to the diffraction limit. In this article, we propose an optical nano-profilometry framework with convolutional neural networks, which can retrieve deep sub-wavelength geometrical profiles of nanostructures from their optical images or scattering spectra. The generality, efficiency, and accuracy of the proposed framework are validated by performing two different measurements on three distinct nanostructures. We believe this work may catalyze more explorations of optics-based nano-metrology with deep learning. With the continuous development of innovative materials and advanced nanoscale fabrication techniques, a wide range of functional nanostructures can be fabricated today to address various scientific and engineering challenges across many fields, e.g., integrated photonic devices, metamaterials, and semiconductor transistors, to name a few. More specific examples include nanoscale scatterers for tuning a whispering gallery-mode micro-toroid cavity to operate at non-Hermitian spectral degeneracies Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) enable direct imaging of entire nanostructures with single-digit nanometer resolutions due to the ultra-small de Broglie wavelength of electrons. However, they suffer from destructive sample preparation and low integratability With the recent advances in computer vision and machine learning, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been shown to excel at many image processing tasks such as classification The proposed CNN metrology framework is shown in Fig. The CNN model can be represented mathematically as a general composite function given by , , , ... , ... where f1, f2, ..., fn are the layers of the network and can be operations such as convolution, pooling, batch normalization, and dropout. Θ denotes the network parameters to be optimized. Our models follow the VGGNet The objective of training is given as Here ( ) ˆn i y is the i-th reconstructed dimension of the n-th data sample and ( ) n i y is the corresponding actual dimension. N denotes the size of the training data set whereas M is the number of geometrical dimensions to be extracted. We introduce ωyi here as the weight term associated with the i-th dimension. We call this cost function the weighted mean squared error (WMSE). The weight term ωyi offers an extra degree of freedom in controlling the mapping dynamics of the network and allows us to treat each geometrical dimension with its own criticality. Depending on the measurement system used, the input to the network can be a 1-D, 2-D, or 3-D tensor, while the output is a vector whose elements correspond to the dimensions to be estimated. For training, the network parameters are randomly initialized following the method proposed in We used two types of optical systems, i.e., BFM and ellipsometry, to validate the proposed framework in this paper. The first instrument is an in-house epi-illumination microscope equipped with a fiber-coupled 405-nm light emitting diode (LED) source (M405FP1, Thorlabs Inc.) and a CCD camera (C4742-80-12AG, Hamamatsu Inc.). The magnification of the BFM system is 106.7×. An insertable bandpass filter (FB405-10, Thorlabs Inc.) centered at 405 nm and with a 10-nm full width at half maximum (FWHM) is used in front of the CCD to narrow down the spectrum for accurate model mapping. A Zeiss plan-apochromat 20×/0.8 numerical aperture (NA) objective lens is used together with the 5.33×4-f lens system (L4 and L5). Fourier optics is adequately accurate for the generation of training sets for CNN. The detailed configuration of the BFM is illustrated in Fig. The samples under investigation include the silicon fins on a NIST RM 8820 artifact The first optical modality we used with the proposed framework is BFM. The measurand under consideration is a NIST RM 8820 artifact, with an array of short lines characterized by three geometrical dimensions, namely the bottom width (BCD), the height (HGT), and sidewall angle (SWA) (see Fig. The CNN is trained for 3000 epochs in around 3 minutes; see Fig. The second modality we worked with is ellipsometry. Ellipsometry measures the polarization-sensitive scattering spectrum at either multi-wavelengths or multi-angles (incident or azimuthal angle), which is completely different from BFM in terms of the measurands and operation modes. We use an ellipsometer operating in the specular reflection mode (see Fig. The results on the simulation data are presented in Fig. To further validate the generality of the proposed method, we fix the incident and azimuthal angles at 65 ° and 0 °, respectively, while only capturing the wavelength-resolved scattering spectrum. The source has an operating wavelength in the range of 200-800 nm with a 10-nm increment, and we use the resulting 61× 15 spectra as the input to the CNN. We investigate a DRAM transistor, whose geometrical profile consists of three parameters D1, H1, H2, H3, SW A1, and SW A2; see the schematic and the TEM measured cross-section in Figs. The CNN is trained for 2,500 epochs in around 4 minutes; see Fig. We can further improve the reconstruction accuracy for an individual dimension by adjusting its associated weight in the WMSE loss function. Here we demonstrate this process on the thickness of the SiO2 layer denoted as H2. There are two major reasons for this adjustment. First, without any special treatment, the prediction accuracy is worst for H2 among all six dimensions. This is because the scattering signature is very insensitive to H2. Second, H2 is the thickness of the central layer and governs the leakage current of the DRAM unit and thus has a significant effect on the device performance. Therefore, accurately determining its value is critical. The optimal value of ωH2 is determined by performing hyper-parameter tuning on the validation set. The improved accuracy can be observed by comparing Figs. We next consider the reconstruction with measurement data. We select four dies on a 12-inch wafer to take the die-to-die variations into account. Each die is measured thirty times and we use the averaged spectrum to mitigate random perturbations in the measurement. As can be seen in Figs. In this paper, we introduced a CNN-assisted nano-metrology framework for the reconstruction of deep-subwavelength geometrical profiles of nanostructures. The proposed framework works with diffraction-limited optical modalities such as the bright-field microscopy and the optical ellipsometry, and is non-contact, non-destructive and fast in run-time. We demonstrated the effectiveness and generality of the proposed method by the successful reconstruction of profiles (including sub-10-nm dimensions) of various nanostructures, which are widely seen in fields like semiconductor industry, integrated photonics, metamaterials, one-dimensional photonic crystals, biosensors, and neuromorphic chips, at a sub-nanometer scale accuracy using single-shot microscopy images or scattering spectra. Moreover, we showed that the reconstruction accuracy with respect to individual dimensions is adjustable, enabling us to investigate the most critical dimensions that govern the performance of nanoscale devices. The proposed nanometrology framework is built upon the power of neural networks in representing the highly nonlinear mapping between the scattering information and the geometrical dimensions of the measurands and is expected to work with other diffraction-limited optical modalities. Our CNN models are adapted from the VGGNet architecture and are modified for critical dimension extraction with the weighted mean-square-error (WMSE) regression loss. We use the same basic model but with different parameters for our three examples, due to the difference in input size. For the NIST 8820 artifact example, we use bright-field microscopy (BFM) to get a 2-D image of the measurand. We crop the image to a size of 101×101. We then take the average of the 101 horizontal slices of the image, resulting in an input of size 101×1. For the nanowire example, we use angle-resolved ellipsometry to get the scattering spectra of the measurand, resulting in an input size of 5×19×15, for the five incident angles, nineteen azimuthal angles, and fifteen elements of the normalized Muller matrix. In the DRAM case, we use wavelength-resolved ellipsometry with sixty-one wavelengths, resulting in an input of size 61×15 for the sixty-one wavelengths and fifteen elmenets of the normalized Muller matrix. We use convolution of kernel size 2 and max pooling of size 2 along each input dimension. We normalize the input and output to be within range [0, 1], and use the rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation function defined as y(x) = max(0, x) with convolution layers and the first fully-connected layer, and the sigmoid activation with the last fullyconnected layer. Table For training, we use the Xavier initialization and the Adam optimizer, with the batch size chosen to be 1024, and β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999. The learning rate is set initially to 1×10 -3 , and decays by a factor of 5 whenever the validation loss hits a plateau, until it reaches 1×10 -6 . We also checkpoint the network parameters every 10 epochs and use early stopping to terminate the training once the validation loss is not decreasing for over 500 epochs. The training curves for the three examples can be found in Fig. 