Superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors promise efficient (∼100%) and fast (∼Gcps) detection of light at the single-photon level. They constitute one of the building blocks to realize integrated quantum optical circuits in a waveguide architecture. The optical response of single-photon detectors, however, is limited to measure only the presence of photons. It misses the capability to resolve the spectrum of a possible broadband illumination. In this work, we propose the optical design for a superconducting nanowire single-photon spectrometer in an integrated optical platform. We exploit a cascade of cavities with different resonance wavelengths side-coupled to a photonic crystal bus waveguide. This allows to demultiplex different wavelengths into different spatial regions, where individual superconducting nanowires that measure the presence of single photons are placed next to these cavities. We employ temporal coupled-mode theory to derive the optimal conditions to achieve a high absorption efficiency in the nanowire with fine spectral resolution. It is shown that the use of a mirror at the end of the cascaded system that terminates the photonic crystal bus waveguide increases the absorption efficiency up to unity, in principle, in the absence of loss. The expected response is demonstrated by full-wave simulations for both two-dimensional and three-dimensional structures. Absorption efficiencies of about 80% are achieved both in two-dimensional structures for four cascaded cavities and in three-dimensional structures for two cascaded cavities. The achieved spectral resolution is about 1 nm. We expect that the proposed setup, both analytically studied and numerically demonstrated in this work, offers a great impetus for future quantum nanophotonic on-chip technologies. Single-photon detectors play an essential role in many quantum optical applications The detection of single photons in SNSPDs relies on the transient breaking of the superconducting state in the superconducting nanowire, triggered by the absorption of light The recent advances of quantum nanophotonic technology require a single-photon spectrometer to be implemented in a platform that can also accommodate other functionalities. One promising platform is provided by 2D PhC slabs, which enable on-demand manipulation of photons in various ways In this work, we propose a single-photon spectrometer using SNSPDs implemented in cascaded 2D PhC structures with different lattice constants in a slab geometry, as exemplarily illustrated in Fig. For the purpose of deriving the optimal conditions for the coupling strengths among individual components to maximize the absorption efficiency in the nanowires, we use temporal coupled-mode theory (TCMT). The optimal conditions are exploited to identify suitable structural parameters. The functionality of actual devices is verified with full-wave simulation of PhC structures. We perform 2D simulations, with a geometry invariant in the third dimension, of four cascaded PhC cavities. Absorption efficiencies of about 80% are achieved with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) of about 1 nm. Threedimensional (3D) simulations of PhC slab structures are also carried out, showing similar spectral performance in the absorption. These 3D simulations are limited up to a cascade of two cavities due to the constrained computational memory. We expect that the proposed single-photon spectrometers using SNSPDs will be exploited in various on-chip applications where its practical usefulness is experimentally demonstrated in the near future. The proposed design of our single-photon spectrometer using SNSPDs is depicted in Fig. The theoretical evaluation and prediction of the spectral performance requires an appropriate analytical model. Particularly, it shall enable us to find the conditions that allow us to identify the structural parameters of the single-photon spectrometer scheme that maximize the performance metric of the spectrometer. To be specific, we require a high efficiency and a fine spectral resolution, while the excellent timing charac-teristics comes from using extremely short superconducting nanowires. To express the conditions that lead to an optimal design, we employ here TCMT for a single waveguide-cavitynanowire structure Consider a homostructure, where a cavity and a nanowire are placed in line and side-coupled to the bus waveguide in the middle, as illustrated in Fig. L and E +(-) R are the amplitudes of right-going (+) [left-going (-)] waves at the left (L) and right (R) side of the waveguide, respectively. Their relations can be written as where d L (R) is the distance from the cavity to the left (right) boundary, β is the frequency-dependent propagation constant of the mode in the bus waveguide, ω 0 is the cavity resonance frequency, Q in is the quality factor associated with the coupling between the waveguide and the cavity, and E c is the amplitude of the cavity. The equation of motion for the amplitude E c reads as where the radiative loss, with an associated quality factor of Q c , and the absorption in the nanowire, with an associated quality factor of Q nw , are additionally taken into account. The radiated field (E rad ) and the field (E nw ) in the nanowire are written as Cavity Nanowire where the tilde denotes the fields at a time before the interaction with the cavity. They are assumed to be zero throughout The set of above coupled equations [Eqs. (1) to ( for E - R = 0. Among those, the key quantity in this work is the absorption A = |a| 2 in the nanowire, obtained by solving the above coupled equations. The absorption can be written as One can see that the absorption A cannot be greater than 50% since light extraction from the bus waveguide to the cavity is limited to maximally 50%. Such upper bound can also be explained by looking at the extent to which light is neither transmitted nor reflected, i.e., the total dissipation D = A + L, where L = |l| 2 , written as where Q diss is defined as Here, D ≤ 1/2 and the upper bound is achieved when Q in = Q diss at resonance. This is the first condition to be considered when optimizing individual homostructures in the spectrometer in the absence of a mirror at the end of the bus waveguide. This condition corresponds to the condition of critical coupling Interestingly, the upper bound for D can be lifted up to unity by placing a mirror at the end of the bus waveguide, e.g., at the right edge in Fig. where ∆ is the phase delay introduced by the mirror. It can be shown that the modified dissipation D reads as where the effective parameters modified by the mirror are given by Here, θ = 2βd R + ∆ is the phase difference between the leftpropagating wave escaped from the cavity and the reflected wave from the mirror. It can be shown that D = 1 at resonance when This condition can be tuned by manipulating θ, e.g., by controlling β, d R , or ∆. Note that β and ∆ depend on the wavelength. This is naturally accommodated in the full-wave simulation conducted in Sec. IV. It is interesting to note that D ≈ 1 can be kept in a broad range of θ. It implies that the extraction with a nearly unity efficiency is tolerant to moderate experimental imperfections When light is transferred to the cavity-nanowire system, the energy is distributed through radiation (L) and absorption (A). The extent to which light is absorbed in the nanowire, written as increases with the ratio Q c /Q nw . This requires a high Q-factor for the cavity, i.e., Q c Q nw , which is the second condition to be considered when optimizing the spectrometer over the structural parameters. The last important figure of merit for the spectrometer is its spectral resolution, i.e., a narrow FWHM is desired where Q total is the total Q-factor given as Here Q eff in is replaced by Q in in the absence of the mirror. The FWHM ω of Eq. ( where λ eff 0 is the effective resonance wavelength of the cavity and FWHM λ λ 0 has been assumed. Obviously, high spectral resolution, represented by narrow FWHM λ , requires Q total to be as large as possible, constituting the third condition to design the spectrometer. One can see that increasing Q c not only raises the absorption efficiency but also narrows the FWHM, i.e., a good cavity with high Q c is always favored. On the other hand, one can find a trade-off between the absorption efficiency and the FWHM with Q nw , i.e., increasing Q nw decreases both the absorption efficiency and the FWHM. Note that the spectral behavior of absorption A of Eqs. ( The absorption in the proposed structure shown in Fig. Let us consider a 2D PhC structure with a triangular pattern of air holes, characterized by lateral and vertical lattice constants (a l and a v ) and the radius of the hole (r), in Silicon as shown in Fig. The cavity resonance wavelength λ 0 can be tuned by changing the lateral lattice constant a l . The respective dependencies are shown in Fig. As analyzed in the previous section with the TCMT, the absorption efficiency can be further increased (in principle up to 100%) by placing a mirror at the end of the bus waveguide. Here, a PhC structure with a l = 350 nm is used as a PhC mirror at the end of the PhC bus waveguide. In such a structure, the total Q-factor is calculated while varying the distance d R between the center of the cavity and the heterointerface (or mirror interface) [see Fig. To simulate a multi-channel spectrometer, we consider a cascade of five homostructures with decreasing lateral lattice constants along the PhC bus waveguide (a l = 420, 415, 410, 405, 400 nm), as shown in Fig. x i 5 w j m Z L z 9 A I F y i q A = < / l a t e x i t > Lateral lattice constant Qdiss/2 ⇡ 1800 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " A W O q R n 0 Z 7 L 4 5 L 0 M P l S h / J g s The Q-factor of the waveguide-cavity-nanowire structure with a PhC mirror, Q eff total depending on the distance dR between cavity center and the mirror interface in units of al, in comparison with Qdiss considered in panel (d). (f) The spectra of absorption A in the nanowire in an optimized cavity in the absence (black squares) and presence (red circles) of the PhC mirror. Solid lines represent the Lorentzian fitting. An absorption efficiency of about 44% at 1709.05 nm is obtained without the mirror, whereas 81% is reached at the slightly modified wavelength of 1709.16 nm with the help of the mirror, where the constructive interference occurs through nearly satisfying the optimal conditions for Q-factors. The FWHMs are approximately 0.94 nm and 1.06 nm, respectively. Here, dR = 5al = 2.1 μm is chosen. absorption efficiencies above 50% are observed even in the absence of the mirror because of partial reflections that occur at the heterointerfaces between adjacent PhC structures. The absorption can be improved when the last PhC structure with a l = 400 nm is replaced by the far detuned one (i.e., a l = 350 nm) in Fig. < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " 8 + q T V H 9 W v 4 K m s Z g k f 5 n 0 l s 0 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " P q 6 Q e T d T X i d B 0 J a 2 5 g 5 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " M 0 u d R T 0 r g u f J 7 L I l G I g q q 6 Q K < l a t e x i t s h a _ b a s e = " J L j J the remaining four resonance wavelengths [see red circles and curves in Fig. Contrary to the 2D PhC structures simulated above, PhC slab structures with a finite height are required to consider experimentally relevant scenarios. Here, the superconducting nanowire needs to be placed on top of the PhC slab and next to the cavity, as shown in Fig. With these additional loss channels, the Q-factor of a pointdefect Lx PhC nanocavity is significantly reduced (e.g, Q c ≈ 3980 for the L1 cavity) when compared to 2D structures made by the same defect number x. The Q-factor increases generally with x, and we choose here a L3 cavity since cavities with x > 3 exhibit multiple resonances in the relevant wavelength range. We wish to avoid this to suppress any spectral crosstalk that would harm the ability of our spectrometer. The L3 cavity Q-factor can be further increased by adjusting the position of the neighboring holes presence of additional losses into free space, eventually increasing the loss L. The full spectral behaviors are shown in Figs. A3(e) and (f). For multi-channel 3D simulations, we are limited to a small number of channels since simulation of many channels (e.g. with the mirror, respectively. The FWHMs are about 1 nm at all the absorption peaks. The unwanted absorption in the nearest neighboring nanowire amounts to only 0.4 ∼ 0.8%, slightly larger than the case of 2D structures, but still negligibly small. Note that a small red peak is observed around λ ≈ 1529 nm due to a Fabry-Perot effect occurring between the input facet and the PhC mirror interface more than two) is computationally prohibitive due to memory requirements. We thus perform 3D simulations for two cascaded structures without the PhC mirror, and with the PhC mirror region additionally attached to the end of the structure [see Fig. We have proposed a design of a superconducting nanowire single-photon spectrometer that exploits cascaded photonic crystal cavities. They are connected by a photonic crystal bus waveguide that delivers the light to the respective cavities. On the base of an analytical model that relies on TCMT, we have discussed the optimal conditions required to maximize the absorption efficiencies in the nanowires placed next to the PhC nanocavities, and showed that these optimal conditions are attainable by means of full-wave simulations for both 2D and 3D designs. It has thus been shown that absorption efficiencies of about 80% in the nanowires can be achieved in full-wave simulations despite the presence of the scattering loss that occurs from injection, and radiation losses from the cavity and the PhC waveguide to free space. The analytical and numerical evidences we have provided through this work will motivate further investigations in the near future. For example, one can study similar PhC structures which keep the same lattice constant for all sub-regions, where the resonance wavelength of the PhC cavity is tuned differently by modifying the positions or radii of the holes near the cavity region We expect these improvements in experiment and theory to facilitate the use of the proposed single-photon spectrometers for a variety of quantum information processing applications in photonic crystal platforms with diverse functionalities which have already been developed over the last few decades. due to the large group index that inevitably increases losses and distortion of the pulse various geometric parameters in 3D structures, consequently leading to the results shown in Fig. 