We apply time-dependent Ginzburg Landau (TDGL) numerical simulations to study the finite frequency electrodynamics of superconductors subjected to intense rf magnetic field. Much recent TDGL work has focused on spatially uniform external magnetic field and largely ignores the Meissner state screening response of the superconductor. In this work, we solve the TGDL equations for a spatially non-uniform magnetic field created by a point magnetic dipole in the vicinity of a semiinfinite superconductor. A novel two-domain simulation is performed to accurately capture the effect of the inhomogeneous applied fields and the resulting screening currents. The creation and dynamics of vortex semiloops penetrating deep into the superconductor domain is observed and studied, and the resulting third-harmonic nonlinear response of the sample is calculated. The effect of point-like defects on vortex semi-loop behaviour is also studied. This simulation method will assist our understanding of the limits of superconducting response to intense rf magnetic fields. Superconductor technology is widely used in industrial applications where high current and low loss are required. With technological advancements in the fabrication of high quality superconducting materials and significant reduction in cryocooler prices, superconductor-enabled devices like Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), high performance microwave and radio frequency (RF) filters, low-noise and quantum-limited amplifiers, or fast digital circuits based on rapid single flux quantum (RSFQ) logic devices became feasible Superconducting Radio Frequency (SRF) cavities This work is motivated by results for third-harmonic generation from a near-field microwave microscope utilized on Nb surfaces In this work, numerical solutions of the time-dependent Ginzburg Landau (TDGL) equations are obtained for a superconductor subjected to a spatially nonuniform applied rf magnetic field, and the effect of boundary conditions on the accuracy of the results is investigated. First, the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory and its range of validity is discussed in section II. Secondly, the TDGL equations and the normalization used in this paper are presented in detail in section III. Then, the implementation of the TDGL simulation in COMSOL Multiphysics simulation software with all appropriate boundary conditions is summarized in section IV. Later, in section IV.1 a two-domain simulation capable of correctly modeling spatially nonuniform magnetic fields and the response screening currents of the superconductor is described, and simple examples are presented to demonstrate the validity of the two-domain model. Next, in section V, an application of the two-domain simulation is presented, where vortex-semiloops created by a strongly inhomo-geneous field distribution are simulated. The time evolution of the vortex-semiloops, their dependence on the magnitude of the rf magnetic field, and their interaction with a localized defect is studied. Finally, in section V. The Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory is a generic macroscopic model appropriate for understanding the electro-dynamic response of superconductors subjected to static magnetic fields and currents in the limit of weak superconductivity The GL equations are differential equations which relate the spatial variation of the order parameter Ψ( r) to the magnetic vector potential A( r) and the current J( r) in a superconductor. GL starts with an expression for the free energy density of a superconductor in terms of position-dependent order parameter and vector potential Here, α( r, T ) and β( r, T ) are the temperature and position-dependent phenomenological expansion parameters, m * = 2m e is the mass of the Cooper pair, e * = 2e is the charge of the Cooper pair, B a = B a ( r, t) is the amplitude of the externally applied magnetic field, and i = √ -1. Taking variational derivatives and minimizing the free energy with respect to Ψ and A leads to the coupled Ginzburg-Landau equations (3) Apart from the TDGL model, the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations Equations and Normalization The GL equations are static, thus cannot be used to study the temporal evolution of the order parameter and the screening currents. In 1966, Schmid proposed a timedependent generalization of the GL equations that could be utilized to study the dynamics of the order parameter Gor'kov limited the use of TDGL to gapless superconductors, or to materials with magnetic impurities or other pair-breaking mechanisms that would round off the singularity in the BCS density of states In order to extend the validity of the TDGL formalism to gapped superconductors, a generalized version of TDGL (gTDGL) was proposed TDGL numerical simulations have been employed on a broad variety of problems Often a three dimensional problem is simplified by assuming that the sample is infinite in the direction parallel to the externally applied magnetic field, thus reducing the 3D problem to a 2D one Here we give a brief motivation for the origins of the TDGL equations. Once the GL free energy is known in its functional form (Eq. 1), the relaxation dynamical equation can be written by considering how the order parameter evolves after being slightly disturbed from its equilibrium value where γ plays the role of a friction coefficient. Here, the scalar electric potential Φ is included to make the equation describing the dynamics of the superconducting order parameter gauge invariant. The TDGL equations are then derived through the variational derivatives of the GL free energy equation (Eq. 1) with respect to Ψ * and A and are given as follows where Ψ = Ψ( r, T, t) is the time-dependent order parameter, A = A( r, t) is the magnetic vector potential, B a = B a ( r, t) is the externally applied magnetic field, Φ = Φ( r, t) is the scalar electric potential, D is the phenomenological electron diffusion coefficient given by is a characteristic time for the relaxation of the GL order parameter , where ξ 0 is the zero temperature GL coherence length. Eq.( The superconducting current can be obtained from the expectation value of the momentum operator for a charged particle in a magnetic field: The TDGL equations are invariant under the following change of gauge A( r, t) → A( r, t) + h e * ∇χ( r, t) Φ( r, t) → Φ( r, t) -h e * ∂χ( r, t) ∂t It is useful to introduce dimensionless variables (denoted by twiddles ∼) to simplify the simulation and normalize Eqs. 5 and 6: The order parameter is scaled ac- the bulk superfluid density at zero temperature in the absence of external magnetic field, α 0 ≡ α(T = 0) and β 0 ≡ β(T = 0). The spatial coordinates are scaled according to the zero temperature GL penetration depth λ 0 ≡ m μ 0 n s e * 2 , so that (x, y, z) → (λ 0 x, λ 0 y, λ 0 z), thus . Time is scaled according to the characteristic time for the relaxation of the vector potential τ 0 , t → τ 0 t where τ 0 ≡ μ 0 λ 2 0 σ n is the magnetic flux quantum. The superconductor current is scaled in terms of J c , J → J c κ J, where μ 0 λ 0 is the critical current density at T = 0 and B = 0, and κ is the GL parameter and is defined as the ratio of two characteristic length scales κ ≡ λ 0 ξ 0 . The normal state conductivity is scaled with its zero temperature value σ → σ n σ and since it is nearly constant in the temperature range of interest for Nb, it is set to σ = 1. The "normalized friction coefficient" is defined as the ratio between the two characteristic time scales τ Ψ and τ 0 , η ≡ τ Ψ τ 0 . For cases when the source of externally applied magnetic field is outside of the superconducting domain, the B a term in Eq.( Defects (such as pinning sites) can be introduced into the model via spatial variation of the GL coefficient α( r, T ). Such defects could be due to spatial variation of temperature T , critical temperature T c ( r) and/or spatial variation of the mean free path l( r). One can calculate the vortex pinning potential created by these kinds of disorder using the method outlined in dictates the maximum possible value for the superfluid density n s ( r, T ) at a given location and temperature in the absence of external magnetic field. In this work we are interested in studying the effects of some common SRF surface defects, such as lossy Nb-oxides and metallic Nb-hydrides near the surface of Nb To numerically simulate the superconducting domain, we must specify the boundary conditions for the order parameter, current density, and vector potential. In this work only the superconductor-insulator boundary is considered. Any current passing through the boundary between a superconducting domain and vacuum/insulator would be nonphysical, thus on the boundary ∂Ω of the superconducting domain Ω we expect: Here n is unit vector normal to the boundary, and since we expect Eq.( Likewise when both A = 0 and Ψ = 0, to satisfy Eq.( leading to The third condition generally used is the continuity of magnetic field across an interface. where B external is the externally applied magnetic field. COMSOL multiphysics simulation software The General Form Partial Differential Equation is one of the equations best suited to be solved by COMSOL multiphysics simulation software and is given as: Here F is the driving term vector, d is the inertia tensor, u is a column vector of all unknowns and Γ is a column vector function of u. We can rewrite Eq.( where v 1 and v 2 are real functions of position and time. where A 1 , A 2 and A 3 are real functions of position and time representing the magnitudes of the components of A in the x, ŷ, ẑ directions. We thus have 5 independent unknown variables, and 5 equations (2 from Eq. ( FIG. Here v 1x stands for ∂v1 ∂x , A 2z stands for ∂A2 ∂z and so on. These equations say that the change in A( r, t) is driven by the total current, while the change in Ψ( r, t) is driven by both Ψ( r, t) and its interaction with A( r, t). The boundary conditions at the superconductorvacuum interface are as follows: and IV.1. Two-Domain TDGL and Inclusion of Superconducting Screening After reviewing some previously published TDGL simulations To include the important physics of screening, our simulation is divided into two domains: Superconductor and Vacuum (Fig. We now examine several key examples where it is crucial to include the screening response of the superconductor to capture the interesting physics. Through these two examples we validate our approach to solving the TDGL equations. IV.2. Superconducting sphere in a uniform magnetic field First consider the classic problem of a superconducting sphere immersed in a uniform magnetic field. Assume that the superconductor remains in the Meissener state. It is known from the exact solution to this problem that there will be an enhancement of the magnetic field at the equatorial surface of the superconducting sphere due the magnetic flux that is expelled from the interior of the sphere. To test this approach to solving the TDGL equations we created a model of this situation in COMSOL To test the reproducibility of the result, the simulation was later repeated, but this time the external magnetic field was increased linearly in time from zero to 0.01B c2 between time 0 and 500τ 0 . After this, the simulation was again iterated for t = 1000τ 0 time steps. The results of Eqs. ( The top plot in Fig. At the surface of the sphere the magnetic field calculated from the two-domain model reproduces the exact analytic solution, while the single domain model fails to account for the enhancement of magnetic field on the equator of the sphere. This disparity between the single domain model and analytic solution is caused by the treatment of the boundary conditions. In the single domain model, Eq. 26 is enforced at the superconductorvacuum interface, which completely ignores the effect of screening currents. Thus a two-domain model should be used for any problem where screening and the magnetic field profile at the surface of the superconductor is important. To ensure that we can accurately simulate the screening currents produced by a spatially nonuniform magnetic field, we numerically simulated the case of a static point magnetic dipole placed at a height of h dp = 1λ 0 above the surface of a semi-infinite superconductor. The superconducting domain and vacuum domain are simulated inside two coaxial cylinders with equal radius R = 8λ 0 with common axis along the ẑ direction of the Cartesian coordinate system. The origin of this coordinate system is located on the superconductor surface immediately below the dipole. The thickness of the superconducting domain is h sc = 10λ 0 and the height of the vacuum domain is h vac = 5λ 0 . The normalized friction coefficient η and the GL parameter κ are set to 1. The surface magnetic fields produced by the dipole are assumed to be below the lower critical field H c1 , so that the superconductor remains in the Meissner state. The simulation was started with a superconductor in the uniform Meissner state and the dipole field equal to 0. Then, at time t = 0, the dipole magnetic field is turned on, and the simulation is iterated in time until the relative tolerance of ∂u u < 0.001 is achieved for all the variables in the column vector of all unknowns u (Eq. Microwave Microscopy of a Superconductor The dominant material used in SRF cavities is Nb, which is a type II superconductor and can host vortices. Vortices can be created by high rf magnetic fields used in SRF cavity operation and point-like surface defects The type of vortices inside an SRF cavity and the dynamics of those vortices was theoretically studied by Gurevich and Ciovati To study the dynamics of these vortex-semiloops a novel near-field magnetic microwave microscope was successfully built using a magnetic writer from a conventional magnetic recording hard-disk drive The rf magnetic field produced by the magnetic writer probe sitting on top of a sample is very similar to the magnetic field produced by a horizontal point magnetic dipole with normalized magnetic moment M dp (t)||x placed at a height h dp above the sample. The normalized vector potential produced by such a dipole in free space is given by x 2 + y 2 + (z -h dp ) 2 3/2 -(z-h dp )ŷ+yẑ The superconducting domain and vacuum domain are simulated inside two coaxial cylinders with equal radius R (see Fig. The boundary condition Eq. 26 is enforced at the top of the vacuum domain, whereas a B = 0 boundary condition is enforced at the bottom and the sides of the superconducting domain, since it is expected that the superconducting currents due to the Meissner state will fully shield the externally applied magnetic field before it reaches the outer boundary of the superconductor. The interaction between the probe and the sample was modeled by solving the TDGL equations. In the simulation, we specify M dp (t) indirectly through the FIG. the magnetic field experienced at the origin (on the superconductor surface immediately below the dipole) x, where M dp (t) = M dp (0)sin(ωt). The driving rf magnetic field profile is specified through the analytic equation for the magnetic vector potential of a point dipole (Eq. 27), therefore the dipole itself can be placed either inside the vacuum domain h vac > h dp or beyond it h vac < h dp without affecting the accuracy of the simulation. h vac is chosen to be large enough to be consistent with Eq. 26 at the top of the vacuum domain. The main objective of this work is to simulate the response of the SRF grade Nb, thus the parameters are chosen accordingly. For Nb, σ n ranges from 2 × 10 8 S/m to 2 × 10 9 S/m depending on the RRR value of the material, and λ 0 = 40nm The spatial distribution of the magnetic field at the surface of the superconductor is set through the value for the dipole height h dp . While the driving rf magnetic field is specified through the analytic equation Eq. 27, the goal is to reproduce the actual spatial distribution produced by the magnetic writer head at the surface of the superconductor, which was provided by the manufacturer We consider a dipole that oscillates sinusoidally in time with frequency ω, and calculate the response of the superconductor to this external inhomogeneous and timedependent magnetic field. Our objective is to describe a spatially-inhomogenious microwave frequency stimulus of the superconducting surface. In this section a uniform superconductor domain with no defects is considered. The simulation is started with the order parameter having a uniform value of |Ψ| 2 = (T ) everywhere. At time t = 0 the externally applied magnetic field is turned on. Then the simulation is run for several rf cycles to reach the steady state solution. Fig. reaches its deepest point inside the superconducting domain illustrated by the silver surface in Fig. Fig. One can also study the effect of the applied rf field amplitude, defined through B 0 , on the number and the dynamics of vortex semiloops. Fig. In the past GL has been used to estimate the surface superheating field of superconductors The effect of a localized defect can be specified through the function ( r, T ) = α( r, T ) α(T = 0) in Eqs. ( . (28) where (x d , y d , z d ) are the central coordinates of the defect and σ x , σ y , σ z are the standard deviations in the 3 coordinate directions, all expressed in normalized values. Fig. In previous sections, we examined the dynamics of vortex semiloops created by a point magnetic dipole, as it is relevant to the magnetic microscopy experiment Fig. The solution shown in Fig. solution, i.e. the simulation is not run for several cycles to reach the steady state condition. When the vortex semiloop reaches the boundary of the simulation in the field direction the results become nonphysical due to artificial pinning of the vortex semiloop by the boundaries. This finite size effect is currently limiting our ability to perform full rf parallel field simulation. Nevertheless, the transient solution shown in Fig. These simulations have proven very useful in understanding the measured third-harmonic response of Nb materials, subjected to intense localized rf magnetic fields While most of the work was done for an oscillating parallel magnetic dipole, we also showed that vortex semiloops are created when a localized defect is introduced in the internal surface of an SRF cavity. It is plausible that vortex semiloops are one of the key sources of dissipation inside an SRF cavity at high operating power. The losses associated with such a vortex can be studied by combining the TDGL numerical technique with the experimental work published in While recent advances in SRF cavity fabrication, especially the novel technique of Nitrogen doping and Nitrogen infusion There is also a proposal to create superconductorinsulator multilayer thin-film coatings with enhanced rf critical fields Parameter Name Symbol Scale Fig. Values of parameters used for TDGL simulations of the oscillating magnetic dipole above the superconductor. † The static superheating field is calculated using the asymptotic formulas of reference In this work we present a novel way to perform TDGL simulations in 3D for spatially nonuniform magnetic fields applied to a superconducting surface. Proof of principle results are presented to show the validity of the proposed two-domain simulation method. The vortex semiloops created by a point magnetic dipole above the surface, and the rf dynamics of such vortices are studied. The effect of temperature, rf field amplitude and the surface defects on the vortex semiloops are studied and presented. The resulting third-harmonic nonlinear response can be calculated and compared with the experimental data (comparison published in 