Predicting phase stabilities of crystal polymorphs is central to computational materials science and chemistry. Such predictions are challenging because they first require searching for potential energy minima and then performing arduous free-energy calculations to account for entropic effects at finite temperatures. Here, we develop a framework that facilitates such predictions by exploiting all the information obtained from random searches of crystal structures. This framework combines automated clustering, classification and visualisation of crystal structures with machine-learning estimation of their enthalpy and entropy. We demonstrate the framework on the technologically important system of TiO 2 , which has many polymorphs, without relying on prior knowledge of known phases. We find a number of new phases and predict the phase diagram and metastabilities of crystal polymorphs at 1600 K, benchmarking the results against full free-energy calculations. Predicting the properties of solid materials requires an understanding of how atoms are arranged, which in turn necessitates the determination of the relative stabilities of possible crystal polymorphic phases under various conditions. Advances in crystal structure prediction Although Gibbs energies can be computed using free-energy methods such as thermodynamic integration (TI) In this study, we propose an approximate method that combines RSS and machine learning (ML) to estimate free energies of solid phases and hence the thermodynamic phase behaviour * bc509@cam.ac.uk of a system of interest with relatively little computational effort and without relying on prior knowledge of the known phases. We have selected titanium dioxide at ambient and high pressures to benchmark the method because it is a widely used metal oxide with a large number of polymorphs (see the Supplementary Information), many of which may have interesting optical a. Calculations using empirical potential For RSS and accurate free energy calculations, we focus on the simple MA empirical pair potential for TiO 2 We performed RSS at 0 GPa, 20 GPa, 40 GPa and 60 GPa using the AIRSS To benchmark how well our approximate framework can predict the phase behaviour of TiO 2 at ambient and high pressures as described by the MA potential, we also performed free-energy calculations for both the known phases and the new phases obtained from RSS. Specifically, we computed the chemical potentials of the polymorphs using Frenkel-Ladd integration All the necessary input files for performing the abovementioned calculations using AIRSS and Lammps are provided in the supporting data. b. DFT calculations For the metastable polymorphs identified with the MA potential, we performed geometrical optimisation and computed the enthalpies at the DFT level over a pressure range of 0 GPa to 70 GPa in steps of 10 GPa. We separately employed three common functionals, LDA The key value of the current study lies in the data analysis, which we describe in the following section. A Python notebook implementing the machine learning and data processing steps, input and data files are available on the public repository https://github.com/BingqingCheng/TiO2_ random_search_pattern_recognition. At each pressure, RSS using the MA potential produced thousands of distinct TiO 2 structures with different atomic coordinates, cell shapes and numbers of formula units in the cell. Even though knowledge of the space groups, molar volumes and energies of the structures provides hints on how to classify them, it is still a formidable task to sort through them manually. In recent years, ML-inspired approaches have been used for the classification and visualisation of atomic structures a. Similarity measurements This pattern recognition task is built around the construction of a kernel matrix {K(A, B)} that measures the similarity between each pair of structures A and B in the data set. The kernel matrix should be positivedefinite and normalised. If it is not already normalised by construction, then K(A, B) should be divided by K(A, A)K(B, B). The kernel function K(A, B) can be formulated as an inner product of the features of A and B, where Φ = {φ i } denotes the set of global fingerprints associated with the whole structure, rather than with individual atomic environments X A n that are centred on each atom n in the structure A. A straightforward way of obtaining these global fingerprints from the local ones is to take the average where N A denotes the total number of atoms in the system A if it only contains one element. If the system contains multiple atomic species and if the local fingerprints are specific to atomic species, the average in Eq. ( by summing over Gaussians centred on each atom i of species α that has a displacement r i within a given cutoff r c of the central atom of the environment X. The density ρ α X (r) is invariant to translations and permutations of identical atoms, but not to rotations. The SOAP representation addresses this by first expanding with a set of orthonormal basis functions on radial direction g(|r |) and spherical harmonics of angular directions r as and then taking the power spectra that characterise the rotational-invariant arrangement of atoms of species α inside the local environment X [26, 29] The vector {k α nn l } constructed in this way up to certain cutoffs l max and n max can then be used as the local fingerprint Ψ (X) in Eq. ( b. Low-dimensional maps The kernel matrix {K(A, B)} provides distance measurements between structures in a highdimensional space. To visualise such distances, we project them onto a two-dimensional map using kernel principal component analysis (KPCA) As an example, in Fig. d. Identification of known and new phases In the KPCA map of Fig. e. DFT calculations Although the MA potential satisfactorily predicts many properties of TiO 2 In this section, we investigate whether it is possible to approximate the entropies of different phases solely from the information one can obtain from RSS. The RSS scheme, which involves performing energy minimisation of random structures, is rather similar to the direct enumeration method To estimate the entropy of the basin of the crystal structures found in RSS, we assume that (i) S b of a crystal structure is extensive with respect to its system size, S b = ns b , where n is the number of TiO 2 formula units; and (ii) when performing energy minimisation with the same number of TiO 2 formula units, ns b is proportional to the logarithm of the frequency of finding a certain crystal structure. With these strong assumptions, we are able to infer the relative basin entropy for each crystal structure considered. The value of s b obtained in this way depends on the frequency of occurrence of each structure for a given choice of n. However, for structures whose unit cells do not have compatible numbers of formula units, we can nevertheless infer the difference in s b between two such polymorphs provided that they are found in searches together with other structures that have a well-defined s b for both values of n. To test our assumptions, and to compare the basin entropy s b of the crystal structures and the thermodynamic entropy S, we plot them against each other in Fig. Nevertheless, the results here demonstrate that the frequency of finding a structure in RSS does encode some information about its entropy. Furthermore, the correlation between s b -S and H means that the difference in s b is a better estimator of the actual entropy difference between structures with similar enthalpies than for pairs with large enthalpy differences. Since we are typically interested in phases in the vicinity of the most favourable structure, this may be sufficient. In order to demonstrate the level of approximation one can achieve in estimating the free energy using only RSS results, whenever we discuss ML-based approximations of G, we use s b to estimate the true entropy. To obtain a more accurate estimate of S, one can use the harmonic approximation As the number of local minima in the PES grows exponentially with increasing system size, it is difficult to ensure that all the important structures have been found during RSS. Indeed, not all the previously characterised or new structures of TiO 2 have been found at each pressure considered. There may also be situations where a certain crystal structure is known for an analogous system, but may not have been considered for the system of interest. In all such cases, we may wish to predict the enthalpies as well as the free energies of such structures. Of course, for a certain lattice arrangement, one can choose to perform energy minimisations and free-energy calculations, but it would be convenient to have a surrogate model that can quickly assess its enthalpy and basin entropy. We developed such an approximate model using the kernel ridge regression (KRR) approach. In the following, we only discuss estimating H; the estimation of S b follows the same workflow. For a given pressure, an enthalpy estimate function defined on a given structure A is represented as a linear sum over kernel functions which are summed over a representative set of structures M. The M representative structures are selected from the total N structures that are generated from RSS at each pressure. For this selection, we exploited the farthest-point sampling (FPS) approach, which is a greedy algorithm that aims to select reference structures that are as diverse as possible by successively selecting a new point that is farthest from the ones already selected. The set of weights {w M } can be determined using where K M M , K N N , K M N denote the kernel matrix between the M representative set, between the N complete set, and between the representative and the complete set, respectively; Λ is an N × N diagonal matrix that is commonly used in the KRR framework to regularise the fit; and H N is the enthalpy per formula unit of the N structures found by RSS. To estimate the statistical error due to the finite size of the training set N, we employed a subsampling technique We plot the predictions of the KRR model alongside values obtained in direct energy minimisation simulations in the Supplementary Information [Fig. In Fig. [53] The baddeleyite phase and several of the newly considered phases [namely 0-c-I4 1 /a, 0-e-C2/c, 60-c-Pc and 60e-P2 1 /m] do not appear in Fig. To circumvent extensive and laborious free-energy calculations, we can approximate the chemical potential using solely the data obtained from RSS. If a structure is found in RSS at a particular pressure, we use h(0 K) -T s b to approximate its chemical potential, where h is the enthalpy per formula unit. For structures that are not found, we first use the ML schemes outlined in Subsection III C to estimate the enthalpy and basin entropy, and then estimate the chemical potential using the same expression. These chemical potentials are plotted in Fig. The agreement with the calculations of Fig. We note that Fig. This paper presents a framework that uses a combination of ML methods to help extract information from random crystal structure searches. This framework allows automatic classification and characterisation of possible solid phases, as well as providing an estimate of the phase diagram and metastabilities of solid polymorphs. The framework does not use any prior knowledge of the phase behaviour of the system and instead relies only on data obtained directly from a random structure search. Starting from the thousands of structures obtained from RSS, we first employ a pattern recognition approach to cluster similar structures with little manual input. We then estimate the basin entropy of the crystal structures found by assuming that their basin of attraction is related to the number of times each structure is found. Moreover, we use a machine learning approach to predict the enthalpy of unknown structures based on ones that are observed. Combining all these, we can estimate the free energies of solid phases and hence the thermodynamic phase behaviour of a system of interest with relatively little computational effort. We tested the framework on the rather complicated system of TiO 2 at ambient and high pressures. We predicted a number of possible phases and estimated their chemical potentials at finite temperatures. Even though we only explicitly showed the chemical potentials at a moderately high temperature, the framework that we present can be used for any reasonable temperature. Pair potentials similar to the ones used for our RSS are widely used for other binary oxides The methods we propose are transferable to other systems with many solid polymorphs, such as high-pressure solid hydrogen 