We discuss a robust method to simultaneously fit a complex model both to the complex impedance and the noise data for transition-edge sensors (TES). It is based on a differential evolution (DE) algorithm, providing accurate and repeatable results with only a small increase in computational cost compared to the standard least squares (LS) fitting method. Test fits are made using both DE and LS methods, and the results compared with previously determined best fits, with varying initial value deviations and limit ranges for the parameters. The robustness of DE is demonstrated with successful fits even when parameter limits up to a factor of 5 from the known values were used. It is shown that the least squares fitting becomes unreliable beyond a 10% deviation from the known values. Transition-edge sensor (TES) is a versatile, state-of-the-art radiation detector Here, we propose a different approach to fit TES thermal models, which is independent of the initial parameters given, and can fit both the complex impedance and the noise data simultaneously, even for three-block models,producing more reliable results than the least squares method. It is based on the differential evolution (DE) algorithm 2 Three-block thermal model In Ref. 3 Genetic algorithm and differential evolution Differential Evolution (DE) is a high performance, yet simple, optimizer algorithm based on mutation and crossover of the trial argument vectors of the optimized function. Three different functions are simultaneously fitted to the measured data. The complex impedance is broken down to its real and imaginary parts and used as the first two fit functions. The third function comes from the total TES current noise, including a constant (4 pA/ √ Hz) 2 SQUID noise component. The cost function to be minimized for both the DE and LS fitting methods is the sum of squares of the errors of absolute values |fit value -data|, summed over the real and imaginary parts of the complex impedance and the noise. For the noise data and fit, and additional log 10 is taken prior to the subtraction. All the calculations are done with Python 3.7, NumPy version 1.15.1, SciPy version 1.1.0 and both of the optimization algorithms are from the package scipy.optimize: least squares and differential evolution. The least squares fits are done with the trust region reflecting method A total of six fitting parameters were chosen to be free parameters for the fitting tests: All the three heat capacities of the model, the two steady state temperatures T 0 and T 2 , and one of the thermal conductances, g tes,2 . g tes,1 was kept fixed at the values determined in Ref. For the estimation of initial values, the Corbino geometry of the devices of Ref. The intermediate block temperature is somewhere between the TES temperature and the bath temperature, depending on the values of g tes,2 and g 2,b . Fig. We have implemented a robust method for simultaneous fitting of complex impedance and noise data of TES detectors by a differential evolution (DE) algorithm. The three-block thermal model has already been shown to fit this TES data well manually, but with DE, the problem of choosing the initial parameters and the tediousness and unreliability of the fitting process is removed. When the number of fitting parameters is small and the limits are close to the initial or actual physical values, least squares fitting will be faster, finding the solution in a matter of seconds, whereas DE takes roughly a minute. However, a few extra minutes, in the case of less accurate initial estimates, is a small price to pay for the robustness and Fig. reliability that DE offers. In addition, when running the calculations with larger deviations, multiple different solutions may arise as was shown in Fig. 