The development of high-field accelerator magnets capable of providing 16 T dipolar fields is an indispensable technological breakthrough needed for the 100 TeV energy-frontier targeted by the Future Circular Collider (FCC). As these magnets will be based on Nb3Sn Rutherford cables, the degradation of the conductor performance due to the large electro-magnetic stresses becomes a parameter with a profound impact on the magnet design. In this work, we investigated the stress dependence and the irreversible reduction of the critical current under compressive transverse load in high performance Powder-In-Tube (PIT) Nb3Sn wires. Tests were performed in magnetic fields ranging between 16 T and 19 T on wires that were resin-impregnated similarly to the wires in the Rutherford cables of accelerator magnets. The scope was to predict the degradation of the cable under stress from a single-wire experiment. Interestingly, the irreversible stress limit, irr, defined as the stress level corresponding to a permanent reduction of the critical current by 5% with respect to its initial value, was found to depend on the applied magnetic field. This observation allowed us to shed light on the mechanism dominating the irreversible reduction of the wire performance and to compare and reconcile our results with the irreversible limits measured on Rutherford cables, typically tested at fields below 12 T. The goal of increasing the potential of discovering new physics is pushing the High Energy Physics community to conceive novel experiments based on a highest-energy hadron collider with a centre-of-mass collision energy of 100 TeV where B is the intensity of the magnetic field and R is the radius of the ring A 16 T field in a dipole configuration translates into a requirement of a minimum critical current density, Jc, of more than 1500 A/mm 2 in the superconductor at 16 T and 4.2 K The degradation of the conductor performance due to stress is a parameter with a profound impact on the magnet design. In the frame of the European project EuroCirCol, four options are being studied for the dipoles of the FCC: cos-theta Assessing the stress tolerance of Nb3Sn Rutherford cables becomes therefore essential to estimate the transport current properties of the conductor within the magnet. However, experiments with full-size cables under transverse compressive stress are difficult to conduct and are possible only in very few facilities around the world. At the University of Twente cables can be tested under high transverse compression ( 200 MPa) The PIT Nb3Sn wire tested during this measurement campaign has 192 filaments embedded in a high-purity Cu matrix, and the resulting Cu/non-Cu volume ratio is approximately 1.22. Tests were performed at two different diameters, 1.00 mm and 0.85 mm. Both were developed by Bruker EAS for CERN: the one at 1.00 mm for the FRESCA2 dipole Fig. Flexural tests performed at CERN Interestingly, when plotting the normalized critical current at a given applied stress, Ic load ()/Ic0, versus the normalized critical current measured after the corresponding stress unload, Ic unload (  0)/Ic0, measurements exhibit a scaling behavior. This is shown in Fig. As reported already in the introduction, the irreversible reduction of the critical current under transverse stress results from the combination of the effects of plastic deformation of the Cu matrix and cracks in the Nb3Sn filaments. However, the effects of these two phenomena on the measured critical current are different. The residual stress imposed from the plastically deformed matrix to Nb3Sn determines a permanent distortion of its crystal structure. This in turn induces a reduction of the upper critical field after unload, Bc2 unload , with respect to the value measured on the virgin wire, Bc2,0. For a wide range of multifilamentary Nb3Sn superconductors the scaling law for the field dependence of the critical current is well approximated by the expression where C is a prefactor almost independent of  over a large range of applied transverse stresses In order to assess the dominant mechanism behind the irreversible reduction of Ic unload observed in our experiments, we tested at B = 16 T the dependence on transverse stress of Ic on a new sample from billet #31712 and impregnated with epoxy type L, labelled as #31712_bis. In addition, we measured the field dependence of Ic load and Ic unload at given values of the applied stress, namely  = 76, 104, 135, 173 and 207 MPa. This allowed us to determine the stress dependence of the upper critical field under load, Bc2 load (), and after unload, Bc2 unload (  0), via the wellknown Kramer extrapolation that follows directly from eq. ( In this work, we have investigated the stress dependence and the irreversible reduction of the critical current under compressive transverse load in high-performance PIT Nb3Sn wires. Tests were performed on single wires that were resin-impregnated similarly to the wires in the Rutherford cables of accelerator magnets. The main results of the present study are the following: -The irreversible stress limit of the wire is found to be largely controlled by the rigidity of the impregnation. In our tests, we measured an increase of irr of about 50 MPa by replacing a soft epoxyimpregnation with Stycast or by adding a glass-fiber reinforcement. -A scaling behavior is observed when the normalized critical current at a given applied stress, Ic()/Ic0 is plotted against the normalized critical current measured after the corresponding stress unload, Ic unload (  0)/Ic0, regardless of the type of impregnation. We identified the origin of this scaling behavior in the intrinsic response of Nb3Sn filaments to the local stress. -The comparison of Ic() measurements performed at B = 16 T and B = 19 T shows that the fraction of critical current recovered after unload, Ic unload (  0)/Ic0, depends on the magnetic field. From this observation we concluded that the irreversible reduction of Ic unload is dominated by the residual stress in the Nb3Sn filaments, which arises from the plastic deformation of the Cu matrix under load. -Finally, we have shown that the results of the tests under transverse stress on a single wire are fully consistent with those performed on a full-size Rutherford cable and that is therefore possible to extract quantitative information about the degradation of the cable from a single-wire experiment. Solid and open symbols correspond to the measurement under load and after unload, respectively. The irreversible stress limit, denoted by dashed lines in the plot, depends on the intensity of the magnetic field. 