Sensitive microwave detectors are critical instruments in radioastronomy Many attractive electrical and thermal properties in graphene make it a promising material for bolometry and calorimetry Inspired by the demonstration of using heating or quasiparticle injection to control the supercurrent in superconductor-normal-superconductor junctions in the DC regime We study the GJJ switching as a function of temperature and gate voltage. Fig. The coupling efficiency can be characterized using reflectometry (see Fig. I s decreases monotonically as we raise the microwave input power P mw . Fig. The effectiveness of the thermal insulation at the graphene-superconductor contacts due to Andreev reflection can be evaluated using the Wiedemann-Franz law. If there is any heat diffusion at the contacts, the GJJ (being wide and short) will have the largest contribution to the thermal conductance which, based on the one-dimensional thermal model We can estimate the NEP by first identifying the minimum input power δP min required to suppress the I s by one standard deviation of the switching distribution σ Is . It is given by σ Is • |d , where d I s /dP mw is the slope in Fig. Intrinsic thermal fluctuation of a canonical ensemble imposes a fundamental limit on the sensitivity of a bolometer given by √ 4G th k B T 2 Method. The device is fabricated by first encapsulating the monolayer graphene between two layers of atomically flat and insulating boron nitride ( 30 nm thick) using the dry-transfer technique. The superconducting terminals consist of 5-nm-thick niobium and 60-nm-thick niobium nitride deposited after reactive ion etch and electron beam deposition of 5-nm titanium to form the one-dimensional contact We design the device for optimal impedance matching to a 2 kΩ graphene resistance, an estimated value based on its dimensions. Energy dissipation is dominated by Joule heating into the graphene in such a structure, since the typical internal Q-factor of NbN superconducting resonators without a graphene flake is on the order of 10 5 -10 6 , compared to the internal Q-factor of our device measured to be less than 30, based on the circle fitting method On the other hand, it is possible that the contact resistance between the graphene flake and microwave resonator degrade the bolometer by dissipating the photon energy at the contact instead of the graphene flake. To estimate this effect, let the graphene resistance along resonator direction be R n,res and the graphene/NbN contact resistance along the resonator (horizontal direction in Fig. The graphene-based Josephson junction is at or nearly at the ballistic limit. This is because if we assume the graphene is in the diffusive regime, the Drude mobility and mean free path of graphene are estimated to be 20,000 cm 2 /Vs and 340 nm, respectively. However this mean free path exceeds the junction length of 270 nm. This is usually the case when graphene is encapsulated by atomically flat and insulating hBN flakes and protected from dirty environment during the fabrication processes. Ref. Electron-phonon cooling. We can use the electronphonon coupling theory in the supercollision or disorder regime to calculate Σ where ζ is the Zeta function, E F is the Fermi energy of graphene charge carriers, v F is the Fermi velocity in graphene, ρ M is the mass density of the graphene sheet, D is the deformation potential, k B is the Boltzmann constant, is the reduced Planck constant, l mfp is the mean-free-path, and s is the sound velocity of graphene lattice. However, the enhanced electron-phonon cooling that we observed is more likely due to the resonant-scattering by defects located around the edge of graphene flake 