Current models for calculating nonlinear energy dissipation in the oscillation of acoustically excited bubbles generate non-physical values for the radiation damping term for some frequency and pressure regions including near resonance oscillations. We provide critical corrections to the present formulations. We highlighted the importance of the corrections by calculating the scattering to damping ratio (STDR) for nonlinear regime of oscillations. We then introduce two new parameters to assess the efficacy of applications. They are defined as the multiplication of maximum re-radiated pressure and radiation dissipation by STDR. Bubbles attenuate ultrasound through viscous damping due to liquid friction (Ld), radiation damping (Rd) and thermal damping (Td) van Wijngaardan and where c is the sound speed, ρ is the density of the medium, v(r, t) is the velocity field, P (r, t) is acoustic pressure, β = 4 3 NπR(t) 3 is the void fraction where N is number of bubbles per unit volume, and R(t) is the radius of the bubble at time t. These two equations can be re-written into an equation of energy conservation, by multiplying (1) by P and (2) by v: ∂ ∂t The dynamics of the bubble model including the compressibility effects to the first order of Mach number can be modelled using Keller-Miksis equation where In this equation, R is radius at time t, R 0 is the initial bubble radius, Ṙ is the wall velocity of the bubble, R is the wall acceleration, ρ is the liquid density (998 kg m 3 ), c is the sound speed of the medium (1481 m/s), P g is the gas pressure, σ is the surface tension (0.0725 N m ), μ is the liquid viscosity (0.001 Pa.s), and P A and f are the amplitude and frequency of the applied acoustic pressure. The values in the parentheses are for pure water at 293 0 K. In this paper the gas inside the bubble is air and water is the host media. Thermal parameters of the Air at 1 atm Where C v is the specific heat at constant volume, T 0 =293 0 K is the initial gas temperature, L th is the thickness of the thermal boundary layer. L th is given by L th = min( aR(t) where a is the thermal diffusivity of the gas. a can be calculated using a = L Cpρg where L is the gas thermal conductivity and C p is specific heat at constant pressure and ρ g is the gas density. To calculate the radial oscillations of the bubble Eqs. 4, 5 and 6 are coupled and solved using the ode45 solver of Matlab. Multiplying both sides of Eq.4 by N ∂V ∂t and summation with equation 3 yields: The kinetic energy of the liquid around bubble can be written as using equation 7 and 8 and re-arranging terms we will have: Eq.9 can be written as: where td, ld and rd are time dependent thermal, liquid and radiation damping respectively. For N=1, Jamshidi and Brenner presented the damping terms in Eq. 9 as: Integrating Eq.11 over one acoustic period T results in: The first term on the left hand side of Eq. 12 cancels over one acoustic period where Td, Ld and Rd are total energy loss over time T. However, Eq. 13 in its current format is not correct and several terms need to be re-arranged. Every term that contains the sound speed represents the compressibility effects to the first order of Mach number and should be added to the radiation damping term. Thus the corrected damping terms will be in the form of Eq. 14: Radiation damping is due to the re-radiated (scattered) pressure by the bubble. The acoustic energy scattered by an oscillating bubble can be calculated using where P sc is the pressure scattered (re-radiated) by the oscillating bubble here r is the distance from the bubble center. Using Eq.15 and Eq.16 we can write: The dissipated energy due to radiation should have the same value of the acoustic scattered energy by the bubble. Therefore, one can compare Rd and W sc to validate the predictions of Eq. 14. To demonstrate the regions where Eq. 13 fails to predict correct values, Eq. 4, 5 and 6 were solved over 60 cycles of driving force, then Eq. 13, Eq. 14 and Eq. 17 were used to find the dissipated power for the last 20 cycles of oscillations. Fig. The values for Rd, Td and Ld are pressure and frequency dependent. Rd grows with a faster rate than the other damping factors by pressure increase and there are regions in frequency and pressure domain in which Rd is stronger than other damping factors. This can have significant consequences for the optimization of applications. In this section, we attempt to define parameters to assess the efficacy of bubble related applications. Re-radiated (scattered pressure) by bubbles and attenua- tion The nonlinear STDR is an important parameter in the characterization of bubbles in oceanography In order to have a better understanding of the effect of nonlinear bubble oscillations on the STDR and to examine if this parameter can be used as a unifying parameter to assess application efficacy, we have considered 6 different oscillations regimes. Figure In this section we will look at the dynamics of the scattering to damping ratio (STDR) in the nonlinear regimes of oscillations introduced in Fig. This parameter can be used to find parameter regions that result in high bubble activity while reducing the effect of damping. One application would be the optimization of contrast enhanced ultrasound by increasing the echogencity and decreasing the attenuation. Figure In some applications like bubble enhanced heating in HIFU the goal is to maximize the absorbed power that is re-radiated by bubbles while minimizing the absorption of re-radiated energy by bubbles outside of the focal region Figure Existence of bubbles increases the attenuation of the host media. Understanding the phenomena related to bubble dynamics and the optimization of the bubble activity requires a solid understanding of the changes of the medium attenuation due to bubble pulsations. The attenuation of the medium is a function of the bubble dynamics which are shown to exhibit nonlinear beahvior including subharmonic, superharmonic and chaotic oscillations To accurately understand the attenuation of the medium, effects of large amplitude oscillations of the bubbles and their dependence to the local acoustic pressure should be incorporated in the model. Furthermore, nonlinear effects of liquid comprehensibility and thermal damping should be included. Louisnard This study provides accurate formulations for the mechanisms of power dissipation during propagation of the ultrasonic waves through a bubbly medium. The approach used in this paper can be applied to derive equations of power loss in other types of media like sediment 