Solar parabolic trough collector technology has received significant attention among researchers for its economic potential to meet electrical and thermal energy demands. Furthermore, parabolic trough collector power plants can be hybridized with fossil fuels or other renewable power plants. Improving the efficiency of the parabolic trough collector leads to increase the electricity production and allows the parabolic trough collector power plant to be built in a more compact size, at reduced capital investment. This review focuses on parabolic trough collector receivers, which uses cavity technology to improve efficiency. The cavity receiver has shown potential to overcome shortages of the conventional receiver. It was seen that the thermal losses of the cavity receiver are affected by various parameters such as aperture sizes, emissivities, and working fluid temperature as well as mass flow rate and wind velocity. Different cavity designs have a different effect on the solar flux distribution along the circumference of the receiver. An efficient cavity receiver still has the potential to minimize the losses and hence, improve the overall efficiency. Some of the design gaps have been identified as a guide for future work. Among the concentrated solar power technologies, the Parabolic Trough Collector (PTC) is the earliest and most widely accepted design for harnessing solar energy for the dispatchable source (it refers to the source of energy that can be used on demand or at the request of power grid operators) of electricity or industrial and chemical, due to its low cost and reliability The conventional type of the PTC receiver unit for PTC is evacuated glass metal. It consists of a blackened absorber pipe encapsulated by the glass cover. An evacuated region in between minimizes convective heat losses, see Figure Figure The thermal contacts between the receiver pipe and the glass cover are kept to a minimum to reduce conduction heat losses. The conventional receiver has advantages such as high efficiency and low heat loss. However, it has some deficiencies, such as: • The breakage of the glass and the metal glass seal, which leads to vacuum loss in the annular region between the absorber pipe and the glass cover • The permeation of hydrogen gas into the annular region is due to the thermal decomposition of the organic heat transfer fluids (HTF) such as Therminol VP-1. The hydrogen gas in the annular region is found to increase the heat losses to four-time those in the evacuated receiver • Lower efficiency at high temperatures • Non-uniform thermal distribution and thermal stress problems • High capital outlay and high maintenance cost Increasing the outlet HTF temperature is one of the main challenges to improve the overall efficiency of the PTC power plant and to reduce the Levelized Cost of energy and the combined thermal storage. For example, thermal storage quantity can be reduced to one third, if the HTF temperature increases from 350 °C to 600 °C Further, the solar receiver SCHOTT PTR 70 is designed for solar thermal power plants operating with oil-based HTF at a temperature up to 400 °C Furthermore, Eliamasa-ard, Thianpong and Eiamsa-ard Nanan, Thianpong and Pimsarn Other studies focus on geometrical structure improvement for the absorber pipe of the receiver unit such as a dimpled tube, unilateral milt-longitudinal vortex-enhanced tube as well as symmetric and asymmetric outward convex corrugated tubes. These inserts manipulate the Reynolds number, substantially improving the "mixing" of different temperature layers of fluid. A numerical study showed improved performance of a dimpled absorber pipe under non-uniform heat flux over uniform heat flux Further, researchers have investigated Nanofluids (with suspended nanoparticles) to enhance the heat transfer. The most used nanofluids contain nanoparticles such as Al, Fe2O3, Al2O3, Cu, TiO2, and SiO2 An alternative to the evacuated receiver is the cavity receiver, where the concept of the cavity receiver comes from the blackbody principle. The blackbody is an ideal object, absorbs all incident radiation, regardless of direction and wavelength The base design of the cavity receiver consists of a cylindrical metal tube with a cavity opening for the incident solar radiation. In most of the cavity receivers that have been studied, the space inside the cavity was at atmospheric pressure. The inner cavity surface opposite to the aperture window was mirrored. The aperture window of the cavity was at the bottom, facing the parabolic mirror collector and it was closed by a transparent cover to reduce convection and re-radiation heat loss. Moreover, the outer cavity surface was thermally insulated to minimize the effect of heat loss by convection and radiation to surroundings. Ramchandra et al. The dimension of the cavity aperture was carefully selected alongside with the focal line of the collector to ensure that all reflected radiation enters the cavity through the aperture and to minimize inaccuracies in both tracking and directional errors due to the suns shape. The optimum annulus dimension between the absorber pipe and the cavity envelope was selected to reduce convection and conduction heat loss. The optimum dimension of the annulus largely depended on the diameter of the receiver components Figure Although this cavity receiver with a parabolic trough of small rim angle (around 45°) was capable of being a suitable alternative to the conventional receiver, it had some limitations. First, the intercept factor (the incident energy that enters the aperture and reaches the absorber) was lower than that of a conventional receiver. This problem was addressed by coupling this cavity design with a lower rim angle (around 45°) for the parabolic trough. The conventional receiver had a maximum concentration at rim angle = 90°, whereas the concentration ratio for this design was maximum at rim angle = 45° Heat Transfer Fluid Glass cover Air gap at atmospheric pressure Aperture A similar philosophy to the above mention design by Ramchandra et al. The hot mirror coating for a solar collector must meet some performance specifications. It needs to be highly transparent in the visible region and have high reflectivity in the IR region of the solar spectrum. Granqvist et al. For PTCs, the effects of the hot mirror film have been modeled and studied previously, see Figure Figure Practically, current hot mirror coatings have not been found to improve on the overall efficiency of solar plants, but have the capacity of reaching much higher temperatures than their selective coating counterpart. Hot mirror type systems are currently investigated, which may, in the near future, surpass selective coating technology C. Mirrored cavity receiver with a hot mirror application on the aperture K Mohamad and P Ferrer filed a patent on a cavity receiver for PTC A vacuum in between minimized convective losses see Figure Figure The cavity system was simulated and studied in many aspects using the operating conditions and design parameters for SEGS (Solar Electric Generating System) LS2. It is one of three generations of parabolic troughs installed in the nine SEGS power plants in California Although the cavity system seemed theoretically capable of reaching very high temperatures, it is unlikely that it will be used as such. A very high reflectivity (> 99%) inside the cavity walls, which is well within the realm of possibility, will make the system very efficient. Higher efficiency will likely allow the HTF to achieve optimum plant temperature in a shorter length, thus reducing the needed AP length. This system is likely to reduce costs and the overall size of the system Roman Bader et al. Figure The authors suggested a modified cavity receiver design that evolved from the initial design, which is discussed next. Roman Bader et al. The absorber pipe was eliminated to allow the HTF (air) to flow in a sufficiently large cross-section through the cavity to compensate for the lower volumetric heat capacity. The cavity from the inside (surface 1, Figure The two window panes of a double-glazed window with air in between were used to trap the emitted radiation of surface 1 and the inner window to reduce the heat conduction through the window. The authors studied this design with four different receiver configurations: smooth, V-corrugated absorber tube, single, and double-glazed aperture window. Using the air as a HTF in this design is to avoid the chemical instability during the operation and to allow the direct coupling of the solar collector with a packed bed thermal storage The simulation was validated with the experimental work for the design in Figure Barra et al. The inside of the annular tube was coated with black paint. The entrance aperture with the insulation on the wall side was cut in V-shape to limit the thermal radiation loss from the collector aperture. It was assumed to have a diffuse surface to reduce the effect of radiative field view of the aperture to the surrounding Figure Figure Xueling Li et al. Figure The thermal performance of this design was studied theoretically using a numerical model Fei Cao et al. Figure Figure The position of the absorber pipe was on the opposite focus from the opening. The design was studied using a ray-tracing model and a heat transfer model. The study focused on analyzing the heat transfer and the heat flux distribution in a 1m cavity receiver tube as well as the thermal stress distributions of the absorber pipe. The geometry of the design and its dimension were mentioned in Fei Cao et al. F Chen et al. Figure A radiation shield was placed at the aperture to reduce the view factor of the absorber pipe to the surrounding ambient. Experimental and theoretical work was conducted to study the heat loss due to the absorber inclination and the ambient wind speed. The results showed that the ambient wind speed had a relatively significant effect on heat loss, while the impact of the absorber inclination was relatively small. The heat loss was found to be 51. In a windless case, the heat loss of this design was equivalent to that of UVAC3 evacuated receiver and the new-generation (UVAC2008) Two studies investigated the same design with an additional glass cover on the aperture Moreover, the heat transfer fluid temperature in this cavity design could exceed 570 K Fei Chen et al. Figure Figure Regarding the effect of the on-off state of the movable mechanism of the cavity on the heat loss, it was found that the heat loss of turning off the movable cover was less than that of turning on Further, the thermal conductivity of insulation materials was significantly improved the thermal performance of the design, i.e., the collector efficiency increased by 1.47 times, if the thermal conductivity of the insulation materials changed from 0.1 to 0.02 W. K/m The efficiency of this design was comparable to the efficiency of the metal glass evacuated tube (64.25%). If we use the following optimized parameters: • εε aaaa = 0.15, • absorption coefficient of the absorber in visible region = 0.935, • thermal conductivity of insulation material 1 (Figure • thermal conductivity for insulation material 2 = 0.1W/m.K Zhai H et al. Moreover, the solar conversion efficiency could be beyond 67% for the triangle cavity Singh et al. Also, this study proposed another trapezoidal cavity receiver with a rectangular pipe absorber instead of round pipes to compare and evaluate their performance, see Figure Figure Figure The dimensions of the designs were mentioned in detail in showed that the difference between the heat loss coefficient of rectangular and round pipe absorbers in the trapezoidal cavity were not significantly different -they differed by a factor of 3.3 to 8.2 W/m 2 , respectively Figure Oliveira et al. Reynold et al. Moreover, the trapezoidal cavity receiver has been studied optically by Liang et al. Natarajan et al. The alternative to the evacuated receiver unit of the Parabolic Trough Collector (PTC) that can overcome its shortages and compete in terms of efficiency, performance, and cost-effective is the objective of the research of the PTC. Cavity receivers have the potential to overcome the shortages of the evacuated receiver. This work is a comprehensive study of different cavities receiver designs. It was found that the effect of the cavity aperture size and the mirrored reflectivity on the cavity performance are essential, where the smaller the cavity aperture and the higher cavity mirror reflectivity yield higher efficiency. Further, the reflectivity of the cavity mirror enhances the optical performance and solar flux distribution inside the receiver as well as reducing the temperature gradient and thermal stresses due to the effect of the multiple reflections in the cavity annulus. However, the dimension of the cavity aperture alongside with the focal line of the collector should be carefully selected to ensure all the reflected radiation enters the cavity receiver through the aperture. It is necessary to keep the concentration ratio maximum (it could require to change the parabolic trough rim angle) and to minimize inaccuracies in both tracking and directional errors due to the sun shape. To diminish the effect of changing the focal length on the cavity opening and the error in the tracking angle, the cavity aperture could have a mirrored V shape or adding flat plate reflector at the cavity aperture (optical funnel). The main deficiencies of most of the existing cavity designs are keeping the cavity annulus under atmospheric pressure and leaving the cavity aperture open. This often leads to significant losses. Generally, the thermal losses of the cavity are affected by the following: surface emissivity, working fluid temperature, mass flow rate, and wind velocity. Also, cavity geometry could affects both optical and thermal efficiency. In which case the cylindrical geometry seems to be more effective, especially in terms of thermal and optical flux distribution. In non-cylindrical geometry cavity receivers, for the case of the elliptical cavity receiver, which the absorber pipe was positioned on the opposite focus from the cavity opening, was prone to deformation due to non-uniform heat flux absorption across the pipe circumference. The triangular and V-shape cavity receivers had the best optical efficiency among the non-cylindrical cavity receivers followed by the elliptical cavity with a flat plate reflector. However, their heat flux distribution of the heating surface were heterogeneous, which could cause thermal stress at a higher temperature. In addition, their thermal performance was comparable to the evacuated receiver at the medium temperature range and the heat loss was equivalent to the evacuated receiver in a windless condition. Moreover, the optical performance was affected by the aperture width, the depth to width and the offset distance from the focus of the triangular shape. For the trapezoidal cavity receiver, the optical efficiency of the absorber tube was about 45% and for the total configuration was around 85%. The overall heat loss of the trapezoidal cavity aperture with double-glazed cover reduced by up to 15% compared to the single glass cover. For cylindrical cavity receivers, where there is no vacuum in the annulus, the convection and heat loss in the annulus can be minimized by selecting the optimum annulus dimension between the absorber pipe and the cavity envelope. Although this largely depends on the diameters of the receiver components. The conventional designs that was developed by coating the inner side of the glass cover with a mirrored or hot mirror coatings had a deficiency of being breakable. The receiver unit with hot mirror over the glass cover with a vacuum in the annulus was found to be more effective than the conventional receiver at a higher temperature. The hot mirror receiver could be better alternative to the conventional receiver with improving hot mirror materials for hot mirror applications especially, the transmissivity in the visible region. In the current receiver unit with hot mirror application, the hybrid system is usually favored. Those receivers that were utilized air as a working fluid had overcome the lower volumetric heat transfer capacity of the air by increasing the heat transfer area. This was done by eliminating the absorber pipe and using corrugate structure inside the cavity wall to allow the air to flow in a sufficient large cross section, but a significant energy power was required for pumping the working fluid. In cylindrical geometry designs of the absorber pipe for the cavity receiver such as copper pipes, copper annulus and crescent shaped channel had the aims of raising the HTF and reducing the cost of production and maintenance. It was found that, the heat loss of the cavity receiver with the crescent shaped channel with a borosilicate glass on the cavity aperture was less and slower than that of the evacuated receiver at a high temperature (> 400 °C). The design of the mirrored cavity receiver with a hot mirror application on the aperture showed that it was able to achieve the highest thermal and optical efficiencies, especially if the hot mirror coating has a higher transmission coefficient for the incident solar radiation. Further, this cavity exceeded the HTF temperature ceiling compared to existing alternatives and hence increase the efficiency of the system.