Recently, detailed real space imaging using scanning tunneling spectroscopy of the vortex lattice in a weakly pinned a-MoGe thin film revealed that the vortex lattice melts in two steps with temperature or magnetic field, going first from a vortex solid to a hexatic vortex fluid and then from a hexatic vortex fluid to an isotropic vortex liquid. In this paper, we show that the resistance in the hexatic vortex fluid state is extremely sensitive to radio-frequency electromagnetic perturbation. In the presence of very low-amplitude excitation above few kilohertz, the resistance increases by several orders of magnitude. On the other hand when the superconductor is well shielded from external electromagnetic radiation, the dissipation in the sample is very small and the resistance is below our detection limit. The Abrikosov vortex lattice 1,2 (VL) in a Type II superconductor behaves like soft periodic solid. In principle, thermal excitations can melt the crystalline VL into a vortex liquid with increase in temperature or magnetic field While indications of vortex liquid states have been obtained in several quasi-2D systems such as weakly pinned superconducting films Recently, evidence of vortex liquid states existing down to very low temperatures has been obtained from detailed scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) imaging of the vortex lattice In this paper, we find that the vortex fluid states in a-MoGe are extremely susceptible to low frequency electromagnetic excitations. When the superconducting sample is well shielded from external electromagnetic radiations using low-pass RC filters, the resistance remains below the sensitivity of our measurement, till the vortices are deep in the IVL state. However when a small controlled a.c. current drive with frequency larger than few kHz is added to the d.c. measurement current the resistance in the vortex fluid states increases rapidly. We show that this sensitivity is fundamentally linked to the extremely weak pinned nature of the 2-dimensional vortex lattice and propose a model that captures the dependence of resistance on the frequency and amplitude of the a.c. excitation. Sample. The sample used in this study is a 20 nm thick a-MoGe thin film grown on surface oxidized Si substrate with Tc ~ 7.2 K, similar to that used in ref. 13 . The films were grown using pulsed laser deposition using a Mo70Ge30 target prepared by arc-melting stoichiometric amounts of Mo and Ge metals. We observed that starting from arc-melted target is essential to obtain a-MoGe thin films with low pinning. Samples grown from commercial targets prepared by sintering MoGe powders, had similar Tc, but much stronger pinning. Energy dispersive X-ray compositional analysis of the thin films showed that the latter had considerable amount of dissolved oxygen which possibly gets incorporated in the sintered targets due to surface oxidation of the powder. The film used for transport measurement was capped with a 2 nm thick Si layer to prevent surface oxidation and patterned into a hall bar geometry to improve sensitivity. In contrast, the film used for STS measurements in Appendix A was directly transferred in the scanning tunneling microscope using an ultra-high vacuum suitcase without exposure to air. Transport measurements: The transport measurements were performed down to 300 mK in 3 He cryostat fitted with a superconducting solenoid of 110 kOe. The sample is mounted on a sample rotator where the angle of the normal to the film plane with respect to the magnetic field (θ) can be varied from 0 -90 0 . The default configuration for most measurements was θ = 0. However, the anisotropic response of the vortex state was investigated in some measurements by varying θ. To shield the sample from external electromagnetic radiation room temperature low-pass RC filters were installed on the electrical feedthrough connected to the sample at the entry point into the metal cryostat. The schematic of the measurement setup is shown in Figure First, we qualitatively demonstrate the extreme sensitivity of the vortex state to external electromagnetic radiation. 13 that these fields corresponds to the transition from a VS to HVF state and a HVF to IVL respectively. The shallow minima in R and corresponding maxima in Ic are signatures of "peak effect" To understand this effect more systematically we now investigate the response of the superconductor to a small controlled a.c. excitation. We first shield the sample using the RC filter with fc ~ 340 kHz and then add a small a.c. current, (frequency f < 340 kHz), to the d.c. current ). Figure In the presence of magnetic field the transport properties of the superconductor are expected to be dominated by vortex dynamics. To investigate this further, the magneto-resistive response of the sample was measured by changing the orientation of the sample with respect to the magnetic field. In Fig. In configuration (iii) the Lorentz force per unit length, & ̅ × ( )Φ (where ( ) is the unit vector along is the flux quantum), on the vortices is the same as (i), but vortices are along the plane of the film. Here finite resistance appears only above 60 kOe. The insensitivity of the superconductor to the a.c. excitation till much larger fields than configuration (i), reflects the fact that the long vortex lines in this configuration are more strongly pinned than in the case where the magnetic field is perpendicular to the film plane. In addition, between 60 -100 kOe the resistance shows a pronounced peak effect. Since the sample is expected to have between 1 -2 vortices on its width, this feature is surprising and needs to be investigated further. In Figure We would like to note that while at low fields the zero resistance state observed with H perpendicular to FP is robust to small a.c. excitations, it is nevertheless possible to destroy that by increasing the amplitude of a.c. current. This is shown in Fig. .) The deep blue line shows contour where R exceeds 1 mΩ, the sensitivity of our measurement. We observe that threshold in !"# where a measurable resistance appears rapidly decreases with magnetic field and drops below our resolution of 0.3 above 17 kOe. This indicates the collapse of a pinning related energy scale which renders the vortex lattice susceptible to very small perturbations. We believe that it is this energy scale that demarcates the low field state, identified earlier as a VS with the HVF at intermediate fields. However, this needs to be confirmed through more in depth theoretical analysis. The most important question that arises from these measurements is why the transport properties of a-MoGe film displays this extreme sensitivity to very small radio-frequency perturbations, whereas bulk superconductors remain largely unaffected. In our experiments we observe that the presence of very weakly pinned 2-dimensional vortices plays a central role in the observed behavior. Since at finite frequencies vortices can dissipate energy to the electrons even with a subcritical drive current, in principle it is possible for the sample to get overheated. A simplistic estimate of the extent of overheating required to produce an effect of the magnitude observed in our experiments can be obtained by comparing the resistance versus temperature (R-T) of the film measured, for example, at 40 kOe without filter and with an RC filter with fc = 340 kHz (Fig. Comparing the temperature at which the R-T curve with filter reaches the same resistance as that of the R-T curve without filter at 300 mK, it would require the sample to get overheated by about 4 K to observe this effect. An equilibrium heating of the sample by such large amount is impossible without manifesting as a corresponding increase in the temperature measured on the temperature sensor placed next to sample which we do not see. On the other hand, in ref. 14 it was suggested that the electrons could get overheated with respect to the phonons by several Kelvin due to weak electron-phonon coupling at low temperatures. Such a non-equilibrium overheating would not reflect on the temperature sensor which is electrically isolated from the sample. However, it will alter other superconducting properties that depend on the electronic temperature, such as the flux flow resistance, Rff, for I > Ic. To verify this in Fig. (1) The absolute value ΔA is difficult to calculate, since it depends on the vortex mass where M = 2NO, t is time, D is the Bardeen-Stephen viscous drag per unit length of the vortex Solving this equation we obtain the amplitude-square of oscillation as, (2) caused by anharmonic terms in the pinning potential. In principle, the fits could be improved by incorporating additional refinements, for example, distribution of the size of vortex bundles which would give a corresponding distribution of ΔA. However, such an exercise will add additional parameters without providing any additional physical insight. We also observe a small difference in the values of 4 ; and K extracted from the two fits. This is due to the fact that the 340 kHz cut-off filter does not completely eliminate the ambient radio-frequency electromagnetic radiation. Even though here the residual external radiation does not produce a detectable resistance within our measurement sensitivity, this makes the resistance of the initial state (without the application of a.c. current) somewhat arbitrary and dependent on the level of ambient noise present at the time of the measurement. We now return to another aspect of our data namely the observation of the shallow minimum in R-H close to 72 kOe when measured without a filter (Fig. Finally, it is interesting to try to identify the source of electromagnetic radiation that could give rise to the observed effect when measurements are performed without filter. We observe that using a low-pass filter with 340 kHz cut-off effectively removes the effect of ambient radiation, even though the sample responds to much lower frequencies. To understand this we first note that most wireless communicating devices, such as Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, wireless mouse and keyboard work at frequency ranges well above 100 MHz. FM radio stations which are another source of electromagnetic radiations transmit at carrier frequencies of tens of MHz. All these are easily filtered out with filters with much higher cut-off. However, in the city of Mumbai we found six short and medium wave AM radio stations transmitting in hundreds of kHz to few MHz frequency range In conclusion, we have shown that the 2-dimensional vortex states in weakly pinned a-MoGe thin film is extremely susceptible to external electromagnetic excitations. The most intriguing part of this study is the very low frequency and amplitude threshold of ac excitation above which we see this effect. We believe that this is due to the formation of vortex fluid states with very low mobility of the vortices. Thus even though the vortex motions at low currents in these fluid states do not produce any detectable resistance, the mobility of the vortices gets vastly enhanced in the presence of an external electromagnetic excitations. It would be interesting to explore to what extent this could be generic for other systems, such as InOx and few layered NbSe2 which display similar sensitivity in the presence of magnetic field. In Fig. We can now calculate the resistivity that would arise from the vortex motion. Assuming To understand the effect of on the resistance it is important to ensure that is kept low enough such that non-linear resistive effects do not result from the d.c. current drive itself. In pratap@tifr.res.in