We find systematic signatures suggesting a different superconducting nature for a triple-layered cuprate Bi 2 Sr 2 Ca 2 Cu 3 O 10+δ with respect to a double-layer through the properties of intrinsic Josephson junctions (IJJs). Our measurements on the current-voltage characteristics reveal that the c-axis maximum Josephson current density is sensitive to the superfluid density in outer planes while the critical temperature and the superconducting gap remain unaffected. Switching dynamics of stacked IJJs exhibit that the fluctuation in gauge-invariant phase difference of an IJJ implies that the inner plane completely shields the capacitive coupling between adjacent IJJs, which is essential for mono-and bilayered cuprates. Cuprate superconductors have been widely debated for the past three decades. Particulary, the underlying mechanism that determines the critical temperature (T c ) and methods to increase T c have received much attention. An essential ingredient that determines T c is the number of CuO 2 planes (n) composing superconducting layers (SLs) that are separated by blocking layers (BLs). It is known that T c increases with increasing n for identical BLs in the crystal structure. T c reaches its maximum value for n = 3, beyond which it decreases with increasing n 1 . This is attributed to an insufficient carrier doping in inner planes (IPs) from BLs due to the presence of outer planes (OPs) 2,3 , resulting in inequivalent superconducting gaps ∆ of OP and IP This inequivalent ∆ arises issues on the relevance between T c and the maximum c-axis supercurrent J c in these trilayer materials because the low-energy electrodynamics along the c-axis of cuprate superconductors are mostly described by the Josephson tunnelings between SLs Although doping evolutions of ∆ and J c in trilayer Bi 2 Sr 2 Ca 2 Cu 3 O 10+δ have been reported, the effect of the inequivalent ∆ is smeared because of unwanted Bi2212 layers included in the samples In multi-layered cuprates, multiple intralayer plasmons corresponding to different combinations between adjacent CuO 2 planes have also been observed In this letter, we discuss the peculiarities of a trilayer cuprate superconductor in comparison to mono-and bilayer cuprates through measurements of the Josephson critical current density (J c ), the superconducting gap (∆), and the Josephson switching rate (Γ(I)). The measurements were performed on several mesa-structured samples of Bi2223 with a few IJJs of planar area S = 1.0μm 2 as illustrated in Fig. Second, we exhibit that chemical disorder of the Sr site significantly reduces ρ s of OPs irrespective to T c . Figure It is clearly seen that the mean J c2 of samples K and L is considerably lower than samples of M and N despite their higher T c . One can infer two exponential doping evolutions in J c corresponding to the difference in Bi/Sr chemical compositions of crystals. This is in sharp contrast to the case of Bi2212, where the doping evolution of J c falls into a single exponential dependence irrespective of the difference in Bi/Sr ratios The difference of intralayer electrodynamics between bi-and trilayer cuprates is illuminated by fluctuation measurements of the Josephson switching of an individual IJJ more explicitly in terms of the capacitive coupling between adjacent IJJs because its length scale is the order of 1 nm in BSCCOs 9 . The Josephson switching rate Γ(I) consists of quantum ) and thermal (Γ T ∝ exp[-T -1 ]) contributions, where ω p and T are the Josephson plasma frequency and temperature of the system, respectively This absence of the enhancement in ω p is presumed to be attributed to a reduction of the capacitive coupling in Bi2223 through the following considerations. It is noted that the possibility of heating as the origin of the increased ω p for SS of Bi2201 and Bi2212 is certainly excluded by a counterintuitive behavior in sample M that the saturated T eff for SS (T * 2 =2.0 K) is slightly lower than that for FS (T * 1 = 2.3 K). T * 2 /T * 1 roughly corresponds to the enhancement factor of ω p . In the presence of the capacitive coupling, IJJ2 couples with the Josephson oscillation ω J = 2eV /h of IJJ1 on the verge of SS, where V is the applied voltage to IJJ1. Here, IVCs offer ω J /2π 12 and 20 THz for Bi2212 and Bi2223, respectively. Assuming an SL being a uniform superconducting electrode, IJJ1 directly couples to IJJ2. Josephson coupling energy E J = hJ c0 S/2e of IJJ2 (∼ 10 THz) is smaller than hω J for both Bi2212 and Bi2223, thus the Josephson radiation results in excitations to continuous energy state out of the hollow of tilted washboard potential. This is an analogue of the photovoltaic effect. The Josephson radiation to IJJ2 of Bi2223 damps to the factor of 0.3 -0.5 in comparison with the case of Bi2212 because of increase in screening superfluid carriers in SL2. An introduction of the intralayer Josephson coupling explains the phenomena more microscopically. The lowest intralayer Josephson plasmons lie at 14 and 15 THz for Bi2212 Recent observations of the light-induced superconductivity in YBCO up to room temperatures T eff for SS is much higher than that of FS at low temperature region. In the inset, temperature dependence of fluctuation-free critical current densities J c0 are plotted with the same symbols. A. Trokiner, L. L. Noc, J. Schneck, A. M. Pougnet, R. Mellet, J. Primot, H. Savary, Y. M. Gao, and S. Aubry, Phys. Rev. B 44, 2426 (1991).