Solid polymer electrolytes for lithium batteries promise improvements in safety and energy density if their conductivity can be increased. Nanostructured block copolymer electrolytes specifically have the potential to provide both good ionic conductivity and good mechanical properties. This study shows that the previously neglected nanoscale composition of the polymer electrolyte close to the electrode surface has an important effect on impedance measurements, despite its negligible extent compared to the bulk electrolyte. Using standard stainless steel blocking electrodes, the impedance of lithium salt-doped poly(isoprene-b-styrene-b-ethylene oxide) (ISO) exhibited a marked decrease upon thermal processing of the electrolyte. In contrast, covering the electrode surface with a low molecular weight poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) brush resulted in higher and more reproducible conductivity values, which were insensitive to the thermal history of the device. A qualitative model of this effect is based on the hypothesis that ISO surface reconstruction at the different electrode surfaces leads to a change in the electrostatic double layer, affecting electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements. As a main result, PEO-brush modification of electrode surfaces is beneficial for the robust electrolyte performance of PEO-containing block-copolymers and may be crucial for their accurate characterization and use in Li-ion batteries. Solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs) are a potentially disruptive advance in lithium battery technology. Poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) is a common constituent of polymer electrolytes in solid-state electrochemical devices, where homopolymers can readily meet minimum battery conductivity requirements of 10 -4 S cm -1 . The principal motivation behind this study is the unexpected observation that the ionic conductivity of a 3D gyroid morphology depends strongly on SPE interfacial processing rather than on the refinement of the bulk structure. Since this observation is difficult to rationalize in terms of bulk phenomena, electrode-polymer interfacial interactions are considered, causing the surface reconstruction of the polymer microphase morphology at the electrode surfaces. Our results suggest that it may be interesting to revisit earlier studies where BCP surface effects were ignored. Specifically, high energy surfaces such as stainless steel appear to have a deleterious effect on impedance measurements and surface modification of these electrodes may be necessary to achieve reproducible maximal conductivities. The behavior of BCPs near interfaces is closely related to the thermodynamics of polymer-polymer phase separation in the presence of surfaces, For certain applications, such as the one discussed here, it appears essential that the interfacial morphology of BCPs near surfaces can be controlled down to the length scale of the BCP's structural unit cell. This can be achieved by rendering the surface chemically neutral with respect to the polymer blocks, a technique employed with lamellae and cylinder forming BCPs. The SPE investigated in this study is the linear triblock terpolymer poly(isoprene-b-styrene-b-ethylene oxide) (ISO) with an overall molar mass of 33 kg mol -1 . It consists of tethered polyisoprene (PI), polystyrene (PS), and poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) block with relative block volume fractions of 0.31, 0.52 and 0.17, respectively. At thermodynamic equilibrium, this terpolymer phase separates into the alternating gyroid morphology (space group I 4 1 32) consisting of intertwined PI and PEO network struts separated by a PS matrix. The ionic conductivity of a BCP electrolyte is typically described by where φ c is the volume fraction of the conducting phase, σ c (T ) is the temperature-dependent intrinsic conductivity of the conducting phase and f is a morphology factor. For homogeneous BCP phase morphologies f has theoretical values of 1/3, 2/3, and 1 for hexagonally packed cylinders, lamellar stacks, and 3D continuous morphologies (e.g. the gyroid), respectively. Note that the value of σ c (T ) for nanostructured phases may differ from that of a bulk homopolymer due to BCP confinement effects. Further, the value of f in equation 1 has evolved to include the tortuosity of the conducting phase in addition to its morphology. An initial sample series consisted of ∼ 800 μm thick ISO films containing a salt concentration of r = 0.08 (r = [Li + ]/[ether oxygen]). Film resistances were determined by fitting impedance data of films sandwiched between stainless steel electrodes to the equivalent circuit shown in Figure S1 in the Supporting Information (SI). The results of these fits are shown as a function of temperature in Figure To confirm the invariance of the BCP bulk morphology upon annealing (i.e. to rule out an OOT), small-angle xray scattering (SAXS) experiments were carried out on the samples in Figure , √ 16 with respect to the principal peak, indicative of hexagonal symmetry including that found in the gyroid. While such a scattering pattern in BCPs can arise from a hexagonal arrangement of cylinders (which would give rise to 1D Li diffusion) it can also arise from an alternating gyroid with a distinct [111] orientation perpendicular to the substrate. Note that the peaks are quite broad and overlap, indicating small grain sizes. The decrease in width of the principal peak indicates a minor increase in grain size with increasing annealing temperature, while the decay of the higher order peaks might arise from a partial reorganization of the microphase morphology. Importantly, the scattering profiles show no evidence for a lamellar morphology, which would be a potential cause of a significantly reduced conductivity in this system. The fine-structure morphology arises from self-assembly, while the coarse roughness is indicative of sparse surface nucleation. To further corroborate the presence of a 3D interconnected phase morphology, and to exclude the presence of hexagonally packed cylinders, samples were replicated into Au for Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging. The PI block of ISO-electrolyte films (r = 0.08) on fluorinated tin oxide (FTO) coated glass substrates was etched away followed by electroplating Au into the voids. The images in Figure To obtain real-space information of the order within the BCP morphology, ∼ 500 nm thick ISO-electrolyte films (r = 0.08) were prepared on flat silicon substrates and subsequently annealed. The atomic force microscopy (AFM) im- ages in Figure Noting the limitations of this set of AFM experiments, the smaller film thickness and the fact that only the surface is imaged, the results of Figure Based on the results above, it is very unlikely that the conductivity reduction upon annealing (Figure Impedance measurements were carried out similarly to those of Figure Note the limited stability of the thiol bond at elevated temperatures, which makes annealing at 190 °C impractical and which might account for the small decrease in conductivity for the samples annealed at 160 °C. Since it is highly unlikely that the change in electrode surface has altered the bulk morphology of the film, the results of Figure The conductivity values in Figure To rule out the possibility that the electrode modification itself caused the conductivity increase, two control experiments were performed. The first consisted of a PEO homopolymer electrolyte (molar mass: 35 kg mol -1 , r = 0.08) either between two stainless steel electrodes or between PEO brush modified stainless steel electrodes. The similar conductivities of these two samples (Figure The conductivity reduction upon annealing of Figure The rationale of using a self-assembled polymer with continuous PEO pathways in all three spatial dimensions (i.e. the gyroid) is to avoid conductivity reduction by inherent self-assembled blocking interfaces in randomly oriented 1D and 2D conducting pathways that cylinders and lamellae form at grain boundaries, surfaces and interfaces. Intriguingly, however, gyroid-forming ISO electrolytes between stainless steel blocking electrodes behave rather similar to the lamellae-forming BCPs described by Chintapalli et al., The qualitative effects of electrode surface modification can clearly be seen in Figure Beyond the detailed description of the system, the advantages of electrode modification emerge qualitatively from Figure Motivated by the conceptual conductivity advantages offered by a 3D interconnected gyroid BCP morphology, we have investigated the suitability of an ISO triblock terpolymer as an SPE for Li-ion batteries. The surprising finding of this study is that Li-ion conductivity across very thick samples depends sensitively on the nature of the surfaces the electrolytes are sandwiched between. This unexpected observation is confirmed by measuring similarly processed thick samples (∼ 800 -1000 μm) with and without PEO brush (∼ 6 nm) treated stainless steel electrodes. While a detailed physical picture is currently elusive, we present a tentative qualitative argument based on the build-up of electrostatic double layers at electrode surfaces, which differs depending on the surface enrichment of either PS or PEO at the electrode surface. We speculate that this gives rise to the differences in the frequency-dependent impedances of the different devices. Importantly however, the presented results are of practical relevance for solid-state energy storage devices. They demonstrate that the properties of electrode surfaces are important for the construction of SPE-containing devices, which was hitherto ignored, especially for blocking electrodes and their reported conductivity results. This study confirms that electrode-electrolyte interfaces and their associated surface reconstruction behavior are an essential component to controlling the conductivity of structure-forming BCP electrolytes. Therefore, appropriate electrode surface engineering is a prerequisite for accurate studies of BCP electrolytes. While the ISO-electrolyte film thickness in this study is much larger than that typically used in devices, our results can be extrapolated to practical SPE thicknesses ( 100 μm). Our results may also be of great relevance for the integration of BCP SPEs in electrochemical devices (batteries, super-capacitors), where maximal ion-access to the electrodes is essential to minimize unwanted resistances and ion-concentration gradients. To this end, the surface modification of lithium metal electrodes has already been demonstrated Materials: The polyisoprene-b-polystyrene-b-poly(ethylene oxide) (ISO) triblock terpolymer with a total molar mass of 33 kg mol -1 was prepared by anionic polymerization following synthesis procedures described elsewhere. Anisole and poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether thiol (M n = 6 kg mol -1 ) were provided by Sigma-Aldrich. For electrodeposition a commercial Au plating solution (Metalor ECF 60) with 0.5% (v/v) brightener was used. The brightener was a 1.32% (w/v) As 2 O 3 solution in deionized water with KOH added to adjust the pH to about 14. Thermal stability: Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of ISO electrolytes and LiTFSI was performed with a Mettler-Toledo STAR thermogravimetric analyzer under N 2 atmosphere in a temperature range of 0 °C to 500 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C min -1 . Spin coating: ISO films were coated onto silicon substrates cleaned by successive 10 min sonication in acetone then ethanol. Thin films were spun from various w/w so-lutions of ISO + LiTFSI (r = 0.08) in anhydrous anisole. Rotation speed, acceleration, and spin-time were selected to achieve films with thicknesses from 100 to 900 nm. Au replication: The same spin coating procedure was used as above, but with silanized FTO-coated glass substrates provided by Sigma-Aldrich Silanization was achieved by dipping cleaned FTO glass into a 0.2% v/v solution of octyltrichlorosilane in cyclohexane for 15-20 s. The electronically conductive samples were then exposed to UV light (Fisher Scientific, λ = 254 nm, 15 W, lamp-sample distance 7 cm) and washed in ethanol for 30 min to selectively remove the PI block. The voided gyroid network was backfilled with Au by electrodeposition using a potentiostat (Metrohm AutoLab PGSTAT302N) and a Au plating solution (Metalor ECF 60 with 0.5% v/v brightener). A three-electrode cell was employed with FTO-coated glass substrate as the working electrode, a Pt electrode tip (Metrohm) as the counter electrode, and a Ag/AgCl reference electrode (Metrohm). Au was electrodeposited by cyclic voltammetry within a potential range of -0.4 V to -1.15 V at a scan rate of 0.05 V/s, followed by applying a constant potential of -0.762 V. After electrodeposition, the remaining PS and PEO phases were etched away in an O 2 plasma (Diener electronic GmbH ZEPTO at 100 W for 10 min). Drop casting: ISO and LiTFSI (r = 0.08) were mixed with anhydrous anisole 2/1 w/w and stirred at 50 °C until fully dissolved. The solution was drop cast into PTFE washers on PTFE dishes until overflowing after drying. Samples were then pressed in a spring-loaded Swagelok cell to remove excess material, followed by annealing. All casting and manipulation was done inside an Ar glovebox (< 0.01 ppm O 2 and H 2 O). Annealing: Annealing was performed in a Binder vacuum oven under N 2 . The dwell time was 1 h with a ramp rate of approx. 2 °C min -1 followed by cooling at room temperature. PEO brush deposition: Brushes for drop cast samples were made by sputtering 5 nm of Au onto stainless steel discs, which were then soaked for 24 h in a 5/1 w/w solution of H 2 O/methyl ether thiol terminated PEO (6 kg mol -1 ). The discs were then dried at 90 °C for 24 h. Brush formation was confirmed by contact angle measurements (Data-Physics OCA 15Pro). Cell construction: Stainless steel Swagelok cells and current collectors were used for EIS measurements. All samples were assembled in an Ar glovebox (< 0.01 ppm O 2 and H 2 O) with a PTFE spacer for width control and a spring to maintain cell pressure. Atomic force microscopy: AFM was performed with a NanoWizard 2 (JPK Instruments). Scanning electron microscopy: SEM was performed with a Tescan Mira 3 LMH microscope. Small-angle X-ray scattering: SAXS was performed using a Rigaku NanoMAX-IQ SAXS camera equipped with a Cu target sealed tube source (MicroMax 003 microfocus from Rigaku). Scattering data were collected with a Pilatus 100k detector (Dectris). The sample-to-detector distance was calibrated with a silver behenate standard. Differential scanning calorimetry: DSC measurements were performed under N 2 using a Mettler-Toledo STAR system operating at a heating/cooling rate of 10 °C min -1 . Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy: EIS data were taken using both a Metrohm Autolab PGSTAT302N, and a BioLogic SP-300. The Swagelok cell temperature was controlled in a Binder oven with approx. a 1 h dwell for temperature equilibration. The samples were tested in typical through plane configurations and the measured impedance was converted to a conductivity where R is the bulk resistance determined from equivalent circuit fitting (Figure 