As the precision frontier of large-area survey astrophysics advances towards the one millimagnitude level, flux calibration of astronomical instrumentation remains an ongoing challenge. We describe initial testing of silicon solar cells as large-aperture precise calibration photodiodes. We present measurements of dark current, linearity, frequency response, spatial response uniformity, and noise characteristics of the Sunpower C60 solar cells, an interdigitated back-contact 125mm x 125mm monocrystalline solar cell. We find that these devices hold considerable promise as large-area flux calibration sensors and warrant further characterization. Flux calibration remains a primary source of systematic uncertainty in the use of type Ia supernovae as probes of the history of cosmic expansion. The Large Synoptic Survey Telescope One metrology challenge of this approach is to measure the flux emanating from the CBP, which has an exit pupil diameter of 240 mm, about twenty times larger than the diameter of typical silicon photodiodes. The LSST team is considering several solutions to this unsolved problem, including changing the projector beam focus to reduce the spot size, collecting the light with a focusing concentrator, using an integrating sphere with a 250mm port, or scanning the exit beam across one or more standard calibrated photodiodes. Each of these approaches, all suboptimal, are born of a perceived need to measure a large light source with a small detector. There is nothing fundamental to the process of flux calibration that mandates the use of a sensor with a small collecting area. Indeed, photon-to-electron converters with large collection areas are already in use in the form of photovoltaic cells. Using a large-area calibration sensor allows for increased photon detection rates, without the need to use intervening focusing optics that themselves require calibration. Additionally, modulation of the calibration light can be used to discriminate between background and calibration illumination. In this paper we consider the possibility of using an array of high-efficiency solar cells as a full-aperture sensor for calibrating the LSST CBP and other large-diameter light sources. In Section 2, we describe the general architecture of an interdigitated back-contact monocrystalline silicon solar cell and introduce the C60 solar cells that we study. In Section 3, we describe the methods and results of our measurements. We conclude in Section 4, where we summarize the results of our experiments and discuss what additional steps should be taken to fully assess the prospect of creating a precision photometric calibrator composed of solar cells. As with astronomical CCDs and other silicon photosensors, solar cells exploit the band-gap in silicon to convert incident photons into electron-hole pairs. The challenge is to extract these charge carriers from the bulk material. We seek a two-terminal device that sweeps charge carriers out of the bulk and into an external circuit, where photocurrent is used to determine incident flux. A standard approach is to apply a bias voltage along the photon incidence direction to produce an axial electric field that sweeps the charge out of the device. This requires electrical contact to the surface that the light strikes, which can compromise efficiency due to reduced fill factor or increased reflection. Back-contact solar cells, We present a conceptual illustration of the back contact solar cell layout in Figure In back contact solar cells, the electrical potential is periodic in the direction perpendicular to the electrodes, creating a series of regions where the perpendicular electric field is zero. This will reduce the QE of the device if the charge carriers dwell in these regions of null electric field Other internal loss mechanisms can also reduce the solar cell QE. These mechanisms include charge traps (local minima in the electrical potential energy), undesirable energy levels from contamination and defects, and electron-hole recombination. Manufacturers have worked hard to maximize the QE of silicon solar cells by minimizing these effects and by applying an anti-reflection (AR) coating to the detecting surface to minimize reflections. The QE of contemporary solar cells is in excess of 95% over much of the wavelength range of interest. In analyzing the properties of a solar cell, we found it useful to model the cell's electrical behavior using a simple equivalent circuit. In this work, we use the standard single-diode equivalent circuit In this model circuit, a pair of current sources drive current towards the output terminals. One source, I L , increases monotonically with the incident light. The other, I B , sources the bias current. With no external load, these currents flow through the system's internal diode, shunt resistance, R sh , and shunt capacitance, C sh . When the solar cell is connected to an electrical load, such as a current amplifier, current is also driven across this load in series with the cell's series resistance, R ser . Our tests in Sections 3.2 and 3.4 find that this single diode circuit is a good model for the C60 solar cells, with one notable exception: when back-biased, the cell's current response deviates from the linear behavior expected from R sh , presumably due to quantum tunneling. We obtained a sample of Sunpower C60 monocrystalline back-contact silicon solar cells ('C60 solar cells' henceforth) from the Amazon online storefront. The C60 solar cells are 125mm truncated square silicon elements with interdigitated anode and cathode electrodes. The front (illuminated) side has no electrical connection, and the electrodes on the back (dark) side have solder tab connections. The vendor advertises an AR coating as having been applied to enhance photon conversion efficiency in the blue. The vendor claims a QE of greater than 0.95 for λ between 500nm and 900nm and a QE of greater than 0.9 for λ between 400nm and 1050nm. Monocrystalline silicon Side Length 125 mm Thickness 165 μm Short-circuit current in 1000W/m 2 illumination 6.3 A Open circuit voltage in 1000W/m 2 illumination 0.68 V Max-power output voltage in 1000W/m 2 illumination 0.58 V Max-power output current in 1000W/m 2 illumination 5.9 A Table The C60 solar cells do not come with any external wires for connection to other devices. The manufacturer recommends that the user directly solder a pair of specially designed "dogbone" connection tabs, one for the anode and one for the cathode, to the system's solder points. However, we found that soldering the solar cells directly caused their unbiased dark currents to increase by a factor of 5 -100 or more. Any non-photoelectric current introduces measurement error (both statistical and systematic), and ought to be minimized. We soldered wire leads to the dogbone tabs and used electrically conductive copper tape, reinforced with non-conductive super glue, to affix the dogbone tabs to the solar cells. This method produced stable connections at room temperature without degrading the dark current. However, we are concerned about these attachment's multi-year reliability and their stability under large current loads. We suspect that a conducting adhesive would yield better long-term results. As we model in Figure When a current, I Out , passes through the load, the voltage drop over the series resistance and the load will drive a current, I sh , through the shunt impedance, Z sh : Current generated within the solar cell, I SC , will split between the shunt impedance and the load: The fraction of the solar cell current that passes through the load is thus dependent on the applied bias voltage and the ratio of the impedances: where r ≡ Z sh /(R ser + Z L ) defines a figure of merit for the solar cell and load. For light sources modulated at frequencies less than 100Hz, Z sh R sh . A value of I Out /I SC less than unity reduces the effective system QE of the detector over all photon wavelengths. Any variations in the resistances or in the bias voltage will produce a wavelength-independent, systematic change in the cell's effective QE and a corresponding error in flux measurements. Furthermore, because the shunt impedance of the solar cell is non-ohmic (see Figure To better understand the device-to-device variation in r, we measured the shunt and series resistances of 37 C60 solar cells before affixing the conducting tabs. According to the equivalent circuit model of Section 2.2, I Out for an unilluminated solar cell with forward-bias voltage, V f b , is determined by Ohm's Law: where we ignore the cell's bias current, assume R sh >> R ser , and assume that V f b is less than the conducting voltage of the diode. Using Equation When the applied voltage biases the diode into conduction, R sh is shorted and has a negligible effect on the cell's internal resistance. The DC behavior of the cell in this regime is determined entirely by the summed impedances of the diode and the series resistance: where k B is Boltzmann's constant, T is the temperature of the silicon, n is the diode quality factor (typically between 1 and 2), In Figure After deciding to preserve those cells with the largest values of r for future projects, we mea- (the point labeled "AX" in the left plot), the shunt resistance is about 120% larger and the series resistance is about 1300% larger. The increased series resistance is likely due to the resistance of the affixed wiring, and underscores the importance of good electrical contacts and short electrical leads. The increase in shunt resistance is somewhat surprising, and something that we do not presently understand. sured the full, unilluminated room-temperature IV curve of the C60 solar cell "AX" after affixing electrical leads by the process described in Section 3.1. We show this curve in Figure ure Although these cells partially conform to the behavior predicted by the equivalent circuit of Figure We anticipate using these devices in a mode where the light source of interest is modulated in order to distinguish calibration light from background illumination. The symmetrical ohmic behavior of these devices near zero applied bias voltage opens up the interesting possibility of applying an actively controlled bias voltage in order to drive a leakage current that cancels the sum of dark current and DC photocurrent from background illumination. This will reduce the Poisson noise at the modulation frequency, even if the cancellation is imperfect. Noise arising from fluctuations in the background level at the modulation frequency will remain a limitation. If the calibration light is modulated with a square wave, a fast A/D converter could monitor the net DC current when the light is in the off state and could change the applied bias to minimize this value. An analog circuit could be designed to accomplish the same task. We define the nonlinearity of a solar cell as the dependence of its QE on the incident photon flux, φ. An ideal solar cell is perfectly linear, meaning its QE is entirely independent of φ. Our method for determining the nonlinearity of the C60 solar cells combines the simultaneous illumination of a reference and uncharacterized detector We used a Stanford Research Systems (SRS) DS345 function generator to drive a set of Thorlabs LEDs, listed in Table Table LED ID * Nominal Wavelength (nm) Nominal power through 1500μm dia. fiber (mW) † M365FP1 365 300.0 M415F3 415 390.0 MINTF4 554 480.0 M625F2 625 320.0 * More information available at thorlabs.com/newgrouppage9.cfm?objectgroup id=5206 † Inferred from reported power through a 200μm fiber assuming optical power scales with cross section area. In Figure We are interested in applications where the calibration light is modulated at some modest frequency to discriminate calibration light from ambient light. To determine a solar cell's viability as a calibrator for such a modulated light source, we must determine two semi-distinct frequency dependencies. 1. As the modulation frequency increases, more photocurrent will be discharged over the solar cell's shunt capacitance. 2. If the effective QE of the detector diminishes as the modulation frequency of the light source increases, possibly due to non-negligible collection and diffusion times of the charge carriers, Both of these effects could reduce the amplifier signal as the frequency of modulation increases. We measured the shunt impedance of the solar cell, Z SC (f ), by measuring the voltage across a series capacitance of 1μF given an applied 50mV peak-to-peak sinusoidal voltage of varying frequency. The output voltage, V out , is determined by Z SC (f ) and by the impedance of the capacitor, In Figure We repurposed the configuration used to measure the solar cell linearity (Section 3.3) to measure the solar cell's response to modulated light. Our results are dominated by the gain bandwidth product of the current amplifier and by the upper frequency limit of the LED driver. We determined that the solar cell has an acceptable time response out to at least 200Hz. The electrodes along the back of the C60 solar cells (see Figure pair of convex lenses to image the pinhole onto the surface of solar cell "AX", forming a 150μm diameter spot. We used a translation stage to scan the pinhole image across the cell parallel to the electrodes, perpendicular to the electrodes, and diagonally with respect to the electrodes. We show the results of these three scans in Figure The response of the solar cell as the 150μm spot is moved parallel to the electrodes is characterized by a series of sharp "troughs" of varying depth. Fourier analysis indicates that the spacing between these troughs is 1.2mm, ∼ 2.5 times larger than the spacing between adjacent electrodes of opposite polarity. It is unclear if this spatial variation is caused by the corrugations in the electric field produced by the electrodes or due to some other regularly structured spatial inhomogeneity in the solar cell. In the parallel and diagonal scans, the spot obliquely traversed the electrodes and produced a series of much broader troughs in the measured current. These broader troughs contain considerable substructure, suggesting that the QE response along the electrodes is not homogenous. the spot is moved perpendicular to the electrodes (black), nearly parallel to the electrodes (blue), and offset 10 degrees from parallel to the electrodes (orange). For the small spot moving perpendicular to the electrodes, the SC signal is characterized by a series of sharp "troughs" in which the response drops by between 1% and 17%. These troughs are 1.2mm apart. The considerable structure within the troughs of the small spot's diagonal and parallel scans indicates that the solar cell response is highly nonuniform along the troughs. Some ≤ 0.04% variations at the O(1mm) spatial scale are apparent in the solar cell response to both the the perpendicular and parallel scans of the 30mm spot. This spatial dependence of the cell's QE introduces a source of systematic error that will diminish as the cross section of the incident light grows. To assess the effect of this systematic error on large optical beams, we scanned a 30mm diameter spot across the cell parallel and perpendicular to the electrodes. The results of these scans are shown in Figure We are primarily concerned with the statistical uncertainty due to Johnson noise where < • > denotes the expectation value, e is the electron charge, ∆f is the monitored bandwidth, k B is Boltzmann's Constant, T is the temperature of the solar cell, R sh is the shunt resistance, and r is the resistor ratio figure of merit defined in Section 3.2. For a solar cell with r >> 1 and R sh = 500Ω operating at T = 300K, the expected contributions from shot noise and Johnson noise are equal when I L 100μA. Poisson-noise-limited performance requires I L > 100μA. We have measured the electrical properties, linearity, frequency response, spatial uniformity, and noise characteristics of C60 back-contact monochrystalline solar cells. We undertook this exploration in the hopes that these cells might serve as precise photometric calibrators for the LSST's Collimated Beam Projector (CBP) and for other large area light sources. Our results are promising. In Section 3.2, we measured the electrical properties of unilluminated solar cells assuming the equivalent circuit model of Figure In Section 3.3, we used a lock-in amplifier and a set of LEDs to measure the dependence of a cell's QE on the total incident flux (it's 'linearity'). The cell showed less than 1% variation in QE for photocurrent densities between 0.01 nA cm -2 and 100 nA cm -2 . In Section 3.4, we determined that the cell's frequency response to a modulated light source is nearly unity for modulation frequencies less than 200Hz. Additional study is needed before they can be used for higher modulation frequencies. In Section 3.5, we found that the solar cell QE varied by as much as 17% as we moved a 150μm diameter spot perpendicular to the cell's electrodes. We suspect that this QE variation results from corrugations in the cell's electrical potential, though the apparent mismatch between the electrode spacing (0.46mm) and the spacing of the QE troughs (1.2mm) is something that we do not yet understand. This spatial variation in QE constitutes a source of systematic error that will diminish as the cross section of the incident beam grows. For a beam of diameter ≥30mm, the systematic error in QE resulting from this effect is ≤0.04%. In Section 3.6, we discussed some sources of statistical error. The statistical fluctuations in our measurements will be dominated by shot noise for photocurrents 100μA. As we described in Section 3.2, the flow of current over the resistance of attached electrical leads will drive a smaller current through a cell's modest shunt resistance. Variation with time ore termperature in these resistances will produce a commensurate time-dependence in the cell's effective QE, introducing a systematic error. We believe this effect constitutes the largest obstacle to employing these cells as sub-percent photometric calibrators. We are also optimistic that this obstacle can be surmounted by minimizing the resistance of the leads and of the connections to the current amplifier, by selecting those cells with the largest shunt resistances, and by carefully controlling systematic voltage and resistance drifts. Our results and the vendor's reported quantum efficiency C60 solar cell (SC) nonlinearity measured using a lock-in amplifier (LI) for the LEDs listed in Table for photocurrent densities between ∼100pA/cm 2 and ∼100nA/cm 2 for incident photon wavelengths between 365 and 625nm. Circuit configuration for measuring frequency dependence of C60's parallel impedance (left) and the results of the measurement (right). We fit the measured voltage ratio values (points) to the voltage ratio predicted in Equation C60 spatial response to a 150μm diameter spot (middle column) and to a 30mm diameter spot (right column) as the spot is moved perpendicular to the electrodes (black), nearly parallel to the electrodes (blue), and offset 10 degrees from parallel to the electrodes (orange). For the small spot moving perpendicular to the electrodes, the SC signal is characterized by a series of sharp "troughs" in which the response drops by between 1% and 17%. These troughs are 1.2mm apart. The considerable structure within the troughs of the small spot's diagonal and parallel scans indicates that the solar cell response is highly nonuniform along the troughs. Some ≤ 0.04% variations at the O(1mm) spatial scale are apparent in the solar cell response to both the the perpendicular and parallel scans of the 30mm spot. Manufacturer's Characteristics of C60 Solar Cell. The Thorlabs LEDs * used to study the linearity of the C60 solar cells. 1