Optical focusing at depths in tissue is the Holy Grail of bio medical optics that may bring revolutionary advancement to the field. W avefront shaping is a widely accepted approach to solve this problem, but most implementations thus far have only operated with stationary media which, however, are scarcely existent in practice. In this article, we propose to apply a deep convolutional neural network named as ReFocusing -Optical-Transformation-Net (RFOTNet), which is a Multi-input Single-output network, to tackle the grand challenge of light focusing in nonstationary scattering media. As known, deep convolutional neural networks are intrinsically powerful to solve inverse scattering problems without complicated computation. Considering the optical speckles of the mediu m before and after moderate perturbations are correlated, an optical focus can be rapidly recovered based on fine-tuning of pre-trained neural networks, significantly reducing the time and computational cost in refocusing. The feasibility is validated experimentally in this work. The proposed deep learning-empowered wavefront shaping framework has great potentials in facilitating optimal optical focusing and imaging in deep and dynamic tissue. When light enters a disordered medium which is thicker than a few scattering mean free path l (~0.1 mm for human skin), light will undergo multiple scattering due to the mismatch of refractive index Deep learning, often known as deep neural networks (DNNs), are promising for their superior ability in revealing complex relationships through transforming representations at one level to a higher and more abstract level As illustrated in Fig. To verify the feasibility of the proposed method, simulation was conducted. We used a transmission matrix generated from circularly symmetric Gaussian distribution We generated twenty different matrices to model different levels of perturbations, and for each matrix, simulation was conducted five times. Results were averaged and shown in Fig. After Group 1 demonstration, experiment conditions were manually varied, and the whole experiment was repeated three more times from Steps 1 to 4. The amount of samples in pre-training and fine-tuning, the RFOTNet structure, and the training settings were all identical to the first experiment (Group 1). Results are illustrated in Fig. However, retaining the original phase modulation pattern on the SLM can no longer keep light focused after the medium change in experiment, which is consistent with the finding reported by Benjamin et al. It also should be highlighted that if conventional iterative wavefront shaping Optical focusing plays a central role in many biomedical applications, which, however, is challenging at depths in tissue due to the strong scattering of light. In recent years, progresses in wavefront shaping have been achieved to focus light tightly and efficiently through or within thick scattering media. Most of these works (including CNN-based studies) 2,9,13,42 , however, have been limited to mechanically stationary samples as the each optimization process is specified to only one state of the medium. When the medium is perturbed or starts to move, the quality of light focusing will degrade in terms of focal intensity and focal-to-background ratio. If the change is beyond the memory effect regime, with existing methods, a new time-and/or resource-demanding optimization process is required to recover the focusing. To tackle such a challenge, in this study, for the first time to the best of our knowledge, we propose to fine-tune the pre-trained RFOTNet so as to recover the degraded or even extinctive optical focus after perturbation much more rapidly than the conventional methods. In order to manifest the performance of our method against conventional memory effect more clearly, experiments were conducted and results are shown below. Fig. Next, let's examine how the focusing recovery performance is related with the amount of finetuning samples and the degree of medium change. Experiments were conducted five times, with averaged results shown in Fig. The scenario is that a monochromatic optical wave field propagates from the source to a scattering layer, and the transmitted scattered light is collected by a camera. After scattering, the optical field at the receiving plane c r (e.g. the camera plane in Fig. where a r is the source plane (e.g., the SLM p lane in Fig. Based on the above forward scattering model, to precisely compute the required incident complex optical field () a E r with which light is focused through the scattering medium, the inverse scattering model has to be obtained based on the recorded transmitted light intensity distribution () c I r . From Eqs. (1) and ( In order to fit the general regularized formu lation and solve the specific light scattering problem, here we co mb ine Eqs. ( where () cn a t r is a co mplex transmission coefficient describing light propagation from the n th optical mode on plane a r to the receiving plane c r . Therefore, the general Tikhonov regularized formu lation can be given as , and α is the regulation parameter. In our wavefront shaping, f is a matrix a E that consists of N different optical modes,   A lot of iterative methods, such as distorted Born iterative method 61 , subspace optimization method (SOM ) 62 , and iterat ive shrinkage and thresholding algorith m (ISTA) 63 , have been reported to solve Eq. ( As regard to Eq. ( where the desired estimation ˆa in which W is a convolutional transformation and p is the transformation coefficients. L is the Lipschitz constant, L eig W H HW    . From Eq. ( and bias   L W H I , followed by a point-wise nonlinear operation A  by value θ. This is actually quite similar to a typical structure of CNN 65 . As the abovementioned iterative methods can effectively (albeit time consuming) solve the inverse scattering problem, it is natural to hypothesize that CNNs can be implement to tackle the problem. As a pioneering work, in this study we directly apply a deep CNN to model the inverse scattering function 1 H  and establish the relationship between the speckle intensity distribution c I and its corresponding incident optical wavefront ˆa E . The process can be formulated as a supervised learning problem 53 . Note that we will not compare the parameters in iterative algorithms with the CNN weights. When the scattering medium is subject to perturbations, both H and 1 H  change accordingly. The speckle correlation theory in random media suggests that, when the configurations of the scatterers are changed randomly, the scattering media before and after moderate change are correlated 66 , which can be shown as below Here, ab T is the transmission coefficient between the incident mode a and transmitted mode b (similar for ab T  ), C  contribute to the short-range correlation, long-range correlation, and ... infinite-range correlation, respectively Experiment setup is illustrated in Fig. U-Net is widely used to solve the image reconstruction problems through scattering media 51,65,68 . Image features are extracted and abstracted in contracting paths, which significantly enlarges the effective receptive field of the network and improves the output prediction 51 . Then expansion paths upsample feature maps back to the original image resolution The structure of the proposed RFOTNet is shown in Fig. The experimental setup is illustrated in Fig.3. The resolution of the SLM screen is 1280 × 1024, and it is divided to 32 × 32 macropixels to display the SLM patterns, i.e., one macropixel contains 40 × 32 pixels. The size of speckle patterns recorded by the camera is 64 × 64 pixels. In experiment, we use 32 grey levels in SLM to represent phase values from 0 to 2π. In experiment, for Step 1, 10,000 pairs of samples were collected for training, and the epoch was set to 10. The reason why 10,000 samples were used here is that, based on the training results with different amounts of samples, training RFOTNet with 10,000 samples could balance the trade-off between focusing performance and training cost including time and memory. Before training, the intensity of all collected speckles and SLM patterns are respectively normalized to between 0 and 1. Training time was approximately 2 minutes. After training, a targeted speckle (shown as Fig.4(m)) with a single speckle grain was sent to the RFOTNet, predicting an output, which was then loaded onto the SLM to modify the incoming optical wavefront. The final speckle pattern recorded using the predicted SLM pattern was shown in Fig.4(a). As seen, light was focused to a single point with diameter ~30 μm, and the enhancement η was 64. After training, the RFOTNet has learned the information of the current medium state, and is able to focus light through the diffuser. It is worth noting that although here we only focus light to a single position, the trained RFOTNet is capable to focus light to an arbitrary position on the image plane.