Hybrid perovskites have received tremendous attention due to their exceptional photovoltaic and optoelectronic properties. Among the two widely used perovskite solar cell device architectures of n-ip and p-i-n, the latter is interesting in terms of its simplicity of fabrication and lower energy input. However this structure mostly uses PEDOT:PSS as a hole transporting layer which can accelerate the perovskite solar cell degradation. Hence the development of stable, inorganic hole extraction layers (HEL), without compromising the simplicity of device fabrication is crucial in this fast-growing photovoltaic field. Here we demonstrate a low temperature (~100 o C) solution -processed and ultrathin (~ 6 nm) NiO nanoparticle thin films as an efficient HEL for CH3NH3PbI3 based perovskite solar cells. We measure a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 13.3 % on rigid glass substrates and 8.5 % on flexible substrates. A comparison with PEDOT:PSS based MAPbI3 solar cells (PCE ~ 7.9 %) shows that NiO based solar cells have higher short circuit current density and improved open circuit voltage (1.03V). Apart from the photovoltaic performance under 1 Sun, the efficient hole extraction property of NiO is demonstrated for indoor lighting as well with a PCE of 23.0 % for NiO based CH3NH3PbI2.9Cl0.1 p-i-n solar cells under compact fluorescent lighting. Compared to the perovskite solar cells fabricated on PEDOT:PSS HEL, better shelf-life stability is observed for perovskite solar cells fabricated on NiO HEL. Detailed microstructural and photophysical investigations imply uniform morphology, lower recombination losses, and improved charge transfer properties for CH3NH3PbI3 grown on NiO HEL. © <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 2 Emerging hybrid perovskite solar cells hold the promise for inexpensive and highly efficient photovoltaic technology, with certified power conversion efficiencies of 24.2 % The most successful and widely investigated perovskite solar cell architecture is n-i-p consisting of high temperature processed planar and mesoporous TiO2 as electron transporting layer (ETL) and expensive Spiro OMeTAD as hole transporting layer A crucial aspect of the operation of perovskite solar cells is the presence of charge selective contacts. For their efficient functioning, these layers need to meet important attributes of high transparency in the visible range, energy level matching with the perovskite active layer, good charge transport properties and being easy to deposit. Among the p-type inorganic semiconductors, NiO is interesting for hole transporting layers because of its wide bandgap, stability, high hole mobility in bulk, good electron blocking ability and energy level matching with hybrid perovskites such as CH3NH3PbI3 annealing. However to exploit the promises for device flexibility and conformability with perovskite solar cells, the interlayers also needs to be fabricated at moderate temperatures and specifically, below 150°C in the case where polyethylene terephthalate (PET) is used as the flexible substrate Hybrid perovskite solar cells have so far been mainly investigated for their performance under outdoor solar illumination with very few reports discussing the indoor photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells The dry NiO nanopowder was prepared by flame spray synthesis using a precursor solution of nickel salt in 2-ethylhexanoic acid; the solution was diluted with 30 wt% THF. The precursor then was fed to a spray nozzle, dispersed by oxygen and ignited by a premixed methane-oxygen flame (CH4: 1.2 l min -1 and O2: 2.2 l min -1 ). The off-gas was filtered through a steel mesh filter (20 micron mesh size) by a vacuum pump at about 20 m 3 h -1 . The obtained dry nanopowder was collected from the filter mesh. A stable suspension was prepared by dispersing 2.5 wt% nanopowder in ethanol by using an undisclosed dispersant (proprietary information of Avantama AG). NiO nanoparticle thin films were prepared from the above mentioned NiO nanoparticle suspension (Avantama, P-21, product number 10128, 7 nm particle size) from Avantama. The as-received NiO nanoparticle was ultrasonicated for 1 minute followed by diluting (1:10 by volume) the suspension in anhydrous ethanol. The diluted NiO nanoparticle suspension was sonicated for 5-10 minutes before spin coating. The spin coating was carried out under ambient conditions, at 2000 rpm for 60 seconds. After spin coating, the glass/ITO/NiO substrates were annealed at 100 o C for 10 minutes. The pre-patterned ITO-coated glass substrates were cleaned in detergent (sodium dodecyl sulphate-SDS), successively ultrasonicated in deionized water, acetone and isopropyl alcohol, After the electrode deposition, the devices were encapsulated with a UV optical adhesive and a glass coverslip. The current-voltage characteristics were determined under an illumination intensity of 100 mW∕cm 2 in air using an air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) Sciencetech solar simulator (SS150-AAA) and a Keithley 2400 source-measure unit. The illumination intensity was verified with a calibrated monosilicon detector and a KG-5 filter. The solar cells were applied a bias sweep from -0.20 V to 1.5 V, with a voltage step of 10 mV and a delay time of 200 ms. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements were performed at zero bias by illuminating the device with monochromatic light supplied from a Xenon arc lamp in combination with a dual-grating monochromator. The number of photons incident on the sample was calculated for each wavelength by using a silicon photodiode calibrated by the National Physical Laboratory (NPL). For the indoor measurements, the LED light source used was Cree (Cree XML T6) and the illuminance intensity (2.2 mW/cm 2 ) was adjusted by changing the input voltage. A fluorescent lamp (RS components, PL 11 lamp, 11 W) was also used as an illumination source (intensity 0.32 mW/cm 2 ). The irradiance level is measured using RK 5710 power radiometer and Optometer P9710. © <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 6 The UV-Vis absorption and transmission spectra of NiO and hybrid perovskite thin films were recorded using a Cary 300 spectrometer for the wavelength range of 300-800 nm. The thickness of the films were measured using Dektak II profilometer (stylus force 6 mg and a measurement range of 6.5 μm). HOMO levels of the NiO and PEDOT:PSS films were measured using ambient photoemission (KP Technology The characterization of the prepared NiO thin films were done to check the potential of these Compared to NiO nanoparticle films, the PEDOT:PSS HOMO is slightly deeper. After characterizing the various optoelectronic and structural properties, the low The lower PCE is mainly due to the lower FF for the PET/ITO/NiO based perovskite solar cells compared to that on the glass counterpart. This could be related to the higher sheet resistance (60 ohm/sq.) of the PET/ITO substrate compared to glass/ITO substrate (15 ohm/sq). So far the fabrication of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells on different HEL layers and the glass/flexible substrate was discussed. Now, in order to understand the differences in solar To understand the origin of this difference in recombination dynamics of photogenerated charge carriers in solar cells, based on NiO and PEDOT:PSS as HELs, the structural, morphological and photophysical properties of the CH3NH3PbI3 thin films on these interlayers were studied. are not related to differences in absorption or crystalline properties of perovskite active layer. To understand the contribution of any morphological differences, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were taken. This faster collection of holes and the possibility for reduced recombination can thus account for the improved short circuit current (hence higher EQE) and better Voc of CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells on NiO HEL compared to those on PEDOT:PSS HEL. From the morphological studies and photophysical characterization, the higher short circuit current density of CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells on NiO is revealed due to homogeneous morphology, better energy level alignment and faster hole extraction from the perovskite active layer. Even though the higher Voc of CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells on NiO can be explained by less recombination losses and favourable energy alignment, to confirm this further surface photovoltage measurement is performed and explained below. To understand the contribution of HELs specifically to the open circuit voltage, surface photovoltage was measured using a macroscopic Kelvin probe set up. This method allows the measurement of photovoltage of partial or incomplete solar cell device architectures and analysis of each contact (buried interface) on the role of charge extraction and has previously been successfully used to study CH3NH3PbI3 layers grown on different interlayers Previously Lee et al Hybrid perovskite solar cells are primarily tested and certified for outdoor applications and record efficiencies are reported for illumination at 1 Sun. Compared to the outdoor photovoltaic performance of hybrid perovskites, little attention has been given to their indoor photovoltaic properties. It has been previously reported that in the case of indoor lighting conditions, the optimum material bandgap is 1.9-2.0 eV in order to maximise the power conversion efficiency For stability studies, the encapsulated solar cells were kept in the dark under ambient air A summary of the stability study is given in Figure We have demonstrated that simple solution-processed NiO thin films are efficient hole extraction layers for perovskite solar cells. In particular we find that NiO leads to much better performance than PEDOT:PSS in p-i-n perovskite solar cells. Under solar illumination we obtained a power conversion efficiency of 13.3% for the NiO containing solar cells compared with 7.9% for those made with PEDOT:PSS. We attribute this improvement to superior microstructural, optoelectronic and interface properties of hybrid perovskites grown on NiO. In addition we showed that the NiO layer worked well with mixed halide perovskites as well as for CH3NH3PbI3. The low temperature processing of NiO means that we could readily make devices on flexible substrates. We also explored the photovoltaic performance under indoor lighting. We © <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 16