A vacuum compatible cryogenic accelerometer is presented which will reach < 0.5 pg Hz -1/2 sensitivity from 1 mHz to 10 Hz with a maximum sensitivity of 10 fg Hz -1/2 around 10 Hz. This figure can be translated to a displacement sensitivity < 2 fm Hz -1/2 between 2 -100 Hz. This will supersede the best obtained sensitivity of any motion sensor by more than three orders of magnitude at 1 Hz. The improvement is of interest to the fields of gravitational wave instrumentation, geophysics, accelerator physics and gravitation. In current particle accelerators and proposed future gravitational wave detectors < 10 K cryogenics are applied to the test masses in order to reduce thermal noise. This concept can benefit from the already present superconducting regime temperatures and reach a > 10 5 signal-to-noise ratio of all terrestrial seismic spectra. The sensor may be used for control of beam-focusing cryogenic electromagnets in particle accelerators, cryogenic inertial sensing for future gravitational wave detectors and other fields. Since 1962, gravitational wave scientists have been pursuing an interferometric approach to probe space-time curvature ripples All these monumental measurements would not have been possible without decoupling the test masses of the detectors from the Earth's ever-present motion. The seismic wall, after the appropriate vibration isolation, is typically limiting below 10 Hz. Many of the world's most precise commercial sensors were used in LIGO The inertial sensors used in the field of GW instrumentation are mostly commercial, e.g. the Sercel L4C Many sensor performances displayed in Fig. Recently, an interferometric readout Here, a concept for a sensor is presented that will enhance inertial sensitivity by at least two orders of magnitude between 10 mHz -100 Hz compared to the state of the art. It uses the superconducting characteristic of the proposed mechanics material Niobium to decimate the effect of Eddy current damping in the coil magnet actuator. Section I will discuss the proposed design.The effect the superconductive state has on the accelerometer mechanics on Eddy current damping is discussed in section II, which will result in an modelled noise budget in section III. Possible applications are discussed in section IV after which a conclusion is provided. The low frequency part of the Ref. An interferometric readout with a voice coil actuator to keep the proof mass mirror position in the linear regime of the interferometer fringe can prove a superior sensing solution with a relatively high dynamic range. The dynamic range is set by the quality of the readout and control electronics and can be as high as eight orders of magnitude. A switch to a material that becomes superconducting at cryogenic temperatures could decrease the effect of Eddy current damping. Niobium seems to be the most logical choice as it has a transition temperature at 9.2 K, high strength and high intrinsic quality factor. Niobium has been used for bar detectors One of London's equations is a result of manipulating Ampere's law and governs the (highly reduced) penetration depth of the magnetic field in a superconducting material as ( Here, B denotes the magnetic field within the superconductor, λ the London penetration depth, m the mass of the charge carrier, μ 0 the magnetic permeability in vacuum, n pl the planar density and e the charge of the carrier. Niobium has a BCC lattice, therefore n pl = 5 • 10 18 cm 2 and, using electron characteristics for the charge carrier, λ is determined to be about 3 μm. This means that the magnetic field decays exponentially to a negligible value within 20 micron and, since currents are practically lossless in a superconductor, Eddy current damping is therefore assumed not to be dominant over structural damping in the following discussion. The Q of the Niobium mechanics may be assumed to be about 10 4 in the cold state The use of the spiral actuator that will generate a magnetic field pressure on the extrusion shown in Fig The standing force, as it will generate a magnetic field that is uniform on a small scale, will not result in an actuator noise. The application of the Biot-Savart law on the center-line of a current loop involves integrating the z-component, where z is the axis normal to the loop. As an example design, the actuator is modelled as 10 loops in a 1 cm 2 area with radius R between 0.05 cm ≤ R ≤ 0.5 cm, and this yields where I is the supplied current to the actuator. Substituting this result in Eq. 2 and considering a typical actuator current of 10 mA yields a force associated with the supplied B field of F B =12.96 nN when assuming a 0.1 mm actuator gap. The Peterson high noise model peaks around 1.5 μg/Hz -1/2 , which would require 1 A current supply to the modelled actuator design. Depending on the application the acceleration needed to keep the interfereometric readout in the linear part of the fringe, the same actuator design may not need such amount of current. Assuming the proof mass moves with an amplitude of 1 micron during usual operation, the stiffness of this spring (assuming a roughly constant F when supplying the said 10 mA) is about k act = 0.013 N/m. The spring constant of a Watt's linkage with a 1 kg proof mass tuned to 0.4 Hz is about k mech = 6.31 N/m which is almost a factor of 500 higher than k act . The actuator's impact on the overall stiffness is therefore negligible. Further reduction of k act is possible by • a more homogeneous magnetic actuator, e.g. using thin film Niobium loops deposited on silicon wafers stacked to make a coil. Niobium wires are not chosen here as historic practical measurement • applying a wedge to the extrusion and tuning the suspension points of the Watt's linkage such that horizontal motion couples to vertical motion All above considerations prove the superconducting spiral actuator, even without much changes from earlier design principles, is viable for its purpose. The calculated F B also suggests that typical stray AC magnetic fields are not worrisome as a potential noise source. The Earth's typical magnetic field has a magnitude around 50 μT and has varied from 56 to 52.5 μT from 1970 to 2012 In any physics experiment, stray magnetic fields generated by some device could interfere with the operation of another device. For this accelerometer this interference can occur in two distinct ways. First, the magnetic field can couple to the proof mass and introduce a acceleration noise in a mechanical sense. This could be mitigated by use of a solid box of superconducting material around the full accelerometer. The Meissner effect of that box will act as a Faraday's cage for magnetic fields. Lead is easily machined and weldable and has appropriate superconducting characteristics and can be used for this. Second, the PDs and subsequent readout electronics might be affected by strong magnetic fields. To solve this, already research towards fully separating the optical readout and its conversion to electronic signals. More results are found in ref. [? ], but the effort can be summarised by stating a pm Hz -1/2 sensitivity was obtained using optical fiber. An in-fiber scheme using fiber splitters, circulators and fiber PDs was used to show proofof-principle for the room temperature sensor in context of its deployment in the proposed CLiC linear collider at CERN. Linearity in the in-house made piezo fiber stretcher actuators was shown and a solid comparison to a Sercel L4C geophone was presented. In table I, parameters similar to those used in Ref. In this particular configuration, the accelerometer mechanical quality factor was found to be limited by viscous damping associated with eddy currents induced on the closely spaced moving metal surfaces by the VC stray field. Here, the aim is to be structurally damped, which will cause a thermal Brownian noise of where k B denotes the Boltzmann constant, T the temperature and φ = 1/Q(ω) the structural loss angle. With ω the angular frequency of the input vibration and k FIG. the stiffness of the oscillator under study, ω 0 denotes the natural frequency of the suspension. It can be seen that the displacement amplitude spectral density (ASD) x th ∝ ω -2.5 above the resonance frequency. Below, calculation methods for several noise sources are summarized from ref. where e denotes the elementary charge and ρ the responsivity in A/W of the photodiode. For solid state lasers the Relative intensity noise (RIN) spectrum can be roughly expressed as where ω c represents the corner frequency above which the light source intensity fluctuations converge to shot noise limit. Thanks to the differential configuration of the interferometer ω c can be pushed to low frequency. The effective value of ω c can be determined experimentally. In ref. where ν L represents the frequency noise quoted by the laser manufacturer, ν 0 = c/λ the central frequency and ∆L 0 the static arm length difference. Depending on the quality of the control and readout electronics, the dynamic range can, at time of writing, be extended by approximately 8 orders of magnitude. This is important to obtain fm Hz -1/2 sensitivity at high frequency and still have almost a μm range to cope with residual motions of the stage on which the sensor is mounted. Low frequency dynamic range may be impeded somewhat by the effective dynamic range of electronics being reduced because of e.g. flicker noise. As some future gravitational wave detectors designs involve cryogenics, these sensors could be installed and used as monitoring or an error signal generating channel depending on the furture suspension designs. As the test mass is already in a cryogenic environment, the cryogenic infrastructure needed for this sensor to operate would already be there and the small mass would not contribute significantly to the heat load. Having sub-femtometer sensing from 5 Hz onward at that suspension stage is of the utmost importance to reach future GW detector low frequency goals. It could also operate as a standalone sensor as it can detect all seismic conditions on Earth with a SNR of > 10 5 between 10 mHz -100 Hz. It would require a cryostat which would make it more challenging. Additionally, any application on a future particle collider such as the International Linear Collider (ILC) The analysis in previous sections focuses on adaptation of the design similar to the O(1) kg proof mass published earlier A novel cryogenic accelerometer that promises to reach a broadband sub-femtometer sensitivity from several hundred mHz to several hundred Hz is presented. The noise budget shows fm Hz -1/2 sensitivity levels are possible from about 5 Hz onwards. This corresponds to a < 500 fg Hz -1/2 acceleration sensitivity from 1 mHz -10 Hz with a maximum sensitivity of 10 fg Hz -1/2 around 1 Hz. To increase dynamic range, the sensor is designed to include a feedback loop, which uses a coil magnet actuator. In prior work, this actuator decreased the Q factor which was limiting suspension thermal noise. Now, by operating at cryogenic temperatures and using superconducting material, this Eddy current damping effect is eliminated. Currently, a proposed change of design of the actuator is being investigated at Nikhef. The design aims to decrease Eddy current damping by switching coil and magnet to have the magnet attached to moving parts This order of magnitude improvement over earlier room temperature and non-superconducting versions of this sensor design brings about even more ability to also monitor the final stages of a GW detector. Additionally, this work will benefit precision measurements in geophysics and gravimetry as well as the use as error signal generation for vibration isolation control in particle accelerators. Optomechanical and readout electronics parameters for the prototype accelerometer. The modeled laser source is The Rock TM from NP Photonics, the opamp used in the transimpendance amplifier is the OPA827 and the photodiodes have a typical responsivity and dark current. Some quoted electronical noise figures are at room temperature and might improve.