A new photonuclear thermal neutron facility has been developed at the Physics Department of University of Torino. The facility is based on a medical electron LINAC coupled to a compact converter and moderator assembly. A homogenous thermal neutron field of the order of 10 6 cm -2 s -1 is achievable in the enclosed irradiation cavity with low gamma and fast neutron contaminations. Its intensity can be tuned varying the LINAC current. These characteristics make the source appropriate for several applications like detectors development, material studies and BNCT preclinical research. This work describes the project and the experimental characterization of the facility. This includes the measurement of the thermal neutron fluence rate, the determination of the neutron energy spectrum and of the thermal neutron field uniformity and the evaluation of the gamma contamination. The worldwide effort in developing compact and reduced-cost slow neutron sources not based on nuclear fission has raised the interest in accelerator driven neutron sources. These are often based on proton or deuteron beams impinging on light materials An example of such a development is the INFN e LiBANS (Electron-LINAC Based Actively monitored Neutron Source) project (2016-2018), within which a thermal neutron source for interdisciplinary applications was established, starting from a 18 MV medical-type electron LINAC. The possible applications of this facility are development of new neutron detectors, material studies or preclinical research in Boron Neutron Capture Therapy (BNCT). This article presents the entire development of the e LiBANS thermal neutron source: the design, the construction and the experimental characterization. An Elekta SL-18 MV Precise SW electron LINAC, formerly used in a hospital for radiation therapy, was installed at the Physics Department of University of Torino for research purposes. The accelerator is able to deliver electron or X-ray beams with primary electron energy ranging between 4 and 18 MeV. The X-Ray output is the result of a conversion of the primary electron beam on an internal target. The emitted X-rays have a typical bremsstrahlung spectrum with endpoint set to the primary electron energy. For the present work, X-ray output at the maximum linac energy has been selected. In the LINAC head a system of jaws and multileaf collimators is present. For the purposes of this work they are set to produce a (40x40) cm 2 photon field at 100 cm from the target along the beam axis. The neutron production arises from the interaction of the high energetic photons with the nuclei of the target material via (γ, n) reaction. Some heavy metals, like Pb and W, show the highest (γ, n) cross section values which are around 600 mb, while photonuclear processes are often negligible in light materials. The photon energy threshold is related to the binding energy of the neutron to the nucleus and, indeed, high Z elements show energy thresholds around 6-8 MeV. Emitted neutrons have energy around 1 MeV characterized by a typical evaporative spectrum. The structure to exploit the photonuclear processes for the thermal neutron production consists of a heavy material conversion target, to produce the neutrons, and of a moderator volume, to slow down the neutrons to thermal energy, embedded in large reflector blocks. The geometry, which is described in the following paragraphs, has been optimized in order to maximize the thermal neutron production and to minimize the fast neutron and gamma contamination. The gamma background is due to primary unconverted photons and to photons coming from neutron capture processes in the moderator. The materials have been chosen after an accurate study of the cross sections, taking into account practical constraints like mechanical properties, material availability and radiation protection issues. The final configuration of the photoconverter, shown in Fig. • A thick lead block serves as conversion target and unconverted X-ray absorber. The target transverse section is 40x40 cm 2 in the first 5 cm of thickness. The X-Ray beam is intercepted at almost 60 cm from the LINAC conversion target, where it has a transverse section of 25x25 cm 2 . The photoconverter target transverse section is reduced to 30x30 cm 2 in the remaining 15 cm of thickness. The total block thickness is indeed 20 cm, obtained with 4 dovetail joint walls, 5 cm thick. The neutron production takes place mainly in the first 4 cm because upon further penetration in the target material the bremsstrahlung photon beam is degraded in energy and intensity and the probability of photonuclear interaction becomes negligible. The extra-thickness of the target is used to absorb the photon beam. • The moderator is composed of a central core in heavy water contained in carbon boxes and an external structure made of 30 cm of graphite on each side. A cavity is obtained in the middle of graphite where the samples are exposed for the irradiation. A graphite back cover wall, 30 cm thick, closes the cavity enhancing the field homogeneity through the back-scattering. The cavity section is 30x30 cm 2 with 20 cm of longitudinal length. • A 0.4 cm thick borated rubber shield, enclosed in thin polyethylene slabs, surrounds the all structure to avoid thermal neutrons diffusion in the experimental room. The project of the photoconverter has been carried out through an extensive Monte Carlo simulation study. The tool used for the simulation is MCNP6 The photoconverter is mounted on a movable support and positioned in front of the LINAC head, at the minimal distance from the LINAC collimators. A graphite block, named back cover wall, stands on a slit which allows to open and close the experimental cavity. Fig. The neutron field inside the experimental cavity has been accurately characterized by means of multiple measurement techniques. The following paragraphs describe the four main measurements performed and the related experimental methods. Section 5 illustrates the results obtained. All the measurements have been taken in the "closed cavity" configuration. The reference value for the thermal neutron fluence rate in the middle of the irradiation cavity has been firstly measured with standard gold activation foils where σ 0 is the nominal cross section for thermal neutron capture in gold (equal to 98.69 b at 0.025 eV), N Au the atom density and g is the Westcott factor which takes into account the deviation of the Au cross section from the ideal 1/v dependency. The factors F a , F b , F c are corrective coefficients respectively related to: a) the incomplete thermal neutron attenuation in the Cd cover, b) epithermal neutrons attenuation in the Cd cover, c) the self absorption of the thermal neutrons in Au foil. Since these factors values depends on the energy spectrum of the field and on the foils geometry, they have been calculated with appropriate MCNP6 simulations. The fluence distribution in the irradiation volume has been determined by means of a small active thermal neutron rate detector (TNRD) A Bonner Sphere System (BSS) equipped with a TNRD has been used to measure the fluence energy spectrum. Ten high density polyethylene spheres, with diameter ranging from 60 mm to 200 mm, have been exposed in the irradiation volume. The spectrometric system had been previously calibrated as described in The value of the gamma background in the irradiation volume has been measured with a commercial, energy compensated Geiger Muller (GM) counter insensitive to the neutrons thanks to a proper lithium loaded cap. The 0.64 cm long active volume of the detector has been placed in the middle of the cavity and a bias voltage of 500 kV has been applied. Unless otherwise indicated, all the results described hereinafter have been obtained in the same LINAC working configuration which corresponds to 18 MV photon beam, with 40x40 cm 2 collimators aperture and a dose rate equal to 400 Monitor Units 1 (MU) per minute. The value of the thermal neutron fluence rate in the center of the irradiation volume resulting from the Au activation foil measurement is: This value is expressed in terms of sub-cadmium cut-off fluence rate in the Westcott convention which, as expected, indicates a highly thermalized field. The uniformity of the thermal fluence in the transverse section of the irradiation volume is shown in Fig. A very homogenous field results from the map. Three regions can be analyzed: the complete plane (region A, 49 cells), the complete plane excluding the most external perimeter (region B, 25 cells) and the central region (region C, 9 cells). Tab. 1 records the average value and the standard deviation of the fluence rate distribution in each area together with the maximum discrepancy between the cells in the region. The sub-cadmium fluence rate in the Westcott convention measured in the middle of the cavity with the TNRD detector, averaged over 4 repeated acquisitions, is: The error indicates one standard deviation and takes into account the uncertainty on the detector calibration factor, 2%, The longitudinal profile of the thermal neutron fluence rate along the central axis of the cavity is shown in Fig. As far as the gamma background is concerned the gamma dose rate measured with the GM counter positioned in the center of the cavity results: The ratio between the gamma absorbed dose and the thermal neutron fluence rate, often taken as figure of merit for the neutron field purity, is equal to The neutron and the photon fluence rate are both linearly dependent on the LINAC current. This has been proved through repeated measurements with the TNRD and with the GM counter measuring at different LINAC dose rate, e.g. the LINAC current, expressed in terms of MU per minutes. The linearity of the thermal neutron fluence rate and of the gamma dose rate are shown in Fig. The new thermal neutron source developed and installed at the Physics Department of University of Torino is based on photonuclear (γ,n) conversion, obtained through a medical LINAC coupled to a photoconverter. The optimal structure for the neutron production and moderation, emerging from MCNP6 simulations and cross section analysis, consists in a lead target and a proper graphite and heavy water moderator assembly. The thermal neutron field obtained inside the irradiation volume is very well known with an accuracy of 2%. The measure of the neutron energy spectrum shows the predominance of the thermal component, attested at 87% of the total neutron fluence, an epithermal component of 11% and a residual fast neutron component below 2%. The purity of the thermal neutron field is also guaranteed by the low gamma dose rate measured in the cavity, producing a figure of merit of the order of 10 -12 Gy cm 2 . The thermal neutron fluence rate is homogeneously distributed in the irradiation volume: the maximum deviation is within the 8% in the cross plane with a slow decrease along the longitudinal axes, 0.6% cm -1 when operated in the "closed cavity" configuration. The e LiBANS source offers a small scale irradiation facility with the important feature of the tunability of the thermal fluence rate with the LINAC current intensity. At the present standard working condition the thermal neutron fluence rate is about 2 10 6 cm -2 s -1 . The easy access and the reduced costs make this source an attractive solution for various applications needing samples irradiation, like detectors development and materials study or cell specimens irradiation for preclinical BNCT research where high purity sources are required. The positive outcome of this work is not only the availability of a new irradiation facility but also the demonstration of the feasibility of this type of source. The linear dependence of the output neutron fluence rate on the accelerator current intensity could make this kind of facility competitive with the more complex nuclear reactor extracted beams. A dedicated, more powerful accelerator would bring an advantageous increase in the fluence rate intensity that would make the source competitive with nuclear research reactors. Furthermore, the innovative detectors used for this study make this work an important example of complete experimental characterization of a neutron field.