A wind turbine's power curve relates its power production to the wind speed it experiences. The typical shape of a power curve is well known and has been studied extensively; however, the power curves of individual turbine models can vary widely from one another. This is due to both the technical features of the turbine (power density, cut-in and cut-out speeds, limits on rotational speed and aerodynamic efficiency), and environmental factors (turbulence intensity, air density, wind shear and wind veer). Data on individual power curves are often proprietary and only available through commercial databases. We therefore develop an open-source model which can generate the power curve of any turbine, adapted to the specific conditions of any site. This can employ one of six parametric models advanced in the literature, and accounts for the eleven variables mentioned above. The model is described, the impact of each technical and environmental feature is examined, and it is then validated against the manufacturer power curves of 91 turbine models. Versions of the model are made available in MATLAB, R and Python code for the community. The power curve of a wind turbine relates the speed of the wind flow intercepted by the wind turbine rotor to its electrical output. A power curve is needed at different stages of the lifetime of a wind farm. Prior to its market introduction, the power curve of a newly designed turbine must be assessed to validate its performance. Project developers use power curves together with wind information to evaluate the economic viability of developing a wind farm. When operating, the aerodynamic efficiency of a turbine may evolve over time due to wear of turbine components, dirt accumulation on the wind turbine blades, and many other effects There has been extensive research on methods for assessing power curves over the last decades Power curves are assessed and made available by turbine manufacturers after the correction of different issues, such as turbulence intensity, wind shear, wind veer, up-flow angle; following the procedures defined by the IEC standard 61400-12-1 There are different possibilities for estimating the power production from wind speed data when the power curve is unknown. One approach consists of using a statistical model whose parameters are trained on joint measurements of power output and meteorological inputs for a historical period. An impressive number of analytical and statistical tools have been identified, including polynomial models, linearised segmented models, neural networks and fuzzy methods If statistical models look similar to a power curve at first glance and can be exchanged in some applications, they differ on some important points. Firstly, statistical models capture the relationship between wind speed and net (rather than gross) power production, including potential wake effects, the impact of the local orography, wind turbine availability or even systematic errors in the wind speed data. These factors should be disentangled as the gross turbine production is of interest. Secondly, supervised statistical models require training data and therefore they cannot be used to model a planned wind farm or to simulate a fleet of wind farms where available measurements do not yet exist. In the latter case, the use of power curve is unavoidable and the lack of information is often addressed by choosing equivalent power curves based on the similarity between the desired turbine and those for which a power curve is available As described in numerous studies on the dynamics of wind turbines The physically-based approach suggested here uses the rated power and the rotor dimension as the main input parameters, and allows other operating characteristics, which are also standard information, to also be specified (such as cut-in and cut-out wind speed, or minimal or maximal rotational speed). This work relies on existing analytic power coefficient functions describing the aerodynamic efficiency of the blade published in the literature such as e.g. Power curves are traditionally divided into four operation regions, as shown in Figure Above the cut-in wind speed, there is sufficient torque for rotation, and power production increases with the cube of wind speed before reaching a threshold corresponding to the rated power of the turbine (or nominal power) that is designed to not exceed. The lowest wind speed at which the nominal power is reached is called the rated (or nominal) wind speed and is typically between 12 and 17 m/s. Region II is delimited by the cut-in and the rated wind speed, and corresponds to an interval where the wind turbine operates at maximal efficiency. There are, however, some exceptions to the optimal operation of the wind turbine in this region. Firstly, while an optimal operation requires the rotational speed to be proportional to the wind speed, the speed of rotation is bounded by lower and upper limits. Secondly, at high wind speeds, the turbine can sometimes be deliberately operated at lower power to reduce rotor torque and noise levels For wind speeds above the rated wind speed, the wind turbine is designed to keep output power at the rated power, which cannot be exceeded. This can be achieved by means of a stall regulation or pitch control. The latter solution consists in adjusting the pitch angle of the blades to keep the power at the constant level and is overwhelmingly used in modern large turbines. Region III corresponds to wind speed values where the turbine operates at its rated power, and is bounded by the nominal wind speed and the cut-off wind speed, which is introduced below. The forces acting on the turbine structure increase with wind speed, and at some point the structural condition of the turbine can be endangered. To prevent damage, a braking system is employed to bring the rotor to a standstill Figure The wind power calculation for regions I, III and IV is trivial with the information typically available on a wind turbine Rotor area is straightforward to obtain and data on air density are readily available, although it should be noted that density at a specific site varies over time for a specific site (for example between 1.1 kg/m 3 and 1.3 kg/m 3 between summer and winter in Germany Parametric model of the power coefficient C p (λ, β) The power coefficient C p (λ, β) expresses the recoverable fraction of the power in the wind flow. This quantity is generally assumed to be a function of both tip-speed ratio λ and blade pitch angle β (2) The above equation reflects the general relationship of the power coefficient C p with λ and β. Different values can be found for the model coefficients c i . In our study, six different parameter sets from different authors have been considered We limit the extent of the analysis to six parameterisations but our approach can be easily extended to any other parametric models or numerical data. If we assume that the wind turbine is designed to achieve its maximum efficiency in region II, the blade pitch angle can be set to zero between the cut-in and the nominal wind speed. Indeed, it is usually assumed that the blade pitch is only used to limit the power production to the nominal power in region III The tip-speed of the blade is equal to the product of the rotational speed of the rotor ω and the rotor radius, D rotor /2. We can therefore express the tip-speed ratio as a function of the rotor rotational speed and radius as well as of the wind speed V W S as follows: As explained above, the aerodynamic efficiency of the wind turbine depends on the tip-speed ratio λ. The maximum power yield in region II is therefore obtained for λ opt namely the value that maximises C p for a given wind speed: Considering Eq. ( As illustrated in Figure As summarised later in section 2.4, the relationships and modelling assumptions described in section 2.2 are sufficient for estimating the power curve of a wind turbine. However, this power curve corresponds to ideal operating conditions and external factors should be taken into consideration to better simulate the behaviour of a wind turbine in real conditions. These factors are the turbulence intensity, air density, wind shear and wind veer, inflow angle and wake effects. Wake effects are strongly dependent on the specific layout of a wind farm, particularly the number of turbines and their spacing. Wake losses amount to approximately 11 to 13 % for turbines spaced 7 to 9 turbine diameters apart The effect of turbulence intensity on the power curve The power curve derived in the previous section corresponds to the ideal case of a laminar and stationary wind conditions, which rarely occurs in practice. Since the relationship between wind power and wind speed is non-linear, the effect of high frequency variations in the wind speed on the power must be taken into consideration In the above equation, μ(u) represents the mean wind speed and σ(u) the standard deviation of the wind speed measured at a frequency of 1Hz or higher in a time period of 10 minutes Numerous works have been produced to evaluate and model the effect of the turbulence intensity on the power production of wind turbines The effect of the turbulence intensity on a power curve is illustrated in Figure With the approach proposed in this work, the consideration of air density on the power curve is explicit and straightforward, as is illustrated for values varying between 1.15 and 1.3 kg/m 3 in Figure It can be observed in Figure Where u(z hub ) is the wind speed at hub height, z hub , and u(z) is the wind speed at height z. In this equation, α is the Hellman or shear coefficient, which quantifies the wind shear and varies typically between 0 and 0.4. The effect of the wind shear on the vertical profile of the wind speed in the region of a rotor area is illustrated in the middle panel of Figure Wind veer is defined as the change in wind direction as a function of height. It has been shown that wind veer does exist in typical wind situations The coefficients A i correspond to the area of elementary horizontal bands of the rotor area as illustrated in the left panel of Figure The influences of the wind shear and veer on the power curve of a 2-MW wind turbine with a rotor diameter of 80 meter and a hub height of 60 meter are represented in Figure We can also observe in Figure The wind shear and veer are both integrated in the codes accompanying this paper. It necessitates information on the hub height as additional parameter for the generation of power curve. The main computational steps described in the previous sections are summarised in Figure The analytical expression given in Eq. ( The input parameters of the model are listed in the upper line of Figure As argued in The present sensitivity analysis is limited to a univariate analysis: one parameter is varied at the time. The sensitivities of the parameters are not quantified as in the Morris screening method It is interesting to note that for very small rotors, the power curves move away from a cubic increase and even decrease at high wind speed. This is due to the rotational speed that increases with decreasing rotor area to reach the optimal TSR. As soon as the rotational speed is bounded by the maximal rotational speed, increase of the wind speed brings about decrease of the power coefficient which can ultimately results in a decrease of the power (blue curves in Figure The effects of variations of the cut-in and cut-off wind speeds on the reference wind turbine are illustrated in the second row of Figure The sensitivities of the model output to the minimum and maximum rotation speeds are displayed in the third row of Figure firstly, the wind speed corresponding to the maximum rotation speed is very close to the nominal speed and, secondly, the decrease of the C p value with the wind speed at maximal rotation speed is relatively small. The sensitivity of the model to the minimum rotation speed is more pronounced and should accordingly be carefully chosen since the frequency of occurrence of the wind speed in the interval 3-9 m/s is high. In the last row of plots, the sensitivity of the model output to the scaled C p model and the maximal value of the power coefficient are displayed. We rescaled the shape of the C p model to the magnitude of C p values given by the model and proposed to scale the model output using the new parameters C p,max , which corresponds to the maximal power coefficient given by the model. This is very instructive since as can be observed in the plots (e) and (f) of Figure shows that the choice of the C p model is not critical but the choice of an accurate value for C p,max is decisive for an accurate calculation of the wind power production. While parameters such as the nominal power and the rotor area are readily available for each turbine, this is not the case for other parameters such as the maximum power coefficient or the rotor minimal and maximal speeds. In order to address such situations, a statistical analysis of the model parameters was performed, which can be used as guidance to the choice of unknown parameters. For this, we used the database of wind turbines and power curves provided by thewindpower.net ( The value of C p,max has been evaluated for 600 wind turbines using the power curve and characteristics of the turbine by inverting Eq. ( As can be observed in Figure A validation of the model introduced in section 2 has been conducted using the power curve of 91 wind turbines with a nominal power greater than 1 MW as provided by their manufacturers and available in the thewindpower.net (2018) dataset. For this validation, the power curve model has been run with specific information on the nominal power and rotor area, while other model inputs are set to the reference values described in section 4 and the air density is set to 1.225 kg/m 3 . As the level of turbulence intensity corresponding to each power curve is unknown, they are compared to model outputs obtained with values of the turbulence intensity ranging between 0 and 10 %. As a consequence, a quantitative validation could not be conducted, as this unknown parameter would have to be optimised in the model (which would instead be calibration). Rather, a qualitative validation is performed through a visual comparison of the model output to the database of power curves, whose main outcomes are described in this section. In Figure It can be observed that the best matches between model output and turbine data are obtained for different values of the turbulence intensity: 2.5, 5 and 7.5% for the wind turbine 258, 263 and 270. As mentioned above, information on the turbulence intensity is not available in the database, which hinders a proper validation of the model and represents a non-negligible source of uncertainty for power estimation made with these power curves taken from manufacturers and other sources. This highlights an advantage of the model we present, because it allows the value of the turbulence intensity to be controlled, or varied. This also applies to the effect of air density, allowing exploration of how the power curve evolves with the altitude, temperature and season. Examples of wind turbines found to have the highest difference between model and turbine power curves in the validation are given in Figure Such values are known to result from power curves measured with shaded anemometer In the examples presented so far the shape of the power coefficient function matches with that from the wind turbine database. However, turbine 404 in Figure and further validation work would be needed to get a deeper insight in the performance of the model and possible sources uncertainty on the power curves. The different examples presented above summarise most situations encountered in the validation work. In order to give an overview on the match between the model output and the database of power curves, all power curves have been represented by blue lines in Figure This final analysis shows that even in cases with the largest errors, such as those presented in Figure We propose here an approach to estimate the power curve of a wind turbine from its main characteristics. The present work has aggregated existing knowledge on wind turbine operation to address a current need for energy modeling applications. The model, with 12 parameters, offers the possibility to adapt the turbulence intensity and air density to the actual conditions of a specific site. A sensitivity analysis has been conducted and established that nominal power, the rotor area and the maximal C p value as the most influencing parameters. Choosing the nominal power or the rotor area is straightforward since these two parameters are often used to characterise a turbine and are even frequently contained in the turbine model name. Then, a statistical analysis of the remaining parameters was conducted to suggest default values, relying on an extensive database of turbine characteristics. A qualitative validation has been conducted where the model output has been compared to power curves taken from a wind turbine dataset. This validation revealed that the model yields realistic power curves when compared to power curve from the database for most of the wind turbine model. However, large and suspicious differences are observed for a limited number of wind turbines that would deserve further analysis, since power it is unclear whether they result from modelling issues or data quality issues within the database. This highlights the need for caution when using power curves found online. Another conclusion of this validation is that the different power curves contained in the database obviously correspond to different level of turbulence intensity. This information is generally not given and leads to an uncertainty that is avoided by the use of our model. The proposed model is not aimed at replacing power curve measurements campaigns as described in the IEC The present approach being based on the assumption that a turbine is always operated to yield the maximum possible output, potential improvement of the proposed model may consist in integrating control strategies that result in sub-optimal yield production such as e.g. noise emission limitation or smooth disconnection at cut-off. In addition, further validation work would be needed to get a better insight in the performance and weaknesses of the proposed method. This model offers a lot of flexibility and can therefore be used in simulation of the wind power production in energy mix analysis. It maybe now be interesting to evaluate the impact of the different sizing parameter on the annual energy yield of a wind turbine but also to evaluate the expected yield of future wind turbines. Finally, to assist with the use of the parameterised model, we have developed implementations of the model able to generate power curves in MATLAB, R and Python, which can be found as supplementary material of this paper (https://github.com/YvesMSaintDrenan/WT_PowerCurveModel). (source: thewindpower.net ( The cut-in, cut-off and rated wind speed as well as the rated power are typically given in wind turbine product sheets. If not available, missing parameters can still be estimated, as explained later. The typical maximum of the spectral density of the wind speed has its maximum in the frequency range of about 1/100 Hz, while even large wind turbines can accelerate and decelerate the rotor within only a few seconds (frequency of response higher than 1/10 Hz).