We investigate ultra-high frequency electrical properties of nanoscale n + -i -n + diodes made of polar semiconductors. The calculations show that the coupling between optical vibrations of the lattice and the ballistic electrons strongly modifies and enhances the time-of-flight effects giving rise to narrow resonances of the diode impedance in the reststrahlen frequency range. Particularly, negative dynamic resistance is induced in close proximity to the optical phonon frequency. The resonant effects in the dynamic resistance of nanoscale GaAs and InP diodes are studied in detail. The obtained magnitudes of the negative dynamic resistance effect indicate that the nanoscale diodes are capable of generating electromagnetic radiation in far-infrared spectral range under electric pumping. The interaction of ballistic electrons with the electromagnetic radiation offers a significant opportunity for generation and detection of ultra-high frequency radiation. Particularly, the two-and three-terminal structures scaled down to the nanometer dimensions can access the THz frequency range by taking advantage of the ultra-fast semiclassical ballistic electron transport. Another important factor giving rise to characteristic features of solid-state ballistic devices is the frequency dependence of the dielectric permittivity κ(ω). Indeed, the high frequency response of these devices and, particularly, the negative dynamic resistance (NDR) effect arise due to the correlation between the electronic motion and the space charge dynamics. where κ 0 and κ ∞ are the low frequency and high frequency permittivities, respectively, ω T O is the frequency of the transverse optical vibrations, and γ is the optical phonon damping. The frequency of the longitudinal optical vibrations, ω LO , equals to κ0 κ∞ ω T O . The permittivity, κ(ω), varies considerably near the frequency ω LO and Re[κ(ω)] can change its sign in the interval [ω T O , ω LO ], which is known as the reststrahlen frequency range (RFR). Note, for semiconductor materials and heterostructures widely used in high speed electronics, the characteristic frequencies of optical phonons vary in a wide THz range. In III-V compounds ω LO are in the range 5 THz (InSb) to 12 THz (GaP) To study the resonant enhanced effects in the resistivity for the RFR, we analyze a short n + -i -n + diode assuming ballistic electron motion and frequency dependent permittivity of Eq. ( We begin with the analysis of a simple model of the diode with injection of monoenergetic electrons from cathode to the i-base. This model facilitates the understanding of main features of the high-frequency electron dynamics and resistivity of the diode in the RFR. To describe the semiclassical space-charge-limited transport of ballistic electrons we introduce the velocity, V (x, t), the electron density, n(x, t), the electric field, F (x, t), and the electron current density, J(x, t) = -en(x, t)V (x, t). Here the x coordinate varies along the diode base: 0 ≤ x ≤ L. For this approach, the basic equations are the Newton's law, the continuity equation, and the Poisson equation: Here, m is the electron effective mass and D(x, t) is the electric displacement. In Eqs. ( The expression for κ(ω) is as provided in Eq. ( From Eqs. ( The steady state problem has a well-known solution in the implicit form: with x varying from 0 to L. The current-voltage characteristic is given in a parametric form: where U 0 is the applied voltage and V f ≡ V 0 (L) has the meaning of the electron velocity at the anode. At large biases, these formulae lead to the Child's law: 27 For the time-dependent problem, we obtain two linear differential equations: An important property of these equations is the x-dependencies of the coefficients via the steady state solution V 0 (x). To solve Eqs. (10), (11), it is convenient to introduce a dimensionless variable, ζ, in place of x: as well as dimensionless functions in place of the electron velocity V ω and the field F ω : where In such a formulation, the results are parametrically dependent on dimensionless applied voltage, u 0 , and initial velocity, v i ,: Then, Eqs. ( Here, only the second equation parametrically depends on frequency via the resonant factor I(w) = 2κ 0 /κ(w ω LO ) and the oscillating exponential in the right hand side (rhs). The latter determines time-of-flight resonances of ballistic electrons at a given frequency and, particularly, the optical phonon -transit time resonance at w ≈ 1. According to the above discussion, the boundary conditions for Eqs. ( It is useful to indicate that maximum of the phase of the exponential in the rhs of the second Eq. ( where the time-of-flight, τ tr , is determined as Eqs. ( Corresponding homogeneous equation has the following independent solutions: Two independent solutions of a linear homogeneous second order differential equation allow one to construct a general solution to nonhomogeneous Eq. ( At the zero boundary conditions, the time-dependent variations of the velocity, Re[V ω e -iωt ], and the field, Re[F ω e -iωt ], are induced entirely by the external ac electric bias. By solving Eqs. ( By using real and imaginary parts of V ω and F ω we found that spatio-temporal dependencies of the electron velocity and the electric field are in the form of waves propagating from the cathode to the anode; their amplitudes increase toward the anode. Once the ν(ζ) dependence is obtained, we can calculate the diode impedance (per unit area of the device cross-section) as In Fig. From presented results it follows that the lattice vibrations in polar materials give rise to strong modifications of the high-frequency resistivity in the RFR near the optical phonon frequency. Both Re[Z(w)] and Im[Z(w)] demonstrate a few oscillations with amplitudes tens time larger than the differential resistivity in the steady state regime, Re[Z(0)]. Particularly, Im[Z(w)] shows alternative inductive and capacitive characters, in opposite to the exclusively inductive character in the case of dispersionless permittivity shown in Fig. The physics underlying the effects of positive and negative Re[Z(w)] is related to correlation between the electronic motion and the self-consistent alternative field. This is well illustrated by the field-coordinate dependencies presented in Fig. For Fig. One can see that for all cases the power density W (x) is oscillating function on the coordinate. For curves 2, 3 of Fig. More general pattern of the resonances in the high-frequency resistivity of the short diode is illustrated in Fig. Generally, the diode response, Z(w), is strongly influenced by the two main factors entering Eqs. ( In At small value of the damping, g = 0.005, the amplitudes of the resonant variations of the high frequency resistivity are large. Twofold increase in g leads to more than one order decreasing in these amplitudes. Subsequent twofold increase in g totally suppress the resonance effects. Note, according to Eq. ( The second factor influencing the studied resonant effects is the product given by Eq. (18). Since the major effects are expected at ω close to ω LO , this factor depends mainly on the diode length, L, and the applied dc voltage, U 0 , via the ζ f (U 0 )-dependence. It is necessary to mention that in the model of the monoenergetic electron injection the discussed results depend on the initial electron energy (velocity, V i ). Varying V i at fixed other parameters, we found that the resonance features in the resistivity are always observable, however, there are frequency shifts in their position. Fig. The above results were obtained for strictly collisionless motion of the electrons in the diode base. Approximately, the effect of electron scattering can be estimated by introducing a "frictional force", -v τsc into the right hand side of the Newton Eq. ( In this Section we consider the resonant effects in the high-frequency resistivity for a few particular nanodiodes based on polar III-V semiconductor compounds. As discussed above, the value of the optical phonon damping, γ, is critically important for the resonant effects under consideration. Thus we shall begin with a remark about the available data on phonon decay. Two different approaches were used to study the optical phonon decay. The first is incoherent Raman spectroscopy of noncoherent nonequilibrium phonons based on time-resolved incoherent Raman measurements, For high quality GaAs crystals, it was found the optical phonon dephasing times: τ ph ≈ 2 ps at T = 300 K, 6.4 ps at T = 77 K, 9 ps at 6 K. For comparison ballistic and quasi-ballistic diodes, which is shown in Fig. We performed also the calculations for the GaAs diode with shorter base, L = 50 nm, for which the fraction of the ballistic electrons exceeds 0.95 and 0.8 at u 0 = 1 and 2, respectively. For such a diode, at u 0 = 1 we found J 0 = 53.4 kA/cm 2 , the windows with the NDR, 0.996 < w < 1, and minRe[Z] = -15.2 × 10 -6 Ω cm 2 at w = 0.998. At u 0 = 2, we obtained J 0 = 132 kA/cm 2 and minRe[Z] = -55 × 10 -6 Ωcm 2 at w = 0.997. InP diodes. In comparison with GaAs, InP crystals are characterized larger ionicity (see Eq. 21) and larger optical phonon lifetime. For calculations we used the following parameters of InP: κ 0 = 12.5, κ ∞ = 9.6, ω LO = 43 meV (ω LO /2π = 10.4 THz, ω T O = 0.88 ω LO ) and m = 0.08 m 0 . In high-quality InP crystals at low temperatures (T ≤ 100 K) the electron mobility can reach 10 5 cm 2 /Vs, with the mean free path up to 1 μm. However, the electrons with energies E above ω LO rapidly emit the optical phonons, (this is actual for U 0 > ω LO /e). We found that the fractions of the ballistic electrons at the distance L = 50 nm are greater than 0.95 and 0.6 for u 0 = 1 and 2, respectively. At the distance L = 75 nm and u 0 = 1, the fraction of the ballistic electrons is 0.9. Thus, for these parameters the electron transport can be considered as quasi-ballistic. InP materials are characterized by relatively large optical phonon lifetime: τ ph = 7.6 ps at T = 100 K (g = 0.001), 22 ps at T = 77 K (g ≈ 0.0004) and 40 ps at T = 6 K (g ≈ 0.0002). We found that nanoscale InP-diodes show all discussed above resonant features of the resistivity near the optical phonon frequency. In the case of the base length 75 nm at u 0 = 1 we found τ tr = 0.36 ps, ω LO τ tr /2π ≈ 3.8, J 0 = 27 kA/cm 2 , Z(0) = 1.8 × 10 -6 Ω cm 2 . There is one relatively wide frequency interval with NDR, 0.993 < w < 0.997, where minRe[Z] = 14 × 10 -3 Ω cm 2 at w = 0.995. In the case of the base length 50 nm at u 0 = 1 we found τ tr = 0.24 ps, ω LO τ tr /2π ≈ 2.5, J 0 = 61 kA/cm 2 , Z(0) = 0.55 × 10 -6 Ω cm 2 . There is one frequency interval with NDR, 0.993 < w < 0.997, with minRe[Z] = -12 × 10 -3 Ω cm 2 at w = 0.996. In general, the analyzed resonant effects are considerable larger for nanoscale InP-based diodes in comparison with the GaAs diodes. Thus, the model of the monoenergetic electron injection predicts strong resonant effects in high-frequency resistivity and opening frequency windows with large amplitudes of the NDR. Finalizing this analysis we mention that this type of the injection can be realized, for example, by the use of the resonant tunneling through a double barrier heterostructure. To take into account the finite temperature of the injected electrons we should apply more adequate model for the ballistic electron transport in the nanodiodes. To take into account the velocity distribution of the injected electrons, Eqs. ( Now two functions, Φ(x, v, t) and F (x, t), describe completely the system under consideration. The electron concentration and the current can be calculated by using Φ(x, v, t): i.e., n = Φ d 3 v, j = -e V x Φ d 3 v. The latter relationships and Eqs. ( The subsequent computations confirmed the basic conclusions discussed in Sections II and III for the simple model. We also checked that the results based on the Boltzmann transport coincide with those obtained in the simple model, when the cathode temperature T → 0. At a finite temperature, T , we found that current-voltage characteristics and Z(0) are almost the same as in the simplest model. However the resonance effects are weakened, as expected. In Fig. In Fig. We investigated ultra-high frequency electron response of nanoscale ballistic diodes made by polar materials. For such nanoscale diodes the polarization lattice vibrations provide the dynamic screening and significantly contribute to the high frequency response of the devices. When characteristic frequencies of ballistic electron transfer across the diode are of the order of the polarization lattice vibrations, we found large resonant effects in the frequency dependent resistivity and an enhanced negative dynamic resistivity in the reststrahlen frequency range. In this frequency range, as the result of the specific dynamic screening, the alternative selfconsistent electric field, the lattice polarization and the electron (average) velocity are oscillating functions of the coordinate with growing amplitudes along the electron flow. While outside of the RFR amplitudes of these characteristics decrease along the flow. In close proximity to the optical phonon frequency both real and imaginary parts of the impedance Z(ω) show a few oscillations with amplitudes tens time larger than the differential resistivity in the steady state regime, Re[Z(0)]. Particularly, Im[Z(ω)] shows alternative inductive and capacitive characters, in opposite to the exclusively inductive character in the case, when the dynamic lattice polarization is neglected (see Fig. The amplitudes and sharpness of the resonances are determined by the factor (21), which is proportional to both a relative contribution of the polar lattice vibrations to the permittivity and the optical phonon lifetime. Comparison of the diodes made of GaAs (the material with modest polar properties and a small optical phonon lifetime) and InP (the material with larger ionicity and larger phonon lifetime) demonstrates that the latter diodes should show considerably stronger resonant effects in the dynamic resistivity. It was ascertained that in the ballistic diodes the studied effects are dependent on the temperature of the electrons injected from the cathode: an increase in the cathode temperature suppresses the resonant effects. Meanwhile, the resonant effects, including the negative resistance in the RFR, are still pronounced at T ≥ 77 K for the GaAs diodes and at T ≥ 150 K for the InP diodes. The studied NDR of the nanoscale diodes can be utilized to amplify and generate farinfrared emission at the expanse of energy of the current. Indeed, absolute values of found specific negative dynamic resistance, above 10 -5 Ω cm 2 for the GaAs diodes and above 10 -3 Ω cm 2 for the InP diodes, are well above the specific contact resistances Z c for these materials (Z c ≈ 10 -6 Ω cm 2 ). The key parameter of a device is its quality factor Q = -Im[Y ]/Re[Y ]. Value Q nearly -1 is favorable for easy matching to external circuits. The ultra-high frequency resonances and NDR also can be observed in planar nanoscale diodes made from hybrid structures -non-polar semiconducting films or two-dimensional crystals on polar substrates. Indeed, in such structures time-and space-dependent planar electron transport induces an alternative electric fields, which, in turn, polarize substrate near the interface. As a result, one can expect resonant interaction of electron flux with polarized substrate near surface optical phonon frequencies. Examples are graphene on polar substrates (SiO 2 , SiC, hBN, Hf O 2 , etc.). Different aspects of interaction of graphene electrons with polar substrates were studied in numerous papers (see, for example, In summary, nanoscale diodes made of a polar material with ballistic electron transport can exhibit a large effect of optical lattice vibrations on the ultra-high frequency electrical properties of the diodes. This results in the modification of the time-of-flight effects and dramatic reconstruction of the ω-dependent impedence/admittance in the reststrahlen frequency range. Particularly, narrow resonances in the diode impedance with the negative real part are induced near the optical phonon frequency. The resonant effects in the dynamic resistance of nanoscale GaAs and InP diodes are studied in detail. The obtained magnitudes of the NDR effect indicate that the nanoscale diodes are capable to amplify and generate electromagnetic radiation in the 10-THz range.