Conjugated polymer-based organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs) are being studied for applications ranging from biochemical sensing to neural interfaces. While new conjugated polymers are being developed that can interface digital electronics with the aqueous chemistry of life, the vast majority of high-performance, high-mobility organic transistor materials developed over the past decades are extremely poor at taking up biologically-relevant ions. Here we incorporate an ion exchange gel into an OECT demonstrating that this structure is capable of taking up biologically-relevant ions from solution and injecting larger, more hydrophobic ions into the underlying polymer semiconductor active layer in multiple hydrophobic conjugated polymers. Using poly[2,5-bis(3-tetradecylthiophen-2-yl) thieno[3,2-b]thiophene] (PBTTT) as a model semiconductor active layer and a blend of the ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (BMIM TFSI) and poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP) as the ion exchange gel, we demonstrate more than a four order of magnitude improvement in OECT device transconductance and a one hundred-fold increase in ion injection kinetics. We demonstrate the ability of the ion exchange gel OECT to record biological signals by measuring the action potentials of a Venus flytrap plant. These results show the possibility of using interface engineering to open up a wider palette of organic semiconductor materials as OECTs that can be gated by aqueous solutions. Because of their ability to conduct both electronic and ionic charge carriers, conjugated polymers have emerged as promising materials for use in a wide array of applications, such as energy storage devices, 1-3 neuromorphic computing, To achieve OECTs with high transconductance, the conjugated polymer active layer should have both a high electron or hole mobility (μ) and a high volumetric capacitance (C*). Herein, we demonstrate a platform that uses an interfacial ionic liquid-based ion exchange gel to enhance the transconductance and ion injection kinetics of OECTs gated with aqueous solutions. We show that the ion exchange gel can significantly improve both the OECT transconductance and kinetics of ion injection for OECTs with active layers composed of a variety of different hydrophobic polymers, including poly[2,5-bis(3-tetradecylthiophen-2-yl) thieno [3,2-b]thiophene] (PBTTT), a common polymer previously used in OFETs 44 and non-aqueous electrolytegated OECTs. Figure in OFETs We compare the performance of OECTs with and without the ion gel present using PBTTT as the conjugated polymer active layer. Figure To compare the ion-exchange OECT to other state-of-the-art OECTs, we measure the μC* product, an intrinsic property of the polymer active layer that is independent of transistor dimensions and film thickness. Finally, as a practical demonstration, we explore the viability of the ion-exchange gel-modified OECTs for measuring extracellular action potentials by using them to record the action potential of a Venus flytrap (Dion-aea muscipula) upon mechanical stimulation. The Venus flytrap serves as a model system for recording extracellular signals with an action potential that consists of a sharp depolarization peak followed by a longer hyperpolarization. We simultaneously record a series of action potentials with the OECT and standard Ag/AgCl electrode by stimulating the trigger hairs on the Venus flytrap repeatedly. Movie S3 and Movie S4 show OECT action potentials recorded upon flytrap stimulation. Traces of voltage versus time show the simultaneous recording of the action potential with both the ion exchange gel PBTTT OECT (L = 20 μm, W = 400 μm, d = 55 nm) and a standard commercial Ag/AgCl wire electrode (Figure We have used an ion exchange gel to enhance the prop-erties of hydrophobic polymers when incorporated into OECTs in contact with aqueous electrolytes. By exchanging Cl -in the aqueous electrolyte with TFSI -in the ion exchange gel, we show enhanced device performance with transconductance values improving by up to four orders of magnitude and a μC* approaching the highest performing accumulation mode OECT materials. We additionally show an improvement in the ion injection kinetics by as much as 100x and stability of the ion gel under repeated cycling. To show the utility of the ion exchange gel, we measure the action potential of a Venus flytrap with and without the ion exchange gel and show over two orders of magnitude improvement in the SNR upon incorporating the ion exchange gel. Overall, using an ion exchange gel for enhanced OECT performance is a promising, straight-forward means to turn an otherwise poorly-performing hydrophobic polymer into a high-performing, sensitive OECT active layer material. This technology allows for the fine-tuning of polymer-ion interactions independent of the aqueous electrolyte and provides a promising route for OECT device optimization through interfacial layers.