Topological insulators (TIs) having intrinsic or proximity-coupled s-wave superconductivity host Majorana zero modes (MZMs) at the ends of vortex lines. The MZMs survive up to a critical doping of the TI at which there is a vortex phase transition that eliminates the MZMs. In this work, we show that the phenomenology in higher-order topological insulators (HOTIs) can be qualitatively distinct. In particular, we find two distinct features. (i) We find that vortices placed on the gapped (side) surfaces of the HOTI, exhibit a pair of phase transitions as a function of doping. The first transition is a surface phase transition after which MZMs appear. The second transition is the well-known vortex phase transition. We find that the surface transition appears because of the competition between the superconducting gap and the local T -breaking gap on the surface. (ii) We present numerical evidence that shows strong variation of the critical doping for the vortex phase transition as the center of the vortex is moved toward or away from the hinges of the sample. We believe our work provides new phenomenology that can help identify HOTIs, as well as illustrating a promising platform for the realization of MZMs. Introduction.-In the past decade there has been an explosion of interest in new forms of topological matter, driven by the discoveries of topological insulators and gapless topological semimetals Recently, some aspects of topological phases of matter have received newborn attention after the introduction of so-called higher-order topological phases cent works We begin with a conventional 3D T -invariant topological insulator. From here, Ref. 13 predicts that one can form a 3D HOTI having chiral hinge states if one adds a C z 4 T symmetric term. This term acts to gap out the surfaces perpendicular to the x and y directions, but leaves the z-surfaces gapless. When proximitized by swave superconductivity, the z-surfaces behave as in an ordinary TI, as long as any vortices are far from any (gapless) hinges of the sample. However, vortices on the side surfaces show a different phenomenology. Besides the large critical doping μ c,2 that marks the known vortex phase transition (VPT) We illustrate these transitions, in comparison with an ordinary proximitized TI, in Fig. Model.-We begin with a lattice model for a 3D superconducting chiral HOTI with s-wave singlet pairing. Let and κ, and σ are Pauli matrices in orbital and spin spaces, respectively and we set lattice constant to one. For t 2 = 0, Eq. ( In the presence of superconductivity, the HOTI will develop chiral Majorana hinge modes, with a pair of chiral modes on hinges parallel to z that split when they intersect the top and bottom surfaces x 2 i + x 2 j , φ 0 = arctan(x j /x i ), and we choose ξ 0 = 1. We ignore any contributions from the vector potential and Zeeman term from the field used to induce the vortex as in Ref. Results.-We obtain the low-energy spectrum in the presence of a vortex by numerically diagonalizing the BdG Hamiltonian in Eq. ( For the parameters mentioned above, Ref. Next, we turn on t 2 to push the system into the HOTI phase and obtain the spectrum for vortex lines oriented in the z (Fig. Lets now consider a vortex line parallel to x the corresponding spectrum for k x = 0 is shown in Fig. To get a clearer understanding of the surface phase transition demonstrated in Fig. We now show that, in addition to the chemical potential, an external Zeeman term can provide some amount of tunability of the surface phase transition. Let us consider a vortex line along the x direction passing through the center of the y -z plane. An external magnetic field B x in the x direction gives rise to the Zeeman term B x J x = B x τ z κ 0 σ x . This term can partially suppress the effect of t 2 . B x = 0.1, for example, reduces μ c,1 from 0.33 to 0.16. For sufficiently strong magnetic field, the phase appears after the surface phase transition can still possess Majorana hinge states , where the surface is an N × N square, and n is the coordinate of the vortex center along the diagonal (Fig. In summary, we have found that vortex phenomenology can be utilized to distinguish a class of HOTIs from TIs, and can also serve as a platform for the realization of Majorana zero modes. In HOTIs having proximityinduced or intrinsic s-wave superconductivity we identified a new critical doping μ c,1 that marks a topological surface phase transition for the gapped surfaces. We showed that MZMs only appear in a range of doping levels between μ c,1 and μ c,2 , the latter being the critical doping for the known vortex phase transition. The surface transition results from two competing mass terms on the gapped surfaces of HOTI: the superconducting gap and a T -breaking mass term resulting from the bulk C 4 T symmetric term that is responsible for driving a parent T -invariant TI into the HOTI. We note that the latter condition is general and surface phase transition should occur in any chiral HOTIs for which the projection on the surfaces connected by the vortex of the mass term and of the superconducting pairing term commute. In the SM we consider two other HOTI models to exemplify this general condition. The surface phase transition can be tuned with chemical potential or Zeeman fields which may help the experimental detection of the phase transitions and MZMs. Recently, iron-based superconductors attracted attention because they can host both topological and trivial vortices simultaneously On the other hand one can build a I symmetric HOTI by turning off the C 4 T symmetric term ,t 2 = 0, but instead applying the magnetic field in all three directions to gap all the surfaces as, Fig . In the main text, we focused on the spin-singlet intra-orbital pairing which has the most experimental relevance. Here we show the VPT spectrum for five other possible k-independent pairings allowed by Fermi statistics. However, we do not intend to analyze the physics in depth as each pairing deserves to be discussed separately elsewhere. Instead, we show the the spectrum and point out some qualitative remarks. We can write the BdG Hamiltonian as, The requirement that the pairing term satisfies Fermi-Dirac statistics implies that there are only six possible pairing matrices ∆ i (See e.g., The results shown Fig. 