Resistance in superconductors arises from the motion of vortices driven by flowing supercurrents or external electromagnetic fields and may be strongly affected by thermal or quantum fluctuations. The common expectation borne out in previous experiments is that as the temperature is lowered, vortex motion is suppressed, leading to a decreased resistance. A new generation of materials provides access to the previously inaccessible regime of clean-limit superconductivity in atomically thin superconducting layers. We show experimentally that for few-layer 2H-NbSe2 the resistance below the superconducting transition temperature may be non-monotonic, passing through a minimum and then increasing again as temperature is decreased further. The effects exists over a wide range of current and magnetic fields, but is most pronounced in monolayer devices at intermediate currents. Analytical and numerical calculations confirm that the findings can be understood in a two-fluid vortex model, in which a fraction of vortices flow in channels while the rest are pinned but thermally fluctuating in position. We show theoretically that the pinned, fluctuating vortices effectively control the mobility of the free vortices. The findings provide a new perspective on fundamental questions of vortex mobility and dissipation in superconductors. The transport properties of superconductors penetrated by magnetic fields are determined by the dynamics of vortices, which are topological defects in the superconducting order parameter. Vortices may be introduced by magnetic fields B We study ultra-thin samples of the layered superconductor 2H-NbSe 2 We induce vortices by applying a magnetic field B; the extreme two-dimensionality of our samples means that the areal density of field-induced vortices is n v = B/Φ 0 where Φ 0 = h 2e is the superconducting flux quantum. The vortex dissipative state is probed by applying a DC current, I DC . The current produces a Lorentz force of magnitude F Lorentz = JΦ 0 t (current density J = I DC /wt where w and t are the sample width and thickness) on each vortex, causing some vortices to move. We characterize the resulting dissipation by the measured resis- tance, R DC = V DC /I DC . In the resistance measurement, low temperature electronic filters with a cutoff frequency of 5kHz were used to prevent measurement artifacts from electromagnetic noise Figure To visualize the regime where the increase of resistance is found and how it changes with layer number we present in figure 2 a color map of the normalized change in resistance between our lowest temperature, T ∼ 250mK, and a fixed temperature around T min ∼ 550, 600 and 1000mK for the monolayer, trilayer and quadrilayer devices respectively. The expected behavior of the resistance is a decrease or saturation with decreased temperature shown by blue and white color in the figures, respectively. The nonmonotonic behavior is shown in red in the color maps and reflects that the resistance increases at low temperature. We observe that in a monolayer most of the vortex flow regime displays this unexpected behavior. As the layer number is increased the regime of increased resistance is shifted to lower magnetic fields and higher currents. Our understanding of the measured behavior begins from the observation that our samples are in the clean limit, therefore characterized by dilute (on the scale of the coherence length) scattering sites. We assume that some fraction of the scattering sites are strong pinning centers, which trap individual vortices. For very weak drive currents, the logarithmic vortex-vortex interactions lead to collective pinning of the entire vortex lattice, so that the linear response resistivity is exponential in inverse temperature, corresponding to thermal activation of defects in the collectively pinned vortex lattice. As the drive current is increased, some of the vortices become detached from the pinned lattice and can move, leading to a flux-flow resistivity that remains non-zero even at lowest temperature. The crucial new insight is that the motion of the detached vortices is affected by scattering from the pinned vortices; in particular, as temperature increases, the pinned vortices fluctuate more and more strongly about their pinned positions, leading to scattering that increases as temperature increases and hence lead both to a strongly temperature-dependent vortex mobility and to a decrease in the number of mobile vortices as the temperature is increased. To investigate this scenario in detail we have numerically solved the time-dependent-Ginzburg-Landau (TDGL) equations for a two dimensional strip geometry including a magnetic field, which sets the number of vortices, and strong pinning centers, which may trap some of the vortices; see section 3 in supplementary materials for details. The effect of thermal fluctuations is simulated by requiring that pinned vortices oscillate with an amplitude that increases with temperature, T ∼ Ω 2 A 2 (Ω and A are the frequency and amplitude correspondingly). From our simulations we compute the resistance (voltage drop across the computational sample divided by imposed current) and generate movies of the time and space dependent magnitude of the order parameter ∆. In the movies vortex positions are clearly revealed as the local suppressions of ∆. The simulations capture the same qualitative dependence observed in the experiment where as the oscillations amplitude is increased the average velocity of the mobile vortices decreases and vortices may possibly even stop moving altogether, see figure The key feature of both the TDGL and the particle simulations is that at intermediate current strengths the mobile vortices are confined to channels confined by regions of bound vortices, as also found in prior work A key difference between the Clem-Chow model and our results is the magnetic field dependence of the temperature of the resistance minimum T min . As shown in figure 4b in both experiment and the proposed thermalscattering model T min increases with increased B, see figure S4, while in Clem-Chow model T min decreases. The thermal-scattering model reproduces additional similarities as evident by the comparison in figure The data exhibit a strong dependence on the number of superconducting layers in the device: as the number of layers is increased, the non-monotonic region is confined to lower vortex densities and stronger Lorentz force. We understand this as a consequence of two related effects. First, the c-axis coherence length is longer than four unit cells, so a vortex is an essentially vertical column and can be pinned by a pinning site in any layer. Thus the effective density of pinning sites is increased, meaning that a stronger current is required to displace a vortex. Further, the vortex-vortex interaction also increases linearly with the layer number Understanding vortex dissipation mechanisms is a crucial step to manifesting and controlling emergent phenomena in superconductors and their interfaces with other materials. A vortex is a mesoscopic system with a natural normal-superconductor interface. Such interfaces can lead to novel electronic phenomena such as Majorana fermions Each vortex carries a quantum of flux which generates a winding of the superconducting phase around the vortex core. The motion of vortices changes the superconducting phase in space and time generating an electrostatic potential given by the Josephson relation, V = h 2e d dt ∆φ (h, e and φ are the reduced Planck constant, the electron charge and the superconductor phase respectively). The change in the phase over time can be written in terms of the mobile vortex density, n mobile , and the mean vortex velocity, v y , giving an electrostatic potential V = LΦ 0 n mobile v y (L the distance between voltage probes and Φ 0 the quantum of flux). The overdamped vortex velocity is related to the Lorentz force by the vortex mobility, μ, v y = μF L , and to the current through F L = JΦ 0 t (t the film thickness, J = I/wt, I the sourced current and w the sample width). Overall giving a linear voltage-current relation that can be written in terms of a resistance, R mobile = L w Φ 2 0 n mobile μ. In the table below we summarize parameters of the measured devices: the layer number, the 2D mean free path l 2D = h e 2 1 √ 2πn 1 R 1 (n 1 and R 1 are the electron density and resistance per layer), and the coherence length estimated from the T → 0 limit of H c2 (0), 3 Time-Dependent-Ginzburg-Landau simulations To model the dynamics of driven vortices we employ a deterministic set of TDGL equations to describe the 2D superconductor in the presence of a perpendicular magnetic field and a sourced current [?, ?]. We compute the complex superconducting order parameter ∆ = |∆| e iφ , the charge density ρ as well as the current density j in dependence of time and space in the 2D sample. The electromagnetic fields are represented by the vector potential A(t) as well as the scalar potential Θ(t). We set units by choosing h = c = e = 1 such that the superconducting flux quantum Φ 0 ≡ hc/2e = π. The equations (34-36) are thus Here D is the normal state diffusion constant, Ψ is the electrochemical potential per electron charge, ξ = √ 6Dτ s is related to the superconducting coherence length ξ 0 = ξ/ r/β, where τ s is the spin-flip scattering time, λ TF is the Thomas-Fermi static charge screening length and β is a system dependent constant that sets the magnitude of the order parameter. For definiteness we measure lengths in units of ξ and time in units of ξ 2 /D (which we write simply as D -1 since ξ is our unit of length) and choose parameters β = 1, σ = 0.1, τ s D = 1 6 and λ 2 TF /ξ 2 = 0.1. We verified that choosing other parameters does not affect the general conclusions. The equations are furthermore supplemented by the continuity equation and the Poisson equation for the scalar potential Using a finite elements approach we solve the coupled partial differential equations Eqs. ( To model disorder pinning vorties we choose to allow for a position dependent r(x, y) = r 0δr(x, y), where r 0 = 1 sets the superfluid stiffness without disorder and δr(x, y) describes the disorder effects. We use where N describes the total number of defects, (x i , y i ) denotes the position of the i-th defect and δ i is the i-th defect's strength. We choose N = 10, δ i = 5 and draw x i and y i from a uniform distribution (0, L x ] and (0, L y ], respectively. These randomly distributed defects will tend to pin some of the vortices in place. The TDGL equations are a mean-field theory so pinned vortices are simply frozen at the defect position. Therefore, to model the thermally induced motion of the vorteces around the defect position we move the defect position in a random direction by replacing x i → x i (t) = x i + An x i sin(Ωt) and y i → y i (t) = y i + An y i sin(Ωt) with a randomly drawn direction vector n i = (n x i , n y i ) with unit length for each pinning site. We choose Ω = 0.05 in our units of time. The temperature inducing thermal fluctuations of the pinend vortices is then to be identified via the kinetic energy T ∼ A 2 Ω 2 and we study its effects by scanning A. We find that thermally activating the pinned vortices can hinder the vortex flow which is shown in figure As a simplification we treat the vorteces as point-like particle in a box with periodic boundary conditions which we found to reproduce the main features of vortex motion as described by the full TDGL simulations. The vortices are separated into N mobile moving and N pin pinned ones. The pinned vortices follow the instantaneous positions of the strong pinning sites, where the oscillations mimic thermal activation. The position R pin,i (t) of the i-th pinned vortex thus follows R pin,i (t) = (x i + An x i sin(Ωt), y i + An y i sin(Ωt)) with x i and y i drawn from a uniform distribution (0, L x ] and (0, L y ], respectively as well as a randomly drawn direction vector n i = (n x i , n y i ) with unit length as above. The mobile vortices then follow over-damped dynamics with dR mobile,i (t) where F J is the forced exerted on the vortices due to the sourced current and the second term on the right hand side describes the Force exerted by the vortex j (be it pinned or mobile) onto the vortex i, which is long-ranged F (R mobile,i , R j ) = C R mobile,i -R j |R mobile,i -R j | 2 with a characteristic 1/|R mobile,i -R j | dependence. For definiteness we choose F J = (0, J), Ω = 5 and C = 0.1. 