The evolution of the scanning modules for scanning transmission electron microscopes (STEM) has realized the possibility to generate arbitrary scan pathways, an approach currently explored to improve acquisition speed and to reduce electron dose effects. In this work, we present the implementation of a random scan operating mode in STEM achieved at the hardware level via a custom scan control module. A pre-defined pattern with fully shuffled raster order is used to sample the entire region of interest. Subsampled random sparse images can then be extracted at successive time frames, to which suitable image reconstruction techniques can be applied. With respect to the conventional raster scan mode, this method permits to limit dose accumulation effects, but also to decouple the spatial and temporal information in hyperspectral images. We provide some proofs of concept of the flexibility of the random scan operating mode, presenting examples of its applications in different spectro-microscopy contexts: atomically-resolved elemental maps with electron energy loss spectroscopy and nanoscale-cathodoluminescence spectrum images. By employing adapted post-processing tools, it is demonstrated that the method allows to precisely track and correct for sample instabilities and to follow spectral diffusion with a high spatial localization. In the last twenty years, significant improvements on the spatial resolution of scanning transmission electron microscopes (STEM) have been achieved by the widespread implementation of spherical aberration correctors. Currently, atomically-resolved images are routinely obtained for a wide range of materials going from semiconductors, nanostructures, to functional oxides, etc. The structural information can be complemented by the synchronous acquisition of several spectroscopic signals accessible, such as electron energy loss, X-ray emission or cathodoluminescence (CL), which can then be bundled into hyperspectral images. Besides the instrumental characteristics, the ultimate spatial resolution obtainable in spectro-microscopy is strongly limited by the radiation sensitivity of the sample. Indeed, higher spatial resolution corresponds to a smaller illumination area and number of scattering centers, which imply higher electron doses for a given signal intensity collected. Irradiation effects have a much stronger impact in hyperspectral imaging since inelastic scattering processes have significantly lower cross sections than elastic scattering employed in STEM imaging, thus hindering the signal collection efficiency. Furthermore, within the finite time required for recording a hyperspectral image, the sample might drift, transform and/or the spectroscopic signals of interest evolve. Therefore, a hyperspectral image does not always portray the sample in a definitive state since different pixels are acquired at different times. These unavoidable drawbacks motivate the development of novel operating modes that could reduce sample dependent limitations in STEM spectro-microscopy. The use of unconventional scan pathways is a promising route currently explored to improve acquisition speed, reduce electron dose In this work, we present an original implementation of an effective random scan acquisition mode in STEM obtained directly using the scanning control unit. The setup permits an extended control of the scanning parameters and therefore offers a large flexibility on the acquired image data structure. The complete image matrix is filled in a fully randomized fashion, each pixel being stamped with its acquisition time. A series of subsampled random sparse images can then be extracted at successive time frames and inpainting image reconstruction applied. This method permits to decouple the space and time information and to monitor the sample and spectral signals dynamics. After illustrating the operating principle (section II) and its practical implementation (section III), we provide examples of EELS and nano-cathodoluminescence (nano-CL) hyperspectral images acquired with the newly implemented random scan mode (section IV). With respect to the conventional raster scan mode, we demonstrate that random scan permits to limit dose accumulation effects, but we also emphasize the possibility of tracking and correcting for sample drift and to monitor the spectroscopic signal dynamics over time in hyperspectral images. In Fig. An advantage of the random-scan mode is the reduction of dose accumulation. After illumination, the system transitions to its ground state within a characteristic time defined by diffusion and recombination processes (charge or thermal diffusion, radiative recombination, etc.). The illuminated area might therefore interact with previously visited regions or even overlap with an already excited state since excitation volumes can be larger than the probe size. This dose accumulation effect can lead to image artifacts or induce radiation damages. Reducing irradiation effects can also be achieved by acquiring sparse images containing only a fraction of well-interspersed pixels of the frame. The full image can then be reconstructed using appropriate inpainting techniques. Since the sparsest solution which is consistent with the target image is a priori unknown, the choice of a predefined sampling rate might be responsible for a significant loss of information. In a traditional sequential raster scan, the space and time information are coupled and the temporal evolution of the imaged region or of the spectroscopic signals during the acquisition cannot be recovered. This limitation can be overcome by operating in a random scan mode, and time-stamping the pixels. The acquired data can be represented as a random sparse matrix having two space and one time coordinate for simple images, and an additional spectroscopic dimension for hyperspectral imaging. This object can be segmented into successive time windows and a series of random sparse images/hyperspectral images can be built [Fig. The evolution of the scanning modules for scanning transmission electron microscopes (STEM) now allows to generate arbitrary scanning patterns and to explore new illumination modes. Through the development of a custom scan control module, we have implemented the random-scan method described here on two dedicated STEM microscopes: a VG-HB501 and a spherical aberration-corrected Nion UltraSTEM 200. After defining the image matrix, the pixel acquisition order is shuffled at the start and the so-defined random scan path is loaded into a dedicated scan generator. For each pixel, the beam illuminates the specimen only for the time required for the signals acquisition while the camera is in the exposure mode [Fig. The time response of the current in the deflecting coils implies that the nominal beam position can only be asymptotically achieved, and therefore the displacement time has to be adapted to a required level of accuracy. A typical criterion is to assume that the illuminated spot position should deviate from its nominal value by less than half of the pixel size. In the random scan mode, the longest displacement for successive pixels occurs for a movement between the extremes of a line or a column (vertical and horizontal movements are decoupled due to the independent circuits controlling the displacements along the two axis). The accuracy condition is achieved when the current attains (N -1)/N times its target value, where N is the number of pixels on a row. The displacement time (t) should then satisfy the condition t > τ ln N , where τ is the time constant of the circuit, typically of the order of some tens of μs. This implies that displacements in random-scan mode take about one-two orders of magnitude longer than the usual dwell time for STEM imaging (about few μs), even if shorter times could be obtained by the use of low-inductance magnetic coils or electrostatic deflectors. On the basis of these arguments, Kovarik et al. The random scan method can be very generally employed in hyperspectral imaging with the sole limitation of longer probe displacements with respect to a standard raster scan. As already discussed, its potential interest arises in the spectroscopy of systems sensitive to electron irradiation, and in monitoring the spectral signal and image dynamics. Here we present some proofs of concept of the flexibility of the random scan method illustrating its applications in different spectro-microscopy contexts: atomically-resolved EELS mapping and nano-CL spectrum images. Specimen drifts are very often encountered in STEM and are usually caused by limited mechanical stability of the sample holder, sample thermalization or Coulomb repulsion consequent of charge accumulation. Drift is, for instance, very difficult to fully eliminate in cryo-STEM, as the sample holder is cooled to liquid nitrogen temperatures and thus experiences much larger thermal gradients. As an example of such problems, Fig. Ultimate imaging capabilities can be recovered by combining the random scan acquisition mode described with a post-treatment workflow designed to segment, cross-correlate, and realign sparse image stacks. Fig. The recovered image presents a very straight interface and an undistorted lattice. The same drift correction can then be applied to time slices extracted from the full coreloss EELS hyperspectral image synchronously acquired with the STEM-HAADF image. Atomically-resolved elemental maps can then be extracted from the realigned hyperspectral image as shown in Fig. In recent years, the need of reducing radiation damage in STEM has promoted the development of new scanning modes. The acquisition of random sparse images combined with the capability of reconstructing the target image with adapted post-processing techniques has emerged as an efficient way to reduce total electron dose and dose accumulation effects. A main drawback of the method is the need to know a priori the sampling rate consistent with a limited loss of information. In the random-scan mode, the complete image is recorded and therefore no image reconstruction is required. The random order of the pixel acquisition, and the wide distance between suc-cessively illuminated area, limits dose accumulation effects. To illustrate the advantage of the method we show the difference between sequential and random scan on nano-CL images of point defect-related emissions. Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) is a wide band-gap semiconductor presenting strong excitonic emissions in the deep ultraviolet (UV), at ∼6 eV. Emission instabilities strongly degrade the spatial information that can be obtained from hyperspectral images, but considerable improvements can be achieved by operating in the random scan mode. Fig. In hyperspectral imaging, the observation of the temporal evolution of a spectroscopic signal with a spatial resolution is precluded by the intrinsic coupling of the space and time coordinates given the conventional sequential scanning. However, time-dependent changes can be considerably recovered by operating in the random scan mode, and employing a multi-step and iterative post-processing. Time-slicing and spatial integration permit a precise identification of even faint and nonrecurrent spectroscopic features changing in time, and avoid spectral mixing. Once relevant signals are identified, their evolution with time can be monitored, the time windows over which spectroscopic features are stable can be determined, and corresponding time-resolved spectroscopic maps can be extracted. As discussed in the previous section, h-BN emitting defect centers present time instabilities, spectral diffusion and a highly localized CL signal, therefore they may serve as an ideal system to illustrate the potential of random scan to recover the time evolution in hypersectral images. Additional plasma treatment of h-BN-loaded TEM grids was used to generate a higher density of defect centers within the flakes. Fig. In this work, we have presented the implementation of a random scan operating mode in STEM obtained at the hardware level via a custom scan control module, and provided examples of its use in EELS and nano-CL hyperspectral imaging. With respect to the conventional raster scanning mode, probe displacements are longer and thus random scan might not be as suitable for simple STEM imaging, but this is not problematic in STEM spectro-microscopy for which longer illumination times are required. The reduction of dose-accumulation effects, and the possibility of decoupling the space and time information are significant advances brought on by the use of random scan to STEM hyperspectral imaging. In the current implementation, the complete scan pattern is defined prior to the acquisition and then a full image matrix is recorded together with the pixel scanning order. Hyperspectral images can be filtered as a function of the pixel acquisition history, and image reconstruction techniques can be applied to these time series of subsampled random sparse images. By employing adapted post-processing tools, it is shown that the random scan method allows to track and correct for drift caused by sample instabilities, and to follow spectral diffusion with a high spatial localization. The practical implementation of the method permits a high control and flexibility of the acquisition parameters, and other operating modes can be later explored. Therefore, we foresee that STEM random scan could be generalized to a wide class of problems for which further specific protocols and post-processing tools might be developed. For instance, a constrain on the minimal dis-tance between successive pixels could be imposed to further limit accumulation effects. The technique can also be easily extended to feature-adapted dynamic sampling, which has been recently discussed as a way to combine high-resolution and low electron dose. A NdNiO 3 (NNO) thin film was grown by pulsed laser deposition over a LaAlO 3 (LAO) substrate and a crosssection lamella for electron microscopy was prepared along the [100] pseudocubic zone-axis of the substrate by focused ion beam (FIB) using a FEI Scios DualBeam. More details on the interface growth and specimen preparation can be found in Ref. 21. Atomically-resolved EELS mapping was performed on a Nion UltraSTEM 200 microscope operated at 100 keV. Few-layer h-BN flakes have been obtained by liquidphase exfoliation of commercially available micrometric powder following the protocol presented in Ref. 43. A solution of h-BN powder in isopropanol (1 mg/mL) was sonicated for 1-10 h, and then drop-casted onto a lacey carbon TEM grid. Flakes presented a lateral size of few microns and an average thickness of few tens of nm. Additional plasma charging of the h-BN-loaded TEM grid in 25% O 2 /Ar atmosphere was used to generate/activate more defect centers for the results presented in Fig. 