We proposed an effective acoustic abatement solution comprised of periodic resonators and multi-panel structures with porous lining, which incorporates the wideband capability of porous materials and the low-frequency advantage of locally resonant structures together. Theoretical model and numerical implementation are developed and validated. Two-dimensional poroelastic field expressions are used and resonator forces are incorporated. The results agree well with those reported in the literature and the results obtained from the finite element method. It turns out that sound insulation concerning both the amplitude and tuning bandwidth can be achieved effectively using porous additions and locally-resonant designs. This study presents a promising and practical alternative for wideband acoustic modulation. Industrial noise, a stubborn disease, has been widely concerned for years; however, its abatement and modulation are very challenging because it exists in a rather wide frequency range and commonly adopted noise reduction methods are only effective for low or medium to high frequency. Therefore, researches on wideband (wide frequency range) noise abatement are exciting and fascinating. Nearly a decade ago, Fuller et al. Periodic structures, which were introduced by Liu et al. in their seminal work On the other hand, porous materials are recognized as wideband noise control solutions. Fruitful theoretical and numerical results on the acoustic properties of porous materials were obtained during the twentieth century However, results on poroelastic structures with periodic inclusions or additions are relatively less compared with rigid frame ones. By studying poroelastic heterogeneous acoustic metamaterials, Slagle et al. The motivation of the present paper is to investigate whether incorporating macro-scopic periodic resonators into a poroelastic composite structure is a solution to wideband acoustic modulation. In Section 2, a theoretical model and numerical implementation are prepared to study the sound transmission loss (STL) of the poroelastic composite structures with periodic resonators presented here. In Section 3, the influences of porous additions and resonators are investigated. Section 4 ends with conclusions. Two-dimensional periodic poroelastic composite structures, which comprise multipanel structures with porous lining and distributed resonators, are shown in Fig. A plane wave transmits through the periodic composite structure with velocity potential Φ i = e jωt-jkr , where k = (k x , k z ), r = (x, z), j = √ -1. According to Fig. A1. The composite structure and its adjacent domains are all infinite, therefore no reflections from outside the composite structure are considered. A2. The resonators are periodic along the x-axis with a periodic span l x , and multiple different resonators can be placed evenly in a periodic lattice (span). A3. The composite structure and the resonators are ideally point-connected, therefore the resultant force of a resonator (simple resonator or composite resonator) simplifies to a concentrated force. A3, however, is not substantial as distributed forces or moments can also be conveniently translated to a concentrated force and/or a moment; it is provided to show the essential idea with elegance here. The modeling procedures for periodically rib-stiffened composite structure with porous lining When periodic boundary conditions are presented, the poroelastic displacements are assumed to comprise six groups of harmonic components where k m x is the wave number component (along x-axis) of the harmonic components; matrix Y m is the 4 × 6 coefficient matrix of porous field variables (the non-zero elements of Y m are provided in Appendix B), which can be obtained using space harmonic series (2) Here, e ±jk m 1z z , e ±jk m 2z z , and e ±jk m 3z z are the wavenumber component (along z-axis) of the harmonic components; C m 1 (i = 1, 2 . . . 6) are the unknown amplitude of the harmonic components (solved later by appropriate boundary conditions). In Ref. Once the porous displacement u is obtained, the stress components in the poroelastic field is where e s = ∂u s x /∂x + ∂u s z /∂z, e f = ∂u f x /∂x + ∂u f z /∂z; N, A, Q, and R are poroelastic parameters detailed in Ref. Here x i and x j denote x or z coordinate; in other variables, i, j denote x or z. The thin plate theory is used here as the frequency range discussed is far below the coincidence frequency of the plate; otherwise, the Timoshenko-Mindlin plate theory should be used. Therefore, when in-plane and out-of-plane force or moment are present, the vibration equations of the plates in the periodic poroelastic composite structure here are where Here, L i (•) and L t (•) are the in-plane and out-of-plane vibration operator, u and w are the in-plane and out-of-plane displacements, f x and f z are the in-plane and out-of-plane forces, M y is the in-plane moment normal to the x -z plane; ρ p , h, D p , and D are the density, thickness, in-plane stiffness, and the transverse stiffness of the plate. The schematic diagram of the placement of spring forces (simple resonators) according to assumptions A2 and A3 is shown in Fig. Therefore, the force f i of a simple resonator i is w (with damping) ( where ; the matrices K, C, M, and F of composite resonator A or B can all be obtained by their dynamic equations Their elements are provided in Appendix A. Therefore, the resultant force F sum of the periodic resonators is Here, x i is the position of resonator i, x i = ia, a is the distance between two adjacent resonators; integer n = -∞, . . . + ∞, integer i = 0, 1, . . . N s , β i is the contribution coefficient of a resonator to lattice n. According to the boundary conditions of the periodic composite structure, there exists one incident acoustic domain, one transmitted acoustic domain, and one or more intermediate acoustic layers between the porous domain and multi-panel structure. The acoustic domains are all assumed linear, and the related velocity potential Φ follows where c is the corresponding sound velocity. The boundary conditions between the porous domain and multi-panel structure were detailed before The periodic composite structure comprises acoustic domains, porous domains, multipanel structures, and periodic resonators. To show the essential ideas with an elegant formulation, we limit the multi-panel structure to a single panel or a double panel here. The boundary conditions can be OU/OB for the single panel cases (Fig. According to the law of refraction and the method of space harmonic series (SHS), the velocity potential of the three acoustic domains can be expressed as where k m z,i , k m z,a , and k m z,t are the wave number component (along z-axis) of the harmonic components; R m 1 , I m 2 , R m 2 , and T m 3 are the amplitude of the wave harmonics which can be solved by the boundary conditions. k m z,i , k m z,a , and k m z,t can be solved by substituting Eq.( Here c × is the sound velocity in the corresponding domain. In the thin plate, according to the law of refraction and the method of space harmonic series (SHS), the displacement u = [u, w] T expands to In OU case, all the boundary conditions at the interfaces of different domains or at the middle plane are where ρ × is the density of the related domain; is the porosity of the porous media; σ z , τ zx , and s are the normal stress, shear stress and fluid pressure of the solid and fluid phases in the porous media respectively, and they can be obtained using Eq.( In Eq.( Subsequently, according to the orthogonal property below where integer m, p = -∞, . . . + ∞; Eq.( where Integer m, n = -∞, . . . + ∞; the non-zero elements of matrices A m , B n , and vector p are provided in Appendix E. To obtain a numerical solution, the preceding Eq.( Here, the blank blocks of Ã are all zeros, while B is a full block matrix; 0 T is a zero 1 × 14 vector. Subsequently, Eq.( As the dimension of matrices Ã, B, and vectors x, p are all infinite, Eq.( Subsequently, the unknown amplitude of the harmonic components are determined. The sound transmission coefficient τ of the composite structure is Here Re(•) is the real operator for a complex variable. When sound wave transmit through the composite structure at φ ∈ [φ lim , π/2], where φ lim is the minimum elevation angle (that sound can transmit), the STL of the preceding composite structure is defined as When the unknown amplitudes are obtained, STL can be solved by numerical integration subsequently. The convergence characteristics of the periodic poroelastic composite structure are complicated To validate the present periodic composite model and show its applicability in a wide frequency range, we compared the results obtained from the present model with the results reported in the Refs. In Ref. Meanwhile, Ref. In the low-frequency range, comparisons with the multiple identical simple resonator (resonance frequency f r =300Hz) or composite resonator (resonance frequency f 0 1 =300Hz) results in Ref. Either the oblique incidence case results (Fig. In the high-frequency range, result comparisons versus Ref. Default parameter values adopted in the following study are listed Tab. 1 unless otherwise specified. The STL is calculated in 1/24 octave bands between 10Hz and 10kHz using Simpson's Rule; the integration domain is split into 90 subdivisions. In 2D case, different minimum elevation angle φ lim are used To show the influence of porous additions, here we used multiple identical simple resonators in a periodic span, where m i =27g, η i =0.01. Fig. Notable STL improvement occurs around the resonance frequencies (a local crest), with a decrease around the subsequent anti-resonance frequencies (a local trough). The overall STL recovers to the cases without resonators (the solid lines in Fig. Composite (multiple-degree-of-freedom) resonators can provide better vibration or wave attenuation for the primary and secondary resonators respectively). If no damping is present (i.e. ζ i 1 = ζ i 2 = 0), the resonance frequencies of composite resonator A are The resonance frequencies of composite resonator B are Parameters of multiple simple resonator cases I and II, the mass ratio γ=0.2; for resonator i, the mass m i and resonance frequency f i r are The STL can be tuned around the resonance frequencies of the simple resonators. When the resonance frequencies are in the low-frequency range, the sound insulation of the periodic composite structure can be improved; however, as the resonance frequencies increase, the sound insulation deteriorates and becomes not better than the cases without resonators. As the resonator number N s increases, the STL amplitude and its modulation bandwidth can be tuned in either case I or II. Furthermore, while cases I and II are analogous, their STL are slightly different. A comparison is made in the following. The local STL crests and troughs are caused by the resonance and anti-resonance of the periodic resonators. The extremum amplitudes and bandwidths are determined by the damping and resonance frequencies of the resonators. If multiple simple resonators are properly selected, the STL amplitudes and the bandwidths can be tuned, therefore, the sound insulation performance here is modulated. Composite resonators with different resonance frequencies are arranged in a single lattice using parameters in Tab. 4; in resonator i, the resonance frequency of the primary mass is chosen as f i 1 = f 0 1 + 500(i -1)(Hz), i = 1, . . . N s . The results are given in Fig. For composite resonator A, the coefficients are , and A 0 = sω 4 1 ; as to composite resonator B, A 4 = r, A 3 = -j(2r 1 , and A 0 = 1 4 4s + s 2 ω 4 1 . The characteristic frequencies are determined by solving these quartic equations. The STL can be improved around the resonance frequencies in the low-frequency range; however, as the resonance frequencies increase, the STL deteriorates and becomes not better than the cases without resonators (Fig. To show the differences between the above four resonator cases, we choose N s =4, γ=0.2 (other parameters as those in Tab. 3 and 4), and the resonance frequencies (f i r or f i 1 ) as 3000 + 500(i -1)(Hz), i = 1, . . . N s . All the results are given in Fig. The bandwidths of the two simple resonator cases are almost coincident as the resonance frequencies are identical, while the STL magnitudes are different because of different mass distribution; however, the STL differences are tiny as the mass differences of the resonators are not significant. Compared with simple resonator cases, the composite resonator A and B cases all show wider working bandwidth, without a significant decrease in STL magnitudes. However, the bandwidth or STL magnitude is slightly different in the two composite resonator cases. In Fig. In a word, multiple simple resonator cases apply to simple STL modulation solutions, as both the bandwidths and magnitudes can be tuned as desired; however, if wider bandwidth is anticipated and a tradeoff in magnitudes are acceptable, composite resonator cases can be the right alternatives. capability of porous materials and low-frequency advantage of periodic structures can be utilized and incorporated together in that structure. The STL of the present periodic composite structure is caused by both porous additions and resonators; therefore, both the amplitude and tuning bandwidth of STL can be adjusted with appropriate resonator arrangements. When the resonance frequencies of the resonators are low, notable STL improvements occur nearby, with a decrease around the subsequent anti-resonance frequencies (a local trough); however, as the resonance frequencies increase, the STL modulation nearby weakens. Compared to simple resonators, adopting composite resonators can obtain wider bandwidths while a compromise in the magnitude of STL is inevitable. Though the results are preliminary, the synergistic effect of locally resonant design and poroelastic composite structures is quite impressive, which is likely to provide a promissing wideband acoustic modulation solution. The non-zero elements of coefficient matrix Y m are Here, k 1 , k 2 , k 3 , b 1 , b 2 , and g were described in detail in Ref. Appendix C. The summation in Eq.( According to Eq.( 