Ultra-fast dynamics, insensitivity to external magnetic fields, or absence of magnetic stray fields are examples of properties that make antiferromagnets of potential use in the development of spintronic devices. Similar to their ferromagnetic counterparts, antiferromagnets can store information in the orientations of the collective magnetic order vector. However, also in analogy to ferromagnets, the readout magnetoresistivity signals in simple antiferromagnetic films have been weak and the extension of the electrical reorientation mechanism to optics has not been achieved. Here we report reversible and reproducible quenching of an antiferromagnetic CuMnAs film by either electrical or ultrashort optical pulses into nano-fragmented domain states. The resulting resistivity changes approach 20% at room temperature, which is comparable to the giant magnetoresistance ratios in ferromagnetic multilayers. We also obtain a signal readout by optical reflectivity. The analog time-dependent switching and relaxation characteristics of our devices can mimic functionality of spiking neural network components. Ferromagnets and antiferromagnets are two fundamental classes of materials with magnetic order. Although antiferromagnets are more readily available than ferromagnets, their magnetic order cannot be easily harnessed 1 . Current-induced spin-orbit fields in ferromagnets with broken inversion symmetry can be used to manipulate the magnetic order vector of a ferromagnet, an effect necessary for the operation of ferromagnetic memories. The reorientation of the magnetic order vector -or switching -has recently been extended to antiferromagnets such as CuMnAs and Mn 2 Au 2-7 , where the local symmetry-breaking of the lattice gives rise to a staggered spin-orbit field The polarity of current pulses with pulse lengths in the μs-ms range and threshold currents around 10 6 Acm -2 was used to demonstrate the reorientation (switching) of the Néel vector in CuMnAs devices 1 . The observations, obtain by X-ray magnetic linear dichroism photoemission electron microscopy (XMLD-PEEM), showed reproducible, reversible, and stable switching of large, micron-scale antiferromagnetic domains and the measurements were consistent with the expected symmetry of the staggered current-induced field. However, only weak AMR readout signals of ∼ 0.1 % were obtained by switching the large domains in the CuMnAs film 1 . The small AMR amplitude in single-layer CuMnAs films was independently confirmed in a recent study where the Néel vector reorientation was induced by a strong external magnetic field 18 . On the other hand, multilayers with giantmagnetoresistance, which made ferromagnetic MRAMs a commercially viable technology Furthermore, after a decade of research, optical control of magnetism using ultra-short single femtosecond-laser pulses has been demonstrated only for ferrimagnets 20 ; the reorientation of the ferrimagnetic order vector is based on unequal, light-induced demagnetization dynamics of the different spin-sublattices and this mechanism is not compatible with antiferromagnets. All-optical switching was recently observed in ferromagnets, but requires a complex process involving demagnetization and domain-nucleation and expansion driven by multiple laser pulses 20 . In this Article, we report deterministic and reversible changes in the resistivity of a film of antiferromagnetic CuMnAs by using electrical pulses with a current density over 10 7 Acm -2 or by ultra-short optical pulses. By applying the writing pulses, the antiferromagnet is brought to the vicinity of the magnetic transition point and then quenched into a nanofragmented domain state with high resistivity. We term this effect quench switching of an antiferromagnet. The corresponding resistivity changes exceed the previously reported AMR signals related to the reorientation switching of the magnetic order vector by up to three orders of magnitude. The quench switching can by also probed optically by reflectivity measurements. The nano-fragmented antiferromagnetic domain state under electrical pulsing conditions has been imaged by diamond NV-center magnetometry 9 , and we confirm the findings via synchrotron-based XMLD-PEEM measurements. Our observations suggest that the time dependence of the resistivity after the quench switching follows the Kohlrausch stretched-exponential relaxation form. Fig. The abrupt resistance drop after the weaker pulse excludes the possibility that the detected high resistance after the first pulse was due to the sample still remaining at an elevated temperature during the readout time. In the Supplementary Information Fig. Our switching signals are therefore detected at times safely exceeding the transient heating time. We estimated from the measured resistivity during the 100 μs pulse and from the measured dependence of the resistivity on the base temperature (Supplementary Information Fig. In Fig. While at 300 K the metastable high-resistivity state relaxes within a ∼ 10 s time-scale, at 200 K the retention time approaches a year (for details see the discussion of Fig. When quench-switching the device by the 100 μs writing pulse at 200 K we can therefore perform longer measurements, such as the temperature sweep shown in Fig. In Fig. The picture of switching in our devices into complex states, as described by the Kohlrausch model, is consistent with the antiferromagnetic domain nano-fragmentation systematically imaged in our devices by laboratory diamond magnetometry 9 and confirmed by our synchrotron X-ray microscopy which we discuss later in the article. The Kohlrausch relaxation is an example, noted in the past in a range of physical systems, that reproducible and universal behavior can transcend the details of the complex disordered materials and of the measurement probes 25 . Indeed, we observe high reproducibility of the above switching and relaxation characteristics across different samples and experimental set-ups. In Figs. For consistency, we used 100 μs writing pulses in all experiments presented so far. Our devices have, however, analogous switching characteristics over the full explored range of current pulse lengths down to 1 ns. This is illustrated in Fig. To explore the ultimate pulse-length limit we now move in Fig. In the measurement shown in Fig. We emphasize that our quench-switching mechanism allows us to write, in the same material and device, by a pulse whose length covers the entire range from micro to femtoseconds and that our energy of the laser pulse is lower than in the earlier ultra-fast optical switching experiments in ferrimagnets 20 . Next we show that we can optically control the high/low resistance switching as in the unipolar electrical experiment. In the measurement in Fig. The optical switching we observe is independent of the polarization of the laser pulse, as shown in Fig. To illustrate the additional spatial resolution allowed by extending our switching mechanism to optical pulses, we plot in Fig. The smooth relaxation function we observe in our universal electrical or optical quenchswitching is unparalleled in traditional magnetic devices in which the memory loss has a form of stochastic fluctuations between the two equilibrium states with opposite magnetization. Our quench-switching and relaxation functionality can be implemented in analog spiking neuromorphic circuits to mimic the neuron's leaky integration (Fig. In this section we discuss the microscopic origin of our new switching mechanism. In a parallel study on our CuMnAs devices 9 , electrical pulsing has been performed simultaneously with a scanning NV-diamond magnetometry of antiferromagnetic domains using a pump-probe scheme. The imaging reveals a nano-scale fragmentation of the antiferromagnetic domains linked to the analog switching signals. The domain fragmentation, which is estimated to reach a 10 nm scale, is controlled by the number and amplitude of the pulses. Images acquired at different pump-probe delays reveal that the fragmented domain pattern maintains a memory of the pristine state towards which it relaxes. These characteristics are mirrored in the multi-level switching and relaxation of the electrical readout signal. An independent confirmation of the pulse-induced fragmentation of antiferromagnetic domains by our XMLD-PEEM measurements is presented in Fig. Additionally, a collection of structural characterization measurements has been performed on our samples, some presented in Supplementary Information Figs. S13 and S14, and an extensive set of results summarized in a parallel study 10 . The experiments show that the single-crystal CuMnAs epilayers grown with the best substrate matching, stoichiometry, uniformity, and minimized abundance of defects have optimized characteristics of our quenchswitching signals. As mentioned above, we experimentally determined that the system heats up to the vicinity of the antiferromagnetic transition temperature during the short writing pulse. In comparison, the range of optimal growth temperatures (190-260 • C) exceeds the Néel temperature and at these high temperatures and for the much longer growth time (tens of minutes) than the pulse length, the synthesized epilayer preserves full crystal order. Our structural characterizations also include scanning electron microscopy (Figs. S13) and X-ray absorption PEEM (Fig. The transition to the metastable nano-fragmented domain state is, on the other hand, firmly established by the two independent magnetic microscopies. The excitation of the antiferromagnet into a fragmented domain state when bringing the system close to the Néel transition point can be readily ascribed to the entropy gain in the free energy 30 . Remarkably, our experiments show that the antiferromagnet retains the high resistive nano-fragmented domain state over time scales that exceed by many orders of magnitude the time over which the system is in the transient excited state at elevated temperature. Regarding the magnitude of the resistive signal we refer, for example, to an earlier study of the striped domain phase of a Co film 11 where a 5% increase of the resistivity compared to the uniform magnetic state was caused by a density of domain walls about twenty-times lower than the density reached in the present experiments, as inferred from the parallel NV-diamond magnetometry study on our devices 9 . Resistive changes of ∼100% in our nano-fragmented state are, therefore, in line with the measurements in ferromagnets when extrapolated to our high domain wall densities. Another comparison is provided by earlier ab initio transport calculations in CuMnAs 12 . Here a relative increase of the resistivity by over 100% was obtained when comparing the resistivity of a material with a given substitutional lattice disorder and a perfect magnetic order to a material with the same lattice disorder and a strong frozen magnetic disorder. Finally, we remark that in current-polarity dependent switching measurements, the NVdiamond magnetometry study also illustrates a coexistence of the domain fragmentation with the Néel vector reorientation in the antiferromagnetic domains 9 . The Néel vector reorientation was also directly observed in earlier XMLD-PEEM studies 1,33 . From the magnetic imaging and from another parallel study of AMR in CuMnAs in strong magnetic fields 18 we conclude that for the resistive switching ratios on the order of a fraction of a per cent 7,34 , both AMR due the Néel vector reorientation in the domain and the resistivity increase due to the domain fragmentation can contribute. With increasing amplitude of the resistive readout signal, the domain fragmentation quench-switching takes over. We note that the magneticfield dependent AMR and XMLD 18 indicate that the reorientation of the Néel vector inside the antiferromagnetic domains can occur at around 2 T while XMLD-PEEM measurements 18 showed that the system remained in a multi-domain state even after applying and removing a 7 T field. Consistently with these microscopies, our large quench-switching signals, ascribed to nano-fragmented multi-domain states, are insensitive to strong magnetic fields (see Supplementary Information Fig. We have reported the quenching of an antiferromagnet into high-resistive nano-fragmented domain states after bringing the system close to the Néel transition point using electrical or ultra-short optical pulses. Key questions do though remain, which are related to the limiting excitation time-scales of the quench-switching process, as well as the scattering mechanism responsible for the high resistivity of the quenched state. Furthermore, the processes that allow a single-crystal epilayer with a collinear antiferromagnetic ground state to remain in the fragmented metastable state for macroscopic timescales are currently unclear. To address these questions, considering the nanoscale fragmentation and the picosecond relaxation attempt times we observe, microscopic imaging techniques with higher spatial and temporal resolution will be needed. Furthermore, since electronic (structural) fluctuation at the nanoscale might accompany the strong magnetic disorder, both charge and spin sensitive imaging will be desirable to elucidate the microscopic origin of the activation energy barriers determining the retention/relaxation time-scale. The quench switching in dipolar-field free antiferromagnets reported here has no counterpart in ferromagnetic systems and could prove to be of value in a range of areas, from unconventional memory-logic devices to ultrafast optical switching. Growth. of the films of tetragonal CuMnAs used in this study was done by molecular beam epitaxy at substrate temperatures around 200°C. The films were capped by 3nm of Al layer which, after quick oxidation following removal from vacuum, prevents oxidation of CuMnAs 10 . To pattern the devices we used electron beam lithography and wet chemical etching: Aluminium cap was removed in 2.7% C 4 H 13 NO (3 s) and as the CuMnAs etchant we used a mixture 4:1:2 C 4 H 6 O 6 (5%):H 2 O 2 (5%):H 2 SO 4 (10%) with the rate of 50 nm per 30 s. Synchronous electrical and optical readout. (Figs. Photo-emission electron microscopy (PEEM) images. (Fig. Data availability statement. The data that support the plots within this paper and Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to K.O. and T.J. Electrical readout is performed as in Fig. b, Switching signal after a single 1 ns pulse (black), and five (red) and ten (blue) 1 ns pulses of amplitude 1.2 × 10 8 Acm -2 . The experiments were done at room temperature. xii