The discovery of new materials with unique properties is the principal parameter for the sustained development of contemporary devices and for upliftment of device performances. In the last decade, intensive research efforts were made to create a large number of novel materials, notably those belongs to the nanometer regime. The outcome of the prolific research are the structures with reduced dimension, viz. two-dimensional structure, one-dimensional structure, and zero-dimensional structure. As the size of a material reduces to nanometer-scale dimensions then the material in general become superior to its bulk counterpart for many applications owing to its higher surface-to-volume ratio, size-dependent properties, and its potential for downscaling of device size. Among different elements, Carbon, placed at group 14 (IV A), has become one of the most important elements in the periodic table owing to its ability to form sp 3 , sp 2 , and sp hybrids which results in 3D (diamond and graphite), 2D (graphene), 1D [carbon nanotube (CNT)], and 0D (Fullerene) materials with a wide variety of physical and chemical properties (Fig. TABLE 9.1 Types of CVD Techniques Employed for CNT Synthesis Exhaust Transport gas Preheater (A) (B) Main reaction zone Substrate holder Substrate T reac T pre FIGURE 9.10 Schematic representation of SSCVD experimental setup used by Weissker et al. [44] for synthesis of CNT. SSCVD, solid source chemical vapor deposition; CNT, carbon nanotube. Among the carbon allotropes, CNT has become a center of attraction in the field of nanoscale research in modern science. Nanotubes are nearly one-dimensional structure due to their high length to diameter ratio. CNTs exhibit a unique combination of electronic, thermal, mechanical, and chemical properties Since then the field has advanced at a breathtaking pace that is reflected in the increasing number of publications along with many unexpected discoveries. There are many methods by which CNTs can be produced, including but not limited to arc discharge, laser ablation, and chemical vapor deposition (CVD). These three synthesis methods of CNT can be classified into two main categories depending on the growth temperature. High temperature routes are the electric arc method and the laser ablation method, whereas medium temperature routes are based on CVD processes. The high temperature process involves sublimation of graphite in an inert atmosphere and condensing the resulting vapor under a high temperature gradient. The difference between the various processes is the method used for subliming graphite. An electric arc formed between two electrodes is used for sublimation of graphite in case of the arc discharge method. An ablation induced by a laser is used for sublimation of graphite in case of the laser ablation technique. Previously, high-temperature processes were used as the primary methods for synthesizing good quality CNTs. However, both methods have major disadvantages. Firstly, both methods require high purity graphite rods, consume ample amounts of energy, and yield is also low. So, these methods are not commercially viable to scale up for CNT production at an industrial level. Secondly, CNTs grown by high-temperature methods are in highly twisted forms, assorted with unwanted species of carbon and metal. Thus the grown nanotubes are hard to clean, manipulate, and accumulate for construction of CNTbased device architectures. Controlled production on substrates with preplanned CNT structures has not been possible by these vaporization methods. These necessitate the application of CVD process by which all the above mentioned drawbacks can be overcome. CVD permits abundance of hydrocarbons in several state (solid, liquid, or gas), facilitates the use of different substrates, and harvests CNT in a variety of forms (powder, films), also in different shapes (straight, bamboo-like, coiled). Even site selective growth of in situ metal filled CNT growth on patterned substrate is possible with CVD, which proves the versatility of the method. Thus the present work focuses on CVD synthesis since this method can be easily extended to industrial-scale fabrication. In CVD process initially all gaseous species are removed (called purging) from the reaction chamber other than those required for the deposition. Afterwards the precursor gases (hydrocarbon; denoted as CH) are delivered into the reaction chamber and heated (by energy source) as it approaches the deposition surface. When the precursor gas molecules acquire sufficient energy then they react or decompose to form a solid phase of carbon (C) which is readily deposited onto the substrate. Finally the volatile by-product hydrogen (H) is removed from the reaction chamber by an exhaust system (Fig. CVD methods can be categorized based on chamber pressure, reactor type, carbon source and heating method. A complete tree of different CVD categories is depicted in Table Pressure is an important parameter as far as CVD method is concerned. Based on CNT synthesized by CVD at different pressure, the methods can be categorized as highpressure CVD (HPCVD), atmospheric-pressure CVD (APCVD), and low-pressure CVD (LPCVD). In this type of CVD the pressure inside the reactor is more than 1 atm during the synthesis of CNTs (Fig. A similar high-pressure technique was adopted by Resasco et al. In this synthesis method at atmospheric pressure the substrate is exposed to one or more volatile precursors which react or decompose on the surface of the substrate to produce a deposit (Fig. Majewska et al. In this type of CVD the pressure in reaction chamber is less than 1 atm (Fig. before growth, resulting in SWCNT formation at lower temperatures. Chen et al. Based on temperature of the reactor wall, CNT synthesis by CVD process can be categorized as hot wall and cold wall CVD. In hot wall CVD the reactor tube is surrounded by heating elements thus the temperature of the substrate is same as the reactor wall (Fig. Ayala et al. Furnace Quartz tube Pump Gases FIGURE 9.8 Schematic illustration of the hot wall CVD furnace In the cold wall CVD process only the substrate is heated by RF induction or high-radiation lamps while the reactor wall remains cold (Fig. The catalyst is an important constituent for synthesis of CNT by CVD. Catalyst can be introduced into the reactor in various forms, e.g., solid, liquid, and gas. Based on the physical form of the catalyst used the CVD process can be categorized as solid source CVD (SSCVD), liquid source CVD (LSCVD), and gas source CVD (GSCVD). The term "SSCVD" encompasses all the techniques which employ only solid precursors as starting material for the deposition process (Fig. In LSCVD only liquid precursor is used as primary material for the deposition process (Fig. The term "GSCVD" covers all strategies using only gaseous precursors as initial material for the deposition (Fig. When a traditional heat source such as resistive or inductive or infrared heater is used for deposition process, then the method is called thermal CVD (TCVD). If a plasma source is used to create a glow discharge then it is called plasma-enhanced CVD (PECVD). In this synthesis method a substrate coated with catalyst is placed in a thermally heated atmosphere and exposed to one or more volatile precursors, which react or decompose on the surface of the substrate to produce a deposit (Fig. field effect transistors. Chun et al. The HFCVD process employs a heated filament to decompose the precursor species and deposit a film on the substrate, which is placed close to the filament at lower temperature (Fig. PECVD employs electrical energy to create glow discharge plasma. In glow discharge plasma the electron temperature is much higher than ion temperature which felicitates the maintenance of glow discharge plasma at low temperature. The high-energy electrons promotes the dissociation of gas molecules by which the energy is transferred into a gas mixture. This transforms the gas mixture into reactive radicals, ions, neutral atoms, and molecules, and other highly excited species. These atomic and molecular fragments interact with a substrate and, depending on the nature of these interactions, either etching or deposition processes occur at the substrate. Since high-energy electrons supply the energy needed for chemical reactions in the gas phase, the gas itself is relatively cooler. Hence, film formation can occur on substrates at a lower temperature than is possible in the conventional CVD process, which is a major advantage of PECVD. Moreover, in PECVD a high-electric field is generated in the sheath region due to potential difference between the plasma and the substrate. PECVD reactors are mainly classified by the type of plasma source used to generate the gas discharge of the feedstock, i.e., direct current (DC), RF, and microwave (MW) PECVD. DC-PECVD employs DC power to generate glow discharge plasma between the anode and cathode, placed parallel to each other in a reactor (Fig. RF-PECVD uses RF power to generate plasma In MW-PECVD MWs (2.45 GHz) are introduced into the reactor through a dielectric window for irradiation of gases for generation of plasma (Fig. It is possible to extract the plasma away from where it is generated, and ion-induced damage may be reduced when the wafer is located "remotely (Fig. The pathways for the synthesis of CNTs by CVD can be categorized into catalytic and noncatalytic methods [110À112]. In catalytic method the catalyst type can be broadly classified into two groups. If the catalyst particles are injected into the flowing feedstock to produce CNTs in the gas phase then the catalyst is called floating or unsupported catalyst In the unsupported catalyst approach, a volatile compound containing the catalytic element The methods for the preparation of catalyst in case of supported catalyst approach can be divided into two categories: one is solution-based catalyst preparation technique and the other is the physical evaporation technique. There are numerous methods for preparing catalysts from solutions, for example solÀgel process In the physical deposition technique, metal can be evaporated or sputtered to be deposited on the substrate. The metal, if deposited at room temperature, will generally be amorphous and form a nearly smooth film on the surface of the substrate. Upon annealing, the equilibrium shape may be reached. To know this shape, the Young's equation describing a contact between two phases A and B and the ambient atmosphere has to be considered: where γ is the corresponding interface energies (Fig. It was found that the catalyst must be deposited on the substrate in the form of particles instead of smooth, continuous films Kumar et al. Various substrates like Si Since SWCNT and graphene both have excellent electrical, mechanical, and thermal properties so this result can pave the way towards future nanoelectronics. An interesting study about the influence of substrate surface area on the growth of CNT from ferrocene was investigated by Osorio et al. Lee et al. TCVD relies on thermal decomposition of carbonaceous gas molecules. Baker et al. The key step in temperature-driven carbon diffusion mechanism was believed to be the diffusion of carbon species through the particle from the exposed and hotter front surface on which the exothermic decomposition of hydrocarbons occurs, to the cooler rear surfaces on which carbon is precipitated (endothermic process) from the solid solution Concentration-driven carbon diffusion mechanism involves a concentration gradient across the catalyst particle in contact with hydrocarbon on one side and with a graphitic precipitation on the other side. Carbon growth involves a fast gas phase reaction (decomposition of hydrocarbon), carbon atom dissolution in the metal, and carbon precipitation as graphitic structures at the opposite side of the catalyst particle. Primarily it was assumed that the volume diffusion of carbon through a catalyst particle is responsible for the catalytic growth of CNTs. However, Baird et al. For a catalyst particle of unchanging size, the growth of CNTs should continue until the hydrocarbon is shut off, either by removing the feedstock from the reaction area or by amorphous or graphitic carbon fully coating the particle thus blocking the gas. Additionally, in base growth mechanism, prolonged diffusion of hydrocarbons down to the nanoparticle situated at the base of the CNT may slow down or stop the growth. Ideally, continuous growth of nanotube can be achieved if the nanoparticle is uninterruptedly fed with carbon source and the nanotube extrusion process is free of any obstruction. However, in reality, due to competing reactions at the nanoparticle site, such as the formation of graphitic shells and the deposition of amorphous carbon prevents the carbon feedstock from reacting with the nanoparticle resulting in termination of the growth. Further analysis on the mechanisms of CNT growth and producing scale-up would facilitate higher control of CNT properties like metallic or semiconducting A US-based study 