We report combined experimental and theoretical analysis of superconductivity in CaK(Fe1-xNix)4As4 (CaK1144) for x =0, 0.017 and 0.034. To obtain the superfluid density, ρ = (1 + ∆λL(T )/λL(0)) -2 , the temperature dependence of the London penetration depth, ∆λL(T ), was measured by using tunnel-diode resonator (TDR) and the results agreed with the microwave coplanar resonator (MWR) with the small differences accounted for by considering a three orders of magnitude higher frequency of MWR. The absolute value of λL(T ≪ Tc) ≈ λL(0) was measured by using MWR, λL(5 K) ≈ 170 ± 20 nm, which agreed well with the NV-centers in diamond optical magnetometry that gave λL(5 K) ≈ 196 ± 12 nm. The experimental results are analyzed within the Eliashberg theory, showing that the superconductivity of CaK1144 is well described by the nodeless s± order parameter and that upon Ni doping the interband interaction increases. The CaK(Fe 1-x Ni x ) 4 As 4 (1144) family of iron-based superconductors (IBS) are particularly suitable for the studies of the fundamental superconducting properties due to the stoichiometric composition of the "optimal" compound, CaKFe 4 As 4 , exhibiting clean-limit behavior and having a fairly high critical temperature, T c ≈ 35K. This allows working with a system where unwanted effects caused by large amount of chemically substituted ions are minimal. Multiple experimental and theoretical results are compatible with the clean-limit nodeless s ± symmetry of the order parameter in 1144 system and with all six electronic bands contributing to the superconductivity High quality single crystals of CaK(Fe 1-x Ni x ) 4 As 4 with doping levels of x=0, x=0.017 and x=0.034, were grown by high temperature solution growth out of FeAs flux. The Ni doping level was determined by wavelengthdispersive x-ray spectroscopy (for details of the synthesis and complete characterization see Ref. A temperature variation of the London penetration depth in-plane component ∆λ L,ab (T) was measured using a self-oscillating tunnel-diode resonator (TDR) where the sample is subject to a small ac magnetic field parallel to the c-axis of the sample. This field configuration induces in plane supercurrents j ab and allows a direct measure of λ L,ab . The resonant frequency shift from the value of the empty resonator is recorded and is proportional to the sample magnetic susceptibility, determined by λ L and the sample shape, in the end the variations of the penetration depth with temperature ∆λ L,ab (T ) = λ L,ab (T ) -λ L,ab (0) can be determined (see Fig. The determination of the low temperature absolute value of the London penetration depth λ L (0) is carried out by means of the newly developed NV centers magnetometry technique where χ is the intrinsic magnetic susceptibility of the materialin the superconducting state, which can be taken to be equal to -1. Finally, from H c1 it is possible to calculate the absolute value of the London penetration depth The coherence length ξ can be calculated from the upper critical field and its uncertainty has a small influence on λ L (0) since it appears in the equation only as a logarithm. The complete characterization of the London penetration depth (absolute value and temperature dependence) can also be carried out by means of a microwave resonator (MWR) technique that has already been applied to other IBS crystals where Considering two samples with different shape factors f s , it is therefore possible to deconvolve the λ L,ab and λ L,c contributions to the total λ L measured, and to determine the anisotropy parameter γ λ = λ L,c /λ L,ab . These quantities are shown in Fig. The experimental data can be reproduced within a two-bands Eliashberg s ± -wave model, allowing a deeper understanding of the fundamental properties of the material. The first step consists in calculating self consistently the gaps and the renormalization functions by solving the two-band Eliashberg equations, then from these quantities the London penetration depth can be calculated. The two-band Eliashberg equations The parameter ν 12 = N 1 (0)/N 2 (0) can be extracted from the ARPES measurements in Ref. with Θ is the Heaviside function, ω c is a cutoff energy and sf stands for spin fluctuations. Moreover, Finally, the electron-boson coupling constants are defined as . The penetration depth can be computed starting from the gaps ∆ i (iω n ) and the renormalization functions where w λ i = (ω p,i /ω p ) 2 are the weights of the single band contributions that sum up to 1 (ω p,i is the plasma frequency of the i-th band and ω p is the total plasma frequency). The multiplicative factor that involves the plasma frequencies derives from the fact that the low-temperature value of the penetration depth λ L (0) is related to the plasma frequency by ω p = c/λ L (0) for a clean uniform superconductor at T = 0 if Fermi-liquid effects are negligible Before focusing on the doping dependence of the penetration depth in the CaK(Fe 1-x Ni x ) 4 As 4 system, we compare the results obtained for undoped CaKFe 4 As 4 with the different experimental techniques described in Sect. II. The low temperature absolute values of the penetration depth λ L (0) from MWR and NV-centers magnetometry measurements of undoped CaKFe 4 As 4 are remarkably close (170±20 nm and 196±12 nm respectively), considering that have been obtained with techniques that operate at different frequencies. Also the temperature dependence of λ L,ab from TDR and MWR shows an overall agreement (see Fig. As stated in the introduction, from the low temperature behavior of λ L it is possible to get important information about the pairing state of a superconducting material and, by carrying out a study along the phase diagram, also about the possible presence of a QCP. For each sample we fit the ∆λ L (T )curve with the exponential function a + b(T /T c ) n (see Fig. It is in principle possible to identify a QCP in the phase diagram by analyzing the λ L (0) curve as a function of doping level x: it would correspond to a sharp peak in the λ L (0)(x) plot The Eliashberg equations were solved and the London penetration depth was calculated for all doping values following the approach explained in Sect.II E, yielding the ρ s and ∆λ L vs T curves presented in Fig. In summary, we employed a combination of three experimental techniques (TDR, NV magnetometry and MWR) together with theoretical modelling based on the solution of the two-bands Eliashberg equations to demonstrate that a complete characterization of the London penetration depth allows to study in depth the fundamental properties of superconducting materials. The comparison between the techniques on undoped CaKFe 4 As 4 shows very good agreement both regarding the λ L (0) absolute values (170±20 nm for MWR and 196±12 nm for NV) and the λ L,ab temperature dependence. We ascribe small differences at low temperature to the high probe frequency of the microwave resonator technique that hinders pairbreaking scattering. Overall, the CaK(Fe 1-x Ni x ) 4 As 4 system (with doping levels between x=0 and x=0.034) shows properties compatible with the s ± order parameter symmetry without line nodes in the gaps. Upon doping the system presents a stronger interdependence between the two bands, probably caused by scattering induced by the Fe-Ni substitution. No sign of a QCP was found in the variation of the penetration depth low temperature value upon doping, due to the low number of available data and possibly to the fact that the disorder induced increase of λ L (0) hides the QCP peak.