In order to construct a dielectric analog of spaser, we study theoretically and experimentally several configurations of cluster-based unit cells for an all-dielectric metasurface characterized by resonant conditions of the trapped mode excitation. Excitation of the trapped mode is realized either by specific displacement of particles in the cluster, or by perturbation of the equidistantly spaced particles by off-centered round holes or coaxial-sector notches. It turns out that the latter approach is more advantageous for enhancement of electric near-field with homogeneous distribution in-plane of the structure and its strong localization outside the high-refractive-index dielectric particles. This feature opens prospects for realization of highly desirable subwavelength flat lasing structures based on strong near-field interaction with substances exhibiting pronounced nonlinear characteristics and properties of gain media. Considerable interest in the study of metamaterials is due to the prospects of their use in practical devices. All-dielectric metasurfaces can overcome abovementioned drawbacks of plasmonic structures while being simple in manufacturing. Combining dielectric particles into clusters makes it possible to overcome this obstacle. For instance, in an all-dielectric metasurface composed of bars of different length a trapped mode can be excited. In development of the concept of cluster-based metasurfaces, in the present Letter we propose and characterize several configurations of an all-dielectric metasurface whose array sustains resonant conditions of the trapped mode. We demonstrate that under these conditions the resonant electric near-field appears to be homogeneously distributed in-plane of the structure and is strongly localized outside the high-n dielectric particles. Our finding is confirmed by both numerical simulations and proof-ofprinciple microwave measurements of the near-fields in the actual metasurface prototypes. In what follows, we perform a numerical and experimental study of resonant characteristics of an alldielectric metasurface whose unit cell is composed of four cylindrical resonators (disks) [see Fig. It was theoretically shown The cluster forming metasurface corresponds to the group C 4v for all chosen designs. In accordance with our available experimental equipment, we have chosen the microwave part of the spectrum to characterize the metasurface and confirm its features. Thus, all the geometrical and material parameters of the dielectric particles as well as the structure period are chosen so that the metasurface operates in the specified frequency band (1 -15 GHz). All numerical simulations of the electromagnetic response of the metasurface are performed with the use of the rf module of the commercial COMSOL Multiphysics R electromagnetic solver. The results of simulation of the transmission characteristic of the metasurface versus frequency and asymmetry parameter are collected in Fig. In the spectra of the metasurface composed of nonperturbed disks an additional resonance of reduced transmission appears in the frequency band of interest, provided that the equidistant arrangement of disks in the array is violated [Fig. From the cross-section patterns of the electric nearfield calculated at the corresponding resonant frequency [see inset of Fig. Intuition suggests that, the disks should be spaced equidistantly in the array in order to achieve a more homogeneous electric near-field distribution within the cluster. In this case, the trapped mode can be excited by perturbing directly the disks. Indeed, the cluster-based metasurfaces composed of asymmetrically perturbed disks also support the excitation of the TE 01 mode of the cylindrical dielectric resonator which behaves as a trapped mode of the array. For these two designs, the resonance in transmission arises as soon as the perturbation in the disks is introduced and is typical for the trapped mode excitation. The quality factor of the resonance decreases and the resonant frequency shifts toward higher frequencies as the asymmetry parameter increases. The quality factor of the resonance degrades faster for the structure composed of disks with notch. This effect can be explained by vastly reduced extent of dielectric in the cluster, when the notch size increases. From the electric near-field patterns plotted in-plane of the metasurface [see insets in Figs. We check experimentally all the distinctive features of the near-field distribution and the degree of field concentration by direct measurements for the metasurface prototypes based on three chosen designs. The Taizhou Wangling TP-series microwave ceramic is used as a material for particles fabrication (the losses in this material are estimated as tan δ = 1 × 10 -3 at 10 GHz). The sets of particles are prepared with the use of a precise milling machine. Particles are arranged in a custom holder made of a rigid foam material. All geometrical and material parameters of particles and holder correspond to those listed in the caption of Fig. The measured transmission for all proposed designs is depicted in Fig. We use a near-field scanning system for mapping both electric and magnetic near-fields at the corresponding resonant frequencies. These fields are measured above the metasurface prototypes starting from 1 mm distance from their surface performing subsequent probe moving with the increment of 1 mm in vertical and horizontal directions. The resulting color maps of the measured nearfield distribution confirm discussed above trapped mode resonant conditions, distribution of the electric near-field, orientations of the out-of-plane magnetic moments, and concentration of the magnetic near-field inside the particles holes and notches (Fig. In conclusion, we demonstrate that in the cluster-based metasurface made of an array of equidistantly spaced perturbed high-n dielectric disks, the trapped mode can be excited. For this mode the electric near-field appears to be sufficiently homogeneous and strongly concentrated outside the disks. This effect is extremely promising for applied optics especially for advantageous use of proposed metasurfaces in conjunction with gain media. 