Here we optimized the electrophoretic deposition process for the fabrication of WS2plasmonic nanohole integrated structures. We showed how the conditions used for the site-selective deposition influenced the properties of the deposited flakes. In particular, we investigated the effect of different suspension medium used during the deposition both in the efficiency of the process and in the stability of WS2 -flakes, which were deposited on a ordered arrays of plasmonic nanostructures. Over the last decade, intensive research efforts have been devoted to the investigation of twodimensional (2D) materials. Initially dominated by graphene, now the focus is on a broad range of materials like boron nitride (BN), transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) such as MoS2 and WS2, transition metal oxides (TMOs) as well as others including black phosphorous, silicene, etc. These materials are now deeply investigated due to their diverse properties and potential applications spanning from photonics, electronics, biosensing and catalysis In this context, we have recently proposed and demonstrated the possibility to control the deposition of single layer MoS2 flakes on metallic nanostructures by means of chemical conjugation and electrophoretic deposition (EPD) EPD is a colloidal process where the suspended charged particles are impelled from the suspension medium to the substrate by an electric field. The process has been extensively applied to 2D materials for several applications, such as sensing, Li-ion battery, anticorrosive coatings, etc In this paper we report on EPD of WS2 flakes on metallic nanoholes. The procedure recently described in our previous work We believe that the method here optimized can be used to prepare structures that can find several interesting applications in the research fields based on 2D materials In a glove-box (water < 1 ppm, O2 < 10 ppm), LiBH4 (0.130 g, 6 mmol) and WS2 (0.496 g, 2 mmol) were grounded in a mortar and subsequently transferred in a Schlenk-tube, brought outside of the glovebox and then connected to a Schlenk-line. The sample was heated in a sand bath at 340°C for 5 days under nitrogen. The intercalation product was dropped in 300 ml degassed water in one portion and the suspension was bath-sonicated for 1 h. In order to remove LiOH, the material was washed three times by centrifugation at 10000 rpm (23478g) for 15 min. To select size, the sample was therefore centrifuged at 8000 rpm for 15 min to remove lighter nanosheets and at 1000 rpm for 5 min to settle unexfoliated material. XPS is performed in a custom designed ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) system comprising a load lock and an analysis chamber equipped with an Omicron electron analyzer (EA125), and a dual anode X-ray source (omicron DAR 400). The materials to be investigated are drop casted on a Copper support to form a homogeneous thin film. The dried samples are then inserted in the UHV system and left outgassing extensively for a few hours. All XPS measurements are performed under UHV conditions (<10-8 mbar) at room temperature using a non monochromated Mg K source (h = 1253.6 eV) and an electron analyzer pass energy of 20 eV. The binding energy (BE) scale is calibrated using the Au 4f7/2 core levels (BE = 83.8 eV). XPS multipeak analysis (KolXPD software) was performed using Voigt functions, keeping constant in all the peaks the Full Width Half Maximum (FWHM) and the Gaussian-Lorentzian proportion, which allow to obtain the maximum reliability of the fitting. For the same reason, BEs regarding the same compounds were kept in ± 0.1 eV range from one sample to another. DLS experiments were performed using a Malvern Zetasizer nano ZS and the measurements were evaluated using Zetasizer software. Since polar solvents have been used in this study, 1.5 was chosen as the value for f(k) (Smoluchowski approximation). Thanks to this approximation, the influence of the size of the material in suspension is limited, allowing the use of Henry's equation (therefore DLS) for the evaluation of electrophoretic mobility of nonspherical materials. Data are reported as the average of three measurements (n =3) ± SD. Samples were measured at 25 °C in disposable folded capillary cells (DTS1070) in aqueous dispersants. FEM Simulation of WS2 Flakes Integrated over Plasmonic Nanostructures. We investigate the plasmonic properties of the structure by means of finite element method (FEM) simulations using an RF module in Comsol Multi-physics taking into account the geometries that were actually fabricated. For the nanohole array, we consider a hole of 100 nm in diameter in a 100 nm thick Si3N4 membrane with a 50 nm thick Au layer. A top single layer of WS2 has been considered. The refractive indices of Au and WS2 were taken from the works of Rakic et al. The fabrication of the metallic nanoholes follows a simple and robust procedure. The substrate was a Si3N4 membrane (100 nm thick) prepared on a Silicon chip. The 2D holes were prepared by means of FIB milling with a voltage of 30 keV and a current of 80 pA. After milling, a thin layer of gold, ca. 100 nm, was deposited on the top side of the membrane. EPD has been performed following the method illustrate in details by Mosconi et al. In this work three different suspension mediums have been tested in comparison with water. In particular exfoliated WS2 flakes have been suspended in MES, PBS and B-1. The formulations of these mediums are reported in table 1. MES has been also prepared with different pH with the addition of NaOH (0.1 M). PBS has been tested with different concentrations (0.1; 1 and 10mM). Key aspects to be investigated are the electrophoretic mobility and the effect of the solvents on the structural properties of the WS2. The variable k, known as Debye parameter, is indeed inversely proportional to the temperature (T) and directly proportional to the ionic strength (I) of the solvent as: For these considerations, the ζ is strongly related to the ionic strength (IS), pH and therefore conductivity of the solvent-suspension medium. The ionic strength interferes more on the conductivity of the suspension while less differences were observed instead using 10mM MES buffers at different pHs which ranges. In particular, conductivity decreased from 13,433 ± 1,050 mS/cm measured for PBS pH7.4 200mM to 5,517 ± 0,098 mS/cm measured for PBS 5mM. Varying the pH of the solvent and keeping constant the ion's concentration, less difference was observed in terms of conductivity: the lowest and higher value measured are 0,188 ± 0,005 mS/cm and 1,110 ± 0,073 mS/cm which were achieved respectively for the flakes suspension in MES pH5 and MES pH7 respectively. Exfoliated WS2 was analyzed to get the references for metallic 1T phase, which typically shows lower BE values. We observed the typical downshift of about 0.8 eV due to phase change. However, to achieve a satisfying fitting, a fourth component relative to oxidized W was needed: the resulting BE is intermediate between WVIO3 (35.7 eV) and value reported in the literature for WIVO2 (34.0 eV), therefore we can hypothesize the presence of partially oxidized WV species, formed during the harsh exfoliation process. While Table MES can interact chemically with WS2, generating oxysulfides. At acid pH this action is much faster, since about 75% of pristine 1T-WS2 was converted to oxysulfides (Fig. Figure On the contrary, the low EPD kinetics observed in H2O can be overcome by using other suspension mediums. The following figures illustrate the results obtained with B1, MES and PBS by applying a voltage of 3 V for 5 minutes. It is important to note that with this low potential it was not possible to achieve an EPD in H2O. As can be seen from Fig. As mentioned, TMDs and WS2 in particular, find significant application in several fields, from catalysis, to photonics and optoelectronics. Our EPD protocol can be applied to prepare integrated (hybrid) plasmonic nanostructures enabling light-matter interaction studies, such for instance enhanced Raman (SERS) and Photoluminscence (PL). Moreover, integrated 2D material -plasmonic nanostructures can find application in nanopore technology for single molecule detection Computer simulations (see Methods for details) can be used to better evaluate potential enhancement effects. In particular, we considered a gold nanohole covered with a single layer WS2 flake. Into the 2D layer we designed a pore with a diameter of 5 nm. Figure In the presented work we proved that taking under consideration the properties of both colloidal material and solvent it is possible to select parameters by which an efficient and controlled EDP on nano-holes can be easily achieved. Moreover, we proved that the presence of salts in the buffers can interfere with the physical properties of the material. The obtained integrated nanostructures can find interesting applications in enhanced light-matter interaction such as PL and Raman. Finally, our fabrication method can be applied to prepare plasmonic nanopores for potential single molecule studies. pH. Additionally, a 1,67mM sodium sulphate buffer with pH 10.6, reached by addition of NaOH (1mM) have been tested as well. This buffer has been named B-1 and it has tested since it showed good electrophoretic mobility in other different experiments. The values of ζ, EM and Conductivity measured by DLS are presented in Table 2. As noticed from Table 2, the ζ and EM are proportional between each other. DLS software indeed converts the EM measured for a colloidal suspension in the corresponding ζ using Henry equation where  and 