The characteristic hole concentrations x opt ≃ 0.16 and x c ≃ 0.19 in the under-to overdoped transition regime of cuprate superconductors are shown to be intimately interelated by mesoscale organization of bond-like RVB arrays extending over 3 × 4 copper sites and comprising a hole pair spaced by 3a 0 . The columnar organization maximizes the pairing gap but reduces the superconducting stiffness, while the zigzag organization maximizes the superconducting stiffness at reduced T c . The latter goes hand in hand with the closure of the pseudogap. Columnar and zigzag mesoscale organizations of the bond-like RVB arrays are displacively transformed in each other between x opt and x c . Two distinct hole concentrations, x opt ≃ 0.16 and x c ∼ 0.19, characterize the transition from the under-to the overdoped regime of cuprate superconductors. At x opt the critical temperature T c (x) reaches its maximum value. Fundamental properties of the superconducting phase, such as the zerotemperature superfluid density, the condensation energy, the zero temperature critical Silsbee field, however, are maximal only at x c where the critical temperature is 10% below its maximum value ("slightly overdoped"). x c marks also the closure of a pseudogap which arises in the normal phase at elevated temperatures right up to the thermal decomposition of the doped crystals. Thermodynamic and magnetic data indicate that the high temperature density of states near the chemical potential μ = E F is partially depleted T * (x) decreases linearily with increasing doping and falls to zero at x c . The pseudogap scale ∆/k B = J(1 -x/x c ) with J ≃ 1000 K arises from both, spin and charge degrees of freedom, and is comparable to the antiferromagnetic superexchange energy. Notably this strongly entropy-depleting pseudogap is completely absent beyond x c throughout the strongly overdoped regime up to x ≃ 0.25 where superconductivity vanishes. The apparent disparity of the superconducting properties at x opt and x c still stirs lively debates, particularily on a possible quantum critical point at x c . In this short note we attempt to outline, almost phenomenologically in the framework of the resonating valence bond (RVB) theory The physical properties of the hole doped cuprate superconductors are in essence governed by relaxation of the frustrated kinetic energy causing antiferromagnetic "kinetic" exchange in an insulating parent compound where spin-half electrons are kept apart by large on-site (Mott -Hubbard) Coulomb repulsion U d The strong desire of lattice electrons to delocalize themselves favores homogeneous spatial distributions. In general metals prefer most densely packed lattice structures optimizing the gain of (negative) kinetic energy and opposing segregational interactions. The normal electron liquid in doped cuprate superconductors however appears to be intrinsically strained, even in most carefully annealed stoichiometric compounds with relatively simple crystal lattices. Notorious chemical metastability and electronic symmetry breaking seem to be constituitive properties of superconducting cuprates. One important reason is the intrinsic electron -hole asymmetry In the narrow doping range between x opt and x c however the strain in the electron liquid seems to be gone, with them also doping induced lattice effects Holes doped into a RVB liquid of short range spin singlets are empty states assumed to move free. Though, double occupancy of hole sites is excluded by U d as it is for electrons at electron sites. It is notable that the mobile empty states in the CuO 2 lattice are created by singlet combination of the symmetrized orbital on the four oxygens around a Cu 2+ . Such holes are virtual Cu 3+ sites with a hard core diameter larger than the lattice constant a 0 , set by the "cage" of the oxygen environment. The energy of this so-called Zhang-Rice (ZR) state is by ∼ 5 eV distinctly lower than that of all other combined states, thus such mobile hole states are stable throughout the entire relevant doping regime, 0 < x ≤ 0.33. Coulomb repulsion between oxygen 2p x,y states at the connecting site of two ZR singlets, U p ≃ 6 eV, may be naively held responsible for the supression of nearest neighbor hole pairs. A rough estimate for two ZR states built out of Wannier states yields a repulsion R ≃ U p /32 ≃ 0.19 eV Hole doping contracts strongly the basal plane area. A preliminary inspection of the nonlinearities in the doping dependence of basal lattice constants, bulging at x opt and collapsing at x c , lead us to suggest that the hard cores of the virtual Cu 3+ holes exclude not only onsite double occupancy but also nearest neighbor hole -hole configurations Indirect experimental support for this electron -hole asymmetry, particularily by STM The frustrated kinetic energy causing antiferromagnetism in the parent compound is relaxed through interactions which are short range in space and time. Fig. The green wavy lines in Fig. We expect the nodal fluctuations to generate effectively axial hole -hole attraction by kinetic exchange in an RVB array with at least 3 × 4 = 12 copper sites, see Fig. These bond-like RVB arrays break the rotational symmetry of the lattice and give rise to uniaxial ("nematic") strain in the electronic lattice spreading macroscopically with increasing hole concentrations. Well known macroscopic deformable bodies favor relaxation of uniaxial microscopic strain by formation of meso-scale unidirectional areas, and orientating them most appropriately. Large field STM maps The organization of the bond-like RVB arrays on mesoscopic and macroscopic scales encounters a connectivity problem. Fig. The fully packed columnar configuration may be displacively transformed into the energetically more favorable zigzag configuration, see Fig. Hence x opt at x opt are intimately connected with each other through the geometrical constraints governing the spatial organization of fully coherent assembly of nano-sized bond-like RVB arrays.