A recent analytical model for large area field emitters, based on the line charge model (LCM), provides a simple approximate formula for the field enhancement on hemiellipsoidal emitter tips in terms of the ratio of emitter height and pairwise distance between neighbouring emitters. The formula, verified against the exact solution of the linear LCM, was found to be adequate provided the mean separation between emitters is larger than half the emitter height. In this paper, we subject the analytical predictions to a more stringent test by simulating (i) an infinite regular array and (ii) an isolated cluster of 10 random emitters, using the finite element software COMSOL. In case of the array, the error in apex field enhancement factor (AFEF) is found to be less than 0.25% for an infinite array when the lattice constant c ≥ 1.5h, increasing to 2.9% for c = h and 8.1% for c = 0.75h. For an isolated random cluster of 10 emitters, the error in large AFEF values is found to be small. Thus, the error in net emitted current is small for a random cluster compared to a regular infinite array with the same (mean) spacing. The line charge model thus provides a reasonable analytical tool for optimizing a large area field emitter. Large area field emitters (LAFE) are promising as a high brightness source of cold electrons. They have been investigated for around four decades, as patterned arrays of pointed emitters or clusters of nanotubes or nanorods. They find applications in various vacuum devices such as X-ray tubes, terahertz generators and even in space navigation The electron emission mechanism, at least in metals, is fairly well understood Knowing the degree of field enhancement for an isolated emitter of given shape, height (h) and apex radius of curvature (R a ) is in itself a formidable task. For a LAFE, shielding makes this all the more complicated. At present, a theory of LAFE exists for only the simplest of emitters where the shape is hemiellipsoidal and for which the apex field enhancement factor (AFEF) for an isolated emitter is known analytically where α Si = j =i (λ j /λ i )α Sij j =i α Sij and being the distance between on the cathode plane (XY ) between the i th and j th emitter. In the above, λ is the slope of the line charge density Λ(z) (i.e. Λ(z) = λz), obtained by projecting the surface charge density along the emitter axis Note that Eq. (1) compares well with the exact linear LCM model for an N -emitter random LAFE. For mean spacings larger than h/2, the observed error was < 6% while for mean spacings larger than h, the error is less than 1.5%. This comparison however neglects the non-linearity factor in the charge distribution. It is thus necessary to subject Eq. (1), obtained using linear LCM, to more stringent tests such as by comparing its predictions with numerical (finite element) simulations where the projected charge density does not have constraints of linearity. Such a comparison is also required since LCM predictions are reported to be at variance with other models/numerical predictions The paper is organized as follows. We shall first take a look at the computational domain required to model a large area field emitter using COMSOL with the 'anodeat-infinity' and also study the number of neighbouring emitters required for the convergence of the AFEF using Eq. ( The array-at-infinity is an idealization that simplifies the line charge model but is not essential to it. Computationally, an infinite square array with lattice constant c can be simulated by imposing 'zero surface charge density' at x, y = ±c/2. Thus, ∂V /∂(x, y) = 0 at x = ±c/2 and y = ±c/2. The boundary condition at the anode can be Dirichlet (V = V A , where V A is the anode potential) or Neumann Randomly placed emitters pose a greater challenge insofar as verification of Eq. ( In the present context, an isolated cluster of randomly placed emitters is sought to be modelled. The computational boundary must therefore be chosen to be sufficiently far away if a standard Neumann boundary is to be used in the X, Y directions. Typically, the domain considered is [-10h, 10h] in the X, Y directions and [0, 5h] in the Z direction. The emitters are limited to a patch at the centre in the X, Y plane such that the mean spacing equals h. We have considered 2 such realizations, one having 5 emitters and the other having 10. We present here the results for 10 emitters. The distribution of emitters in the XY plane is shown in Fig. The net field emission current can be calculated using the apex field enhancement factor and the generalized cosine law of local field variation 