Bifacial solar module technology is a quickly growing market in the photovoltaics (PV) sector. By utilising light impinging on both, front and back sides of the module, actual limitations of conventional monofacial solar modules can be overcome at almost no additional costs. Optimising large-scale bifacial solar power plants with regard to minimum levelised cost of electricity (LCOE), however, is challenging due to the vast amount of free parameters such as module inclination angle and distance, module and land costs, character of the surroundings, weather conditions and geographic position. We present a detailed illumination model for bifacial PV modules in a large PV field and calculate the annual energy yield exemplary for two locations with different climates. By applying the Bayesian optimisation algorithm we determine the global minimum of the LCOE for bifacial and monofacial PV fields at these two exemplary locations considering land costs in the model. We find that currently established design guidelines for mono-and bifacial solar farms often do not yield the minimum LCOE. Our algorithm finds solar panel configurations yielding up to 23 % lower LCOE compared to the established configuration with the module tilt angle equal to the latitude and the module distance chosen such that no mutual shading of neighboring solar panels occurs at winter solstice. Our algorithm enables the user to extract clear design guidelines for mono-and bifacial large-scale solar power plants for most regions on Earth and further accelerates the development of competitively viable photovoltaic systems. The record power conversion efficiency (PCE) of monofacial silicon solar cells -currently the dominant solar-cell technology -is 26.7% 1 and approaches the physical limit of around 29.4%, which was calculated by Richter et al. Historically, the module inclination angle was usually set to the geographical latitude of the solar farm location, and the module distance was either set to a fixed value based on experience In this study, we apply a multi-parameter Bayesian optimisation in order to minimise the LCOE of large-scale bifacial solar power plants. We present a comprehensive illumination model for bifacial solar arrays and calculate the annual energy yield (EY) based on TMY3 (Typical Meteorological Year 3) data for two exemplary locations near Dallas and Seattle. We calculate optimal module inclination angles and module distances yielding minimal LCOE for various module to land cost ratios. We find that our calculated optima strongly depend on both the module to land cost ratio and the geographical location. We conclude that currently used rule-of-thumb estimates for optimal module distance and tilting angle must be reconsidered. Our method enables the user to extract clear design guidelines for mono-and bifacial large-scale solar power plants principally anywhere on Earth. With the illumination model we calculate the irradiance onto a solar module, which is placed somewhere in a big PV-field. We assume this field to be so big that effects from its boundaries can be neglected. Further, we assume the modules to be homogeneous: we neglect effects from the module boundaries or module space in between the solar cells. Hence, we can treat this problem as 2-dimensional with periodic boundary conditions, as illustrated in Fig. The PV field is irradiated from direct sunlight under the Direct Normal Irradiance (DNI) Figure The four irradiance components which constitute the illumination of a solar module in dependence of the position P m on the module as defined in Fig. 2. Diffuse skylight I sky diff, f (s) hits the module at P m from directions within the wedge determined by D 1 P m D 2 . Diffuse light does not only reach the module from directions within the xz-plane but from a spherical wedge, which is closely linked to the sky view factor as for example used by Calcabrini et al. dir, f (s) denotes direct sunlight that hits the module after it was reflected from the ground. 4. Finally, I gr. diff, f (s) denotes diffuse skylight that hits the module after it was reflected from the ground. All four components are summarized in Table The total irradiance (or intensity) on front is given by and similar for the back side with a subscript b instead of f . In total, we hence consider eight illumination components on our module. As noted above, the incident light is given as DNI and DHI. The nonuniform irradiance distribution on the module front and back surfaces has to be considered. for the components arising from direct sunlight and diffuse skylight, respectively. Here we omitted the superscripts "sky" and "gr.". The calculation of the components ι gr. dir, f (s) and ι gr. diff, f (s) requires the integration over geometrical distribution functions on the ground γ dir (x g ) and γ diff (x g ), where x g is the coordinate of the point P g on the ground. Figure In particular, we have where we omitted the subscripts "diff" and "dir". The coordinate x g (s, α), on which γ dir and γ diff are evaluated, is defined such that the angle between the line P g P m and the module normal n m is equal to α -the integration parameter. In Fig. Figure Depending on the geometrical module parameters and the position of the Sun, the directly illuminated area (1) may lay completely within the unit cell as in the examples in Fig. Figure All the calculations presented in this work were performed with Python using numpy as numerical library for fast tensor operations. 3 Annual energy yield We calculate the annual electrical energy yield EY by feeding the illumination model described in section 2 with irradiance data. To demonstrate the features of the model, we use TMY3 (Typical Meteorological Year 3) data for this work. TMY3 data is well suited to estimate the solar energy yield for thousands of different locations. and EY b with a subscript b instead of f . TMY3 data is available at the time stamps t i and ∆t is the time between two time stamps, which is typically 1 h for TMY3 data. η f and η b denote the power conversion efficiency for light impinging on the front and back sides of the solar module, respectively. For this work, we use η f = 0.20 and η b = 0.18, hence a bifaciality factor of 0.9. The ι-functions are evaluated on the position ŝi ∈ P m , where P m = {s 1 , s 2 , . . . , s Nm } is the set of all considered positions along the module. In a conventional PV module, all cells are electrically connected in series and therefore the cell generating the lowest current limits the overall module current. To take this into account, we determine ŝi such that for all s ∈ P m . This means that the position on the module with the lowest irradiance, which is proportional to the solar cell current, determines the overall module performance. For high-end solar modules, the module performance might be higher depending on how bypass diodes are implemented. Therefore, our condition establishes a lower bound of the module performance under certain illumination conditions. For the diffuse irradiation components on the module, the corresponding geometrical distribution functions ι diff (s) need to be calculated only once because we assume the incoming diffuse radiation to be isotropic for all timestamps. For the components arising from direct sunlight, also the geometrical distribution functions ι dir (s, t i ) are time-dependent, because they depend on the position of the Sun (θ S,i , φ S,i ), As an example, we discuss results for two locations with different climates: First, Dallas/Fort Worth area, Texas (TX), USA (Denton, 195 m elevation, 33.21°N, 97.13°W) with a humid subtropical climate (Köppen-Geiger classification Cfa Figure For Dallas, the optimal angle for monofacial modules, which only can utilize front illumination, is about 28°; it is mainly determined by direct sunlight. For back illumination, H increases significantly with the module inclination angle θ m : hardly any direct light reaches the module at the back, but contributions from diffuse sky and reflected from the ground increase with θ m . Increasing the module tilt further reduces the shaded area on the ground and therefore increases ground illumination. The optimal module tilt for a bifacial module is a compromise between the optimal tilt for the front and beneficial higher tilt angles for back contribution. Overall, the optimal module tilt for bifacial modules is significantly higher than for monofacial modules. Here it is about 36°. Overall, the trends for Seattle are comparable to those for Dallas. However, we can identify differences: the overall radiant exposure is much lower because Seattle sees around 2170 annual Sun hours, compared to about 2850 h in Dallas. For the front side illumination we see the interesting effect that, while the latitude of Seattle and Dallas differ by 14.5°, the respective optimal tilt angles only differ by 4°. This is probably because of the higher contribution on the annual radiant exposure from the summer months in Seattle compared to Dallas. While in Seattle Mai-September contribute 77 % of the annual radiant exposure this is only 65 % in Dallas. Because the module irradiance during the summer months (with higher elevation angles of the sun) benefits from lower tilt angle θ m values this can explain the difference of latitude to optimal tilt angles. The higher fraction of diffuse light in Seattle that also benefits the radiant exposure on the front side for small θ m might additionally increase this effect. Figure Also the mounting height h affects the bifacial gain. Increasing the mounting height monotonically raises the energy yield. Therefore it is difficult to optimise this parameter without knowing additional technical and commercial constraints. However, we find that the bifacial gain starts to saturate for a height above 0.5 m, which is in agreement with work from Kreinin et al. In section 3 we discussed how to calculate the annual electrical energy yield and we analysed how the annual radiant exposure on the modules depends on the module spacing and tilt for two examples: Dallas and Seattle. In this section, we are going to derive a simple model for the electricity cost and perform some cost optimisations. As a measure for the electricity cost we use the levelized cost of electricity (LCOE), which is a key metric for electricity generation facilities. In the simplest case, the LCOE is given as the total cost C F spent in the facility during its lifetime T (in years) divided by the total amount of electric energy E total generated in that time, where E F is the electric energy generated by the PV field in one year. In more involved models also costs of capital and discount rates are taken into account. By considering a facility with a PV-field of M rows with N modules each the costs can be calculated per unit cell, The peak-power related costs per module C P,m are calculated with where c P denotes the peak-power associated costs given in [c p ] = $/kWp, which we use as input parameter. I P = 1 kW/m 2 is the peak irradiance as used for standardized PV characterization 28 and w and denote the module width and length, respectively. η f denotes the power conversion efficency on the front side of the solar cell. The cost of land consumption per module depends on module width w and spacing d, with the land cost c L given in [c L ] = $/m 2 , which is an input parameter. The annual generated electric energy of the PV field is given by with the annual yield EY according to eq. 4. Combining eqs. ( which is independent of the field dimensions M and N and the module width w. In this study, we assume for the overall costs of the PV system c m = 1000 $/kWp, which includes all costs over the lifetime of the solar park, such as PV module investment, balance of system cost, planning, capital cost and others. The land cost is not included in this The lifetime is assumed to be T = 25 years, a typical time span for the power warranty of solar cell modules. As optimisation method we use Bayesian optimisation, which is well suited to find a global minimum of black box functions, which are expensive to evaluate. Traditionally, the optimal tilt and module spacing are often estimated with the winter solstice rule. Figures We see that the optimum shifts to smaller module spacing with increasing land cost. Further, also the optimal module tilt decreases in order to compensate for increased shadowing because of less module spacing. Overall, bifacial installations show large module spacing and higher tilt angles in optimal configurations compared to monofacial technology. With increasing land costs and therefore reduced optimal module spacing the cost landscape gets increasingly steep. The sensitivity of the optimized parameters increases and using non-optimal geometrical configurations results in increasing yield loss. Seattle shows the same trends for optimal configuration in different cost scenarios. Compared to Dallas optimal tilt and spacing are higher. Our optimisation results differ significantly from the geometric parameters obtained from the winter solstice rule. For Dallas the winter solstice rule only provides comparable optimal parameters for c L = 5$/m 2 . In Seattle, the optimal distances are shorter and the optimal module tilts are larger than expected from the winter solstice rule for all cost scenarios. This can be understood when considering the large share of diffuse light during the Seattle winter, which mitigates shading losses significantly. From these results it is clear that the winter solstice rule is not able to properly reflect different economic trade-offs or different illumination conditions over the course of the year. This is especially true when setting the tilt angle to the latitude of the location. For a minimal LCOE module tilt and spacing should be optimised independently from each other. Further, typical weather patterns and the economic situation location must be taken into account. The results of all optimisations are summarised in Fig. The optimal configuration for bifacial solar cells depends on the radiation conditions and the albedo of the facility location. With increasing latitude (and therefore lower solar elevation angles), albedo and diffuse light contribution the bifacial gain will be increased and therefore make this type of PV technology more attractive for utility scale developers. Cost optimisations for PV installation are quickly outdated because PV module prices have been decreasing for many years and land cost is very volatile. However the optimal installation geometry only depends on the ratio of land cost related to total costs and not absolute values. Hence, at a scenario of c L = 10 $/m 2 and c P = 1500 $/kWp yields the same optimization result as c L = 5 $/m 2 and c P = 750 $/kWp. We developed a detailed model to calculate the irradiation onto both sides of a PV module, which is located in a large PV field. With this model, we could estimate the annual energy yield for monofacial and bifacial PV modules as a function of the module spacing and the module tilt. A simple model to calculate the levelized cost of electricity combined with a Bayesian optimisation algorithm allowed us to minimise the LCOE as a function of module spacing and module tilt for different land consumption costs. Our results show that the bifacial gain and optimal geometry depend on the specific location and cost scenario. The bifacial gain can be expected to increase for locations with higher latitude and higher diffuse light share. The usually used rule of thumb, no shadowing at winter-solstice and module tilt angle equal to the geographical latitude, leads to suboptimal module spacing and tilt combinations, because it does not account for economic trade-offs and the influence of the local climate. In contrast, optimising the parameters in Seattle can lead to a 23% reduction of LCOE for high land cost scenarios. This shows the significance of site-specific optimisation and helps users to identify the configurations yielding minimal LCOE. Figure The irradiance or intensity is the radiant power a surface receives per area. See for example ref. 24, appendix E. See for example Ref. 24, Chapter 21.