High pressure Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) is known to uncover behavior of matter at extreme conditions. However, significant maintenance demands, space requirements and high costs of superconducting magnets render its application unfeasible for regular modern high pressure laboratories. Here, we present a table-top NMR system based on permanent Halbach magnet arrays with dimensions of 25 cm diameter and 4 cm height. At the highest field of 1013 mT, 1 H-NMR spectra of Ice VII have been recorded at 25 GPa and ambient temperature. The table-top NMR system can be used together with double sided laser heating set-ups. Feasibility of high-pressure high-temperature NMR was demonstrated by collecting 1 H-NMR spectra of H2O at 25 GPa and 1063(50) K. We found that the change in signal intensity in laser-heated NMR diamond anvil cell yields a convenient way for temperature measurements. Recent developments of Diamond Anvil Cell (DAC) based NMR using two-dimensional magnetic flux tailoring Lenz lens resonator structures Two pressure cells of type BX90 All NMR experiments were conducted using a specialized Halbach array magnet of about 1 T field. The magnet has a diameter of 250 mm, heigth of 40 mm and a central hole of roughly 45 mm in diameter. Similar to previous experiments on Ice VII Relaxation delays were chosen to allow for full relaxation of the excited spin systems. To calibrate the magnetic field along the z-axis of the Halbach array magnet (perpendicular to the magnets main plane), the position of cell #1 was carefully changed in steps of 0.5 mm and the resulting center of gravity in frequency space after Fourier transform of the free induction decays were used as an internal primer for the polarizing external magnetic field B 0 in the sample chamber usign the relationship ω 0 = γ n B 0 . For the high temperature experiments, the Halbach magnet together with cell #2 positioned at the magnetic sweet spot was placed between two objectives of a pulsed laser heating set-up described in Ref. Figure Figure Figure 2/3 = 1063(50)K. Figure The aim of this work was the development of a low cost table-top NMR system which can be coupled with other high pressure instrumentation, in particular with laser-heating set-ups. Combining the introduced Halbach array magnet with a small or medium sized NMR spectrometer, significantly reduces space requirements of the whole NMR set-up. Furthermore, the permanent Halbach magnet is does not require maintenance in contrast to high electrical costs of electromagnets-or regular refill of cryogenic liquids in super-conducting magnets. The introduced set-up was shown to yield 1 H-NMR signals of similar spectral resolution in DAC-based experiments as standard electromagnets operating at the same magnetic fields of around 1 Tesla. First application within a double sided laser heating system demonstrated the potential of these set-ups for insitu simultaneous high pressure and high temperature NMR studies. While the found spectral resolutions are too low for structural determinations, the potential scope of this new method is immense. Possible experiments include the investigation of the electronic properties of super-ionic ices which could have a significant impact in the field of geoand planetary sciences, or the observation of formation of reaction products during laser heating assisted sample synthesis. Another field of application would be comprise the examination of melting and freezing dynamics, which would influence NMR spectra on the most basic level. This novel development might lead to a wider applicability of high pressure NMR in high pressure solid state physics, chemistry and geosciences communities. 