Spin waves are the low-energy excitations of magnetically ordered materials. They are key elements in the stability analysis of the ordered phase and have a wealth of technological applications. Recently, we showed that spin waves of a magnetic nanowire may carry a definite amount of orbital angular momentum components along the propagation direction. This helical, in addition to the chiral, character of the spin waves is related to the spatial modulations of the spin wave phase across the wire. It, however, remains a challenge to generate and control such modes with conventional magnetic fields. Here, we make the first proposal for a magnetic spiral phase plate by appropriately synthesizing two magnetic materials that have different speeds of spin waves. It is demonstrated with full-numerical micromagnetic simulations that despite the complicated structure of demagnetization fields, a homogeneous spin wave passing through the spiral phase plate attains the required twist and propagates further with the desired orbital angular momentum. While excitations from the ordered phase may have a twist, the magnetization itself can be twisted due to internal fields and forms what is known as a magnetic vortex. We point out the differences between both types of magnetic phenomena and discuss their possible interaction. Over the past few decades, it has been established that waves with an appropriate spatial structure of the phase can carry a definite amount of orbital angular momentum (OAM). This has been shown for classical electromagnetic waves as well as for the quantum dynamics of electrons, or neutron (cf. Refs. Our focus here is on magnetic materials and their excitations that propagate within the material itself. To appreciate the difference to electromagnetic waves carrying OAM, for instance, let us recall that the magnetization M (the order parameter in this case), enters the Maxwell-equation indirectly through the constitutive equation B/μ 0 = H + M which is a material-dependent equation (B is the magnetic flux density, and H is the magnetic field strength). The question of interest for magnetism is which ground state configuration is attained by M, and what is the structure of the excitation spectrum and the corresponding excited state for a given sample. Obviously, it is imperative to set up the freeenergy density of the field-free magnetic system, as well as the equation of motion for M. Once established, we may in principle couple the magnetic dynamics of M to the Maxwell dynamics of B (via the above constitutive equation) which allows investigating the photonic and the optomagnetic properties of the sample, as discussed in the first attempt in Ref. One well-documented method for generating optical vortex fields is to use a spiral phase plate In order to tackle this challenge, it is expedient to start from the fundamentals of magnetization dynamics. A classical magnetic dipole moment m exposed to an external magnetic field H precesses around the orientation of the field, a dynamic governed by the equation of motion (EOM) where γ 0 = 1.76×10 11 (T -1 s -1 ) is the gyromagnetic ratio and μ 0 = 4π10 -7 VsA -1 m -1 is the vacuum permeability. In practice, magnetic losses result in the magnetic moments being eventually aligned along the applied magnetic field. This effect can be introduced in the EOM via a phenomenological (Gilbert) damping parameter α leading to the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation Due to the newly established damping term, the magnetization dynamics is defined by a non-linear partial differential equation. By proceeding with a system of interacting magnetic moments which also includes dipolar interactions, the equation is not only non-linear but also non-local as every magnetic moment interacts with all others over their dipolar fields. These stray fields are commonly called demagnetizing fields as their contribution to the free energy functional favors vortex like configurations that diminish the net magnetization of the system. As an example, the demagnetizing field of a YIG cylindrical waveguide including a Py SPP is shown in figure In consequence the EOM of a magnetic material differs strongly from the Maxwell dynamics for electromagnetic waves. Nevertheless, the complex magnetization dynamics still can host spin waves with helical wave fronts as we showed recently To assess the feasibility of this basic idea, we set up and conduct micromagnetic simulations using the GPUaccelerated, open-source software package mumax3 includes the conventional external field B EXT i that excites spin waves in one end of the waveguide. The exchange interaction field is B EXCH i = 2A ex /M s ∆m i , with A ex being the exchange stiffness and M s the saturation magnetization. The uniaxial magnetocrystalline anisotropy field is B A i = 2K u /M s m z e z , with K u being the anisotropy constant. The demagnetizing field reads B DMF i = M sat Kij * m j , details on the calculation of the demagnetizing kernel K can be found in The external magnetic field, which is circularly polarized and is in the radio-frequency range, acts on the bottom end of the ferromagnetic wire. The peak amplitude is set to B max = 10 mT, the frequency is ω = 2π × 5 GHz and the polarization is circular right-handed. Upon switching on the external magnetic field magnonic plane waves are launched. The task is to convert this wave into a magnon OAM. To construct a magnonic SPP, we use two different materials. As in As a first approach, we disregard the computationally expensive demagnetizing field and check whether a SPP leads to the desired effect of thickness-dependent phase accumulation. The resulting wave fronts can be observed in figure Depending on the rotational sense of the phase plate, the resulting handedness of the helical wave fronts can be tuned, as shown in figures 2a (counterclockwise) and b (clockwise). Still, for both cases, the polarization of each magnetic moment is right-handed, which is the only possible rotational sense in ferromagnetic materials. It is remarkable that even though the nanostructured SPP is limited by the simulation grid's resolution and hence far from a perfectly smooth phase plate, the resulting twisted magnon wave shows the characteristics of the theoretically proposed OAM carrying magnon beam. In addition to the described basic geometry, the system outer boundaries are modeled to absorb most of the incoming magnons by introducing an exponentially increasing damping parameter in a tube shell with a 20 u. c. thickness. This helps to avoid reflection effects. The used material parameters for the YIG wire are: M s = 1.4 × 10 5 A m -1 , A ex = 3 × 10 -12 J m -1 , K u = 5 × 10 3 J m -3 , α = 0.01 When dealing with ferromagnetic systems on the micrometer scale, usually stray fields play an important role. This also holds for the cylindrical wires, where not only do the outer surfaces of the structure lead to strong demagnetizing fields but also the boundary between SPP and YIG nanowire will have an impact, mainly due to the large difference in the saturation magnetization of both materials. For a correct interpretation of the simulation results, one has to keep in mind that because of the demagnetizing field, the magnetization is not homogeneously aligned anymore but shows a canting close to the surface. Therefore, the excitation of the magnetization in figure Summarizing this section, we showed that in spite of the fundamental differences between the nature of magnetization dynamics -non-linear, non-local -and electromagnetic waves in free space, the concept of the SPP for the transformation of plane waves to helical waves holds for the field of magnonics. The long-range dipolar interaction does not necessarily endanger the spatial structure of magnon beams carrying orbital angular momentum but will have an even stronger influence as in the presented example for less symmetric geometries like cuboid-shaped waveguides, which has to be addressed in future studies. The transformation of an incident magnonic plane wave into a twisted magnon by a magnonic spiral phase plate considering demagnetizing fields. The color code corresponds to the excitation of the magnetization in the yz plane relative to the initial relaxed state (see figure Magnonic twisted beams are in essence small transverse deviations from the collinearly ordered phase. Hence, they are qualitatively different from other wellknown twisted magnetic states, for instance, magnetic vortices which are intrinsically non-collinear in their stable configuration Turning to the magnonic twisted eigenmode of the FM waveguide, the topological vorticity is given by the twisted beam OAM, -. The skyrmion number is, however, nearly zero. The chirality is not fixed as well. It depends on the radius r, the time t, and/or the distance z, as demonstrated in figure As for the interplay between the magnonic twisted beams and a magnetic vortex, it has been shown that a smooth background magnetic texture affects the dynamics of a spin wave by changing the basic equation that rules the spin wave behavior We discussed several aspects of magnonic beams carrying orbital angular momentum. We highlighted the characteristics of these topological excitations contrasting them with the well-known magnetic vortices. For generating OAM carrying magnonic beams, we proposed and realized numerically a magnonic spiral phase plate on the basis of the YIG/Py heterostructure. Full-fledged numerical simulations using the heterostructure endorse the experimental feasibility of this type of helical magnonic beams.