Novel materials incorporating electronic degrees of freedom other than charge, including spin, orbital or valley et al have manifested themselves to be of the great interests and applicable potentials. Recently, the multipolar degrees of freedom have attracted remarkable attention in the electronic correlated effects. In this work, we systematically studied the transport, magnetic and thermodynamic properties of the topological semimetal candidate PrBi in the framework of crystalline electric field theory. Our results demonstrate the Γ3 non-Kramers doublet as the ground state of Pr 3+ (4f 2 ) ions. This ground state is nonmagnetic but carries a non-zero quadrupolar moment Ô0 2 . A quadrupolar phase transition is inferred below 0.08 K. No obvious quadrupolar Kondo effect can be identified. Ultrahigh-field quantum oscillation measurements confirm PrBi as a semimetal with non-trivial Berry phase and low total carrier density 0.06 /f.u. We discuss the interplay between low carrier density and 4f 2 quadrupolar moment, and ascribe the weak quadrupolar ordering and Kondo effect to consequences of the low carrier density. PrBi, thus, opens a new window to the physics of topology and strongly correlated effect with quadrupolar degrees of freedom in the low-carrier-density limit, evoking the need for a reexamination of the Nozières exhaustion problem in the context of multi-channel Kondo effect. about specific heat Kondo effects involving quadrupolar degrees of freedom have attracted extensive attention. A conventional Kondo effect For whatever dipolar or quadrupolar Kondo effect, a general presumption is that the system contains indefinitely sufficient conduction electrons to screen the local moments. An interesting question, then, is what if in a system with low carrier density? This encourages us to recall the famous Nozières exhaustion idea In this work, we systematically studied the physical properties of the cubic-structured semimetal PrBi. Previous studies on PrBi have reported a large magnetoresistance (MR) which potentially originates from electronhole compensation High quality single crystalline PrBi and its non-4f reference LaBi were grown by Sb-flux method as described elsewhere First-principles calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) were performed using the planewave basis projected augmented wave (PAW) method as implemented in Vienna Abinit Simulation Package (VASP) The compound studied here, PrBi, is a topological semimetal with low carrier density. This can be seen from the transport measurements as shown in Fig. Clear Shubnikov-de Hass (SdH) quantum oscillations can be seen in ρ xx (B). After subtracting the nonoscillatory background ρ xx , we show the oscillatory part ∆ρ xx in Fig. The electron carrier density can be calculated by estimating the total volume of α pockets, and this yields n e =4.08 × 10 20 cm -3 . Note that we have incorporated the spin degeneracy. Since F γ is missing in SdH, we can not obtain the hole carrier density directly, however, n h is assumed to be close to n e in semimetals The main frame of Fig. where Ôm l (l=4,6; m=0,4) are Stevens operators We demonstrate that Γ 3 is the ground state in PrBi by fitting the magnetic susceptibility to the CEF theory, in which B 4 and B 6 are set as free parameters. The best fitting parameters are B 4 =0.0012(2) K, and B 6 =-0.00065(3) K. This is equivalent to W =-0.8911 K and x=-0.0808 in Lea-Leask-Wolf (LLW) parameters In Fig. It is possible that the degeneracy of the Γ 3 doublet ground state can be further lifted by quadrupolar Kondo effect or forming a quadrupolar ordering at lower tem-TABLE I. CEF parameters, energy levels, wave functions and the 4f charge distributions in PrBi at zero magnetic field. Calculated with B4=0.0012(2) K, and B6=-0.00065(3) K (or equivalently, W =-0.8911 K and x=-0.0808 in LLW parameters E(K) 0 0 50(5) 50( To summarize the important findings: (1) By ultrahigh field transport and quantum-oscillation measurements, we confirm PrBi as a topological semimetal with low carrier density, n e +n h ≈8.6×10 20 /cm 3 , viz 0.06 /f.u.; (2) The Pr 3+ 4f 2 sitting in the cubic-symmetry CEF has a nonmagnetic Γ 3 doublet ground state that carries non-zero Ô0 2 quadrupolar moments. They are expected to be ordered below 0.08 K; (3) Both quadrupolar Kondo effect and RKKY interaction seem to be rather weak in PrBi. Expanding further on point (3) above. The weak RKKY interaction between the quadrupolar moments can be seen not only from the super low quadrupolar transition temperature, but also indicated by the small Weiss temperature θ W exchange-field parameter λ. As RKKY interaction relies on conduction electrons, it is reasonable that it is weakened in the case of low carrier density. Kondo effect is reduced, as well. 0.06 /f.u. means 6 conduction electrons are to separately screen 100 quadrupolar moments, which apparently is not enough Topology, thus, meets active quadrupolar degrees of freedom in this low-carrier-density semimetal. It opens a new window to the physics of topology and strongly correlated effect with quadrupolar degrees of freedom. One interesting question is how does the physical property evolve with the c-f hybridization. We should point out that the PrP n family (P n=P,As,Sb,Bi) all crystallize in cubic structure and are all likely of Γ 3 CEF ground state. From Bi to P, the c-f hybridization should increase due to the "chemical pressure" effect, the low-temperature The inset shows the integrated entropy S 4f ; the black circles are calculated by assuming S 4f (2K)=0, and this leads to S 4f ≈R ln(9/2) at high T ; the magenta triangles represent an inferred curve with an assumption that the degeneracy of Γ3 doublet is further lifted by a low-T quadrupolar ordering, so that S 4f exhibits a plateau of R ln 2 and finally reaches R ln 9 at high T . property may change. But meanwhile, the spin-orbit coupling reduces, and the topological feature probably fades out. This trend has been seen in the non-4f analog LaP n According to the well-known Doniach phase diagram In all, the topological semimetal PrBi provides an interesting paradigm of quadrupolar degrees of freedom in the limit of low carrier density, evoking the necessity to revisit the Nozières exhaustion problem in the context of multi-channel Kondo effect. Note added: When completing this work, we became aware of several publications on the MR and SdH effect of PrBi R ln 9 at high temperature, as depicted by the blue line in the inset to Fig. * mpzslyk@gmail.com