Multiple superconducting order parameters are extremely rare. Here we show that a very small pressure can induce this phenomenon in the recently discovered heavy fermion superconductor UTe2. This nearly ferromagnetic system shows several intriguing phenomena, including an extraordinary reinforcement of superconductivity in very strong magnetic fields. We find that pressure can tune the system to a more correlated state and probable magnetic order. The superconducting critical temperature is strongly enhanced, reaching almost 3K, a new record for Ce-and U-based heavy fermion superconductors. Most spectacularly under pressure we find a transition within the superconducting state, putting UTe2 among the very rare systems having multiple superconducting phases. UTe2 under pressure is a treasure trove of several of the most fascinating phenomena in unconventional superconductivity and may well be a keystone in their understanding. In most superconductors the superconducting order parameter is s-wave, meaning it has the same symmetry as the crystal lattice. However in the ever expanding family of unconventional superconductors, which includes such disparate members as high-Tc cuprates and pnictides, organic superconductors, and heavy fermions, the order parameter can assume a number of different symmetries, usually lower than the lattice symmetry. This opens the intriguing possibility that a given system could in principle exhibit different order parameters, each one being selected by changing an external variable like temperature or magnetic field. This scenario does in fact exist, but is extremely rare, having been really established only in superfluid 3 He In this report we show that the superconductivity is extremely sensitive to hydrostatic pressure as a tuning parameter and that UTe2 is probably another example of multiple superconducting phases. The superconducting state found at zero pressure is monotonously depressed with pressure but a second superconducting state is found to emerge as pressure is increased. Pressure increases the splitting between the 2 transitions and the high temperature superconducting transition reaches nearly 3K, a new record for a U-based heavy fermion superconductor. Pressure also drives the system towards a more correlated state, with evidence for a strong enhancement of the electronic effective mass. At a critical pressure of about 1.7 GPa both superconducting states are suppressed and a new order parameter, probably magnetic, is found. UTe2 is a paramagnetic heavy fermion system, although its ground state seems to lie close to ferromagnetism In figure Single crystals of UTe2 were grown by vapor transport as described in more detail here In Figure For low pressures the temperature range used was the lowest range above the superconducting transition where a linear dependence in the plot of ρ versus T 2 was found. At higher pressure the fit was made avoiding the beginning of the upturn due to T M 3 , meaning the fit was typically made in the temperature range 6-8 K (see Figure Estimation of the slope of Hc2 from a strong coupling model The slope of the upper critical field at at T = T s is sensitive both to the superconducting transition temperature T s and to an average Fermi velocity v F perpendicular to the applied field. In most cases, the pressure dependence of T s is governed by the pressure dependence of the strong coupling constant λ, which is the most sensitive parameter (in the weak-coupling regime, T s depends exponentially on λ). In turn, the pressure dependence of λ implies a pressure dependence of v F , through the Eliashberg relation: where v band F is the band Fermi velocity renormalized by all interactions but the pairing mechanism. Using a minimal strong coupling model Semi-quantitative analysis of the jumps C/T at the two transitions Although the ac calorimetry measurement is not quantitative, we can compare amplitudes of the specific heat jumps ∆C/T in relation to each other at different pressures, see Figure Our aim is to verify thermodynamic conditions for the appearance of a phase diagram with the topology sketched in Figure In our analysis, we follow the approach used by Leggett in the analysis of the phase diagram of superfluid 3 He where second order derivatives of the Gibbs energy are