The effect of slip transfer on the deformation mechanisms of Al bicrystals was explored using a rate-dependent dislocation-based crystal plasticity model. Three different types of grain boundaries (GBs) were included in the model by modifying the rate of dislocation accumulation near the GB in the Kocks-Mecking law, leading to fully-opaque (dislocation blocking), fully-transparent and partially-transparent GBs. In the latter, slip transmission is only allowed in pairs of SS in neighbour grains that are suitably oriented for slip transfer according to the Luster-Morris parameter. Modifications of the GB character led to important changes in the deformation mechanisms at the GB. In general, bicrystals with fully-opaque boundaries showed an increase in the dislocation density near the GB, which was associated with an increase in the Von Mises stress. In contrast, the dislocation pile-ups and the stress concentration were less pronounced in the case of partially-transparent boundaries as the slip in one grain can progress into the next grain with some degree of continuity. No stress concentrations were found at these boundaries for fully-transparent boundaries, and there was continuity of strain across the boundary, which is not typical of most experimentally observed GBs There has been extensive research for the past three decades to identify how the microstructure affects the deformation of polycrystalline materials. Length scale effects installed into homogenized continuum polycrystal material models can simulate the effects of grain size and evolving dislocation density Development of the viscoplastic self-consistent model This complex set of boundary conditions makes approaches such as finite element modeling of mesoscale grain geometry necessary While both of the above approaches generate heterogeneous deformation in different parts of a given grain that is similar to experimental observations, the agreement between such models and experimental measurements with the same grain sizes and textures has not been fully convincing. For example, comparisons between experimental measurements of activated SS and simulations of the same (usually simplified) microstructure often show good agreement about which SS are activated, but the agreement is worse in regions near GBs and triple points There is much experimental evidence of hardening effects at GBs. For example, early observations of bicrystal deformation show that SS other than the most favoured one are active in some cases, but only near a GB Given that the finite element model intrinsically assumes transparent conditions at GBs, it is necessary to take into account the hardening effect of GBs. Many models have been developed in recent years to account for dislocation density evolution with the ability to account for dislocation transport through the crystal. These models include continuum dislocation dynamics models Moreover, Other approaches to account for GBs in the framework of CP include developing a mantle layer of elements in the GB, where the properties are either initially different from the grain interior, or evolve differently than in the grain interior, to provide the appropriate hardening effects In parallel, experimental investigations of slip transfer in Al polycrystals have provided a statistically relevant evidence that slip transfer across GBs took place when the Luster-Morris parameter > 0.95, which corresponds to low-angle boundaries with <15 • misorientation Slip transfer across GBs was studied in annealed polycrystalline Al foils of 200 μm in thickness deformed in uniaxial tension up to 5% strain The clearly visible slip traces identify the active SS operating in each grain. From the grain orientations (Table An additional advantage of the m αβ parameter is that it can be determined for each GB from the Euler angles of the adjacent grains In particular, Slip system number (N) and SF of grain through the grain boundary on one slip plane, as evident by the continuous slip traces and the lack of ledges along the GB (which are difficult to identify in Fig. The mechanical behavior in each crystal within the polycrystal follows the dislocation-based crystal plasticity model presented in where m is the strain-rate sensitivity coefficient, γ0 the reference shear strain rate and τ α c the critical resolved shear stress (CRSS) on the slip system α. Following where μ and b denote the shear modulus and the Burgers vector, respectively, and ρ β is the dislocation density in the slip system β. The dimensionless coefficients a αβ of the dislocation interaction matrix represent the average strength of the interactions between dislocations in pairs of SS and can be determined by means of dislocation dynamics simulations for each type of crystal lattice The overall hardening of the crystal during deformation is controlled by the evolution of the dislocation density, which depends on the balance between the generation and the annihilation of dislocations where α is the dislocation mean free path along the system α, d b the distance to the closest GB along the slip system α and y c the effective annihilation distance between dislocations. Dislocations are generated as a result of the interaction of dislocations with other dislocations within the bulk of each crystal and at the GBs, that block dislocation slip and lead to the formation of pile-ups. The former mechanism depends on α , which can be obtained as where K is the similitude coefficient relates the flow stress with the average wavelength of the characteristic dislocation pattern and was estimated by The mechanical behaviour of several idealized Al bicrystals with a GB perpendicular to the loading axis and a total length L = 0.36 mm, was analyzed using the finite element method. The schematic of the bycrystal is shown in Fig. The mechanical behavior of each grain was dictated by the rate-dependent crystal plasticity model in the context of finite strain plasticity (more details in It should be noted that the grain boundaries are not modeled as a single row of elements in each crystal in the bicrystal model. All the Gauss points in the finite element model for which the condition 1 α > Ks d b is fulfilled are affected by the presence of the grain boundary, regardless of whether they are in the first row of elements in contact with the grain boundary or farther away. Moreover, as α varies during deformation in each Gauss point, the region affected by the grain boundary also changes during the simulation. Three different pairs of bicrystals were analyzed. The first two cases are idealized simulations to understand the effect of slip transfer with two contrasting cases where the mechanisms of deformation around the boundary involved a single slip system and two SS. In each case, two different sets of boundary conditions were considered. The first one was unconstrained de-formation, in which the bicrystal was deformed in tension along the z axis while the lateral surfaces were stress-free. The second boundary condition corresponded to constrained deformation: the bicrystal was deformed in tension along the z axis while periodic boundary conditions were applied on the surfaces perpendicular to the x and y axes. In all cases, the nodes at z = L were displaced at a constant velocity along the z axis, leading to a constant strain rate of 7.0 10 -4 s -1 , up to a far-field applied strain of 2%. The third case analyzed corresponds to the two crystals with the orientation in Fig. For each bicrystal and boundary conditions set, three simulations were carried out with different properties for the GB. In the first case (fully transparent GB), the term K s /d b in eq. ( The finite element simulations of the bicrystal behavior were carried out in Abaqus/Standard (Abaqus, 2017) within the framework of the finite deformations theory with the initial unstressed state as reference. The non-linear constitutive equations were integrated using a Newton-Raphson algorithm The behavior of three bicrystals with different orientations were analyzed using the crystal plasticity model presented above. The first two cases are ideal bicrystals. In the first case, referred to hereafter as the single slip case, each crystal is oriented to have the maximum possible Schmid factor of 0.5, with these slip systems aligned to be perfectly aligned with each other. In the second case, both crystals are oriented such that two slip systems have the highest possible Schmid factor of 0.43, but only one of them is perfectly aligned with one of the two favored slip systems in the other grain, referred to hereafter as the double slip case. Simulations of the ideal bicrystals were carried out using unconstrained and periodic boundary conditions, and they are analyzed separately. The third case corresponds to the experimental GB in Fig. The crystallographic orientation of each crystal in the three bicrystals are given in Table The magnitude of the SFs under uniaxial tension and of the Luster-Morris m αβ parameter for each pair of SS is presented in Table The tensile stress-strain behaviour near the GB of the two Al bicrystals computed with unconstrained boundary conditions, and the corresponding ) where one slip system is favored over others with the maximum SF and they are aligned nearly perfectly with each other. The first column and the first row indicate the number (N) of the slip system in the grains B and A, that are to the left and to the right of the GB in Fig. Slip system number (N) and SF of grain A ). The first row and the first column indicate the number (N) of the slip system in the grains A and B, that are to the left and to the right of the GB in Fig. Slip system number (N) and SF of grain A hardening rate-strain curves are plotted in Figs. 4a) and b), respectively. For both bicrystals, the results of the simulations show a higher flow stress with decreasing GB transparency although the differences were small. The strengthening induced by GBs results from the region near the GB in which the storage of dislocations at the boundary increased the dislocation density. The hardening rate of the single-slip bicrystals (Fig. For the single-slip favored Al bicrystal, the deformation of the two crystals in the presence of a transparent boundary is dominated by the slip system with the highest SF in each crystal as noted in bold in Table The accumulated shear strains in each slip system near the boundary in Figs. For the double-slip bicrystal, the accumulated shear strain in each slip system is plotted in Fig. There is negligible opportunity for slip transfer from slip system 10 in Grain A to either of the highly active systems in grain B (m = 0.42 for slip system 4 and m = 0.19 for slip system 8). In each grain, the two most favored SS are on different planes and in different directions, such that each will generate forest dislocation barriers on the other system. With these four Figure favored SS, the hardening rate resulting from double-slip is higher than that in the single slip case (Fig. In the double-slip bicrystal with the partially transparent boundary, the shear strain at the center adjacent to the boundary showed a significant reduction in the shear strains near the boundary, as shown in Figs. The total slip Γ (= α | γα | dt) along a line perpendicular to the GB in the center of the bicrystal is shown in Fig. The equivalent plot of the total slip for the double-slip bicrystal is shown in Fig. The influence of slip transfer at GBs on the deformation pattern can be assessed from Figs. ??-10 for the single-slip bicrystal, and 11-13 for the double slip bicrystal. These figures show the contour plots of the accumulated plastic slip on all SS, the total dislocation density and the Von Mises stress, for a single-and double-slip Al bicrystals, for the different boundary characteristics, namely fully transparent, partially transparent and fully opaque. In the case of the fully transparent boundary, slip in one grain can progress into the next grain with apparent continuity for single and double slip, as shown in accumulated plastic slip contour plots in Figs. ??a and 11a. The continuity of the orange band through the boundary and of the red regions of maximum strain near the boundary illustrate that the boundary has no influence on the continuity of the dominant slip system in Fig. In contrast, there is more plastic deformation away from the boundary than around the GB for the partially transparent and fully opaque boundaries, as shown in Figs. ??b-c and 11b-c. The reduction in the plastic slip near the boundary is accompanied by an increase in the dislocation density due to the formation of dislocation pile-ups (Figs. It is interesting to notice that the transition from fully-transparent to partially-transparent to fully-opaque GBs also leads to a gradual transition in all the fields (plastic slip, dislocation density and von Mises stress) near the GB in the case of single slip (Figs. ??, 9 and 10). One important consequence of this observation is that hindering the slip transfer of the less active SS (partially-transparent interface) cannot be neglected although most of the plastic slip in both crystals is concentrated in two SS suitable oriented for slip transfer. If it is assumed that the GB is fully transparent for all SS, the predictions of all the field variables will be very different from those obtained if slip transfer along less-active SS with low m is inhibited. In the case of the double slip bicrystal, the contour plots of the field variables (plastic slip, dislocation density and von Mises stress) near the GB are very similar for the cases of partially-transparent and opaque boundary) and very different from those found for the fully-transparent boundary The tensile deformation of single-and double-slip Al bicrystals were simulated under constrained periodic boundary conditions, and the corresponding stress-strain curves and hardening curves are plotted in Fig. The accumulated shear strains in the active SS near the boundary are shown for both grains in Fig. For the single-slip Al bicrystal subjected to periodic boundary conditions, the most favored SS with the highest SFs are activated (slip system 2 in crystal A and slip system 8 in crystal B) as shown in Fig. In contrast to the single-slip bicrystal, the double-slip bicrystal deformed under constrained boundary conditions shows very different distributions of shear strain on the favored SS (Fig. Regardless of these differences in the active systems for the bicrystal oriented for double slip for unconstrained and constrained boundary conditions, the effect of the GB characteristics on the field variables did not change. The contour plots of the total slip accumulated on all the SS is not plotted because there is no spatial variation. The contour plots of the Von Mises stress for single-and double-slip Al bicrystals are shown in Figs. 17 and 18, respectively, for the different GBs. The Von Mises stress is nearly homogeneous throughout the sample, Figs. 17a) and 18a) for the transparent GB, while a stress concentration develops near the GB due to a pileup of dislocations at the impenetrable interface for the opaque GB (Figs. The m αβ values for all pairs of SS in the experimental GB are provided in Table In the experimental evidence in Fig. The simulated shear strain accumulated on each slip system at points A and B (very close to the GB in the center of the sample in each crystal in Fig. Considering the relative ranking of SS based upon uniaxial tension assumptions, the relative ranking from the simulations differ significantly, especially for grain B, where they are in nearly the reverse order; the most active slip system in all three simulations has the 6th highest SF. The relative ranking of activity of SS in grain B is more consistent for the three simulations than in grain A, which has a variety of relative rankings depending on the simulation. While the agreement is not perfect, the simulation has significantly different boundary conditions than the simulation, as the simulation has free surfaces on all four sides, and the experiment has one free surface from which observations come. The simulation tracks slip activity in the center of the sample. Given these rather important differences, it is reasonable that the agreement is not perfect. Nevertheless, the degree of agreement between the experiment and simulation is at least semi-quantitatively credible, suggesting that the simulation method is able to capture a reasonable approximation of physically meaningful slip behavior as influenced by the grain boundary. This comparison is not a validation of the model, but it points toward consistency. The effect of slip transfer on the deformation mechanisms of Al bicrystals deformed in tension was explored using a rate-dependent dislocation-based crystal plasticity model. The critical resolved shear stress on each slip system depends the dislocation density through the Taylor model and the evolution of the dislocation density in each slip system follows a Kocks-Mecking law. In the latter, the net storage rate of dislocations per slip system is the sum of a positive storage rate governed by a length scale which was the lowest of the dislocation mean free path or distance to the GB, and a negative term accounting for dynamic recovery. This formulation naturally leads to the formation of pile-ups at the GBs and, thus, to fully-opaque (blocking) GBs Two ideal bicrystals were oriented for preferred slip on a single slip system and for slip on two SS with the same high Schmid factor, and simulations were carried out under unconstrained and constrained periodic boundary conditions. The results of the numerical simulations showed that the plastic deformation of the bicrystal by dislocation glide occurs along the SS that have high SF. The stress-strain curves for double-slip bicrystals exhibit higher hardening than those for a single-slip bicrystal because of latent hardening. Modifications of the GB character led to important changes in the deformation mechanisms at the GB. In general, bicrystals with fully-opaque boundaries deformed under unconstrained boundary conditions showed an increase in the dislocation density near the GB, which was associated with an increase in the Von Mises stress. Moreover, the plastic strains at the boundary were smaller than in the bulk. In contrast, the dislocation pile-ups and the stress concentration were less pronounced in the case of partiallytransparent boundaries as the slip in one grain can progress into the next grain with some degree of continuity. No stress concentrations were found at the GBs for fully-transparent boundaries, and there was continuity of strain across the boundary, which is not typical of most experimentally observed GBs Nevertheless, the magnitudes of the dislocation pile-ups and stress concentrations at the GBs depended on the details of crystallographic slip and boundary conditions and this was demonstrated by comparing the idealized bicrystals oriented for single and double slip. The single slip oriented bicrystal enables easy slip transmission through the boundary, making the boundary more similar to a transparent condition. In contrast, when two SS have similar potential for activation in both grains, but only one pair is aligned, the strain is higher on the slip system pair that is aligned, but the effects of latent hardening cause the boundary to become almost as opaque as a fully opaque boundary. Therefore the conditions for slip transfer depend sensitively on the number of active SS in operation in the neighborhood. This outcome suggests that most boundaries will lead to nearly opaque conditions, and that some boundaries will be partially transparent. Thus. incorporating slip transfer into a crystal plasticity model that assumes that GBs are fully-opaque Finally, the model was applied to a particular experimentally observed GB in which slip transfer was clearly operating. The appropriate application of the model to the most favored SS predicted significantly different levels of slip system activity than either the transparent or opaque cases, but in all three cases, the experimentally observed SS were among those that showed high activity in the simulations. Nevertheless, the actual boundary conditions in the experiment and the simulation are not the same, so this represents a reasonable demonstration that the model can produce a meaningful outcome, but it is not a validation of the model. This investigation was supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Advanced Grant VIRMETAL, grant agreement No. 669141) and by the HexaGB project supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science (reference RTI2018-098245). T.R. Bieler acknowledges the support from the Talent Attraction program of the Comunidad de Madrid (reference 2016-T3/IND-1600) for his sabbatical in Madrid and R. Alizadeh also acknowledges the support from the Spanish Ministry of Science through the Juan de la Cierva program 