Faraday and Kerr rotations are magnetooptical (MO) effects used for rotating the polarization of light in transmission and reflection from a magnetized medium, respectively. MO effects combined with intrinsically fast magnetization reversal, which can go down to a few tens of femtoseconds or less, can be applied in magnetooptical spatial light modulators (MOSLMs) promising for nonvolatile, ultrafast, and high-resolution spatial modulation of light. With the recent progress in low-power switching of magnetic and MO materials, MOSLMs may lead to major breakthroughs and benefit beyond state-of-the-art holography, data storage, optical communications, heads-up displays, virtual and augmented reality devices, and solid-state light detection and ranging (LIDAR). In this study, the recent developments in the growth, processing, and engineering of advanced materials with high MO figures of merit for practical MOSLM devices are reviewed. The challenges with MOSLM functionalities including the intrinsic weakness of MO effect and large power requirement for switching are assessed. The suggested solutions are evaluated, different driving systems are investigated, and resulting device architectures are benchmarked. Finally, the research opportunities on MOSLMs for achieving integrated, high-contrast, and low-power devices are presented. microscopy Among the above-mentioned applications, spatial light modulators (SLMs) have drawn significant attention since they are the key components of many photonic devices including holograms and display systems, optical interconnects, projectors, functional Raman microscopy, and visible light communications These SLMs are final products, which cannot yet simultaneously achieve fast modulation and high spatial resolution needed for holography and 3D imaging. For high quality video holograms, SLMs with high space bandwidth product (SBP) are required. SBP is the product of physical size of SLM and the spatial bandwidth, which is determined by the total pixel count in SLM. For a constant SBP, there is a trade-off between the size of viewing window (eye box) and field of view (FoV). For holographic systems with both high FoV and large eye box, SLMs with high pixel counts are needed. Increasing the size of SLM for this purpose is not feasible in most applications due to prohibitively large system sizes, ergonomic considerations, driving optics and electronics. As a result, the solutions focused on reducing the pixel sizes. Large pixels also cause narrow viewing zone and aliasing noise (overlap of diffraction orders) according to the following relation between viewing angle and pixel pitch: Magnetooptical (MO) effects are the phenomena which result from angular momentum transfer between photons and magnetic moments in a magnetized matter. In the classical picture, light with linear polarization is the superposition of a left-and a right-hand circularly polarized (LHCP and RHCP) light beams with identical amplitudes and a phase difference. The phase difference between LHCP and RHCP components of a linearly polarized light defines the angle of its polarization plane. When light is shone on a material, the angular momenta associated with its circularly polarized components affect the charged particles in the material and result in their circular motions. These motions lead to effective magnetic fields that are in opposite directions for LHCP and RHCP beams. When an external magnetic field is applied, the net field magnitudes experienced by LHCP and RHCP components are different, which causes dissimilar interaction and propagation velocities for each The spectral and composition dependence of MO effects and their intensities provide characteristic signatures on the electromagnetic (EM) waves or electronic and spin structure of materials where λ is the wavelength and p is the pixel pitch. For an acceptable viewing angle, the pixel pitch should be on the order of the wavelength of light (pixels < 1 μm for visible) Thus, SLMs with small pixel size, high pixel count, and sufficiently fast to address plenty of pixels in a single image frame, are desired for holography. Research is in progress to reduce the pixel size SLMs that use MO effects for modulating light, called magnetooptical spatial light modulators (MOSLMs), hold promise to address the above-mentioned challenges associated with current SLMs. In MOSLMs, the polarization plane of light is rotated by MO effects and using polarizers allows for passing only the light components at specific polarization angles. This makes possible the analog or digital modulation of light by controlling the amount of rotation in polarization plane, i.e. the intensity of occurring MO effects. Each pixel can be controlled and switched by manipulating its magnetization state. By reversing the magnetic moments in a pixel, the direction of Faraday/Kerr rotation can be reversed and this phenomenon is observed in the intensity and phase of the out coming beam Table Another advantageous feature accompanying MOSLMs is the magnetic remanence, which makes them nonvolatile devices that can operate as memory elements and save the written data in absence of power. Furthermore, MOSLM is a robust solid-state device that can eliminate disadvantages of mechanically moving parts and complicated fabrication steps in DMDs, or pixel crosstalk due to the fluid shape of material and lack of physical separation between pixels in LC-based devices Combination of these features makes MOSLMs outstanding candidates for holographic applications and 3D displays optical isolators and circulators Comparing Tables Power requirements reported for MOSLM prototypes do not include complicated driving electronics and optics, so a final power comparison between mature SLM types and MOSLMs should be done after MOSLMs turn into products. On the other hand, the pixel pitch sizes, pixel counts, wavelength ranges (visible only) and the modulation types (binary only) in MOSLMs must be improved by using the recent MO materials breakthroughs and new switching physics. The main issue hindering MOSLM from practical device applications is the inherent weakness of MO effects. The modulation depth and pixel contrast in MOSLMs depend on the Faraday and Kerr rotation angles. The magnitude of Faraday rotation (FR) is proportional to the path length of light in the MO material while Kerr rotation is generally not large enough (~milliradians) for practical device applications. Hence, enhanced MO effects and reduced optical loss are essential while miniaturizing and integrating MO devices In section 2, we discuss different MO materials as potential constituents of MOSLMs and report the progress to improve the practicality and efficiency of MOSLMs. In section 3, we review the methods for enhancing MO effects with a focus on photonic crystal and plasmonics. In section 4, we present the conventional and the recently developed low power spintronic switching methods for MOSLMs. In section 5, we attempt at bridging the progress covered in sections 2-4 towards nonvolatile, ultrafast and low power MOSLMs by covering the desired materials/device specifications and suggesting implementations for spanning different spatial and temporal resolutions of modulation. Magnetooptical effects mostly occur in magnetic materials with nonzero magnetization such as ferromagnets and ferrimagnets; however, these phenomena have been observed in antiferromagnetic materials as well The property of a magnetooptical or gyrotropic material with a magnetization along z direction can be described with an antisymmetric permittivity tensor in the form of where all tensor elements are complex numbers having real and imaginary parts. Below Curie temperature T c the value of ε 3 is very close to ε 1 and above T c it is equal to ε 1 . With a restriction of low magnetic field and sticking to linear MO effects, it can be safely assumed ε 3 = ε 1 which simplifies the matrix to two, diagonal and off-diagonal, elements Materials that exhibit MO effects can be distinguished in three different categories. In the first category, MO effects originate from the direct action of magnetic field on the orbital motion of electrons and ε 2 is essentially a function of magnetic field (H). All diamagnetic materials including organic molecules and planar molecules with at least uniaxial symmetry fall into this category. In the second category, spin-orbit coupling of aligned spins is the main motive of MO effects, while the direct impact of magnetic field on the electronic orbital motion is negligible. In other words, magnetic interaction of an oriented spin has a much stronger effect on the orbital motion of an electron compared to the direct effect of an external magnetic field. Ferromagnets and nonmetallic paramagnets at low temperatures are in this category, and it is more appropriate to indicate ε 2 as a function of magnetization (M) instead of H in this group of materials. Semiconductors and nonferromagnetic metals establish the third category which represents a transition between these two extremes. In this category, both orbital motion and spin-orbit interactions can have a noticeable role in the MO phenomena and there is no explicit distinction Magnetooptics involves a close interplay between absorption and polarization rotation, which both strongly depend on the electronic band structure. One could study various MO materials under dielectrics, metals, semimetals and 2D materials categories. Below, we present the materials falling in each class and review the materials engineering efforts for improving the performance of MO materials. Due to their high reflectivity, metals are mainly used in reflection configuration and for Kerr effect; while Faraday effect, mostly achievable in wide bandgap magnetic dielectrics, is more useful for practical device purposes Dielectric MO materials include different magnetic oxides, ferrites, spinels, sulfides, and trihalides and we calculated the best FoM achieved in the literature for fundamental red, green, and blue wavelengths, using the provided data and finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations. From Table In metals and alloys, MO properties depend on the density difference of spin-up and spin-down electrons near the Fermi level and the oscillator strength of the optical transitions. Due to such a dependence, it is not intuitive to directly link MO effects with their microscopic origin in the metallic systems, nonetheless, first-principles calculations can provide hints Magnetic transition metals such as Fe, Ni, Co and their alloys, rare earth-transition metal compounds and intermetallics exhibit MO effects and potentially can be used in MOSLMs; however, their practical application for SLM devices is generally complicated due to small magnitude of the effects or large absorption in metals MO activity has been reported even in the noble metals, but with a much weaker intensity compared to the ferromagnets Although MO devices are normally based on the conventional MO materials which were discussed above, lately remarkable MO properties were demonstrated in semimetals and twodimensional (2D) materials which promise for groundbreaking high-density MO and spintronic devices. Graphene, being the first prototype of 2D materials, has a semimetallic nature with unique mechanical, optical and thermal properties It was shown that the giant FR in graphene could be further enhanced by constructive Fabry-Perot interference from substrate, and simulation results presented Faraday rotations up to 0.15 rad (~9o) in multilayer epitaxial graphene grown on SiC In addition to pristine graphene, MO effects have been sought in nitrogen-graphene crystals, which are graphene with different substitutions of C atoms with N. Based on first-principles calculations, in N-C 2D materials, Faraday and Kerr rotation angles strongly depend on carrier carrier concentration and can be tuned by gate voltage More recently, MO effects have been demonstrated in 3D and bulk semimetals. MO properties of Weyl semimetals MO measurements can help probe chiral anomaly in Weyl semimetal state, which can be hosted in noncentrosymmetric and nonmagnetic monoarsenides/phosphides of transition metals, such as TaAs The magnitude of Kerr angle increased with increasing magnetic field or current density. While these materials provide new mechanisms and giant MO figures of merit, their functionalities under ambient conditions and with small magnetic fields are yet to be demonstrated for integrating with MOSLMs. Various materials with different stoichiometries and structures, synthesis methods and parameters, as well as fabrication of composite MO materials were studied in order to achieve larger MO effects. Fabrication procedures and parameters have important effects on MO properties since they determine the final stoichiometry of the materials Among numerous efforts for achieving larger rotation angles in nonreciprocal devices, doping iron garnets with Bi Although garnets were epitaxially grown on lattice-matched Gadolinium Gallium Garnet (GGG) substrates Some other efforts in the context of engineering MO materials include following works: Nur -E-Alam et al. Sadatgol et al. As mentioned in the introduction section, for realization of practical miniaturized and integrated devices, MO effects need to be enhanced while retaining optical losses in an acceptable level. Other than materials engineering that was discussed in the previous section, device engineering can serve favorably for this purpose. Efforts in this regard have led to different MOSLM device structures that will be described in the present section. The first MOSLM was composed of magnetic garnet pixels on a nonmagnetic substrate, operating in transmission mode and being thermally switched by a laser beam Other approaches that have been studied extensively in the literature for enhancing MO effects in active nonreciprocal devices, are identified in the following subsections: Magnetophotonic crystal (MPC) is one of the concepts studied extensively in the literature, for enhancing MO effects in thin films Transmission spectrum of this MPC is shown in Figure Fabrication of an optimized magnetophotonic crystal is challenging since it requires deposition of MO films on non-garnet substrates. This makes it highly difficult to grow single crystal MO layers. Moreover, lattice mismatch between layers can cause defects, cracks, and appearance of undesired absorptive phases. All these problems deteriorate the MO and MPC properties. Another disadvantage of this approach is the bandwidth limitations originating from the transmitted linewidth of the magnetophotonic defect state. While higher number of cavity layers in the MPC enhances the strength of FR, as the linewidth of the transmission peak decreases, the operation bandwidth for this system also decreases. Therefore, for broader band operation, nonresonant or multiple-resonant device architectures need to be developed. Another major approach proposed for enhancing MO effects is magnetoplasmonics where plasmonics hybridized with MO materials enable highly localized field enhancement arising from surface plasmon resonances (SPR) In this approach, localization and enhancement of the EM fields, which increases the lightmatter interactions and leads to enhancement of MO effects, takes place in small subwavelength volumes near the plasmonic structures Thus, enhancement happening all over a thicker film and obtaining a high total rotation requires embedding multiple layers of plasmonic structures in the film Plasmonic enhancement of MO effects can be particularly useful for sensing applications. Both the localized field intensity and optical activity enhancement due to plasmonic modal hybridization can help sense any minor changes in the near-field environment and identify the present materials by recognition and amplification of their fingerprint characteristics in interaction with an EM wave. In magnetooptical surface plasmon resonance (MOSPR) sensors, the enhancement of MO effect and signal-to-noise ratio enable better limit-of-detection (LOD) Raman spectroscopy is a functional method to acquire specific information about materials based on their vibrational, rotational and translational modes of bond structures and densities. This technique, however, suffers from weak Raman signal intensity which limits its sensitivity, and requires long accumulation times and large sample amount In summary, MO structures functionalized with plasmonic surfaces provide highly localized fields and significantly enhance the signal, and this makes them ideal for sensing applications. Furthermore, metallic layers could serve the dual purpose of bias contacts and magnetoplasmonic surfaces in active devices. Applications such as telecommunications could benefit from voltage control and encoding of digital ON/OFF states in the magnetoplasmonic layers. On the other hand, there are some disadvantages in using plasmonics that limit their widespread applications in practical devices. Field enhancement is only localized in small volumes around plasmonic structure. Moreover, the enhancement strongly depends on the plasma resonances of available metals, which fixes the wavelength ranges of operation and limits flexibility. Patterning plasmonic structures could be an expensive process, and these metallic structures cause high optical losses in transmission based devices. In this section, we review different mechanisms reported for magnetization switching that can potentially be used as driving systems for active MOSLM devices. At the end of the section, we will give a comparison of these mechanisms and evaluate their applicability in practical MOSLMs. In 1958, Mayer showed the feasibility of thermomagnetic writing on the magnetic films using a heated pen In the following years, Fan et al. Recently, Stanciu et al. The first MOSLM Thermomagnetic writing in MOPS was implemented by applying an electric pulse to the transparent electrodes and developing Ohmic heat in the illuminated area of the photoconductor, where conduction electrons are generated. Recently, Takagi et al. We discussed above the magnetization switching caused by the heating effect of a laser pulse that its polarization in not determinative. Using thermal effects of a laser leads to low rates of manipulating magnetization, since the repetition frequency would be limited slow cooling rates. Nonetheless, an ultrafast laser pulse is capable of manipulating the magnetization via nonthermal effects as well. Such nonthermal interactions are instantaneous and their time limitation comes only from the laser pulse widths. In contrast to thermal effects, polarization of the exciting laser plays an important role in occurrence of these effects, and they are recognized in two different types: photomagnetic and optomagnetic effects. Photomagnetic effects rely on the absorption of photons leading to an effective excitation of the magnetic system. Optomagnetic effects are based on a coherent Raman-like optical scattering with no need for absorption of photons. In fact, optomagnetic effects are the inverse of magnetooptical effects Kimel et al. Hansteen et al. In case of circularly polarized pulse, in addition to the described effect, a strong transient magnetic field is created along the propagation vector, through inverse Faraday effect. Although Hansteen et al. achieved only 0.6o of magnetization switching with a 100 fs pump pulse, an adequate association of optically induced magnetic anisotropy and magnetic field enables full control and reversal of magnetization. Recently, Stupakiewicz et al. In 1983, LIGHT-MOD (Litton iron garnet H-triggered magneto-optic device) To switch a pixel, current is passed through two adjoining row and column drivelines intersecting at the selected pixel. The magnetic field generated by only one current line is not sufficient to induce magnetization reversal in the pixels, thus an entire row or a column would not be switched. However, the combined magnetic field produced by the two of drivelines switches the magnetic state of the selected pixel. Figure Due to its electrical addressing, LIGHT-MOD was a programmable, fast and stable device and found different applications in optical processing Another current-induced mechanism proposed for magnetization switching and potential for MOSLMs is the use of spin torques. This novel method involves no magnetic field, so it can eliminate the crosstalk problem associated with stray fields which becomes significant when the pixel pitch is small. There is no need for an active-matrix driveline system in this method, and its current demand is orders of magnitude lower than the magnetic-field-based control One approach under this category is called spin-transfer torque (STT), in which the spinpolarized nature of a current passing perpendicular through a magnetic multilayer creates a spin angular momentum transfer between the magnetic sublayers. Devices consisted of altering magnetic and nonmagnetic metal layers of a few nanometers thicknesses show giant magnetoresistance (GMR) One of the magnetic layers designated as free layer changes magnetization with a small magnetic field, while the other magnetic layer, called pinned layer, requires a large magnetic field to switch the magnetization orientation. In order to use such a structure for MO modulation of light, the free layer needs to have MO properties. When a current applied perpendicular to the films plane, passes through the pinned layer, it gains spin polarization and when this spinpolarized current is directed to the free layer, its angular momentum can be transferred to the free layer, changing its magnetization direction. Typical current densities required for magnetization switching in this method are on the order of 10 7 A.cm -2 The other approach that exploits spin torques for magnetization switching is called spin-orbit torque (SOT). This mechanism involves spin Hall According to the spin Hall effect (SHE) According to Rashba effect, when a ferromagnetic film is sandwiched between two dissimilar materials, the electric potential is highly asymmetric in the direction perpendicular to the films plane, which results in a structural inversion asymmetry (SIA) in this direction. Electrons moving in such a structure experience a net electric field, E, that transforms to an effective magnetic field, H R, due to SO interaction: where α R is a material parameter related to the strength of the SO coupling, ẑ is the unit vector parallel to E and <k> is the average electron wavevector. When no current is applied, populations of the k and -k states are equal and <k>=0, however, when a charge current is applied, distribution the electrons in k-space becomes asymmetric. This produces a net effective field and creates a non-equilibrium spin accumulation perpendicular to the current flow, which can subsequently apply a torque on magnetic moment of the material and induce magnetization reversal In a similar effect, if the electric field E resulting in an effective magnetic field and thus, a spinorbit torque, is due to a bulk inversion asymmetry (BIA), this mechanism is called Dresselhaus effect Typical heterostructures exhibiting SOTs consist of a ferromagnetic film sandwiched between a heavy metal with strong SO coupling, and an insulator In spite of the above-mentioned improvements in current-driving of MOSLMs, the required current densities (typically ranging from 10 5 to 10 7 A.cm -2 ) still exceed the critical current values for commercially acceptable energy consumption and reliable device operation. Because of the current passing through the conductors with small cross section, Joule heating occurs over small pixels and causes switching errors due to the temperature drift. Thermal drift due to Joule heating is inevitable in the current-based methods. This situation has motivated the search for lower power switching schemes. Early experimental demonstrations have shown that by eliminating resistive losses, multiferroics reduce the energy dissipation per unit area per switch to 1-500 μJ.cm -2 , which is a noteworthy advancement in comparison to that of current-driven switching (1-10 mJ.cm -2 ) Multiferroic magnetoelectric structures can be divided into two categories: single-phase multiferroic materials in which magnetoelectric coupling enables tailoring the magnetic properties by application of an electric field, and composite structures which combine a ferroelectric (or piezoelectric) material with a ferromagnet (or magnetostrictive component). In practice, the magnetoelectric coupling in composite systems happens through one of the following physical mechanisms -Strain coupling: modification of the magnetic properties through magnetostriction, which is controlled through voltage-driven strain changes -Impact of the polarization direction of the ferroelectric component on the electronic structure of the ferromagnetic one in their interface -Harnessing the exchange interaction between a ferromagnet and a (magnetic) ferroelectric material Figure Magnetoelectric or voltage-driven magnetization reversal minimizes resistive losses and in principle, only needs a charge supply sufficient for a charge/discharge of a capacitor. This reduces the energy dissipation by two orders of magnitude in comparison to the current-driven methods In summary, various magnetization switching methods reviewed in this section have their advantages and disadvantages for application in driving system of MOSLMs. Among all these methods, voltage driving which is a multiferroic switching mechanism, seems more viable for industrializing MOSLMs, as it provides an electrical control of device without substantial Ohmic power loss and thermal drift. Even this method has its drawbacks as it requires materials and structures which can provide both high MO quality and good magnetoelectric coupling. This normally happens through strain coupling, which involves piezoelectric materials and has its own complications. All these challenges that have stalled commercialization of MOSLMs by now, necessitate finding novel materials and driving methods. Figure In spite of decades of research regarding magnetooptical spatial modulation of light, there are still challenges and questions in the field that need to be addressed to achieve functional highperformance MOSLMs. Developed SLM products and MOSLM lab prototypes were compared in Tables A.cm -2 ) orders of magnitude lower than the magnetic-field-based control, without a need for external magnetic field. Multiferroics reduce the energy dissipation per unit area per switch to 1-500 μJ.cm -2 by eliminating resistive losses, which is a noteworthy improvement in comparison to that of current-driven switching (1-10 mJ.cm -2 ). Advancement in terms of pixel count and pitch sizes is necessary for commercially viable device applications. Micro/nanofabrication process developments in the last decade could help reduce the pixel sizes and the required modulation voltages, and help increase the pixel count to projector or display standards (1K×1K or above). With the development of high figure-of-merit MO materials for both visible and near infrared, the wavelengths and operation bandwidth of the MOSLMs could be extended significantly. Implementing the major materials and switching breakthroughs presented in the previous sections could help reduce the power consumption and improve the mentioned features in MOSLMs. An ideal SLM needs to be capable of a complete amplitude modulation between zero and input light intensity which necessitates 90o of polarization rotation in MOSLMs in order to achieve a high-contrast and power-efficient device. The energy required for switching the pixels in MOSLM has to be acceptable such that competing industrialization requirements could be met. Any unnecessary power consumption like optical losses and Joule heating from pixel drive electronics should be minimized in an ideal device. Minimizing these losses not only could lead to a low-power operation but also could prevent the problems associated with thermal drift. Integration of a 2D array of pixels and addressing electronics to the device must be devised in a way that provides the necessary spatial resolution for a specific application while avoiding crosstalk between pixels. For holographic imaging and 3D displays, pixel pitches below 1 μm is preferred for compact devices. Although binary modulation meets the needs of simple displays used in calculators, e-readers, electronic labels, etc., more complicated applications including imaging and holography, require analog or multilevel modulation with sufficient modulation depth (8 bit or more). These applications are normally not satisfied with only amplitude modulation but also necessitate full complex modulation. In order to fulfill all the above-mentioned requirements and develop the MOSLM as an advanced product for emerging applications, research in the following direction is suggested: (i) Direct investigation of the microscopic origin of MO effects and complete understanding of the physics behind these phenomena should be thoroughly accomplished. These studies would allow for the discovery and synthesis of new MO materials in addition to novel approaches for enhancement of MO effects and might help proceed towards achieving 90o rotation and efficient modulation for a broad range of wavelength. (ii) Integration of fast and low-power driving optics and electronics to MOSLMs is another challenge that needs to be resolved. Among the present switching systems, voltage-driving scheme is more promising because of not involving significant Joule heating and power loss, in addition to the simplicity of configuration. However, exploration of multiferroic materials and structures with strong magnetoelectric coupling becomes an open research area for voltage driving. (iii) Forming pixels smaller than 1 μm is not a serious obstacle on the way of developing advanced MOSLMs using the advanced micro/nano fabrication technologies. Depending on the driving scheme, MO material islands may not be needed; however, scaling of drive electronics to small sizes is much more challenging. (iv) In terms of modulation type, binary modulation can be performed in principle and has been experimentally demonstrated in MOSLMs (v) Phase modulation or full complex modulation using MO materials have not been proven yet. The fact that left-and right-handed circularly polarized (LHCP and RHCP) light experience different refractive indices in a magnetized MO material, can provide a platform to investigate possibility of phase control and full complex modulation using MOSLMs. In this review, we described the progress on magnetooptical spatial light modulators Ongoing research in the field is expected to alleviate these difficulties. The demonstrated and suggested driving systems for MOSLMs include switching with thermomagnetic, nonthermal optical, current-induced Oersted field, spin-torque, and multiferroic effects. Comparing advantages and disadvantages of these methods, voltage driving which is a multiferroic switching mechanism, shows promise for MOSLMs, because it provides an electrical control of device without substantial Ohmic power loss and thermal drift. This method also has obstacles on the way of its development as it requires materials and structures which can provide both high MO quality and strong magnetoelectric coupling. These requirements pose significant material compatibility challenges. In spite of the progress on different aspects to develop MOSLMs as high-performance device, no systematic investigation is reported on analog or multilevel modulation, which is a prerequisite for many applications. We suggested using minor hysteresis loops or pixel-wise control of time-dependent magnetization decay for this purpose. With the development of MOSLMs as a functional device, new ultrafast, nonvolatile and high resolution capabilities in holography, heads-up displays, virtual and augmented reality devices, solid-state light detection and ranging (LIDAR), optical communications, data storage and other emerging applications can be achieved. . Reproduced with permission. Rashba field produced by a charge current in typical heterostructures exhibiting spin-orbit torques (SOT). E shows the net electric field due to asymmetric electric potential in the direction with structural inversion asymmetry (SIA). Because of spin-orbit interactions, in the presence of a charge current, this E field transforms to an effective magnetic field H R and induces a non-equilibrium spin density perpendicular to the current direction. These spins exert a torque on magnetic moment of the material and provoke magnetization reversal. Reproduced with permission. Magnetic properties that can be controlled by an electric field and therefore, can be considered as potential mechanisms for low-power magnetization switching (DOS: density of states). Reproduced with permission. 