The search for the Majorana fermions in condensed matter physics has attracted much attention, partially because they may be used for the fault-tolerant quantum computation. It has been predicted that the Majorana zero mode may exist in the vortex core of topological superconductors. Recently, many iron-based superconductors are claimed to exhibit a topologically nontrivial surface state, including Fe(Te,Se). Some previous experiments through scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) have found zero-bias conductance peaks (ZBCP) within the vortex cores of Fe(Te,Se). However, our early experimental results have revealed the Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon (CdGM) discrete quantum levels in about 20% vortices. In many other vortices, we observed a dominant peak locating near zero bias. Here we show further study on the vortex core state of many more vortices in FeTe0.55Se0.45. In some vortices, if we take a certain criterion of bias voltage window near zero energy, we indeed see a zero energy mode. Some vortices exhibit zero energy bound state peaks with relatively symmetric background, which cannot be interpreted as the CdGM discrete states. The probability for vortices showing the ZBCP lowers down with the increase of magnetic field. Meanwhile it seems that the presence and absence of the ZBCP has no clear relationship with the Te/Se ratio on the surface. Temperature dependence of the spectra reveals that the ZBCP becomes weakened with increasing temperature and disappears at about 4 K. Our results provide a confirmed supplementary to the early claimed zero energy modes within the vortex cores of Fe(Te,Se). Detailed characterization of these zero energy modes versus magnetic field, temperature and spatial distribution of Te/Se will help to clarify its origin. In a type-II superconductor at an external magnetic field stronger than the lower critical field, the quantized vortices will appear with the supercurrent circling around the vortex core. The vortex core region shows a suppression of superconducting order parameter and can be described as a normal-state cylinder with the radius comparable to the coherence length ξ. The quasiparticle excitations then take place in the vortex core and form the vortex bound states. The electronic properties of vortex core state were first studied by Caroli, de Gennes and Matricon (CdGM) FeTe 1-x Se x is one of the typical iron-based superconductors with maximum critical temperature T c of about 14.6 K Recent studies show that FeTe 1-x Se x may have a topological surface state. Theoretically it was proposed that the downward shifted p z band due to the Te substitution will cross the d xz band near Fermi energy The vortex core state of topological superconductors shows different behaviors comparing with the CdGM states in a conventional superconductor. It is predicted that one can find Majorana zero modes in the vortices of two dimensional p+ip superconductors In recent STM measurement of vortices on FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 , the ZBCPs were observed and these ZBCPs show a non-splitting behavior in space In this paper, we report our further study on the vortex core states in FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 . By measuring hundreds of vortices in the FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 single crystals, we also find zero-bias differential conductance peaks on the tunneling spectra measured on some vortices. Furthermore, the influences of the magnetic field, temperature, and the Te concentration on the ZBCPs have also been studied. Our results give useful information for the understanding of the ZBCPs (perhaps due to the Majorana modes) appearing on some of the vortices in FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 . The single crystals used in this work were grown with the nominal composition of FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 Here we have to mention that since there are many vortices that have single peaks close to zero energy, in this case, we take a criterion of the bias voltage window from -0.1 to +0.1 mV, to determine whether the vortex has a ZBCP. In other words, if the spectrum at the vortex center shows a single dominant peak close to zero bias and within this bias voltage window, we regard them all as the vortices with ZBCPs. For the situation at 0.5 and 1 T, the vortices are diluted in the field of view. We do the measurements for several times through re-adding the magnetic field in the same area in order to increase the sampling number. The vortices change their positions when we reapply the magnetic field. While at the magnetic fields of 4 and 6 T, we did not measure the spatial dependent spectra crossing each vortex core because the number of the vortices in the area becomes quite large. What we measured are the differential conductance mappings at bias voltage between -1.0 and +1.0 mV with increment of 0.2 mV. Then we convert the differential conductance mappings at different energies to the tunneling spectra and judge whether the vortex has a ZBCP. From the statistic result in Fig. As presented above, we have measured the tunneling spectra in a large number of vortices in FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 , the ZBCPs are only observed in some vortices. The feature of these ZBCPs is different from that of the CdGM states observed in the vortex cores in superconductors with a large value of E F For all the results measured on the vortices of FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 , we found that only a fraction of them exhibit ZBCPs. Since the topological surface states have been predicted and proved in some way in this material In conclusion, through measuring the scanning tunneling spectra within the vortex cores in FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 , we have confirmed the discovery of ZBCPs in some vortices. The ZBCP does not split when moving away from the vortex core center, which is different from that expected by the CdGM states in the vortex cores in most superconductors with large E F , thus it is most likely the Majorana mode. The temperature dependence of the spectra measured in the vortex core center shows that the ZBCP may be suppressed completely at about 4 K, indicating a thermal-fragile feature of the ZBCP. Furthermore, we find that a large magnetic field can suppress the fraction of the vortices with ZBCPs, but the ZBCP can sometime exist at a magnetic field as high as 6.0 T. We did not find any close relationship between the local Te/Se concentration and the presence of the ZBCP within vortex cores. Our results will help to elaborate the origin of these ZBCPs found in the vortex core states in FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 .