Quantum technology requires the creation and control over single photons as an important resource. We present a single photon source based on a single molecule which is attached to the end-facet of an optical fiber. To realize a narrow linewidth, the system is cooled down to liquidhelium temperatures. The molecule is optically excited and its fluorescence is collected through the fiber. We have recorded an excitation spectrum, a saturation curve and analyzed the contributions of Raman background fluorescence. This presents to date the crucial limit for the introduced device. The single photon nature is proven by an anti-bunched auto-correlation recording, which also shows coherent Rabi oscillations. Single photon sources are believed to be a key ingredient for quantum communication, quantum information processing, and quantum measurements. The generation of single photons can mainly be achieved by two different approaches: The generation via a parametric process, which allows to generate photons in pairs whereas one is used to herald the presence of its respective partner. Often, these sources are spectrally broad, which renders their interfacing to other quantum system difficult. Furthermore, such sources suffer from multi-photon contributions under high pump powers which ultimately limits the number of available photons, as they need to be pumped weekly enough to decrease these unwanted contributions. An alternative is the generation by single emitters, such as atoms or ions and, in the solid state, quantum dots, defect centers or novel two-dimensional materials. Historically, the first discovered solid-state source of single photons was realized by single molecules, which simultaneously deliver a high flux and a narrowband emission and hence are still a highly promising system for applications in quantum technology. The usability of single photon sources is often enhanced by their single modal generation. For a single photon source to be useful, in most experiments it is necessary to ensure that the photons are generated in a defined spatial mode, ideally matched to the mode of an optical fiber. This allows for convenient fiber coupling to other devices. Also, as in interference experiments, the modal overlap is crucial. A defined mode such as a Gaussian is optimal. Therefore fiber-coupled single photon sources allow for the integration in quantum networks and hence is applicable beyond a restricted lab frame. In order to facilitate excitation, single solid state emitters have been coupled to optical fibers since their be-ginning An alternative way of coupling the emission of solidstate quantum emitters to the guided modes of a fiber is through coupling to the evanescent field of a tapered fiber. This has been demonstrated with a variety of emitters such as quantum dots The use of single molecules for single photon generation exhibits a number of advantages, which are crucial for a number of applications in quantum technologies. Here we discuss the properties of single molecules under cryogenic conditions (T≤2 K). On of their advantages is their approximately ten-fold larger T 1 -time when compared to quantum dots. Also, the amount of spectral diffusion is significantly lower than for other quantum emitters due to their insensitivity against external spin noise, such that Fourier-limited linewidths are commonly observed. Simultaneously, the detected flux of photons reaches up to millions of photons per second while maintaining negligible background contribution. Here, we show the implementation of a molecule based single photon source implemented by optically coupling a molecule to a high-NA fiber. This configuration is cooled down to liquid-helium temperatures where the molecules' transitions narrow down to their natural lifetime limit. The optical excitation of the molecules is realized by freespace coupling as well as by direct excitation through the fiber. Detection is in all cases accomplished through the fiber which collects the single photons and guides them towards the detection system. To enhance the collection efficiency of a single molecule in proximity to the fiber end, we have chosen a high-NA optical fiber. Usual single mode glass fibers have a numerical aperture around 0.1-0.13. Here we have used a specialized fiber (UHNA7, Nufern/ Coherent Inc) that is manufactured for a wavelength range of 1500-2000 nm and has a core diameter of 2.4 μm while having a very high numerical aperture of 0.41. In the wavelength range used in this experiment, i.e. about 600-700 nm, this fiber is not single mode, but the chosen fiber was a compromise between transmission of the fiber and a small core diameter. In another cryogenic setup where shorter fibers can be used, real single mode fibers (such as UHNA440 from Coherent Inc.) can be used, whereas scattering limits the efficiency in long fibers. The experimental configuration (see Figure To excite a single molecule, a single mode dye laser (Coherent 899 dye ring laser, ∆ν ≈1 MHz) is used. Its linewidth is significantly below the spectral linewidth of the molecules, which enables for resonant excitation and measurement of the molecules' transition linewidths. For the typical fluorescence excitation scheme we use, the utilized filters suppress the laser excitation at the zerophonon line and allow for the collection of Stokes-shifted photons. The single molecules are 2.3,8.9-dibenzanthanthrene (DBATT) molecules (CAS: 188-42-1, from W. Schmidt, Iggling-Holzhausen, see Fig. Detection is either realized by two free-space single photon counting modules (SPCM-AQR, Excellitas) in a Hanbury Brown and Twiss configuration or by a compact grating spectrometer (Ocean Optics, QE Pro) for spectrally resolved measurements. The single photon signals are captured by a time-tagger (Swabian Instruments, Time-Tagger 20) which allows for recording of the antibunching. To understand the experimental situation regarding the collection of fluorescent light, other authors use reciprocity theory In order to determine the amount of light that meets the above criteria, the effect of the dielectric boundaries in the direct proximity of the dipole has to be taken into account. The light is strongly influenced at such interfaces, as described in the literature Fig. For the situation of an orthogonal oriented dipole, the collection efficiency is drastically reduced by a factor of 117. In the case of spherical emission there is no influence by the interface and the refractive indices, such that the collection efficiency is solely set by geometrical parameters. The dashed line which represents the spherical emission in Fig. In order to show the influence on the NA of the fiber, the collection efficiency of a standard optical fiber for the visible region of the optical spectrum has also been con-sidered. The commonly used fiber 460-HP (Nufern) has a numerical aperture of 0.13. This leads to the collection efficiency being limited to around 0.5%, such that experiments with such a fiber will lead to approximately one order of magnitude less light than with the previously discussed fiber. Due to the lower NA, the corresponding cut-off is around 9.5 μm, i.e. the molecule can be more distant to reach the same effective NA for the collected solid-angle. This is implies that also the detection volume is increased, leading to a higher background in conjunction with a lower collection efficiency -an unfavorable behavior for our purposes. We now compare these results to the situation of a usual confocal microscope. In our experimental setup we have numerous examples of very high photon flux and have recorded single molecule emission with more than 1.2 Mio uncorrected detector clicks per second in the past To understand the emission of the single molecule and also an eventual background contribution of the utilized fibers, the first task was to record a spectrum of the individual components. The spectra of the light emitted by the molecules and of the background light stemming 3. Spectral contributions of the experiment. The utilized optical fiber exhibits a large amount of background contributions until approx. 630 nm. Unfortunately, these overlay the majority (about 70%) of the molecular emission spectrum. In order to remove these unwanted contributions, a long-pass filter around 630 nm has been introduced (LP). Another background contribution of the fiber is above 700 nm, such that a short-pass filter has been introduced (SP). To note: the utilized dichroic filter (DF) we used has a sharp cuton around 600 nm. Therefore the spectra are only recorded from there on wards. molecules are clearly separated from background contributions which stems from the fiber. Hence, only this part can be effectively separated and used in the single photon source. In order to filter out these unwanted contributions, spectral filtering is employed. A dichroic long-pass filter (cut-on at 600 nm) is used to suppress the excitation laser light. Unfortunately, this filter suppresses the majority of the emission which corresponds to the decay of first electronic excited state to the first excited vibrational state of the electronic ground state. The spectral distance to this band is 241 cm -1 from the excitation laser. Still this filtering is not sufficient to filter the remaining background light stemming from the optical fiber. Therefore an additional long-pass with cut-on at 626 nm is used. In order to account for the higher wavelength contributions of the fiber an additional short-pass filter with cut-on at 678 nm is used. The remaining detection window (626 nm-678 nm) contains only about 30% of the Stokes-shifted photons The setup can be operated in two configurations: either with free-space excitation of the molecules where the excitation laser enters the cryostat through the windows or by excitation through the fiber. In a first experiment, we employed free-space excitation to reduce the amount of background signal from the fiber. The large focal volume is caused by the f =100 mm lens, which focuses down the excitation light to a large spot of around 10-20 μm at the fiber tip. The alignment procedure is outlined below. Despite the advantage that the background from the fiber is reduced, the amount of background fluorescence is larger than for the case of excitation through the fiber, due to the large illuminated volume. Detected counts (kcps) To enable the free-space excitation at the fiber tip, several mW of excitation light were utilized, and the filters in front of the single photon detector were removed. Simply the scattered light which leaks into the fiber is sufficient to locate the fiber end-facet. Therefore the focus was laterally scanned across the cryogenic configuration by a beam-scanning optics (not shown in Fig. To further explore the technical possibilities, i.e., to excite a single molecule without the full cryostat setup, we now change to an excitation through the optical fiber directly. Also all alignment steps, except the fiber coupling can be omitted. The excitation of a molecule is shown in Fig. The above experiments have been conducted on several molecules. Fig. Each of the detected molecular lines can be further resolved by a finer frequency scan. Fig. where ω 0 denotes the angular frequency of the transition, ω the actual angular laser frequency, and Γ the linewidth of the emitter. As the molecules are long-time stable and there is no limitation by photo-bleaching under cryogenic conditions, it is possible to record long measurements at high excitation powers, as is shown in Fig. where I out is the measured number of emitted photons, I in is the excitation intensity, I sat is the saturation intensity and R ∞ is the detected count rate at infinite excitation. The saturation count rate of around 50 kcps is 10-25 times lower than the achievable count rates in confocal microscopy with a solid immersion lens While the counts of the emitter are saturating, the spectral linewidth in the saturation scan also rises. This is described by the square root proportionality, written as: where the linewidth at the low excitation limit is given as Γ 0 and the incident intensity as I in . For this particular molecule a minimum linewidth of 28.5 MHz is found. This value is larger than the typical values by a factor of approximately two. We account this to eventually opened relaxation channels due to the nearby interface, which may lead to cracks and strain in the formed Shpol'skiȋ-matrix. In the course of the experiments no other, narrower, molecules were observed. Detected counts (kcps) A crucial value for single photon sources is the measurement of their photon auto-correlation function, g (2) (τ ). A measurement of g (2) (0) < 1 proves a nonclassical behavior of the detected photon stream. Such a behavior can not be obtained for classical light sources. A further reduced value of g (2) (0) < 0.5 indicates that we are dealing mainly with a single emitter Additionally, the molecules' auto-correlation curve shows coherent oscillations between the ground and the excited state, so-called Rabi oscillations We find that Γ 2 /Γ 1 = 2, which indicates a Fourier-limited linewidth of the emitter. As usual, Rabi oscillations further indicate that the molecule is driven above saturation. (τ) Ω Rabi =2π×42 MHz FIG. In conclusion, we have presented a fiber-integrated single photon source resonant to the sodium D 2 transition based on single DBATT molecules. The approach used to build the source is very general and can be applied to different molecules or even completely different emitters. Therefore a change of the wavelength is straight forward. For example, it is possible to use the molecule dibenzoterrylene (DBT) in order to do reach to the atomic rubidium or potassium transitions The reported source can be an important resource for quantum technology and reduces the experimental complexity of cryogenic single molecule studies. We expect that a fully fiber integrated source like the one presented here can be immediately used in applications such as quantum sensing and quantum key distribution.