Effective models are constructed for a newly discovered superconductor (Nd,Sr)NiO2, which has been considered as a possible nickelate analogue of the cuprates. Estimation of the effective interaction, which turns out to require a multiorbital model that takes account of all the orbitals involved on the Fermi surface, shows that the effective interactions are significantly larger than in the cuprates. A fluctuation exchange study suggests occurrence of d x 2 -y 2 -wave superconductivity, where the transition temperature can be lowered from the cuprates due to the larger interaction. Introduction -While it exceeds more than three decades since the high T c superconductivity was discovered in the cuprates, search for their analogues in noncopper-based materials has remained a big challenge, both experimentally and theoretically. In particular, nickelates have attracted attention due to their electronic configuration close to the cuprates. For instance, LaNiO 3 /LaAlO 3 superlattice has been proposed as a possible candidate. There, Ni takes the 3+ valence with d 7 configuration, and the d x 2 -y 2 orbital is lowered in energy below d 3z 2 -r 2 , resulting in a single electron occupation of the d x 2 -y 2 orbital This precisely motivates the present study, where we first construct effective low-energy models for the infinitelayer nickelate to compare them with that for a high-T c cuprate superconductor HgBa 2 CuO 4 . For the mother (undoped) nickelate, we shall show that relatively small amount of holes are self-doped into the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 orbital due to the presence of La-originated electron pockets, which is likely to prevent the 3d x 2 -y 2 band from being in a Mott insulating state. When we turn to the Srdoped case, we shall find that the occurrence of d x 2 -y 2wave superconductivity is suggested as in the cuprates x 2 -y 2 ) within the d x 2 -y 2 orbitals will suppress T c due to strong renormalization effects. The model construction is done in three steps. We start with a first-principles calculation with the local density approximation (LDA) using ecalj package We then explore possibility of superconductivity and tendency toward magnetism for the obtained low-energy models with the fluctuation-exchange approximation (FLEX) measure of superconductivity, and the spin Stoner factor α S , given as the maximum eigenvalue of the product between the bare Coulomb interaction in the spin channel and the irreducible susceptibility χ0 (see, e.g., Mother nickelate -We first perform first-principles calculation for the mother compound LaNiO 2 adopting the lattice parameters determined for NdNiO 2 in Ref. We now construct a low-energy model from the firstprinciples bands around the Fermi level. Here, we aim to construct a model that explicitly considers the Ni-and La-centered Wannier orbitals. Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 , Ni 3d 3z 2 -r 2 , Ni 3d xz , Ni 3d yz , La 5d xy , and La 5d 3z 2 -r 2 are known to have weights on the Fermi surface In Fig. TABLE I. The on-site interactions for the mother compound and p = 0.2 doped one evaluated with cRPA. U (U ′ ) are the intra-orbital (inter-orbital) Coulomb repulsions and J the Hund's coupling. U for the seven-orbital model is given for Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 , 3d 3z 2 -r 2 (≡ 3d z 2 ) and La 5dxy, 5d 3z 2 -r 2 (≡ 5d z 2 ) orbitals, and U ′ and J are those between these orbitals. Interactions for HgBa2CuO4 estimated for the five-orbital model are also listed for comparison, where U ′ and J are those between 6s and 6p orbitals. LaNiO2 LaNiO2 (p=0. From charge neutrality, the total density of electrons in the seven-orbital model is 9 electrons per unit cell. The orbital-resolved density is estimated to be n Nid -r 2 = 0.12, and n Ladxy = 0.25. If it were not for the bands having the La character, the d 9 configuration would give n Nid It is thus likely that the self-doping prevents the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 band from being in a Mott insulating state. In addition, the Fermi surface of the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 band is strongly warped and its nesting is not so good, so that the tendency toward magnetic ordering may not be strong. In fact, previous first-principles studies predict that, although antiferromagnetism exists in LaNiO 2 Doped nickelate -We next turn to the Sr-doped case, where superconductivity is observed experimentally Performing FLEX calculation for the seven-orbital model on a three-dimensional k-mesh would be tedious, especially at low temperatures. Since the Ni 3d xy band barely hybridizes with the other bands, ignoring this orbital in the seven-orbital model hardly affects the band structure for the remaining six orbitals, as shown in Fig. From the studies on the cuprates, the main player in the superconductivity in the nickelate is expected to be the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 band, which produces the main Fermi surface. To see if the orbitals that have no weight on the main Fermi surface have any effects on superconductivity or the magnetism (apart from the self-doping effect), we further construct a two-orbital model (Fig. To make a quantitative comparison with the cuprates, we also construct a model for HgBa 2 CuO 4 adopting the crystal structure determined in Ref. We now come to superconductivity. Figure x 2 -y 2 equals the value determined from the seven-orbital model. We can immediately see that λ is significantly reduced in the sixorbital model. This reduction of λ in the six-orbital model can come from either larger values of the interaction, or the presence of the electron pockets. To identify which is the cause, we have performed another FLEX calculation for the two-orbital model adopting the same interaction values as in the seven-orbital model, as included in Fig. The larger interaction and the smaller bandwidth can be traced back to a larger level offset ∆ dp between 3d x 2 -y 2 and oxygen 2p x,y (atomic) orbitals for the nickelates than in the cuprates -y 2 , where t is the nearest-neighbor hopping between d x 2 -y 2 orbitals. The T c reduction for large U d x 2 -y 2 and small t may also viewed in this way. Conversely, the present study allows us to expect that reduction of the in-plane lattice constant, which will increase the Ni d x 2 -y 2 bandwidth and reduce the interaction within the Ni d x 2 -y 2 orbital, should enhance superconductivity. Hence the smaller lattice constant in NdNiO 2 than in LaNiO 2 Summary -We have constructed effective models for the newly discovered nickelate superconductor. For the mother compound, small amount of holes are self-doped into the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 orbital due to the presence of elecpockets. These electron pockets may have relevance to the metallic behavior observed experimentally In the main text, we have considered LaNiO 2 instead of NdNiO 2 to avoid the ambiguity regarding the treatment of 4f orbitals. Here we show that, if we adopt the same set of lattice parameters, the band structure of LaNiO 2 calculated with the ecalj code In Fig. In Table [eV] LaNiO2 (La,Ba)NiO2 (p = 0. Here we present the eigenfunction of the linearized Eliashberg equation (which will be called the "gap function" here) for the six-orbital model of the p = 0.2 nickelate for all the k z ≥ 0 cuts. When the bands are numbered in the order of the energy at each k point, all portions of the Fermi surface are produced by band 4, so we plot the gap function only for this band. As seen from Fig. 