Microwave imaging is a science which evolves from detecting techniques to evaluate hidden or embedded objects in a structure or media using electromagnetic (EM) waves in the microwave range (i.e., from 300 MHz to 300 GHz). Microwave imaging is often associated with radar detection such as target detection and tracking, weather pattern recognition, and underground surveillance which are far-field applications. In recent years, due to microwave's characteristic that allows penetration into optically opaque media, short-range applications including medical imaging, nondestructive testing and quality evaluation, through-the-wall imaging, and security screening have been utilized. Microwave near-field imaging occurs when detecting the profile of an object within the short-range: when the distance apart from the sensor to the object is from less than one wavelength to several wavelengths --This is coarse definition because the size of the antenna and the object is often comparable to the range between them. A near-field microwave imaging system attempts to reveal the presence of an object and/or an electrical property distribution by measuring the scattered field from many positions surrounding the object. Typically many sensors are placed near the object and either a quantitative or a qualitative algorithm is applied to the collected data. Over the past few decades, both the hardware and software components of a near-field microwave imaging system technology have attracted interest throughout the world. Due to limitations of hardware technology (unavailability of data acquisition apparatus), experimental microwave imaging is very challenging for the pioneers. Examples can be found are the canine kidney imaging experiment carried by Jacobi and Larsen in the 1970s The article further outlines challenges faced in current microwave near-field imaging, developmental tendencies of engineers and scientists, and the future outlook. Microwave imaging for medical applications has attracted significant interest within the last twenty years. The physics behind microwave medical imaging is that the dielectric properties of abnormal tissue (e.g., malignant tissue) are significantly different than that of normal tissue at microwave frequencies. This difference in dielectric values results in a noticeable contrast in the reconstructed microwave image. Current studies typically focus from 500 MHz to 10 GHz to balance the tradeoff between penetration depth and image resolution. According to various acquisition setups, the measurement system can be in a passive or active mode. The passive mode systems exploit the principles of radiometry microwave signals in the 300~1000 MHz range. Tomographic images were created for seven different heights as the ring was moved from the chest wall toward the nipple. This system set the stage for later development in active mode microwave medical imaging. Some prior review papers and books With cost reduction in RF manufacturing, many microwave breast imaging systems operate at a few Gigahertz to obtain high resolution, where the dielectric property provides a high contrast between malignant and healthy breast tissues (dielectric contrast between malignant and healthy fibroglandular tissue is not high A more advanced microwave breast imaging system was developed at the University of Bristol by Craddock and his colleagues (a) (b) (c) (d) Figure Using a VNA (especially one with multiple ports) with a microwave imaging system largely increases system cost and size. Persson's research group at Chalmers University of Technology (CUT) developed a compact imaging system for medical diagnostics which does not use a VNA Instead, their time domain system contains an impulse generator (to transmit UWB pulses), a high-speed analog-to-digital converter (ADC) (to sample the analog data collected by antenna), and a fieldprogrammable gate array (FPGA) (to store and process digital data and control the entire measurement). In order to solve the problem of insufficient bandwidth of ADC (800 MHz bandwidth), a wideband track-This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. and-hold (T/H) circuit is utilized to track the received signal and freeze the signal ahead of the ADC, and then hold it for a length of time to allow for the ADC to sample. In addition, a direct digital synthesizer (DDS) is used to generate sampling instructions to T/H and the ADC. The signal receiver and the antenna array developed at Chalmers University of Technology are illustrated in Figure In the first system developed (a) (b) (c) Figure Politecnico di Torino developed uses an embedded platform enhanced with an FPGA to receive and process signals, making the system more practical and able to be commercialized. Additionally, the signal processing speed of FPGA was 20 times faster than on a multicore CPU, allowing for more rapid image reconstructions. Figure In Japan, Dr. Kikkawa reported a hand-held impulse radar detector for breast tumor detection []. The probe is a 4 × 4 cross-shaped dome antenna array operating in the UWB frequency range from 3.1 to 10.6 GHz, which allows to transmit Gaussian monocycle pulses with width of 160 ps. The detector is designed to be placed on the breast with the patient in a supine position. Fig. A microwave method for human brain imaging has not yet attracted quite as much interest as microwave breast imaging. This technology is based upon studies that tissue malignancies, blood supply, hypoxia, acute ischemia, and chronic infarction significantly change dielectric properties of the affected tissues at microwave frequencies Pioneering research for microwave brain imaging can be traced back to 1982 by Lin and Clark's work Semnov simulated microwave measurements with the number of transmitters and receivers being 32 X 32 or 64 X 64 (multi-static mode) for a 2-D model of a head with a radius of 11 cm, containing a few soft tissues, skull, and a small stroke area. Then data was processed in an image reconstruction procedure using the Newton approach This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. later development involved a fabricated array on a helmet the head is placed in A brain stroke imaging prototype system has been developed by EMTensor GmbH, a company founded by Dr. Semenov, along with Prof. Pichot and colleagues at the Universite Cote d'Azur in France Besides breast cancer and brain stroke imaging, the near-field microwave approach has also been applied in other medical diagnoses such as knee injury, skin cancer detection, and lung cancer detection. The knee is one of the most frequently injured joints of the human body, with s traumatic injuries in the young and tissue degeneration in the old. Fear et al. utilized a simulation method and some simple experiments to test the feasibility of using radar-based methods to detect meniscal tears For skin cancer detection, some early studies utilized microwave reflectometry to differentiate cancerous skin tissues from healthy skin tissues using an open-ended coaxial probe with a VNA The reflection coefficient was compared between cancerous skin tissues and adjacent normal skin tissues probe operating from 90 to 104 GHz used mm-wave reflectometry approach to accurately assess the degree of a burn on human skin Other than the knee diagnosis and skin cancer detection, we noticed the recent reports regarding using microwave imaging for lung cancer detection, which is based on the hypothesis that significant difference exists between the dielectric properties of cancerous lung tissue and healthy lung tissues at microwave frequency band. In Australia, Abbosh's group applied a very similar lab system developed for brain stroke detection (Fig. Nondestructive (a) (b) Figure Zoughi's research group at the Missouri University of Science and Technology California in Moghaddam's group created a microwave imaging system to image changes in the dielectric constant due to the application of microwave heating Collaborators from the University of Applied Sciences of Southern Switzerland, Centro di Senologia della Svizzera, and the University of Genoa including Pastorino's research group developed a multi-static mode prototype system first used for the inspection of dielectric materials including wood objects A prototype system developed by Ellumen, Inc. They used printed reconfigurable monopole antennas that can be turned on or off using PIN diodes. They This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. also differed from some other systems described by using a metallic chamber to allow better control over unwanted reflections, potentially allowing the incorporation of a lossless or low-loss matching medium and to shield what is in the chamber from external electromagnetic noise. The system was used to image a wooden cube and nylon cylinder as shown in Figure Through-the-wall microwave imaging is one of the important emerging microwave techniques in recent years. Such an imaging system provides enhanced situational awareness in a variety of civilian and military applications. Such systems not only detect the presence of the targets behind walls, but also provide information concerning each target's location, motion, size, and backscattering cross section This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. (RCS). Compared to traditional radar applications, through-the-wall radar imaging faces challenges such as unknown dielectric characteristics and thickness of the wall, signal attenuation in the wall, and unknown target movement. (a) (b) Figure Many approaches have been attempted in testing through-the-wall radar imaging techniques. The most widely used approach is the wideband or UWB radar mechanism, which contains an antenna array, or one antenna measuring at multiple locations to form a synthetic aperture Another example is a device developed by Akduman's group [] which uses a pair of horn antenna operating between 0.8-5 GHz. The antenna pair works in a bistatic mode and moves together along the wall to collect the signal from different positions. The experiment was performed in a big anechoic chamber as well. Image of the objects behind the wall was reconstructed by processing the acquired data based on an inverse scattering algorithm (microwave tomography). A second approach used is by using a frequency-modulated continuous wave (FMCW) radar The through-wall imaging has achieved commercial success. An interesting video available at https://walabot.com/diy shows a portal microwave device that can be connected to a cell phone is able to detect objects behind the wall and the motion of a mouse inside the wall. The microwave imaging technique has been proposed to detect concealed weapons at major transportation hubs to replace the conventional X-ray screening method, as it may cause less potential health risks of X-ray, especially for pregnant women and infants. The non-ionizing characteristic, and the low cost of the microwave imaging system makes it more likely to be adopted in security screening. Microwave imaging for security applications uses a high frequency which is reflected by human skin yet still penetrates through most fabrics. Thus, a 3-D shape reconstruction of the human along with any metal they may have on them is possible as microwave cannot penetrate through metals. Likely due to hardware restrictions, there are only a limited number of studies in this area. Due to technical progress in RF manufacturing and reduction in costs, mm wave Over the past few decades, microwave near-field imaging has experienced conceptualizations, theoretical analyses, simulation tests, and experimental validations. Due to technical developments both in the hardware manufacturing and the software, many prototype systems for a variety of applications have emerged since the early 2000s. Microwave scientists and engineers are working towards optimizing current prototypes in order to bring these systems into production and more widespread use. One trend for current microwave near-field imaging systems is that bulky and expensive signal recording tools, such as a VNA and an oscilloscope, are replaced by more compact, more cost-effective, and customized instruments such as a high-speed ADC accompanied with an FPGA. This trend will allow for current prototypes to lead the way towards the first commercial microwave imaging product. In This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. addition, the growth of this technology will further extend from research institutions and academia into industrial research and development. It can be expected that in the not too distant future, more applications of microwave imaging techniques and their products will emerge and lead to benefits to humans and society.