We introduce topological phases of matter defined by skyrmions in the ground state spin-or pseudospinexpectation value textures in the Brillouin zone, the chiral and helical topological skyrmion phases of matter. These phases are protected by a symmetry present in centrosymmetric superconductors. We consider a tight-binding model for spin-triplet superconductivity in transition metal oxides and find it realizes each of these topological skyrmion phases. The chiral phase is furthermore realized for a parameter set characterizing Sr2RuO4 with spin-triplet superconductivity. We also find two types of topological phase transitions by which the skyrmion number can change. The second type occurs without the closing of energy gaps in a system described by a quadratic Hamiltonian without breaking the protecting symmetries when atomic spin-orbit coupling is non-negligible and there is a suitable additional degree of freedom. This contradicts the "flat band" limit assumption important in use of entanglement spectrum and Wilson loops, and in construction of the ten-fold way classification scheme of topological phases of matter. We furthermore predict two kinds of bulk-boundary correspondence signatures-one for measurements which execute a partial trace over degrees of freedom other than spin, which yields quantized transport signatures-and a second resulting from skyrmions trapping defects with their own non-trivial topology that is discussed in a second work, which yields generalizations of unpaired Majorana zero-modes. The search for topologically non-trivial phases of matterthose phases of matter distinguished from one another by changes in appropriate topological invariants rather than symmetry-breaking as in the Ginzburg-Landau paradigm In this work, we identify and characterize a foundational generalization and counterpart of the Chern insulator, starting from the following concept: the simplest models for Chern insulators are one-electron Hamiltonians with 2N × 2N matrix representations and N = 1. The topology of the Chern insulator is characterized by the first Chern number, computed for the single occupied band when N = 1. This topological invariant is also, in this situation, the skyrmion number, the topological charge of the momentum space ground state spin texture (or pseudospin texture depending on the degree of freedom in the model). For N > 1, however, this equivalence between the Chern number and the skyrmion number breaks down. For N > 1, Chern insulators are characterized by a total Chern number C of the occupied bands, computed as the sum of the first Chern numbers of individual occupied bands. The skyrmion number Q, in contrast, is a global topological invariant We present results on two symmetry-protected topological phases of matter. First, we introduce topological phases of matter characterized by a single skyrmion number, or chiral topological skyrmion insulators (CTSIs). Second, we present results on two-dimensional topological phases of matter characterized by a pair of skyrmion numbers, or helical topological skyrmion insulators (HTSIs). We use this terminology throughout the paper, but here also introduce additional terminology in a revision of the manuscript: we also call the CTSI simply a Skyrme insulator, and the HTSI a helical Skyrme insulator, as these phases realize a single momentum space spin texture or a pair of such textures similar to counterpart skyrmionic magnetic orders in real-space. The CTSI and HTSI can be realized in effectively noninteracting models that may also be interpreted as describing superconductors, by interpreting an off-diagonal block in the matrix representation of the Hamiltonian with particle-hole symmetry as a superconducting gap function (and that Hamiltonian instead as a Bogoliubov de Gennes Hamiltonian). We mean this in the same sense as in Schnyder et al. In the context of superconductors, we re-interpret the CTSI and HTSI as the chiral and helical topological skyrmion superconductor phases (CTSS and HTSS, or Skyrme and An-tiskyrme superconductors), respectively. Here, we find evidence that both the CTSS and HTSS phases are realized in a model previously used to describe the superconductor Sr 2 RuO 4 in the high-field phase, and that Sr 2 RuO 4 with spintriplet superconductivity A key feature of these topological phases-a topological phase transition by which the skyrmion number changes without the closing of a gap in the bulk electronic spectrum in an effectively non-interacting system without breaking the symmetries protecting the topological phase-results from the invariant being computed as the topological charge of the ground state spin expectation value in the Brillouin zone when atomic spin-orbit coupling is non-negligible and there is a suitable additional degree of freedom (i.e. orbital) vs. negligible atomic spin-orbit coupling or a lack of a suitable orbital degree of freedom, as illustrated in Fig. When crossing some points in phase space, however, the ground state spin expectation value vector can pass through zero in magnitude smoothly at certain points in the Brillouin zone without the need for closing of an energy gap, permitting a topological phase transition by which the skyrmion number changes discretely from one integer value to another without the closing of any energy gaps in an effectively noninteracting system, without breaking the protecting symmetries of the topological phase. This is the most significant result of the paper as it is the first counterexample to the "flat band" limit assumption: given a general band insulator described by a single particle Hamiltonian, a topologicallyequivalent "flat band" insulator, according to the "flat band" limit assumption, can be constructed by setting the energy of all occupied bands to be equal and negative, and all unoccu-FIG. The "flat band" limit assumption is widespread and foundational in study of topological phases of matter, used, for instance, in the construction of the entanglement spectrum In this work, we first discuss topological classification and the invariant for the chiral topological skyrmion phases as well as a simple example of a four-band toy model. Four-band toy models are valuable in understanding the non-trivial topology discussed here, but we refer the reader to a second manuscript for in-depth discussion on construction and characterization of four-band toy models of the CTSI and CTSS We note here that, while the chiral topological skyrmion phase may be thought of as a generalization of a Chern insulator, but with the skyrmion number decoupled from the Chern number rather than coupled, the helical topological skyrmion phase may be thought of as a generalization of a quantum spin Hall insulator, which may be constructed as a Chern insulator paired with its time-reversed partner. This makes clear the importance of the helical phase for experimental realization: in the same way the quantum spin Hall insulator can be realized in time-reversal invariant systems without magnetic order, the helical topological skyrmion phase is expected to be realizable in systems without magnetic order. Since the ability to realize a topological phase without magnetic order has greatly facilitated experimental realization in the past (the quantum spin Hall insulator was observed experimentally long before the quantum anomalous Hall insulator Achieving π d (M ) = 0 for N > 1 when M corresponds to the space of ground state spin expectation values is a largely unexplored topic. Past work, however, has considered the role of a generalized particle-hole symmetry C in symmetry-protecting the Hopf insulator and a fourdimensional extension of the Hopf insulator in the presence of additional bands corresponding to π 3 (Sp(2N )/U (N )) and π 4 (Sp(2N )/U (N )) We note that C symmetry yields topological classification with dimension d that agrees with the topological classification shown in Table That the C operator is the product of particle-hole operator C and spatial inversion operator I suggests a natural place to look for more physically-relevant realizations of these phases is in centrosymmetric superconducting systems, motivating our study here of superconducting Sr 2 RuO 4 in part. Models of Sr 2 RuO 4 with spin-triplet superconductivity in particular possess additional symmetries which we utilize here to find first realization of the helical topological skyrmion phase in addition to the chiral topological skyrmion phase. As the non-trivial homotopy group has integer topological classification, the topological invariant is a two-dimensional winding number, which may be computed with three-vectors acted upon by According to the derivation of the homotopy group, it appears, first of all, that we may compute the winding number using projectors onto occupied bands as done in the ten-fold way Skyrmions can therefore form in the texture of the physical spin or pseudospins acted upon by the appropriate quotient, and the corresponding momentum space skyrmionic spin textures observed can be analogous to the spin texture, due to spin-momentum locking, of a Dirac cone in the electronic dispersion at the surface of a topological insulator A topological invariant can therefore be computed as the winding number (skyrmion number), Q, of the momentum space ground state spin texture, expressed as an integral over the two-dimensional Brillouin zone, where ∼ = S 2 , meaning the homotopy group reduces in this case to π 2 S 2 = Z as expected. We can also derive this expression by considering projected position operators. This is discussed in Section II of the Methods. Essentially, we may classify the degrees of freedom of a Hamiltonian as spin or pseudospin acted upon by elements of Sp(2N )/U(N ), S, or other degrees of freedom that are not (pseudo)spin, S. We may then compute the skyrmion connection (curvature) by performing a partial trace on the Berry connection (curvature) of the ground state of the 2N × 2N Bloch Hamiltonian, over S degrees of freedom. Importantly, this reduced connection/curvature yields a bulk-boundary correspondence for non-trivial skyrmion number: in tracing out S degrees of freedom, we are left with an effective 2 × 2 Hamiltonian for the S degree of freedom describing an open system. The boundary is therefore no longer required to respect C symmetry in order to have topologically-robust boundary states as the relevant homotopy group is then π 2 (S 2 ) = Z, which corresponds to lower symmetry. Non-trivial skyrmion number of the ground state spin of the full Hamiltonian therefore yields topologicallyprotected chiral modes in the non-equilibrium steady state of the spin subsystem analogous to those of a two-band Chern insulator, when one traces out the other degrees of freedom. Interestingly, we could interpret the spin degree of freedom as a system coupled to an environment consisting of the other degrees of freedom. For large N , we could interpret the environment as a reservoir. This suggests the possibility of open systems appearing to exhibit non-trivial topology in their nonequilibrium steady state without symmetry-protection, suggesting a possible mechanism for topological order ostensibly similar to that of the fractional quantum Hall effect. We note that C symmetry restricts the eigenvectors of the Hamiltonian to elements g where I is the identity matrix, as discussed further in the Methods, Section I) guarantee the existence of a three-vector with which the homotopy invariant may be computed. One may further confirm the choice by constructing a minimal four band model for a chiral topological skyrmion phase from any two-band Chern insulator with Hamiltonian where the Pauli matrices {σ i },with i ∈ {0, x, y, z}, corresponding to, for instance, a spin degree of freedom. The counterpart minimal four-band model for a chiral topological skyrmion phase is then where {τ i },with i ∈ {0, x, y, z}, is a second set of Pauli matrices corresponding to a second degree of freedom beyond spin, such as an orbital degree of freedom. The corresponding spin operators used to compute the skyrmion number are, in this case, S i = diag(σ i , -σ * i ), with i ∈ {x, y, z}. For half-filling, one may compute a skyrmion number for these four-band models and find that it is decoupled from the total Chern number. For the simple cases outlined above, one finds skyrmion number Q when the total Chern number is C = -2Q. These models correspond to superconductors when the normal state Hamiltonian is even in k, and additional spin-singlet or spintriplet pairing terms are allowed by C symmetry. This N = 2 case, corresponding to a four band model, is explored in detail in a separate follow-up work In this work, we study the CTSI phase of matter, characterized by a single non-trivial skyrmion number, Q = 0. We can also construct a second topological phase of matter, the HTSI, which consists of a pair of decoupled CTSIs, one with skyrmion number Q = 0 and the other with skyrmion number -Q. One way to effectively construct the HTSI is as follows: we can reinterpret models for the HTSI which possess particlehole symmetry C and spatial inversion symmetry I, which means the system also has C symmetry, as describing superconductors. If the superconductor also possesses normal state mirror symmetry M and superconducting gap function odd under this mirror operation, the superconductor may be divided into two mirror subsectors, which each inherit C symmetry We consider a two-dimensional tight-binding model for Sr 2 RuO 4 with spin-triplet superconductivity on the square lattice with ) and Here, taking lattice spacing constant a = 1 throughout, and of the high-field phase, which corresponds to Zeeman field strengths of greater than the critical value of H c = 20 mT as discussed in Ueno et al. In the presence of an applied Zeeman field of strength H z along the ẑ-axis of Sr 2 RuO 4 (equivalent to the ĉ-axis in some works), the model for the superconductor possesses particlehole symmetry C. We report here that it also possesses the generalized particle-hole symmetry C required for non-trivial homotopy group π 2 (Sp(2N )/U(N )) = Z. As well, the gap function is odd under the normal state mirror operation M xy taking z to -z in the high-field phase regardless of d-vector, meaning C is inherited by each counterpart mirror subsector of the superconducting state, corresponding to mirror operator Mxy . In contrast, the low-field phase gap function is even under M xy , and the M+ xy subsectors do not inherit C symmetry. Thus, the high-field phase of superconducting Sr 2 RuO 4 with spin-triplet pairing satisfies symmetry requirements for the CTSS phase, by having skyrmion number Q = 0 in one mirror subsector and Q = 0 in the other mirror subsector, as well as for the HTSS phase, by having Q = 0 in one mirror subsector and -Q = 0 in the other mirror subsector. We compute the mirror Chern number and the skyrmion number for each Mxy subsector, or mirror skyrmion number, of the Sr 2 RuO 4 model with spin-triplet superconductivity as a function of spin-orbit coupling λ and Zeeman coupling expressed as μ B H z , while keeping other model parameters fixed to those used to model Sr 2 RuO 4 specifically in past work To compute mirror skyrmion numbers for the Sr 2 RuO 4 Hamiltonian, we proceed as follows: in the basis in which the superconductor mirror operator Mxy matrix representation is diagonal, the model for Sr 2 RuO 4 is block-diagonal in the high-field phase. These blocks may be written as H1 (k) and H2 (k), with corresponding basis vectors , respectively, bases which naturally result from changing to the basis in which Mxy is diagonal. H1 (k) and H2 (k) each inherit C symmetry as well as C symmetry. We can construct angular momentum operators for these Mxy subsectors. First, the orbital angular momentum operator for our bases is L = Lx , Ly , Lz , with and i ∈ {x, y, z}. The corresponding normal state orbital angular momentum operator written in the basis of the t 2g orbitals xy, xz and yz 32 is L = L x , L y , L z , where Each Mxy subsector also retains a spin degree of freedom, however, due to the xy being even under M xy and the yz and xz orbitals being odd under M xy . The spin angular momentum operators in the x-, ŷand ẑ-directions of the normal state are generalizations of the corresponding spin operators of SU(2), constructed from linear combinations of generators of the Lie group SU(3) Here, the corresponding normal state spin operator is S 1(2) = S 1(2),x , S 1(2),y , S 1(2),z , where (setting fundamental con-stants to 1), S2 can then be expressed in terms of S1 using the relations S 2,x = S 1,x , S 2,y = -S 1,y , and S 2,z = -S 2,z , since the raising operator for H1 (k) is the lowering operator for H2 (k) and vice versa. This derivation of the spin representation from construction of raising/lowering operators within a given mirror subsector is discussed in greater detail in the Methods, Section V. We stress that these are operators for the physical spin and not pseudospin in our case. The total mirror Chern number for H1 (k) and the total mirror Chern number for H2 (k) as defined in Ueno et al. While skyrmion numbers computed using the ground-state spin expectation value may be quantized over regions of the phase diagram as expected from the quotient of the homotopy group, skyrmion numbers computed using the orbital angular momentum operator L or the total angular momentum J are unquantized and trivial, in contrast. There are some regions where the skyrmion number smoothly transitions from one integer value to another, which will be discussed in greater detail in the next section along with two distinct topological phase transitions by which the skyrmion number changes discretely from one integer value to another. Noise in the skyrmion num-ber phase diagrams is due to extreme features in the skyrmion number integrand Ω k that can occur over very small regions of momentum-space, necessitating a very fine k-mesh using known methods. For a given mirror subsector, Q differs in value from C and Q can be non-zero when C is zero and vice versa. Q for H1(2) (k) can be non-zero when Q for H2(1) (k) is zero, corresponding to the CTSS phase. Importantly, the CTSS phase occurs even for zero magnetic field, when the system is timereversal invariant, because Q here is computed for mirror subsectors. This CTSS phase of matter occurs for model parameters previously used to model Sr 2 RuO 4 specifically (λ = 0.3 and μ B H z = 0.1 as used in past work In the region of the phase diagram highlighted by a dashed line in Fig. We observe three kinds of phase transitions, two of which correspond to discrete changes in the skyrmion number and one during which the skyrmion number smoothly changes from one integer value to another. To better understand these phase transitions, we first study the momentum space ground state spin textures at points α, β and κ in Fig. < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " 9 R R 2 E p U X e 9 G y H w P V w 7 Y L X + t 5 5 2 P e u u L k M 0 f w B 8 7 n D y g j j R w = < / l a t e x i t > c) < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " i I M Z X I 8 V e k l X y 8 Z S g 6 6 9 i U b i h 9 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " T f d 0 T p 8 C R x O 4 9 Q a t q b 9 P R 9 s u 2 y A = " > A < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " M a x M / I + J d j i H g U c 7 n 7 s f B B A Y R z s = " > A A A B 6 X i c b V B N S 8 N A E J 3 4 W e t X 1 a O X x S L o p S R V 0 G P R i 8 c q 9 g P a U D a b T b t 0 s w m 7 E 6 G U / g M v H h T x 6 j / y 5 r 9 x 2 + a g r Q 8 G H u / N M D M v S K U w 6 L r f z s r q 2 v r G Z m G r u L 2 z u 7 d f O j h s m i T T j D d Y I h P d D q j h U i j e Q I G S t 1 P N a R x I 3 g q G t 1 O / 9 c S 1 E Y l 6 x F H K / Z j 2 l Y g E o 2 i l h / C 8 V y q 7 F X c G s k y 8 n J Q h R 7 1 X + u q G C c t i r p B J a k z H c 1 P 0 x 1 S j Y J J P i t 3 M 8 J S y I e 3 z j q W K x t z 4 4 9 m l E x z L z n 3 h A l n 2 r j u t 1 P a 2 N z a 3 i n v V v b 2 D w 6 P q s c n X S 1 T R W i H S C 5 V P 8 S a c i Z o x z D D a T 9 R F M c h p 7 1 w e p / 7 v S e q N J P i 0 c w S G s R 4 L F j E C D Z W 8 g c x N h O C e d a e D 6 s 1 t + 4 u g N a J V 5 A a F G g N q 1 + D k S R p T I U h H G v t e 2 5 i g g w r w w i n 8 8 o g 1 T T B Z I r H 1 L d U 4 J j q I F t E n q M L q 4 x Q J J V 9 w q C F + n s j Mirror skyrmion number Q computed as a function of spin-orbit coupling λ and applied Zeeman field μBHz with step ∆ki = π 500 in momentum-space (i ∈ {x, y}) for H1(k) in subpanel (c) and for H2(k) in subpanel (d), respectively. The parameter set corresponding to Sr2RuO4 is highlighted by the white dot. The three red dots in subfigure (c) show the positions in coordinate space used to compute the momentum space ground state spin textures in Fig. The two kinds of topological phase transitions are also distinct from one another. In the first kind, type I, the skyrmion number changes with the closing of the superconducting gap, such as along the boundary partially highlighted by the black and white dashed line in Fig. < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " c K a n g b S w X 7 s r n ↵ < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " + w S B P e L 8 n x B d v z P X A 2 q s w h G h f p g = " > A A A B 7 X i c b V B N S 8 N A E J 3 U r 1 q / q h 6 9 L B b B U 0 m q o M e i F 4 8 V 7 A e 0 o U y 2 m 3 b t Z h N 2 N 0 I J / Q 9 e P C j i 1 f / j z X / j t s x a C 0 4 + c w x / 4 H z + A I z P j x w = < / l a t e x i t > < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " E p w a d K l 7 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " i I M Z X I 8 V e k l X y 8 Z S g 6 6 9 i U b i h 9 e V l 0 r y o e J e V 6 n 2 1 X L v J 4 y j A M Z z A G X h w B T W 4 g z o 0 g E E I z / A K b 8 7 I e X H e n Y 9 5 6 4 q T z x z B H z i f P z L h j S c = < / l a t e x i t > g) < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " f H a g q O H 0 a E m r P ger skyrmion number away from the phase transition, which is reduced by increasing k-mesh resolution. As noted in followup work Since some topological phase transitions can occur in this system without the closing of direct gaps, bulk-boundary correspondence does not necessarily hold for these topologically non-trivial phases. Thus, we do not expect gapless boundary states even for boundaries respecting C symmetry. One possible exception is when a region containing a topological phase may only be reached by type I topological phase transitions, in which the superconducting gap closes. Such a phase transition in an effectively non-interacting system without breaking the symmetries required for topological protection has important consequences as many results for topological phases assume such phase transitions do not occur. To our knowledge, the flat-band limit assumption actually first appeared in work by Avron, Seiler, and Simon We further note that, while a gap closing is normally expected with a change in skyrmion number in two-band models (N = 1), this situation is different from N > 1: there are multiple expressions for the skyrmion number when it is locked to the Chern number, which better reveal why a gap < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " 0 o j H 1 X f n l S H 5 9 B W k P T x i E z 6 w r g s R n e I U 3 5 9 F 5 c d 6 d j 0 V r w c l n j u E P n M 8 f r G u M 2 Q = = < / l a t e x i t > < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " 9 R R 2 E p U X e 9 G y H w P V w 7 Y L X + t 5 The minimum direct gap between the two lowest bands, d1-0, the minimum direct gap between the second two lowest bands, d2-1, and the minimum direct gap between the two middle bands and minimum direct superconducting gap, dSC of H1(k), each computed as a function of applied Zeeman field μBHz for fixed spin-orbit coupling value λ = 0.3 along the cut shown in Fig. closing is needed to destabilize the calculation in this special case. The integrand of this skyrmion number for N > 1 does not take such forms, to our knowledge. Recent Knight shift experiments have further called into question the nature of the superconducting pairing in Sr 2 RuO 4 The HTSS phase, while occurring for a value of the spinorbit coupling constant λ relevant to Sr 2 RuO 4 , occurs for strong Zeeman fields at which the parameter ∆ of the superconducting gap function is expected to be zero in experiments. This work instead primarily serves as the introduction of this phase and its realization in a physically-relevant model, although the phase does persist to smaller superconducting pairing strength ∆. Given that the C operator is the product of particle-hole operator C and spatial inversion operator I, C symmetry is widespread. Thus, this work serves as motivation for a broad search for other candidates for the topological skyrmion phases of matter. This work also serves as further motivation and guidance in the search for counterpart higher-dimensional topological skyrmion phases of matter, which will be characterized in part by the invariant presented here. The threedimensional topological skyrmion phases, for instance, should be characterized by three weak invariants, the invariant discussed here, and one strong invariant, the topological charge of a three-dimensional skyrmion in the momentum-space spin < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " / F r T r X w / x / x P U q F A F T Q x U y e k y / s = " texture. Follow-up work on three-dimensional topological skyrmion phases We have introduced symmetry-protected topological phases of matter in one-electron Hamiltonians with 2N × 2N matrix representations and N > 1 characterized by ground state spin expectation value textures in the Brillouin zone forming skyrmions, the chiral and helical topological skyrmion phases of matter. These topological phases of matter are protected by a generalized particle-hole symmetry C present in some centrosymmetric superconductors and corresponding to nontrivial homotopy group π 2 (Sp(2N )/U (N )) = Z for mappings from the Brillouin zone to the space of ground state spin expectation values. They are characterized by a global topological invariant, the skyrmion number, Q, computed as the topological charge of the momentum-space ground state spin expectation value texture. While for Hamiltonians with N = 1, this skyrmion number is locked in value to the Chern number, the skyrmion number decouples from the Chern number for N > 1 and characterizes phases of matter distinct from the Chern insulator. Most notably, strikingly different phase transitions by which the skyrmion number can change are possible for N > 1. In systems with non-negligible spin-orbit coupling, for instance, a type II topological phase transition is possible by which the skyrmion number changes discretely from one integer value to another as the ground state spin expectation value passes smoothly through zero in magnitude at a small set of points in phase space, corresponding to a topological phase transition in an effectively non-interacting system without the closing of energy gaps and without breaking of protecting symmetries. This serves as the first counterexample to the "flat band" limit assumption foundational to study of topological phases of matter, used, for instance, in the construction of the entanglement spectrum This type II topological phase transition which occurs without the closing of energy gaps in an effectively non-interacting system without breaking protecting symmetries can be understood as follows: in a system with non-negligible spinorbit coupling, the unnormalized ground state spin expectation value may change in magnitude as shown in Fig. That this type-II topological phase transition indicates bulkboundary correspondence is not necessarily satisfied for the topological skyrmion phases of matter-if measurement does not include a partial trace over degrees of freedom other than spin-is in line with past understanding that topological phases of matter are not required to satisfy bulk-boundary (sometimes also referred to as bulk-edge) correspondence: a very well-known example is the Z 2 quantum spin liquid, a topological phase of matter for which bulk-boundary correspondence does not hold. The Z 2 spin liquid phase is characterized by a topological invariant that can be changed while keeping the bulk gap finite In addition, when measurements on the system perform a partial trace over all degrees of freedom except for spin, we predict quantized transport signatures in the non-equilibrium steady state of the resultant open system, associated with nontrivial skyrmion numbers characterizing the CTSI and HTSI. For superconductors, we specifically predict quantized thermal Hall conductivity when measurements execute the appropriate partial trace, corresponding to discarding knowledge about degrees of freedom other than spin. We note that the skyrmion number being integer-quantized in only part of the phase diagram does not prevent it from serving as a topological invariant in the regions where it is integer quantized. In the regions of the phase diagram where the skyrmion number is everywhere quantized to a particular nontrivial integer value, and must change discretely to another integer value when crossing the boundary enclosing this region, the skyrmion number is a physical quantity unaffected by sufficiently small perturbations, and therefore a topological invariant characterizing a topological phase of matter We furthermore find both phases are realized in an established tight-binding model describing spin-triplet superconductivity in Sr 2 RuO 4 , in this context denoted by chiral topological skyrmion superconductor (CTSS) and helical topological skyrmion superconductor (HTSS), respectively. The CTSS phase is furthermore realized for a parameter set previously established for Sr 2 RuO 4 in the high-field phase, indicating Sr 2 RuO 4 may harbor topological skyrmion phases. Three different kinds of phase transitions are observed by which the skyrmion number changes, two of which are topological, and one which is smooth, differentiated by the structure of the momentum space ground state spin texture in the non-trivial phase. Topological phase transitions can also occur with or without closing of direct gaps in this system modeled by a quadratic Hamiltonian, with important implications in study of topological physics very generally. As well, these topological phases are able to trap generalizations of unpaired Majorana zero-modes, which we call cross zero-modes, as we discuss in follow-up work that introduces the three-dimensional topological skyrmion phases In conclusion, given the tremendous interest in skyrmions for fundamental understanding and applications in many very high-impact works Xu and co-authors They also briefly consider π 4 (Sp(2N )/U (N )). To understand whether the generalized particle-hole symmetry C is desired in the case of a two-dimensional Brillouin zone for Hamiltonians to be topologically-classified by homotopy group π 2 (Sp(2N )/U(N )), we consider a Hamiltonian H(k) possessing C symmetry. H(k) therefore satisfies for each k, with J = , where I N ×N is the N × N identity matrix. This constraint on the Hamiltonian for each k restricts the set of Hamiltonians permitted to the symplectic group, Sp, and also forces the number of bands of the Hamiltonian to be even. A generic element that does not move , where U 1 (k), U 2 (k) ∈ U(N ). For g to be in Sp(2N ), it must satisfy For this expression to hold, U 1 U T 2 = I, where I is the identity matrix. This corresponds to the configuration space of the Hamiltonian being Sp(2N )/U(N ). Xu's discussion II. Derivation of the spin skyrmion number invariant using projected position operators and the observableenriched partial trace. This discussion extends Parameswaran, Roy and Sondhi 56 . There, they explore the restriction of kinematics to a single Chern band. We instead restrict to projections of the density operator onto the ground state manifold. Then, differentiating between the spin degree of freedom, S, and all other degrees of freedom of the Hamiltonian, S, we perform a partial trace over degrees of freedom S. An N -band, single-particle Hamiltonian may be written as where a, b = 1, 2, ..., N are spin and other indices, and k is the crystal momentum restricted to the first Brillouin zone (BZ). The solution to the N × N eigenvalue problem for band α is b H ab (k)u α b (k) = E α (k)u α a (k). We take these eigenvectors to be normalized, a |u α a (k)| 2 = 1. We then define a projector onto the ground state manifold, P GS , as P GS = α,β |k, α k, β|, where The density operator for the full system is ρ q = e iq•r . The density operator projected onto the ground state manifold is then We now consider the reduced density matrix ρq,S , where ρq,S = Tr S ρq . Here, Tr S is an observable-enriched partial trace introduced in a follow-up work We may then consider how the reduced density matrix operator ρq,S acts on a state |k, S of the system after the partial trace has been performed, which is ρq,S |k, S ≈ e i k+q/2 k-q/2 dk •A S (k ) |k + q, S . ( where here we consider a spin-1/2 degree of freedom, so |k, S is an eigenstate of a two-band Bloch Hamiltonian which characterizes the ground state spin of the N × N problem. This corresponds to ρq,S implementing parallel transport for the ground state spin, described by the reduced connection A S (k). Although the dynamics of the full Bloch Hamiltonian describing an isolated system are unitary, the dynamics of a subsystem corresponding to a partial trace over some degrees of freedom are not strictly unitary in general. We could interpret the full Bloch Hamiltonian as consisting of a system containing just the spin degree of freedom, and an environment, corresponding to the remaining degrees of freedom. Unlike in the typical scenario for open systems, however, our environment is similar in scale to our system. Thus, in the cases we are considering, of Bloch Hamiltonians with 2N × 2N matrix representation and N relatively small, it is not appropriate to consider a Lindblad master equation 58 , although this would be more relevant for large N corresponding to a reservoir with far more degrees of freedom. In our case, dynamics of the reduced Berry connection can be determined at each step in the evolution of the full Berry connection by performing the partial trace. For a spin-1/2 degree of freedom, we may therefore write a two-band Bloch Hamiltonian that could be used to compute this reduced connection A S (k) in terms of the ground state spin expectation value vector of the full system, S GS (k) , as where σ is the vector of Pauli matrices. The skyrmion number of the spin for such a two-band Hamiltonian may also be expressed in terms of a reduced curvature Ω S (k) = ∇ × A S (k). For our purposes, it is sufficient to integrate a single component of Ω S (k) relevant to the k x -k y plane to compute our skyrmion number, As a result of the C symmetry of the full Bloch Hamiltonian, this skyrmion number is quantized when the spin is finite in magnitude everywhere in the Brillouin zone, and the reduced Berry phase for the spin subsystem is therefore also quantized despite coupling to the environment. The response signatures of the spin subsystem expressed in terms of the skyrmion number are therefore as robust as in the case of purely unitary evolution. Measurements corresponding to a partial trace furthermore effectively reduce the homotopy group to π 2 (S 2 ) = Z, so a non-trivial skyrmion number Q for the spin texture in the Brillouin zone can then yield |Q| topologically-protected chiral modes in the non-equilibrium steady state of the spin subsystem. In effect, non-trivial skyrmion number corresponds to the system realizing a Chern insulator phase characterized by a two-band Bloch Hamiltonian specifically for the spin degree of freedom, upon tracing out other degrees of freedom. Skyrmion number Q = 0 therefore corresponds to Q chiral modes on each edge in the spin subsystem with open boundary conditions. The system before partial trace is constrained by the spin degree of freedom realizing this topological phase and by its bulk-boundary correspondence. That is, the spin texture at the edge in the full system must yield the chiral modes of the spin subsystem after the observable-enriched partial trace. In a two-band Chern insulator, chiral modes exhibit very strict spin-momentum-locking, and a skyrmion phase leads to spin-momentum-locking persisting in systems with greater than two bands. Further details are included in our follow-up work on the observable-enriched partial trace 57 . More generally, these results apply to response functions of the spin subsystem, which can be expressed in terms of these reduced geometric quantities resulting from performing the partial trace. For large N at which the Lindbladian perspective becomes more suitable, this would correspond to additional restrictions on the dissipators due to symmetries of the system plus environment. We will explore this in future work. III. Construction of the HTSS. First, we consider a schematic model for a two-dimensional superconductor in the x-y-plane with Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian as in Ueno et al. where where Enforcing C symmetry in the mirror Mxy subsector, we also have Then Eq. 31 can be written as Using these expressions, we can write arriving at a constraint for a mirror subsector to inherit C symmetry that is the same as the constraint for a mirror subsector to inherit particle-hole symmetry C 24 . This constraint is only satisfied for Mxy . Thus, in superconductors with C symmetry and Mxy , the C symmetry of the full Hamiltonian is inherited by each Mxy subsector. We can then define the mirror skyrmion number as the skyrmion number computed over the two-dimensional Brillouin zone, but using only occupied states within a single mirror subsector. A topological phase can then be constructed as a system with non-trivial skyrmion number Q in one mirror subsector, and non-trivial skyrmion number -Q in the other subsector, in analogy to the construction of the quantum spin Hall insulator as a system with a Chern insulator with total Chern number C = 0 in one spin subsector, and a second Chern insulator with total Chern number -C in the other spin subsector. We can generalize these results to three-dimensional systems: the matrix Hamiltonian of the superconducting state then satisfies Mxy H(k x , k y , k z ) M † xy = H(k x , k y , -k z ), (40) and mirror skyrmion numbers can be computed in the k xk y planes where k z = 0 or π, as is done for mirror Chern numbers IV. Mirror Chern number and mirror skyrmion number in two dimensions. For a Hamiltonian of a two-dimensional system in the x-y plane with mirror symmetry M taking z to -z, we may blockdiagonalize the matrix representation of the Hamiltonian by going to the basis in which the corresponding matrix representation of M is diagonal, with each block corresponding to a particular eigenvalue of the matrix representation of M. The total Chern number C for each block-the total mirror Chern number as defined by Ueno et al. where c n denotes the Chern number of the n th band in the block and the sum over n is restricted to bands below the Fermi energy. Here, we evaluate c n using a discrete lattice corresponding to the discrete values of the crystal momentum in a finite sample with periodic boundary conditions. The Chern number of the n th band may then be evaluated as where A n k,μ = nk|nk + μ is the Berry connection field and the μ are the nearest-neighbor vectors of the square momentum-space lattice. Similarly, we may compute the mirror skyrmion number for each block of the Hamiltonian matrix representation as the skyrmion number Q for each block, defined in Eq. 1. V. Derivation of spin representation in mirror subsectors The spin representation is derived from the basis for a given mirror subsector (we focus on mirror subsector 1 with spin operators and basis given in the main text), as this determines the form of the raising and lowering operators for the spin, which we denote as S + and S -, respectively. As particlehole conjugation and C act within the mirror subsector, the spin representation for mirror subsector 1 can be decomposed into a normal state component and its particle-hole conjugate. We therefore only discuss here the spin representation for the normal state, which is then used to construct the spin representation for the BdG Hamiltonian of mirror subsector 1 as given in the main text. The xand ŷ-components of the normal state spin representation are constructed in the standard way from raising/lowering operators, as S x = 1 2 (S + + S -) and S y = -i 2 (S + -S -). To construct the raising/lowering operator explicitly and therefore determine S x and S y , we first write the representation of the operator which raises a spin -1/2 state to spin +1/2 irrespective of other degrees of freedom of the normal state in the mirror subsector, which is an orbital degree of freedom. That is, we construct a raising operator that raises spin -1/2 in either of the xz or yz orbitals to the spin +1/2 state of the xy orbital. The representation for the raising and lowering operators in the basis given in the main text is then The raising and lowering operators then also include terms for transition from one spin -1/2 state in the yz orbital to the other in the xz orbital and vice versa. The raising and lowering operators are then This additional transition is counterintuitive, but makes more sense when one considers that it is the ẑ-component of the spin, which encodes whether a transition corresponds to raising or lowering. To construct the representation of the ẑcomponent of the spin, it is helpful to decompose S x and S y in another way. First, we introduce the following expressions: We may then rewrite the xand ŷ-components of the spin representation as S 1,x ∝ σ 1,x + σ 2,x + σ 3,x (48) S 1,y ∝ σ 1,y + σ 2,y + σ 3,y (49) Given that the basis for mirror subsector 1 is Ψ 1 (k) = {c † -k,xy,↑ , c † -k,xz,↓ , c † -k,yz,↓ , c k,xy,↑ , c k,xz,↓ , c k,yz,↓ } t , however, the ẑ-component of the normal state spin representation for the mirror subsector is instead to account for the redundancy of the spin -1/2 label. That is, the representation possesses only two complete SU(2) subalgebras. This furthermore corresponds to generalized commutation relations between the components of the spin representation, j∈{1,2} [σ j,α , σ j,β ] = j∈{1,2} iε αβκ σ j,κ . (51) The commutation relations for spin-1 representation satisfy similar generalized commutation relations, which then further simplify to the standard expressions.