It is well known that cellular dynamical mean-field theory (CDMFT) leads to the artificial breaking of translation invariance. In spite of this, it is one of the most successful methods to treat strongly correlated electrons systems. Here, we investigate in more detail how this broken translation invariance manifests itself. This allows to disentangle artificial broken translation invariance effects from the genuine strongly correlated effects captured by CDMFT. We report artificial density waves taking the shape of the cluster-cluster density wavesin all our zero temperature CDMFT solutions, including pair density waves in the superconducting state. We discuss the limitations of periodization regarding this phenomenon, and we present mean-field density-wave models that reproduce CDMFT results at low energy in the superconducting state. We then discuss how these artificial density waves help the agreement of CDMFT with high temperature superconducting cuprates regarding the low-energy spectrum, in particular for subgap structures observed in tunnelling microscopy. We relate these subgap structures to nodal and anti-nodal gaps in our results, similar to those observed in photoemission experiments. This fortuitous agreement suggests that spatial inhomogeneity may be a key ingredient to explain some features of the low-energy underdoped spectrum of cuprates with strongly correlated methods. This work deepens our understanding of CDMFT and clearly identifies signatures of broken translation invariance in the presence of strong correlations. Broken translation invariance has a long history in cuprate high temperature superconductors The regime where translation invariance is broken in cuprates-intermediate interaction strength, low-temperature, and low-doping-is very difficult to address theoretically Outside this regime, however, strongly correlated electron methods capture most of the phenomenology of cuprates Whether density waves could be the missing ingredient to improve CDMFT results in the low-temperature low-doping regime proves to be a very challenging question. Cluster methods such as CDMFT are badly suited for studying density waves beyond simple Néel aniferromagnetism because their treatment requires an enlarged unit cell, and cluster methods already rely on an enlarged unit cell: the cluster itself. Therefore, these methods are often restricted to specific wavelengths of density waves, determined by the size of the cluster, or they are biased towards these wavelengths. In this respect, CDMFT has an important well-known problem: it already intrinsically breaks translation invariance. The main focus of the present paper is this intrinsic translation invariance breaking of CDMFT. We present results showing that, at low energy, CDMFT breaks translation invariance with the same signatures as those of density waves. To show this, we define order parameters for density waves that emulate our cluster tiling, and we show that these order parameters are non-zero in all our CDMFT solutions. Second, we construct a mean-field model to study how d-wave superconductivity interplays with these density-waves orders and we show that this non-interacting model reproduces the low energy features of our superconducting CDMFT solution. These results demonstrate that artificial cluster-shaped density waves are an intrinsic component of CDMFT results. With the acknowledged presence of those density waves, we revisit the low-energy single-particle spectral weight of the superconducting state found in CDMFT. We find that broken translation invariance is responsible for two important features of the superconducting gap: subgap structures in the density of states, and a differentiation between nodal and antinodal gaps in the spectral weight. We then explain that these two features roughly agree with homologous observations in cuprates: sub-gap structures seen in STM Thus, this paper provides the order parameters that measure the intrinsic broken translation invariance of CDMFT, explore in details the consequences of this broken translation invariance, and how these consequences relate to experimental results in cuprates. This allows to disentangle the effects of broken translation invariance from genuine strongly correlated physics both in cuprates and in CDMFT: we conclude by suggesting that the subgap structures and the nodal and antinodal dichotomy of the superconducting gap might be indirect consequences of inhomogeneity rather than direct consequences of strong correlations. Of course, since the density waves found in CDMFT solutions are an artefact, one may want to remove them. Although this paper does not offer a way to do so, we discuss many important points regarding this endeavour. First, we show that using a large Lorentzian broadening to plot the spectral weight de-emphasizes the signatures of density waves, but does not suppress them completely. Second, we mention briefly how the dynamical cluster approximation (DCA), another cluster extension of dynamical mean-field theory, circumvents the problem and at what cost. Third, we discuss the various periodization schemes suggested to restore translation invariance and full momentum dependence in CDMFT translation invariance. The dynamical cluster approximation (DCA) The paper is divided as follows. Section II A defines the model. Section II B reviews some key aspects of CDMFT. Section II C describes how CDMFT breaks translation invariance and contrasts this with DCA. Section II D reviews the various periodization schemes and explains why Green's function periodization allows to study the breaking of translation invariance, whereas cumulant periodization does not. Section II E defines the spectral quantities we study. Section II F defines the order parameters for superconductivity and the cluster-shaped density waves. Section II G presents the mean-field model we use to reproduce low-energy CDMFT features. The rest of the paper presents the results, with Sec. III A establishing the main signatures of the density waves and Sec. III B presenting an analysis of the doping dependence of these signatures. Finally, Sec. III C discusses the relation of these results with regards to experiments, before concluding. We start from the Hubbard model Ĥ = t + Û on a square lattice, with the kinetic term Operators c † r,σ and c r,σ respectively create and annihilate electrons of spin σ at positions r, and vectors a point to neighbouring sites of r. Hole doping p is controlled through the chemical potential μ. We use band parameters t = 1, t = -0.3 and t = 0.2 for first, second, and third-neighbour hopping, respectively The purpose of this section is to define our notation and to review a few key aspects of CDMFT. For a full description of the method, we refer the reader to Refs. In our notation, z is the complex frequency (z = iω n for the Matsubara Green's function or z = ω + iη for the retarded Green's function). Positions are expressed as r = r+R, with r denoting a superlattice vector (the position of the cluster) and R the position within the cluster. Accordingly, wave vectors in the Brillouin zone are written as k = k+K, with K a reciprocal super-lattice wave vector (K • r = 2π) and k restricted to the reduced Brillouin zone. All quantities are thus expressed in an intermediate Fourier representation (R, k) with N c the number of cluster sites and N the total number of lattice sites. A matrix representation in the coordinates R, R is necessary if we want to write inverse Green's functions. We denote these matrices with bold typeface. In this representation, the lattice Green's function G L R,R ( k, z), or G L ( k, z), in matrix notation, is given by where t( k) is the kinetic term (1) in the (R, k) matrix representation and Σ c (z) is the cluster self-energy. The use of the cluster self-energy Σ c (z) in place of the true lattice self-energy is the main approximation of CDMFT. To find Σ c (z), an Anderson impurity model, defined by ĤAIM = tc + Û + θ + ˆ must be solved, where tc + Û is the restriction of the Hubbard model to a cluster, and θ + ˆ is a non-interacting environment to the cluster. Namely, θ is a hopping Hamiltonian from cluster to non-interacting medium called the bath, and ˆ is the Hamiltonian of this bath. The numerical solution of the impurity model yields the cluster Green's function, from which the self-energy Σ c (z) is extracted. Here, θ and are the matrix representations of θ and ˆ , respectively. The latter are adjusted iteratively to reach the self-consistency condition The fine details of our CDMFT implementation can be found in Kancharla et al. orbitals at zero temperature. The only difference with Ref. 31 is that our distance function uses a sharp cutoff at ω c = 2, as studied in Ref. CDMFT breaks translation invariance. The hopping matrix t( k), is expressed as and the corresponding cluster hopping Hamiltonian is obtained as and has open boundary condition. The self-energy is taken to be zero between clusters, as depicted in Fig. The method known as dynamical cluster approximation (DCA) leading to a different cluster hopping Hamiltonian t c,DCA = N c N k t DCA ( k), which is periodic in R space. As a consequence, momentum K is a good quantum number of the impurity system and DCA preserves translation invariance. For this reason, none of the density waves discussed in this paper will be found in DCA. Although DCA preserves translation invariance, it comes at the cost of a piecewise constant self-energy in the Brillouin zone: the DCA lattice self-energy is defined only for the few K momenta of the periodic cluster. By contrast, in CDMFT, the phase e -i k•(R-R ) , which makes t c,DCA periodic, is not part of the impurity model, and so it can be restituted to the selfenergy when returning to k-space. This allows to bring back full k-dependence, as explained in the next section. We do not consider DCA further in this paper. To estimate the full k-dependence of the CDMFT Green's function Here we revisit periodization of an arbitrary quantity Q( k) to highlight that it consists of two steps: 1. Change the basis from (R, R , k)-space to (k, k )-space. 2. Discard the off-diagonal elements in (k, k )-space. The first step is the following unitary transformation: which preserves all information. The second step amounts to setting where k belongs to the original Brillouin zone. The last equation is the definition of periodization as originally proposed in Ref. The three typical candidates for Q( k) are the lattice Green's function G L ( k, z), the self-energy Σ c , or the cumulant M(z) ≡ (z + μ -Σ c ) -1 . To compare the three resulting approximations, we can write their respective k-dependent Green's function. They are known as (i) the G-periodization (ii) the Σ-periodization and (iii) the M-periodization where t(k) = (k) -μ is the non-interacting dispersion, i.e., the k-space representation of the operator t. In the rest of this paper, we use only the G-periodization. The reasons for this are explained below. First, note that periodized quantities do not satisfy the DMFT self-consistency condition (3). Indeed, the quantities that do satisfy the self-consistency condition are G L R,R ( k, z), M R,R (z), and Σ c R,R (z). With the unitary transform (8), we can transform these respectively to G L (k, k , z), M(k, k , z), and Σ(k, k , z), which are the same objects represented in kspace, and therefore also satisfy the self-consistency condition. However, they are not diagonal in k. With the offdiagonal elements removed through periodization Second, even though G(k, z), M(k, z) and Σ(k, z) are all translation invariant by construction, they are no more than the diagonal elements of G L (k, k , z), M(k, k , z), and Σ(k, k , z), which all break translation invariance. As a consequence, these diagonal elements (the periodized quantities) preserve signatures of broken translation invariance (see appendix A). Section III A 2 studies these signatures of broken translation invariance in the G-periodized spectral weight. These two arguments alone-that periodized quantities do not satisfy the DMFT self-consistency condition, and that they preserve signatures of broken translation invariance-do not justify our preference for the G-periodization: they apply equally to all periodization schemes. What makes the G-periodized Green's function preferable is its relation to the truly self-consistent Green's function G L ( k + K, k + K , z). Indeed, the Σand M-periodized Green's function, given by Eqs. ( Therefore, G(k, z) can be seen as an economical way to study the diagonal elements of G L (k, k , z). Equivalently, if we wanted to study the diagonal elements of M(k, k , z) and Σ(k, k , z), we could consider the periodized M(k, z) and Σ(k, z). However, using the latter to construct a new Green's functions transforms the information about translation invariance in a very uncontrolled manner (referring to off-diagonal elements being discarded before matrix inversions). The resulting Green's function, G Σ (k, z) and G M (k, z), should there-fore be considered as estimators (as originally suggested in Refs. 18, 21, 52, and 54) of the hypothetical translation invariant lattice Green's function. By contrast, the G-periodized G(k, z) is not an estimator; it is the diagonal part, in k-space, of the actual CDMFT solution. The G-periodized Green's function can thus be useful to study the actual CDMFT solution. As we explain in the next section, translation invariant one-particle observables can be computed using only a trace involving the Green's function, i.e., its diagonal elements (this is clear when one uses the Luttinger-Ward functional to derive the CDMFT formalism The local density of states is computed from the unperiodized Green's function using where the trace is over cluster indices. The Lorentzian broadening η is specified for each case discussed below. Note that using the G-periodized Green's function would yield the same result, since the trace is invariant under unitary transformations and only requires the diagonal elements. The Gperiodized spectral weight is given by: with G(k, z) given by Eq. When studying superconductivity, we will also consider the zero-temperature k-resolved gap function: where F(k, z) is the Gor'kov function, also known as the anomalous part of G(k, z). Integrating this function over Matsubara frequency at zero temperature, as in We consider two types of CDMFT solutions to the Hubbard model: a normal solution and a superconducting solution. In the normal solution, no spontaneous symmetry breaking is allowed, whereas in the superconducting solution, superconductivity is allowed and it develops for certain values of interaction U and doping p. It is the first, the normal solution, which is associated with the pseudogap state above T c , although here it is obtained at zero temperature by preventing broken symmetry. To probe the orders present in the CDMFT solutions, we compute the associated order parameters. For example, the pairing operator of d-wave superconductivity (SC) is with ∆ x = -∆ ŷ = 1. This yields the usual d-wave form factor ∆(k) = (cos k xcos k y ) in k-space. In this paper, we are particularly interested in the density-wave operator where t Q x ,x = t Q y ,ŷ = 1 for two wave vectors Q x = πx and Q y = πŷ. These parameters yield a density wave that reproduces the 2×2 cluster tiling used in our CDMFT scheme, as illustrated in Fig. where ∆ Q x ,x = -∆ Q y ,ŷ = 1 that yields the same 2×2 clustershaped tiling for Cooper pairs. This pattern for charge and pair density waves is what we mean by "cluster density waves" (clus.-DW). Note that bond-centered density waves similar to To compute the expectation values of these operators We use G L ( k, z) because it is the only one that can confirm the presence of the cluster density waves. Indeed, the cluster Green's function, G c (z), lacks the relevant inter-cluster elements, whereas any periodized Green's function is deprived from the relevant off-diagonal elements c k+Q c † k . Finally, as demonstrated in Sect. III below, we can reproduce the superconducting CDMFT spectrum at low energy with the following phenomenological mean-field model for dwave superconductivity coexisting with cluster density waves: With B = 0 and P = 0 this models become a d-wave BCS model with amplitude of the superconducting gap controlled by D. When present, the amplitude of the bond-centered charge density waves is controlled by B and that of the pair density wave by P. Such a mean-field model cannot be used to fit the normal CDMFT solution, because a mean field for the pseudogap present in CDMFT would be necessary. The possible existence of a mean field for the pseudogap is still an active field of research Fig. The magnitude of tQ reflects the magnitude of the selfenergy. In the lattice Green's function , the real part of the self-energy Σ c acts as a hopping modifier from t r,r to t r,r + ReΣ c r,r . In CDMFT, the firstneighbour self-energy oscillates in space, being 0 between clusters and non-zero within the cluster. This oscillation is what causes the density wave measured by tQ . In Fig. Density waves also appear in the superconducting case. Fig. The weakening of the density-wave order parameters with doping highlights that they are a consequences of the (dynami-cal) mean-field treatment of inter-cluster correlations. Indeed, spatial correlations decrease with doping, and CDMFT becomes equivalent to single-site DMFT, which is translationinvariant. We now turn to the consequences of these density waves in spectral quantities. Figure In Ref. The order parameters of Fig. Fig. The density of states, Fermi surface, and k-resolved gap are almost identical in the superconducting CDMFT solution and the mean-field model of d-wave superconductivity coexisting with 2 × 2 density waves. This leaves little doubt that density-wave physics is present at low energy in the CDMFT superconducting solution. Now, to understand how broken translation invariance generates the subgap structures, Fig. So far we have used a relatively small broadening η = 0.02 compared to the larger values η ∼ 0.1 typically used with these methods Using larger values of η attenuates certain side effects of using a finite bath. The finite bath required by an exact diagonalization solver leads to a large but finite number of eigenvalues for the impurity hamiltonian. As a consequence, the cluster Green's function G c (z) and the self-energy Σ c (z) have discrete poles located close the real axis ω, at a distance η (for z = ω + iη). In the density of states N(ω), this discreteness is washed out when we restore the full lattice dispersion t( k) in the lattice Green's function However, the self-energy is still described by a discrete set of poles, and thus large values of η allow to smooth out the resulting discreteness on the real axis ω. Note that the density waves we study in this paper are caused by the self-energy being zero between clusters, which is unavoidable in CDMFT. Translation invariance is broken irrespectively of the solver used, the self-energy ω-dependence, the size of the bath, or the value of η. Therefore, neither a large η nor a large bath are expected to remove the density waves studied here. In the previous sections, a small Lorentzian broadening was used to identify the effects of the cluster density waves. This is because although large η cannot remove the density waves, they can hide their consequences to some extent. For example, Fig. The analysis of Figs Fig. After careful analysis of this section's results on the superconducting CDMFT solution, one should be convinced that the three main phenomena described up to here-the subgap structures, the extra nodes, and the nodal and antinodal gapsare all different facets of how the spectral weight is shaped by the cluster density waves. They are consequences of CDMFT artificially breaking translation invariance. With this full picture of how CDMFT breaks translation invariance, we can now describe its implications for the agreement between CDMFT and some experimental observations on cuprates. We focus on two important results: the nodalanti-nodal dichotomy of the superconducting gap seen in ARPES, and the vortex subgap states seen in STM, briefly reviewed below. Of course, since the density waves causing these phenomena in CDMFT are artificial, this comparison to experiments requires a nuanced discussion. Let us first review what is seen in experiments. The experimental nodal-anti-nodal dichotomy of the gap is related to the famous Fermi arcs observed in ARPES. Above T c (in the normal state), these arcs consist of an incomplete Fermi surface, taking the shape of four arcs gap is not perfectly d-wave: it overshoots in the anti-nodal region The experimental subgap structures are observed in the gap measured by STM. The subgap structures are sometimes called "vortex states" or "vortex excitations" for reasons that will become clear below. The gap seen by STM is highly inhomogeneous: it differs as much from site to site on the lattice than the average gap differs from doping to doping To summarize experimental results, both ARPES and STM experiments find double gaps at low temperature in the superconducting state of cuprates: ARPES observes a nodalanti-nodal dichotomy and STM observes subgap structures. We already discussed extensively our equivalent findings in CDMFT: the previous section demonstrated the presence of subgap structures, and of nodal and anti-nodal gaps in the CDMFT superconducting solution. Furthermore, as we described, the key element causing subgap structures and nodalanti-nodal gaps in CDMFT are the artificial 2×2 density waves intrinsic to our method. This strongly suggests that the key element causing the experimentally observed subgap structures, and nodal-anti-nodal gaps in STM and ARPES, might be the 4 × 4 charge order experimentally observed in cuprates, as re-close FIG. To illustrate this compelling comparison of CDMFT to experiments, Fig. Despite this agreement for subgap structures, the nodalantinodal dichotomy seen in ARPES differs a lot from the one obtained in our CDMFT results. The most notable difference is the presence of the aforementioned extra nodes, which are obtained in CDMFT, but are not seen in experiments. We have three possible explanations for this, all related to differences between the artificial 2 × 2 density waves present in CDMFT and the ∼ 4 × 4 charge order observed experimentally. First, as illustrated in Fig. Let us also compare how the Bragg planes intersect the Fermi surface in Fig. We must also mention that a nodal-antinodal dichotomy similar to that found in our CDMFT results had already been studied by Aichhorn et al. using variational cluster approximation (VCA) with a 3 × 3 cluster In this paper, we explained the origin of subgap structures in the superconducting gap of CDMFT solutions to the Hubbard model. These subgap structures are a consequence of broken translation invariance due to the self-energy being zero between clusters in CDMFT. To quantify this broken translation invariance, we measured the order parameter of 2 × 2 charge density waves in both the normal and the superconducting CDMFT solutions, along with 2 × 2 pair density waves in the superconducting case. These order parameters are weaker at higher doping, as determined by the amplitude of the selfenergy which decreases with doping. Careful examination of the spectral weight in the superconducting CDMFT solution showed that the subgap structures appear because of new Bragg planes introduced by the superlattice used in CDMFT. We also showed that, at low energy, the results for the spectral weight at small η can be reproduced with a mean-field model of coexisting superconductivity and 2×2 density waves, leading to the same subgap structures as in CDMFT. We also showed that varying the Lorentzian broadening η is a powerful tool to discriminate artefacts from robust features. Although the presence of these artificial density waves is an uncontrolled by-product of the CDMFT approximation, studying its interplay with superconductivity is enlightening. We discussed subgap structures observed in STM experiments on cuprates that are strikingly similar to those found in our CDMFT results. We also showed that the subgap structures found in CDMFT are related to a dichotomy between nodal and anti-nodal superconducting gaps, reminiscent of the one observed in ARPES, albeit much sharper in CDMFT. Our results therefore suggest that these "double gaps" observed experimentally by STM and ARPES could be indirect consequences of the coexistence between density waves and superconductivity in cuprates (both due to strong correlations). To conclude, let us clarify this last point. We believe this is how our work allows to disentangle the genuine strongly correlated state captured by CDMFT (pseudogap and d-wave superconductivity), from indirect effects coming form broken translation invariance (here subgap structure and nodalantinodal dichotomy in the superconducting state). As we said in the introduction, pseudogap physics at a high temperature T * is mostly captured by strongly correlated electron methods (CDMFT and DCA) without the need for spontaneously broken symmetry. Although we did not discuss DCA extensively, we explained that it preserves translation invariance. CDMFT, on the other hand, artificially breaks translation invariance, which was the subject of this paper. The pseudogap, as manifested in the drop of the Knight shift at high temperature T * , is qualitatively consistent in these two methods, which suggests that its fundamental physics is independent of whether translation invariance is broken or not. However, the two low-temperature experimentally observed phenomena we reviewed-subgap structures and nodal-antinodal dichotomy of the superconducting gap-were obtained in zero-temperature CDMFT solely because of broken translation invariance, as demonstrated throughout this paper. These two phenomena are often considered landmarks of pseudogap physics in cuprates. Our results suggest that they are distinct from the strongly correlated pseudogap captured in CDMFT and DCA at T * . They are instead consequences of inhomogeneity (charge or pair order) at low temperature T → 0 that modify the superconducting gap. To confirm this hypothesis, we would need a proof that subgap structures and nodalantinodal dichotomy of the superconducting gap do not appear in a translation-invariant low-temperature pseudogap (if such a thing exists). Unfortunately, this last point requires a strongly correlated theory capturing the pseudogap while preserving translation invariance and providing sufficient kresolution of the self-energy. Such a method does not exist at the moment, and thus new developments in this direction are still needed. Not all cluster extensions of dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) break The superfluid stiffness calculated with a cumulant-periodized Green's function develops unphysical minima in its doping dependence (see Fig.6.11 of Ref. Periodized-CDMFT (PCDMFT) If the off-diagonal elements were kept in matrix inversions, all schemes would be equivalent, and would lead to G L ( k + K, k + K , z), simply being different implementations of the same unitary transformation The mere presence of pair density waves is not sufficient to get the multiple sign changes: Both the superconducting and the pair-density-wave mean-field values had to be strong enough. Moreover, more than three sign changes were also obtained, for other dopings in the case of CDMFT, or with other mean-field values in the mean-field model. Although this dome-like doping dependence for the SGS might suggest that the SGS is the true superconducting gap, our attempts to separate the small gap from the large gap failed. Both gaps come from the anomalous part of the Green's function. The small subgap cannot be obtained alone.