In this article we review recent work on van der Waals (vdW) systems in which at least one of the components has strong spin-orbit coupling. We focus on a selection of vdW heterostructures to exemplify the type of interesting electronic properties that can arise in these systems. We first present a general effective model to describe the low energy electronic degrees of freedom in these systems. We apply the model to study the case of (vdW) systems formed by a graphene sheet and a topological insulator. We discuss the electronic transport properties of such systems and show how they exhibit much stronger spin-dependent transport effects than isolated topological insulators. We then consider vdW systems in which the layer with strong spin-orbit coupling is a monolayer transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) and briefly discuss graphene-TMD systems. In the second part of the article we discuss the case in which the vdW system includes a superconducting layer in addition to the layer with strong spin-orbit coupling. We show in detail how these systems can be designed to realize odd-frequency superconducting pair correlations. Finally, we discuss twisted graphene-NbSe2 bilayer systems as an example in which the strength of the proximity-induced superconducting pairing in the normal layer, and its Ising character, can be tuned via the relative twist angle between the two layers forming the heterostructure. Van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures Of particular interest are the recent developments involving vdW systems comprised of two layers in which one of the layers has a strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC). The main interest in these systems arises from the possibility of realizing novel electronic systems by combining such a layer with a different layer which possesses little or no SOC but with other interesting properties. For example, graphene possesses only very weak SOC but has very high electron mobility at room * Corresponding author: erossi@wm.edu temperature. By combining graphene with the 2D surface of a three-dimensional (3D) topological insulator (TI) The literature on vdW systems is by now very large, for this reason we restrict ourselves to a particular subset of vdW systems that are among the most relevant to the subject of this special issue and that we have studied over the past few years. We first present, in Sec. II, the model to describe vdW systems with SOC. To exemplify the application of this general formalism, in Sec. III, we discuss the case of vdW heterostructures formed by graphene and a TI. In Sec. IV, we discuss recent progress on vdW systems which include both graphene and a layer of transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD). We then consider, in Sec. V, the case in which one of the layers is a superconductor, discussing the possibility of realizing different exotic superconducting states in vdW systems with SOC. In Sec. VI we present our conclusion and outlook for future developments. While the focus of this article is primarily on vdW systems composed of graphene, topological insulators, and TMDs, we note that much progress has also been made studying vdW systems with other components. Notably, we do not discuss the recently discovered 2D magnetic materials The Hamiltonian describing a generic double-layer vdW system can be written as H = H 1 + H 2 + H t , where H ( = 1, 2) is the Hamiltonian associated with layer and H t describes tunneling processes between the two layers. Here, we write H 1 = kαα c † kα h(k) 1;αα c kα , H 2 = kαα d † kα h(k) 2;αα d kα , where c † kα and d † kα (c kα and d kα ) create (annihilate) single electron states in layers 1 and 2, respectively, with momentum k and all other degrees of freedom described by the composite index α, including spin, orbital, and particle-hole degrees of freedom. We assume that the tunneling between the two layers depends only on the difference between the positions, r 1 , r 2 , of the electrons in the two layers. As a consequence, the crystal momentum is conserved during tunneling processes and we have where G is the reciprocal lattice vector in layer and we have allowed for the possibility that the lattices making-up each of the two layers may possess basis vectors τ s . For example, for the case of graphene we have two basis vectors τ s , which we can write as τ s = {(0, 0); (a 0 , 0)}, where a 0 is the carboncarbon distance. In a bilayer vdW system, two very different kinds of stacking are possible: commensurate stacking, and incommensurate stacking. In the first case, the vdW bilayer has a periodic structure in real space with a large primitive cell that is commensurate with the primitive cells of both layers. In the incommensurate case, no such periodicity exists in real space. For the communsurate case we obtain a well defined Moiré pattern. Given two layers ( = 1, 2) with primitive lattice vectors a i (i = 1, 2), in order for a stacking to be commensurate there must exist four integers m 1 , m 2 , n 1 , n 2 such that: Without loss of generality, using complex numbers to represent 2D vectors, we can write a 11 = a 10 e -iθ1 , a 12 = a 10 e +iθ1 , a 21 = a 20 e -i(θ2-θ) , a 22 = a 20 e +i(θ2+θ) , where a 0 is the lattice constant of layer , 2θ is the angle between the primitive lattice vectors of layer , and θ is the twist angle between the two layers. Using this notation, considering that the magnitudes of the two vectors on the left and right hand side of Eq. ( Notice that Eq. ( The number of commensurate stackings forms a set of measure zero in the whole space of possible stackings. However, the experimental evidence suggests The size of the primitive cell increases very rapidly as the twist angle θ decreases for θ < 5 • . For this reason, to treat vdW systems with small twist angles, it is more efficient to use an effective model in momentum space For the practically important case in which the 2D crystals are triangular lattices and the low energy states (i.e. the states closest to the Fermi energy) are located at the corners (K and K points) of the hexagonal Brillouin zone (BZ), as for graphene, the minimum value of |G 1 -G 2 | is equal to 2K sin(θ/2), where K = |K|, and there are three vectors ). If we account for all tunneling processes with |k 1 -k 2 | = q we find that the higher-order tunneling processes generate a honeycomb structure in momentum space with nearest neighbor points connected by the vectors q i The relative contributions of higher-order recursive tunneling processes is controlled by the parameter γ ≡ t/( (q)), where t is the interlayer tunneling strength between states in the two layers with momenta that differ by at most q, and (q) = min[ 1 (q), 2 (q)], where (q) is the energy of electrons with momentum of magnitude q in layer . The value of γ, therefore, controls the size of this momentum space lattice that one needs to consider to obtain an accurate band structure for the vdW system. For γ < 1 the size of the required lattice in momentum space can be quite small. For very small γ it is sufficient to keep just the first "ring" of interlayer hopping processes. In this case the effective Hamiltonian matrix takes the simple form: where ti are matrices containing the interlayer tunneling elements. The model described above can be generalized to the case when one (or more) of the layers forming the vdW system is superconducting. For concreteness, let us consider the case when the vdW system is formed by only two layers and only one is superconducting; it is fairly straightforward to generalize the formalism to more complex situations, such as when both layers are superconducting. We assume layer 2 is a superconductor so that H 2 → H SC , and that this superconducting layer is a 2D crystal with triangular lattice for which the low energy states are located close to the corners of the BZ, the K and K points. We also assume simple s-wave pairing so that the superconducting order parameter ∆ SC couples states at opposite valleys with opposite spin and momentum k, measured from K (K ). The Hamiltonian for the vdW system is and, to lowest order in γ: where ĥ12 is the Hamiltonian given by Eq. ( where the first block is a 4×4 matrix of zeros and σ2 is a 2×2 Pauli matrix in spin space. As we will discuss in Sec. V B, the form for Λ given by Eq. ( In this section we follow the theoretical treatment given in Ref. In graphene the carbon atoms are arranged in a 2D honeycomb structure formed by two triangular sublattices, A and B, with lattice constant a g = √ 3a = 2.46 Å, with a = 1.42 Å the carbon-carbon atomic distance. The low energy states of graphene are located at the K and K points of the BZ: K = (4π/(3a g ), 0), K = (-4π/(3a g ), 0) (and equivalent points connected by reciprocal lattice wave vectors). At low energies close to the K and K points in graphene, the electrons are well described as massless Dirac fermions with Hamiltonians and where c † p,τ σ (c p,τ σ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator for an electron, in the graphene sheet, with spin σ and twodimensional momentum p = (p x , p y ), k is a wave vector measured from K (K ), v F = 10 6 m/s is the Fermi velocity, μ g is the chemical potential, and τi and σi (i = 0, 1, 2, 3)) are the 2 × 2 Pauli matrices in sublattice and spin space, respectively. One class of materials for which the effect of spin-orbit coupling on the low energy fermionic states is particularly strong is the one of three dimensional (3D) topological insulators (TIs) The 2D states at the TI's surface (TIS) are well described as massless Dirac fermions with Hamiltonian where d † k,σ (d k,σ ) creates (annihilates) a surface massless Dirac fermion with spin σ at wave vector k = (k x , k y , 0) measured from the zone center (Γ-point) of the surface-projected (BZ), σ = (σ 1 , σ2 , σ3 ) is the vector of Pauli matrices acting on spin space, ẑ is the unit vector along the z direction, and μ T I is the chemical potential. For our purposes, a particularly interesting class of 3D TIs is the one of the tetradymites, such as Bi 2 Se 3 , Bi 2 Te 3 , and Sb 2 Te 3 . These 3D TIs have the exceptional property that the lattice constant of the 111 surface, a T I , is such that: a T I /( √ 3a g ) = 1 + δ with δ < 1% for Sb 2 Te 3 and δ ≈ -3% (δ ≈ +3%) for Bi 2 Se 3 (Bi 2 Te 3 ) In the remainder of this section we limit our discussion to the cases in which the TI is Bi 2 Se 3 , Bi 2 Te 3 , or Sb 2 Te 3 , for which v T I ≈ v g /2, given that these materials allow the formation of a graphene-TI vdW system with commensurate stacking and therefore significant hybridization between the graphene and TI surface states. Experimentally it turns out to be difficult to pin the Fermi energy of Bi 2 Se 3 , Bi 2 Te 3 , Sb 2 Te 3 in the middle of the bulk gap so that only the surface states play an active role. One way in which this problem has been overcome is by considering the corresponding ternary and quaternary compounds Different commensurate stacking configurations, corresponding to Fig. In the √ 3 × √ 3 commensurate stacking, in which each atom on the TI surface is directly underneath a carbon atom, the dominant interlayer tunneling term is the one between the atoms on sublattice A (or B) and the TI atoms so that, in momentum space, the tunneling Hamiltonian can be written as , where λ = K, K and t A = t, t B = 0 are the tunneling matrix elements assumed to be spin and momentum independent. The Hamiltonian matrix for such a structure takes the form where the graphene blocks are 4 × 4 matrices in sublattice and spin space and the block describing the TI's surface states is a 2 × 2 matrix in spin space. We note that an analogous Hamiltonian can also be constructed for the similar vdW heterostructure in which single layer graphene (SLG) is replaced by bilayer graphene (BLG) to form a BLG-TI system Assuming γ << 1, we can use the simple Hamiltonian in Eq. ( . with t = t/3. A similar Hamiltonian is valid for the Kvalley The intrinsic SOC in graphene and bilayer graphene is negligible so that the spin degree of freedom does not affect significantly the transport properties Throughout this section, we assume that the ferromagnet (FM) is insulating so that its presence does not significantly alter the bands of the graphene-TI part of the vdW heterostructure. The main effect of the insulating FM layer is to induce an exchange field for the electrons in the heterostructure. This effect is captured by adding the term H ex ∝ M • σ, where M is the magnetization of the insulating FM, to the Hamiltonian discussed in Sec. III. The presence of this additional term simply causes a spin-splitting that we denote by ∆. In a graphene-TI-FM vdW system the dominant source of scattering, at low temperatures, is the presence of charge impurities ) where n imp is the impurity density, |ak is the Bloch state with momentum k and band index a, and a,k is the energy for a quasiparticle with momentum k in band a. For typical TI's samples we have n imp ≈ 10 12 cm -2 Figure Using linear-response theory in the long-wavelength regime, the d.c. longitudinal conductivity is given by where Ω is the area of the BZ, v i aa (k) ≡ ak|v i |ak is the expectation value of the i-th component of the velocity op- is the disorder-renormalized velocity (at the ladder approximation level), and G R/A ka = ( Fka ± i /2τ 0a (k)) -1 is the retarded/advanced Green's function, for electrons with momentum k and band index a. The increase of τ t due to the presence of SLG or BLG is also reflected in an increase of the d.c. conductivity, as can be seen in Fig. where s i aa (k) ≡ ak|s i |ak is the expectation value of the i-th component of the spin density operator. Figure The fact that the Edelstein effect can be much stronger in vdW systems like TI-SLG and TI-BLG than in isolated TIs So far we have considered the case in which the interlayer tunneling is constant, however, spin and charge transport can be coupled in vdW systems such as graphene-TI heterostructures even in the limit when the interlayer tunneling is predominantly random where V , V TI are external driving potentials for the charge in the graphene layer and TI's surface, respectively, ρ is graphene's density of states at the Fermi energy, and h is an external driving potential for the spin in the graphene layer. D is the weighted average of the diffusion constants of graphene, D, and TI's surface, TI , are the tunneling rates for graphene and the TI, respectively: Γ t = πρ TI t 2 , Γ t TI = πρt 2 , with ρ T I the density of states of the TI's surface at the Fermi energy. The interlayer tunneling processes are assumed to be well localized in space so that in momentum space the disorder average of the second moment of the interlayer tunneling matrix is just a constant, t 2 . The second term on the right hand side (r.h.s.) of Eq. ( and l TI the electron's mean free path on the TI's surface. The last term on the r.h.s. of Eq. ( where F is the Fermi energy and τ 0 is the quasiparticle relaxation time in the graphene layer due to intralayer disorder. Equations ( In recent years, much progress has been made on the characterization of the electronic properties of graphene-TMD heterostructures, both theoretically and experimentally. A monolayer TMD can be either metallic, such as NbSe 2 , or a direct gap semiconductor such as MoS 2 , and WSe 2 . At low temperatures NbSe 2 becomes superconducting and so we defer discussion of graphene-NbSe 2 vdW systems to the following section, see in particular Sec. V B. In this section we briefly summarize the main results for graphene-TMD heterostructures in which the TMD is a semiconductor. The structure of a TMD monolayer is shown schematically in Fig. where a is the in-plane lattice constant, γ the in-plane hopping amplitude, λ = ±1 is the index denoting the valley (K or K ), Given that the semiconducting monolayer TMDs have a fairly large gap, ∼ 2 eV, and a large lattice mismatch with graphene, one would expect that their effect on the graphene band structure could be negligible. Indeed, it is the case that the effects induced by proximity of the TMD to the SLG (or BLG) are quantitatively small. However, the presence of these effects can be qualitatively very significant due to the fact that in pristine SLG and BLG the spin-splitting from intrinsic SOC is very small, of the order of Ab-initio calculations Van der Waals heterostructures constructed with superconducting layers are extremely interesting because they allow the realization of novel superconducting states. In particular, when one of the layers has strong SOC, such heterostructures can be engineered to realize topologically non-trivial superconducting states In general, the order parameter describing a correlated electronic state is given by a many-body wavefunction, which must be completely antisymmetric under the permutation of all quantum numbers. This antisymmetry constrains the allowed symmetries of the order parameter. In the limit of static order parameters and a single relevant band degree of freedom, this constraint implies that even-parity order parameters (s-or d-wave) must be odd in the spin index (spin-singlet) while odd-parity order parameters (p-or f -wave) must be even in spin (spin-triplet). The term odd-frequency pairing refers to the possibility that the many-body state is odd in the relative time coordinate, or, equivalently, in the relative frequency. Therefore, odd-frequency states must possess spatial and spin symmetries with the exact opposite correspondence from the static case: i.e. even-parity states must be spintriplet and odd-parity must be spin-singlet. An odd-frequency state was first proposed by Berezinskii [145] as a possible superfluid state for He 3 . Later on, Berezinskii's proposal was extended to superconducting systems While the status of intrinsic odd-frequency states is uncertain, much progress has been made toward understanding how odd-frequency superconducting correlations can be induced using conventional superconductors in heterostructures. One theoretically well-established example can be found in superconductor-ferromagnet junctions which allow the conversion of conventional s-wave spin-singlet Cooper pairs to odd-frequency spin-triplet pairs, due to the breaking of spinrotational symmetry A set of general criteria for the emergence of odd-frequency pairing in 2D systems were given in Ref. To begin, we consider a vdW system formed by a 2D crystal with Hamiltonian H 2D , and a superconductor with Hamiltonian H SC . Without loss of generality we assume the superconductor to also be 2D. Let H t describe tunneling processes between the 2D and the SC so that the Hamiltonian H for the entire bilayer system can be written as H = H 2D +H SC +H t , with where σi are the 2 × 2 Pauli matrices in spin space, c † k,σ (d † k,σ ) and c k,σ (d k,σ ) are the creation and annihilation operators, respectively, acting on the fermionic states in the 2DEG (SC) layer with momentum k and spin σ, h 0 (k) is the spin-independent part of H 2D and h(k) is the field that describes its spin-dependent part due to an exchange field and/or spin-orbit coupling. Here, h SC σσ (k) describes the quasiparticle spectrum of the normal state of the superconductor, ∆ σσ (k) is the superconducting order parameter which, in general, has a linear combination of spin-singlet and spin-triplet terms, and t is the tunneling between the 2D system and the SC, which is assumed to conserve both spin and momentum. To examine the superconducting pairing induced in the nonsuperconducting 2DEG by proximity to the SC, we study the anomalous Green's function, or pair amplitude, within the 2DEG, F 2D k;iωn , which is a 2 × 2 matrix in spin space and a function of both the crystal momentum k and Matsubara frequency ω n . In the absence of interlayer tunneling t no superconducting pairs exist in the 2DEG and therefore F 2D k;iωn = 0. However, for t = 0 we find that Cooper pairs can tunnel from the SC into the 2DEG, giving rise to superconducting correlations with novel symmetries which depend on the properties of the 2DEG. To understand the symmetries of these induced pairings it is sufficient to consider the leading-order terms in perturbation with respect to the tunneling strength t: where F SC k;iωn is the anomalous part of the Green's function for the SC, given by where s SC k,iωn (d k,iωn ) represents the spin-singlet (spin-triplet) pair amplitudes and Ĝ2D k;iωn is the normal Green's function for the 2DEG when t = 0, given by Ĝ2D Inserting Eqs. ( where F even k;iωn (F odd k;iωn ) are strictly even (odd) functions of Matsubara frequency ω n , and is the spin-independent amplitude arising from the product of the denominators of the Green's functions Ĝ2D k;iωn , Ĝ2D -k;-iωn . For the most general form of H 2D , A k;iωn has both even and odd-frequency terms; however, assuming h 0 (k) = h 0 (-k) and |h(k)| = |h(-k)|, which are true for most systems, A k;iωn becomes an even function of both frequency and momentum. In this case the relative contributions from the evenand odd-frequency pair amplitudes are given by F even k;iωn and F odd k;iωn , respectively. We can decompose each of these even/odd-frequency amplitudes into spin-singlet and spin-triplet components: where, for the even-frequency amplitudes we have: and for the odd-frequency amplitudes: where h ± (k) ≡ h(k) ± h(-k) is the even/odd parity part of the spin-dependent field in the 2DEG. Here, h + can be interpreted as the field arising from ferromagnetic ordering and h -as the field due to SOC. Focusing first on the even-frequency spin-singlet amplitudes, we note that the first line in Eq. Turning our attention to the induced even-frequency spintriplet pairing, we see that the first line in Eq. ( We now focus on the induced odd-frequency amplitudes. From Eq. In the case of the odd-frequency spin-triplet pairing, Eq. A real system in which the condition h -(k) × d k = 0 can be realized is a vdW system formed by a monolayer transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) placed on a superconducting surface with Rashba SOC Considering that under parity λ → -λ, we can see that for a 2D system described by the Hamiltonian given by Eq. ( Using the general expressions from Eqs. ( S odd k,λ;iωn = 0 (36) As described for the general case we see that the presence of SOC, proportional to α, mixes the singlet and triplet components for the even-frequency pair amplitudes. The SOC also generates an odd-frequency triplet pair amplitude proportional to the strength of the SOC in the TMD monolayer and the triplet component of the SC, Eq. where k is the spin-independent part of the electrons' dispersion and η is the strength of the Rashba SOC. The energy eigenvalues of ĥSC k , E k = K ± η|k|, identify the bands of the SC in the normal phase. For the order parameter, ∆, we assume, as is standard where ∆ is the superconducting gap, and are the singlet and triplet amplitudes, respectively. Notice that the presence of Rashba SOC gives rise to a triplet component with an in-plane d vector, i.e. a d vector that is orthogonal to the h -(k) field due to SOC in the monolayer TMD. From Eq. ( , where F even k,λ;iωn and F odd k,λ;iωn have the same form as Eqs. ( where K λ is the momentum vector at the K (K ) point for λ = 1 (λ = -1). Here, D odd k,λ;iω is the d-vector describing an odd-frequency spin-triplet pair amplitude. Using the above expressions, we find that this pair amplitude corresponds to a term in the anomalous Green's function of the form where k is the momentum measured from the center of the BZ. So far we have assumed that interlayer tunneling conserves spin and is entirely spin-independent. In general, tunneling between between materials with different spin eigenstates is spin-dependent. Such spin-dependence of the interlayer tunneling introduces additional mechanisms . Therefore, we see that a triplet component with amplitude proportional to sin ζ k emerges due to the spin-dependent phase introduced by a spin-active interface, even when the SC only has a singlet pairing. Using the same leading-order perturbation theory discussed above we can deduce the symmetries of the proximity-induced pair amplitudes in a vdW system that possesses a spin-active interface. Here we briefly sketch how the approach leading to Eq. ( Then, we obtain the following leading-order contribution to the anomalous Green's function in the 2DEG layer: From Eq. ( [162], the pair symmetries given by Eq. ( From Table We note that odd-frequency pairing has also been investigated in buckled honeycomb systems possessing proximityinduced superconductivity In contrast to the results presented in this section, in that work the presence of the superconducting layer was accounted for by adding a spin-singlet BCS order parameter to the To conclude this subsection we note that the pair amplitudes given by both Eqs. ( We now focus on the set of superconductor-based vdW systems in which the superconducting layer is a TMD monolayer. One of the key features of superconducting TMD monolayers is that the superconducting state is extremely robust against in-plane magnetic fields: superconductivity survives for magnetic fields much larger than the Pauli paramagnetic limit. This is due to the strong spin-splitting of the bands at the Fermi surface in metallic monolayer TMDs induced by strong SOC and a lack of inversion symmetry. These conditions favor a particular spin orientation of the Cooper pairs and the resulting superconducting pairing is termed Ising pairing The most commonly studied superconducting TMD is NbSe 2 In vdW systems formed by one monolayer of a material such as NbSe 2 and another, non-superconducting layer we can expect that the superconducting pairing induced by proximity in the normal layer will retain some of the properties of the pairing in NbSe 2 and, in particular, its Ising nature. A natural candidate system to combine with NbSe 2 is graphene. As pointed out above, there is a large mismatch between graphene's and TMD's lattice constants and so one would expect that no significant hybridization between the graphene's and the NbSe 2 's states could take place. However, for some twist angles the Fermi pockets of NbSe 2 are large enough to overlap with graphene's Dirac points. This is displayed in Fig. Figure In this article we have reviewed recent work on heterogenous van der Waals systems in which one of the components has strong spin-orbit coupling. The field of van der Waals systems is now very large and so we have restricted the discussion to a few exemplary vdW systems. We first presented the general effective model to obtain the low energy electronic spectrum for a generic stacking configuration. The model relies on parameters that must be obtained via ab-initio calculations, or, when possible, directly from experimental measurements. We then discussed, in detail, the case of a van der Waals system formed by coupling a single layer of graphene to the surface of a three dimensional strong topological insulator. We discussed how the hybridization between the states in these two systems strongly enhances the spin-orbit coupling of the graphene layer. We then considered the electronic transport of graphene-TI bilayers and showed how the enhancement of the spin-orbit coupling in graphene, and the additional screening of charge impurities by the graphene layer, can lead to a considerable amplification of spin-dependent effects, such as the Edelstein effect. We briefly discussed the case of heterostructures formed by graphene and semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides. In the second part of the work we discussed the case of heterogenous vdW systems in which one of the components is superconducting. Given the scope of this special issue, particular focus was placed on systems in which odd-frequency pairing can be realized. We first presented a general analysis allowing the identification of conditions for realizing odd-frequency pairing based on a combination of proximity-induced superconductivity and spin-orbit coupling in superconductor-based vdW systems. Based on this general treatment, we observed that vdW systems with spin-orbit coupling are ideal systems for realizing odd-frequency pair correlations. A distinct advantage over bulk superconductors with a similar degree of spin-orbit coupling is that the direction of the field describing the spin-orbit coupling and that of the d k vector describing the spin configuration of a triplet superconductor can be completely different since they belong to different layers in the vdW system. After this general discussion, we examined a concrete example in which this condition can be realized: a vdW system formed by a monolayer transition metal dichalcogenide and a two-dimensional superconductor with Rashba spin-orbit coupling. We then discussed the case of vdW systems in which the interface between the superconducting layer and the normal layer causes the interlayer tunneling to be spin-dependent. We reviewed the conditions under which such a "spin-active" interface can lead to the formation of odd-frequency superconducting pairing. Finally, we discussed the case in which the superconducting layer exhibits Ising superconductivity, as in monolayer NbSe 2 . In particular, we saw that in graphene-NbSe 2 vdW systems the size of the superconducting gap, and its robustness against in-plane magnetic fields, strongly depends on the relative twist angle between the layers. Our brief survey of the field shows that van der Waals heterostructures in which spin-orbit coupling is present constitute a very interesting class of systems, both from a fundamental point of view, and for technological applications. The freedom in the selection of the layers forming the het-erostructure, combined with the ability to control the stacking configuration, mean that the number of vdW systems with spin-orbit that can be realized, and that have not been studied yet is very large. This presents the opportunity to realize vdW systems with spin-orbit coupling exhibiting novel spin dependent transport properties or in which known spintronics effects can be optimized and deployed effectively in technological applications. A class of vdW systems with spinorbit coupling that would be very interesting to study, and that is still largely unexplored, is the one in which the presence of spin-orbit is coupled to strong electron-electron correlations. Such coupling could perhaps be realized in vdW heterostructures combining twisted bilayer graphene and layers with strong spin-orbit coupling. The study of the response to several external probes, in particular time-dependent probes, of the type of vdW systems described in this survey is still largely unexplored. Another interesting direction is the study of vdW systems with spin-orbit coupling in which one of the constituents is a nanostructure, such as heterostructures formed by graphene nanoribbons and substrates with strong spin-orbit coupling. These structures could allow the realization of nano-devices with tunable spin-orbit coupling. One of the challenges to understand the physics of vdW systems, and to use them in applications, is the correct characterization of the effects of disorder. For some vdW systems the dominant source of disorder is still unknown. In some vdW structures the twist angle is not spatially homogenous and the effect of the randomness of the twist angle on the transport properties is not known yet. Also still unknown is why in graphene-based structures the experimentally measured spinrelaxation time is orders of magnitude smaller than the theoretical predictions. In the case of superconductor-based vdW systems, a major driver in the field has been the engineering of exotic superconducting states, in particular those which possess unconventional symmetries like odd-frequency pairing. Two major barriers to understanding these exotic states are the scarcity of unambiguous experimental signatures, and the difficulty of realizing systems in which the odd-frequency pairing dominates the even-frequency. While these barriers have been overcome in particular experimental setups, as discussed in Sec. V A, a general solution to the problem is still lacking. We emphasize that one of the most interesting features of van der Waals systems is that the choice of layers is, to a large extent, not constrained by chemistry. On top of the flexibility in the choice of constituent layers, recent experimental developments demonstrating that the relative twist angle between layers can be controlled within a fraction of degree allow for an incredible amount of tunability of the interlayer coupling. As we have seen in our discussion of just a limited sample of possible van der Waals systems with spin-orbit coupling, the ability to combine layers with different properties can be used to realize and control exotic superconducting states and engineer systems with strong spin-dependent transport effects. By continuing to study the myriad combinations of the growing number of two-dimensional crystals, we expect many more novel and surprising electronic properties will be discovered in van der Waals structures.