Additive manufacturing strives to combine any combination of materials into three dimensional functional structures and devices, ultimately opening up the possibility of 3D printed machines. It remains difficult to actuate such devices, thus limiting the scope of 3D printed machines to passive devices or necessitating the incorporation of external actuators that are manufactured differently. Here we explore 3D printed hybrid thermoplast/conducter bilayers, that can be actuated by differential heating caused by externally controllable currents flowing through their conducting faces. We uncover the functionality of such actuators and show that they allow to 3D print, in one pass, simple flexible robotic structures that propel forward under step-wise applied voltages. Moreover, exploiting the thermoplasticity of the non-conducting plastic parts at elevated temperatures, we show how strong driving leads to irreversible deformations -a form of 4D printing -which also enlarges the range of linear response of the actuators. Finally, we show how to leverage such thermoplastic relaxations to accumulate plastic deformations and obtain very large deformations by alternatively driving both layers of a bilayer; we call this ratcheting. Our strategy is scalable and widely applicable, and opens up a new approach to reversible actuation and irreversible 4D printing of arbitrary structures and machines. 4D printing allows the targeted temporal evolution of the shape, property and functionality of a 3D printed structure in response to external stimuli Depending on the application in mind, the shape morphing may be required to be reversible, for example when repeatedly actuating a structure, or irreversible, for example when creating complex shapes from initially flat structures. The differential expansion mechanism is, in principle, reversible, so that after removal of the stimulus, the structure should retake its original shape. In practice, repeatability is not always achieved, for example hydrogels used for moisture or temperature actuation suffering from degradation To overcome these hurdles we present here a new actuator design which does not rely on environmental triggers but instead allows for precise, spatiotemporal control of targeted regions in a 3D printed object. The actuators consist of bilayers of thermoplastic material and conducting material, and are activated by heating due to electrical currents which conveniently allows for control by external electronics. We show that these actuators can act reversibly and return to their initial state, which we leverage to 3D print a self-propelling robotic "turtle". Moreover, our actuators can be driven towards an irreversible regime, allowing large deflections and externally triggered, permanent shape morphing. Finally, by inducing permanent deformations in both sides of a bilayer, we can achieve very large deformations that can be reversed by repeated irreversible deformations -we refer to this as ratcheting. We first demonstrate both reversible and irreversible actuation of 3D printed bilayer-based structures. Our hybrid actuators consist of an insulating thermoplastic (PLA) and a conducting ink (silver nanoparticles gel) and are produced on one-pass by a Voxel-8 3D FDM printer, which allows a resolution of 0.25 mm in the xy plane and of 0.15 mm in the z direction. The Voxel-8 is equipped with two extruder heads filled with thermoplastic material and the conductive ink respectively, allowing to simultaneously print PLA and the conductive ink to obtain the hybrid structures considered in this paper, without the need of manual interaction or post-processing. A demo video of the printing process can be found in the supplementary materials. In configuration I, the body of this actuator consists of a base and a rim, with a heating circuit printed on top of the base (Figure We have 3D printed a turtle-shape robot whose front fins contain the base-rim structure described above. Upon sending a moderate current through the actuators, the base heats up, and the actuator bends and lowers the robot. When the current is interrupted, the fins cool down and the combination of lowering and raising the robot results in a small forward motion (Figure To understand the role of reversible and irreversible deformations in our actuator, we have performed experiments where we drive freshly printed samples through a series of heating-cooling cycles. As the body of the sample is made of a thermoplastic that expands upon heating but also relaxes and flows for temperatures approaching its glass transition, complex behavior can be expected to arise. Our experiments will reveal such relaxation, and moreover find evidence for a 'recoiling'-like relaxation that occurs whenever the sample is first heated above the glass transition. We subject a single actuator (Figure probe the deflection at the tip of the actuator, z, with a laser displacement sensor (MICRO-EPSILON ILD1302) and by taking side-view video images. We found that the bending curvature is uniform in most experiments, and report the approximate curvature κ := 2z/L 2 . All experiments are performed at ambient temperature which is between 22 • C and 24 • C. Using infrared imaging, we have verified that both the temperature difference and temperature of the hot layer is linear in the applied power P exp . We have measured the critical power P g where layer A reaches the glass temperature T g = 70 • C, and report in all plots the rescaled power P A := P exp /P g . We monitor the curvature κ(t) during heating cycles consisting of a 250 s heating period with power P A = P AM , followed by a 150 s cooling period with P A = 0. These periods are significantly larger than the thermal equilibration time which is of the order of tens of seconds (Figure To understand relaxation at high heating power, we have performed experiments where we drive freshly printed samples through a series of heating-cooling cycles. Our experimental protocol consists of 58 heating cycles, where we ramp the heating power of each cycle, P AM , up and down four times (Figure We first focus on cycle 5. Here we observe a significant peak in κ m -κ s but not in ∆κ c -∆κ m , and the deflection during the heating cycle, κ s , relaxes to nearly zero. This strongly suggests that the relaxation in cycle 5 is driven by the relaxation of the bending induced stresses by plastic deformations of the hot layer A. Consistently with this, we observe a negative post-heating curvature κ c . To understand why the relaxation in cycle 5 is so much stronger than in cycle 1-4, we note that the rate of stress relaxation of thermoplastics increases rapidly for temperatures approaching the glass transition. Our data indicates that for cycle 5, where the heating power is larger than in previous cycles, all heating induced stresses relax during the heating period. In the subsequent cooling period, the base layer contracts, resulting in a negative κ c (downward curvature), and ∆κ c is of the same magnitude as the curvature change during heating. The system is now stressed in the cold state, but here the stresses cannot relax. This picture is consistent with the behavior in cycle 6, which has the same heating power as cycle 5. During this cycle, the actuator moves upwards towards an essentially flat and presumably stress-free state, and no stress relaxation and associated peak in κ c -κ 0 is observed. Consistent with this picture, there is some additional relaxation in cycle 7 but not in 8 nor in all subsequent cycles. The relaxation that occurs in cycle 35 when P ≈ 1 is of a different nature than in cycle 5; even though κ c gets significantly more negative, κ m -κ s does not show a significant peak, but rather ∆κ c -∆κ m peaks. Hence, the cooling leads to a much larger deformation than the heating. Therefore, the second plastic deformation peak must have a different origin. We propose that the deformations in cycle 35 are due to the relaxation of frozen-in orientation which is released when the temperature first exceeds the glass transition (i.e. at cycle 35). The concept of flow induced molecular orientation is well known in the field of polymer processing Consistent with this irreversible change in the microscopic structure, we observe that the maximum deflection as function of P after a heat pulse above the critical temperature changes from a nonlinear to a linear function (see S.I. for elastic finite element simulations), significantly improving the sensitivity and functionality of the actuator -see Figure In conclusion, our data shows that we can distinguish two distinct mechanisms that drive irreversible deformations: First, whenever the sample reaches a higher temperature than before this causes relaxation of the stresses and curvature: the hottest samples are straight and unstressed. Second, whenever the sample reaches for temperatures comparable to T g for the first time, there is an irreversible change in the microstructure of the plastic -this change only happens once. This one-time effect has been used for irreversible shape morphing We now introduce a simple model that qualitatively captures the reversible and irreversible deformations as seen in, e.g., cycle 5 of the set of experiments discussed above; we do not attempt to model the recoiling. We model the bilayer actuator with four Maxwell-type visco-elastic compound springs, two for each layer (Figure and fix A = 7 to ensure that forces completely relax within the heating time; the precise choice of the temperature dependence is not critical. The temperature dependence of both the springs rest length and timescale allow for actuation and plastic relaxation respectively . Taken together, each compound spring evolves according to a simple ODE: We assume that during heating, the two springs in the heated layer have equal, positive temperature T A (t), while the two springs in the non-heated layer stay at T = 0. We assume a linear gradient in the extensions of the compound springs: l i -l i-1 = βd, leading to bending of the actuator, and we define the curvature κ := β/ l i . For a given temperature evolution T i (t), we solve the evolution of β by balancing forces and moments. To monitor the plastic deformations, we below report l i 0 , the (virtual) length of the compound spring under zero force, which combines thermal expansion and accumulated visco-plastic relaxations of the spring. We non-dimensionalize our data by the characteristic scales d (length), η 0 /k (time), T c (temperature) and kd 2 (energy), and introduce a characteristic curvature scale κ as (αT c )/d. We report the curvature and length of the compound springs as function of time for two subsequent heating pulses (Figure Here we focus on T A = 1.3T c , and this high power ensures that the system has significant viscous relaxation. We observe that during the first heating cycle, the curvature displays a clear overshot, and then relaxation towards the neutral position -very similar to what we saw in the experiments (Figure The maximal reversible deflection of the actuators that we have considered so far is limited by the amount of heating that we can use before plastic deformations set in. Here we show that we can leverage a complex exchange of deformations and stresses between two layers to obtain large and reversible deformations by a process that we refer to as ratcheting. For this, we aim at alternatively heating layer A and B, and thus print a layer of conducting ink on the rim, so that we independently can heat either layer (Figure We now consider a sample that has received multiple large heating pulses at layer A, so that it has undergone plastic deformations, bends upwards in the cold state, and has a reversible response (Figure To understand the mechanism that drives the complex response to alternately heating both layers in our actuators, we have performed a similar heating strategy in our model where we explicitly can monitor the plastic deformations, stress relaxations and elastic energies. As in the experiment, we prepare the model into a state that has undergone large heating pulses in layer A (Figure Taken together, our experiments and model illustrate the core idea of ratcheting, where alternately heating layer A and B with different heating powers, we can leverage partial relaxation of the actuator to accumulate large deformations. To optimize the amplitude of these deformations, we have experimentally studies the amount of ratcheting ∆κ as function of P BM for fixed P AM . We can anticipate that no ratcheting can occur for very low P BM , while for very large P BM , additional flow in layer B negates the ratcheting. Consistent with this, we observe a peak in ∆κ for P BM ≈ 0.7 (Figure In this paper we have introduced a new design for 3D printed actuators that deform upon electrical heating. Depending on the driving strength, both reversible and irreversible deformations can be realized. We demonstrated reversible actuation by a one-pass 3D printed flexible robot turtle that propels forward under repeated actuation. We demonstrated irreversible, large deformations leading to strongly curved strips, and note that this allows a novel strategy of electrically activated 4D printing. Finally, we demonstrate ratcheting: by alternately heating both layers at appropriately chosen temperatures, irreversible deformations that remain fixed in the absence of driving can be accumulated, but these deformations can also be erased and reversed with subsequent heating cycles. This shows that electrical heating of thermoplastics forms a flexible platform for reversible actuation, 4D printing, and a combination of the two. We show that a model based on spring-dashpots captures the complexity of our actuators, reproduces the 'ratcheting' experiments, and thus uncovers the basic mechanisms. While the thermoplastic material used in the current work is polylactide, the principles of our actuation strategies are expected to apply to thermoplastic materials in general. Our work thus opens up a new avenue for shape morphing and actuation of 3D printed structures.