In a Kondo lattice system, suppression of effective Kondo coupling leads to the breakdown of the heavy-electron metal and a change in the electronic structure [1][2][3][4] . Spin triplet superconductivity in the Kondo lattice UTe 2 5 appears to be associated with spin fluctuations originating from incipient ferromagnetic order. Here we show clear evidence of twofold enhancement of spin-triplet superconductivity near the pressure-driven suppression of the Kondo coherence, implying that superconductivity is strengthened by the affiliated growth of both spin and charge fluctuations. The coherent Kondo state discontinuously transitions to ferromagnetic order at higher pressures. Application of magnetic field tunes the system back across a first-order phase boundary. Straddling this phase boundary, we find another example of reentrant superconductivity in UTe 2 6 . In addition to spin fluctuations 7,8 associated with ferromagnetism, our results show that a Kondo-driven Fermi surface instability may be playing a role in stabilizing spin triplet superconductivity. 1 While proximity to antiferromagnetism is believed to be a key ingredient for unconventional superconductivity (SC), ferromagnetism (FM) is generally antagonistic and incompatible with superconductivity. In a very few cases The recently discovered heavy fermion superconductor UTe 2 Unlike the ferromagnetic superconductors that share some common features with UTe 2 9-11 , UTe 2 does not order magnetically prior to the onset of SC Here we report two fold enhancement of spin triplet SC in UTe 2 5 under pressure. This occurs as the Kondo coherence is continuously suppressed, towards an apparent quantum critical point associated with a Fermi surface instability. However, this trend with pressure terminates at a first order transition, and at higher pressures, magnetic order emerges. This phase boundary can be crossed again by applying magnetic field which increases hybridization, and SC reenters. This shows that both spin fluctuations and electronic structure changes conspire to strengthen SC. Fig. The enhancement of T c is accompanied by a systematic change in the low-temperature normal state resistance value (Fig. It is also clear that the energy scale is suppressed by pressure, e.g., for 0.45 GPa, the scaling is achieved above 10 K, while for 1.18 GPa, the scaling works from temperatures just above T c . Suppression of collective hybridization of local moments leads to a breakdown of the heavy Fermi liquid, and a jump in size of Fermi surface 1-4 . This Kondo destabilization produces both spin and charge fluctuations that could separately or collectively promote attractive interactions to enhance SC As the pressure further increases, both the normal state and superconducting properties change dramatically. The normal state resistivity increases upon cooling with two successive local minima indicating phase transitions. The temperature of the local minimum at higher temperature T M increases with pressure, while that of the lower temperature minimum is roughly pressure independent. T M is highly sensitive to the magnetic field, e.g., suppressed from 7 K to 4 K by 6 T, and disappears in higher magnetic field for 1.4 GPa, indicating its magnetic nature (Fig. Extrapolations of the pressure dependence of T * , T M , and T c meet in the critical pressure region, suggesting that a first-order transition occurs when these phenomena have a common finite energy scale. In an interesting twist, magnetism is suppressed by applied magnetic field, resistivity decreases, and SC is induced, yielding another example of reentrant SC in UTe 2 . This is most apparent at 1.4 GPa. At this pressure, although there is a large drop in the resistivity at low temperatures, a zero resistance state is not achieved (Fig This reentrant SC is stable between fields of 2 T and 8 T, and appears to be related to the sharply suppressed magnetic order. Similar reentrance of SC in the magnetic field is also observed for 1.35 GPa, but only at 1.6 K, not the zero temperature limit. In the region of partial volume SC (grey region in Fig. On the other hand, the hysteresis observed here is only seen at temperatures below the sudden drop of resistivity, suggesting the role of an additional mechanism. Due to the first order phase transition separating SC and FM as a function of pressure, both phases can coexist heterogeneously. The relative volume fractions are different upon up and down sweep of magnetic field, leading to the hysteresis. The first order nature of T M is more obvious when it is suppressed to lower temperatures by applied field. As shown in Fig. Two other reentrant superconducting phases have been already observed in UTe 2 under high magnetic field 6,14 , at ambient pressure, which are likely induced by ferromagnetic fluctuations and decreased dimensionality. The reentrant superconducting phase observed under pressure is quite different. First, the magnetic field scale is much smaller here. In addition, in this case reentrant SC exists on both side of the magnetism boundary, while in case of the field induced SC at ambient pressure, SC only exists in the field polarized state 6 . These differences indicate the reentrance of SC is probably due to different mechanism. The dome like feature and the suppression of two energy scales in the vicinity of optimal SC: Kondo coherence temperature and magnetism, indicate SC is closely related with to magnetic and charge fluctuations. The fact that applied magnetic field can tune the relative strength of Kondo hybridization and long range magnetic order provides a natural explanation for the reentrance of SC. Global phase stability of a Kondo lattice system is governed by two quantities, the ratio between the Kondo interaction and the RKKY interaction, and the degree of quantum fluctuations of the local-moment magnetism The pressure dependence of UTe 2 is qualitatively different from that of the ferromagnetic superconductors tors remains an open question; even in the case of UGe 2 , where changes in magnetic order coincide with apparent Fermi surface changes, SC is not a ground state on the paramagnetic side Single crystals of UTe 2 were synthesized by the chemical vapor transport method using iodine as the transport agent. A non-magnetic piston-cylinder pressure cell was used for electrical transport measurements under pressure up to 1.7 GPa, with Daphne oil as the pressure medium. Transport measurements were performed in a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS), and in Oxford All other data that support the plots within this paper and other findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. We acknowledge S. L. Bud'ko and P. C. Canfield for providing pressure medium. S. Ran is grateful for inspiring discussions with Y. F. Yang and Y. Wang. We acknowledge W. T. Fuhrman for assistance during sample synthesis. We also acknowledge H. SC is observed at these pressures. Constant pressure slices are shown for low pressure (i), 1.35 GPa (ii) and 1.4 GPa (iii). In (i), the T and H limits of superconductivity are rather pressure-insensitive. In (ii) and (iii), the FM/SC coexistence regions are marked in gray, and the relationship between optimal SC and suppression of FM are clearly seen. Error bars of T c are defined by the onset and offset of superconducting transition. I. Paul, C. Ppin, and M. R. Norman, PRL 98, 026402 (2007). Y.-f. Yang, D. Pines, and G. Lonzarich, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114, 6250 (2017), https://www.pnas.org/content/114/24/6250.full.pdf.