Here we show that such control could also enable a new function of artificial neural inference. We demonstrate that metasurfaces can directly recognize objects by focusing light from an object to different spatial locations that correspond to the class of the object. Optical neuromorphic computing offers an alternative approach to realize artificial neural computing. It has several potential advantages compared to digital neural computing such as the ultra-fast speed and ultra-low energy consumption. Several architectures have been demonstrated based on integrated silicon photonics The concept is illustrated in Fig. The metasurface consists of a large area of subwavelength scattering elements. Full-wave tools such as finite-difference time-domain are too computationally expensive for this type of multiscale problem. To obtain the full-wave electromagnetic properties without losing speed, we use locally periodic approximation Here we use TiO2 pillars on a SiO2 substrate to construct the metasurface The phase delay and amplitude modulation change for plane waves incident from different angles. Figure Here we use subscript f to indicate the far-field distribution of light after passing the lth metasurface layer. The training target for the output is y t (x) = I 0 exp (- 2 * σ 2 ), where t is the value of the handwritten digits. x t are the locations where we would like output light to focus on. Locations for different digit value are evenly distributed on the output plane. One can also choose other training target as long as it serves the purpose of classification. In our 2-D case, the peak position of the target intensity x t for different digit number are equally spaced by 9.4um, and the variance σ of the target intensity is 2.35um. Training the metasurface is a gradient descent process that minimizes the loss function L. Here we use the L2 distance between the metasurface output and the target output L = √ (y(x) -y t (x)) 2 . Unlike typical optimization used in nanophotonics and metasurfaces the gradient descent used here is stochastic. Next, we discuss how to compute L and its gradients. First, we try to formulate the relation between the far-field outputs of the l th layer and the (l-1) th layer. This relation depends on the width of pillars w i l in the l th layer. The far-field output is calculated from the near-field E n l (x) through a near-to-far field transformation where G is a Hankel function G(x, x ′ ) = - A n (w l (x))e iφ n (w l (x)) . Here E k is the Fourier component of E f l-1 , the far-field output of the (l -1)th layer. This series of calculation that connects E f l (x) and E f l-1 (x) can all be represented as matrix operation and implemented in Tensorflow We now are ready to calculate the derivative of the loss function with respect to the pillar widths . The calculation can be divided into two steps because ∂w l (x) . The first term is the derivative of the loss function with respect to each layer's output near field, which is calculated by following the chain rule of derivative ∂w l (x) . The phase φ(w l (x)) and amplitude A(w l (x)) as a function of pillar width are shown in Figure Generally, the input of neuromorphic metasurface is the light scattered by the object. In the simulation, the input is replaced by the image of the object. For the 2-D case, we also vectorize the image of the handwritten digit number. The original image is resized to 20 by 20 pixels and converted to a 1 by 400 vector and the intensity is normalized from 0 to 1. Then, we can set the intensity of the vectorized image as the amplitude of the input field. The phase of the input field is set to be the same. The input field is polarized in the z-direction such that field can be treated as a complex scalar in simulation. The wavelength is 700 nm. At this frequency, the response of periodic TiO2 structure changes smoothly when the width of pillar changes. To match the size of the input vector, each layer of neuromorphic metasurface also contains 400 elements. The pitch is 235 nm wide, and the total length of the metasurface is 94 m. The distance between the two adjacent layers is 188 m. The training process of the 5-layer neuromorphic metasurface is shown in Figure 