Image processing has become a critical technology in a variety of science and engineering disciplines. While most image processing is performed digitally, optical analog processing has the advantages of being low-power and high-speed though it requires a large volume. Here, we demonstrate optical analog imaging processing using a flat optic for direct image differentiation allowing one to significantly shrink the required optical system size. We first demonstrate how the image differentiator can be combined with traditional imaging systems such as a commercial optical microscope and camera sensor for edge detection. Second, we demonstrate how the entire analog processing system can be realized as a monolithic compound flat optic by integrating the differentiator with a metalens. The compound nanophotonic system manifests the advantage of thin form factor optics as well as the ability to implement complex transfer functions and could open new opportunities in applications such as biological imaging and machine vision. Imaging processing is a critical and rapidly advancing technology for various science and engineering disciplines with ever more complex digital tools opening the door for new avenues in biological imaging, 3D reconstruction, and autonomous cars. Edge-based enhancement Traditionally, analog image differentiation has been performed using Fourier methods based on lenses and filter systems. However, the use of multiple conventional lenses, such as those found in 4f Fourier filtering, results in a large form factor which is not compatible with compact integrated systems. One option for significantly reducing the optical system size is to employ nanophotonic materials such as metasurfaces For instance, it has been shown that multiple metasurfaces can be used to perform a range of mathematical operations In this work, we experimentally demonstrate a two-dimensional spatial differentiator that operates in transmission. As shown in Fig. In order to perform spatial differentiation, an optical filter or material should act as a Laplacian operator on the transmitted light with an intensity profile given by, I ∇ I , where ∇ is given by + . In this case the optical transfer function H k , k follows the function where s, p denote the polarization of the incident light and c and c correspond to polarization conversion. To achieve the required transfer function we employ a photonic crystal slab supporting quasi-guided modes. Unlike modes guided below the light line In order to realize the required transfer function we employ a 2D photonic crystal composed of cylindrical silicon (Si) nanorods embedded in polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) on a silicon dioxide (SiO2) substrate (see Figs. To better understand the polarization dependence, we examined the mode profiles as a function of incident angle. The structure was modeled using a finite difference time domain (FDTD) solver (MEEP In order to experimentally validate the design, we fabricated a 200 200 μm differentiator using electron beam lithography (EBL) in conjunction with reactive ion etching (RIE). A scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the fabricated device is shown in Fig. The simulated transmission spectra are presented in Fig. The trend and shape of the measured spectra are in good agreement with the simulation. To map the entire transfer function in k-space, we carried out Fourier plane imaging of the device. The To experimentally quantify the resolution, we used the nanophotonic differentiator to detect the edges of 1951 USAF resolution test chart. A schematic of the imaging setup is shown in Fig. One of the primary benefit of flat optics is the ability to vertically integrate them with traditional optical systems. To demonstrate the potential of this approach, we built an edge detection microscope by integrating the image differentiator with a commercial optical microscope (Axio Vert.A1). In this case, the nanophotonic differentiator was redesigned for a wavelength of 740 nm using pillars with a diameter of 180 nm, a period of 385 nm, and a height of 280 nm. Fig. Another way in which these filters can be used in traditional optical systems is integration onto a camera sensor. In this case, and in most practical machine vision applications, fabrication at much larger scales is necessary. One potential avenue for scale-up is to employ self-assembly based nanosphere lithography which takes advantage of the inherent periodicity and cylindrical unit cell geometry employed here. We have recently employed this method for realizing large area reflectors and Fig. In order to mimic a configuration that may be found in a machine vision application, the large-scale spatial differentiator was placed directly in front of a NIR camera detector, after the imaging lens, as shown in Fig. Figs. 5f,h show the imaging results with and without the filter for two separate objects. Compared to the unfiltered images, the edges of the flowers are clearly revealed when applying the differentiator. While we have not placed the differentiator directly on the sensor in this case, there is nothing that would prevent this in creating a monolithic edge-detecting sensor for machine vision applications. Lastly, while we have showcased vertical integration with convention optics, the imaging system can be further compacted by employing a metalens as the focusing element for realizing an ultrathin and monolithic image processing system. To create the device we employed multilayer metasurface transfer techniques that we have previously employed for creating doublet lenses In conclusion, we have experimentally demonstrated two-dimensional image differentiators with high resolution, thin form factor, and a simple geometry which allows rapid and cost-effective large-scale manufacturing. Furthermore, we have demonstrated how a complete image processing system can be accomplished using monolithic compound flat optics. These types of optical analog image processors could open new doors for applications in areas such as biological imaging and machine vision. Metaoptics with more complex k-space response could also be realized by employing multilayer architectures The transmission spectra were calculated using the Frequency Domain (FD) solver of CST Microwave Studio. The refractive index of SiO2 and PMMA were set to be 1.45 and 1.48, respectively, and the index of Si (3.67 at 1120 nm) was obtained using ellipsometry. The Si nanorods were modeled as a periodic unit cell on a SiO2 substrate embedded in a PMMA cladding layer. The details of the quasi-guided resonance simulations are provided in Supplementary section 1. The photonic crystal slab was defined in a 440 nm thick a-Si layer that was grown on a SiO2 substrate using low pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD). A 200 nm PMMA A4 layer was spin coated at 4500 rpm followed by the deposition of 10 nm thick chromium as the conduction layer using thermal evaporation. The patterns were then defined using electron beam lithography followed by depositing 35 nm thick alumina oxide as a dry etch mask using e-beam evaporation. The Si nanorods were then etched using reactive ion etching using a mixture of C4F8 and SF6, Finally, five layers of PMMA A4 were sequentially spin coated to encapsulate the Si nanorods. The same procedure was also used for fabricating the visible image differentiator. In the case of nanosphere lithography a monolayer of 740 nm diameter nanospheres was first formed at the water-air interface of a bath through controlled injection by a syringe pump. A wafer with a 480 nm thick layer of Si on SiO2 was titled at 10° and placed at the bottom of the Teflon bath. The densely packed hexagonal nanospheres were transferred to the wafer by slowly draining the bath. The nanospheres were then downscaled using an O2 plasma and used as an etch mask during reactive ion etching to define the Si rods. The fabrication details of the compound metaoptics and additional details regarding nanosphere lithography are provided in Supplementary sections 2 and 3. 