Inelastic scattering of visible light (Raman effect) offers a window into properties of correlated metals such as spin, electron and lattice dynamics as well as their mutual interactions. In this review we focus on electronic and spin excitations in Fe-based pnictides and chalcogenides in particular, but not exclusively superconductors. After a general introduction to the basic theory including the selection rules for the various scattering processes we provide an overview over the major results. In the superconducting state below the transition temperature Tc the pair-breaking effect can be observed, and the energy gap can be derived. The energies can be associated with the gaps and their anisotropy on the electron and hole bands. In spite of the similarities of the overall band structures the results are strongly dependent on the family and may even change qualitatively within one family. In some of the compounds strong collective modes appear below Tc. In Ba 1-x KxFe 2 As 2 , which has the most isotropic gap of all Fe-based superconductors, there are indications that these modes are excitonlike states appearing in the presence of a hierarchy of pairing tendencies. The strong in-gap modes observed in Co-doped NaFeAs are interpreted in terms of quadrupolar orbital excitations which become undamped in the superconducting state. The doping dependence of the scattering intensity in Ba(Fe 1-x Cox) 2 As 2 is associated with a nematic resonance above a quantum critical point and interpreted in terms of a critical enhancement at the maximal Tc. In the normal state the response from particle-hole excitations reflects the resistivity. In addition, there are contributions from presumably critical fluctuations in the energy range of k B T which can be compared to the elastic properties. Currently it is not settled whether the fluctuations observed by light scattering are related to spin or charge. Another controversy relates to possible two-magnon excitations, typically in the energy range of 0.5 eV. Whereas this response can also originate from charge excitations in most of the Fe-based compounds theory and experiment suggest that the excitations in the range 60 meV in FeSe are from localized spins in a nearly frustrated system. Superconductivity in iron-based componds (FeBCs) was shocking when first reported by Kamihara and coworkers FeBCs typically have a magnetically ordered phase at zero nominal doping. Upon elemental substitution or application of pressure, magnetism can be suppressed and superconductivity (SC) may appear [Fig. In addition to SDW and SC phase transitions, nematic order, with the rotational symmetry broken but the translational symmetry preserved, and wide temperature ranges with fluctuation are observed It will be the purpose of this review to present typical results, provide a snapshot of the current status of the field and outline possible future developments. Note that the scales in x (hole doping) and y (electron doping) differ. From Firstly, we briefly describe the experiment and the theoretical background and then summarize the most relevant results obtained from light scattering with the focus placed on electronic and spin excitations. Shown in Fig. (Ω, T )}R I,S χ I,S (q, Ω, T ).( Here Ω S is the solid angle into which the photons are scattered, and R I,S absorbs matrix element effects and experimental factors, χ μ (q, Ω, T ) = χ μ + iχ μ is the typically non-resonant response function, n(Ω, T ) = [exp Ω/k B T -1] -1 is the Bose-Einstein occupation number and r 0 = e 2 /(4πε 0 mc 2 ) the Thompson electron radius, thus Eq. (1) describes the cross section per electron. Most of the existing FeBCs were studied by Raman scattering. In the beginning the phonons were in the main focus The materials for which data on the spin, charge and orbital response exist are compiled in Table The analysis of the results in the FeBCs requires insight into the theoretical background, including both standard knowledge and modern developments. We give a brief historical summary and sketch the underlying theory. Raman scattering studies of excitations of localized spins started in the 1960s on insulating antiferromagnets Light scattering from conduction electrons was first discussed in the context of superconductors In normal metals, contributions from particlehole excitations were observed and discussed for doped semiconductors Important new developments pertain to the inclusion of an anisotropic pairing potential in the superconducting state Photons do not directly scatter off low energy excitations. Rather, high-energy electron-hole pairs having energies of the incoming photons ω I are created and couple to excitations in the range Ω = O(k B T ) such as phonons, fluctuations, particle-hole, gap or spin excitations. After scattering, the electron-hole pairs recombine and emit photons with energies ω S = ω I ∓ Ω. The mechanism works whether or not the intermediate electronic states are eigenstates. If they are eigenstates the crosssection is resonantly enhanced but most of the results were successfully analysed in terms of non-resonant scattering. In systems with a high correlation energy U = O( ω I ) there are no well-defined eigenstates, and the resonances are in fact found to be mild in most of the cases. Given these considerations, Eq. ( For better visualization, Feynman diagrams for Raman scattering on charge or spin excitations are displayed in Figure Metals have a small penetration depth for light a < δ 0 < λ I,S where a is a typical lattice constant. As a consequence, the momentum transfer in a metal is bigger than in an insulator, |q| = q ∼ δ -1 0 , where 100 Å < δ 0 < 1000 Å for typical metals, as pointed out first by Abrikosov and Fal'kovskii where k is the electronic dispersion. In the FeBCs the relevant in-plane Fermi velocity is of the order 10 6 cm/s, and the penetration depth is close to 1000 Å yielding Ω max 1 meV ≡ 8 cm -1 . Due to charge conservation and screening all isotropic charge excitations are pushed up to the plasma frequency Ω pl n is the band index, and γ n (k, q) is a form factor which is related to the Raman vertex γ α,β (k, q) through the polarization directions êI,S , The bare response χ(q, Ω) is the commutator of ρq , where . . . Ω denotes the thermodynamic average and the Fourier transformation, and χ and χ are the real and imaginary part of χ, respectively. Eq. ( a = a k and b = b k are generalized vertices that stand for either an isotropic The bare response is not gauge invariant, and charge conservation leads to the final -exact -result for the response The vertex is written down explicitly as a subscript in Eq. ( The scattering from free electrons cuts off at Ω max If we disregard spurious contributions to the cross section such as luminescence (being a good approximation at low energies; see, however, Ref. Although the normal state continuum generally signals the presence of strong interactions, it is impossible to describe the superconducting response in terms of strong-coupling theory so long as the microscopic origin of the relevant interactions is unknown. Only in the case of spin fluctuations both the normal and the superconducting spectra have been modelled microscopically on equal footing In the majority of cases, the weak-coupling result It is the result of a superposition of particle excitations across the gap from an occupied into an unoccupied state and pair breaking. Both contributions have a square-root singularity at |2∆ k | and, because of the coherence factors, add constructively in the case of light scattering and destructively in the case of the (real part of the) optical (IR) conductivity σ (Ω) In the case of a charge or spin density wave the functional form of the response is also described by to Eq. ( The simplest type of response in the normal state in systems with vanishingly small v F q results from the presence of (heavy) impurities. Here the electrons change only their momentum but not their energy (Drude model). The gauge-invariant kernel was derived by Zawadowski and Cardona where τ * k is not identical to the electronic relaxation time but is renormalized by a (presumably small) channel-dependent vertex correction, similarly as in ordinary transport where the vertex corrections ensure (among other things) that forward scattering does not contribute to the resistivity. If the electrons scatter from excitations in the energy range of k B T such as phonons, spin fluctuations or among themselves they transfer both momentum and energy. As a consequence they become dressed quasi-particles, and the relaxation rate depends now on energy, momentum and temperature. Due to these interaction effects the electrons' velocity gets reduced and the mass increases by the same factor 1+λ k (Ω, T ), and the response transforms to The energy and temperature dependent projected parameters Γ * k (Ω, T ) and 1 + λ k (Ω, T ) can be derived if Θ k (Ω, T ) is known for a sufficiently wide energy interval An expression equivalent to Eq. ( All results summarized here are essentially lowestorder response theory. However, the experiments in Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 and Na(Fe 1-x Co x )As 2 show Eq. ( The existence of in-gap modes in a superconductor was first noticed by Bardasis and Schrieffer (BS) The functional form of the response additional to can be simply understood resorting to the simplified case of two bands with equal gap and opposite character, γ1 = -γ2 = γ. In this case Eq. ( that has to be contrasted to the result To analyze the general evolution of the Leggett-mode resonance from intra-band dominated to inter-band dominated coupling we study the case of two parabolic bands N i is the density of states on band i. η encodes the ratio of intrato inter-band coupling with η = -1 and η = 1 representing pure intra-and inter-band coupling, respectively. The mode's energy saturates at the maximal gap. The damping starts above the smaller gap. From lowest order [Eq. and was used in Ref. Similarly as in the case of excitons, there may be more than one BS mode in the presence of several sub-leading coupling channels. This possibility was considered recently in a theoretical study In a system with more than one band there is an additional contribution to the response from numberphase oscillations between the bands in momentum space comparable to the Josephson effect in real space For weak inter-band coupling, the mode related to the number-phase fluctuations is below the gap energy and increases essentially linearly with λ i,j . For λ i,i λ i,j the Legget mode is in the continuum above 2∆ and is therefore overdamped. Figure For spin excitations the Elliot-Fleury-Loudon Hamiltonian S r(i) is a spin at site r(i), a is the distance between the sites and δ is a unit vector pointing towards one of the nearest neighbors. < i, δ > is a restricted sum to avoid double counting. The spectral shape can either be determined in terms of spin-wave theory Screening may become relevant in metallic systems such as the FeBCs in which the spins forming the SDW are presumably itinerant as opposed to cuprates which are Mott insulators at low doping. However, there is no analytic treatment yet dealing with the problem of light scattering from spin polarized conduction electrons beyond the nearly antiferromagnetic Fermi liquid In the case of fluctuations, there are three possibilities to deal with the q = 0 selection rule. (i) A fluctuation can have zero momentum. This case applies if all unit cells have the same excitation pattern as for the case of ferro-orbital fluctuations For the FeBCs there are various theoretical studies of fluctuations In the inelastic light scattering experiment, all selection rules must be compatible with the direct product of two dipole transitions in the relevant crystal structure Particle-hole and gap excitations In the simplest approximation the vertices can be expanded into crystal harmonics of the respective point group of the crystal [147]. Figures In the first order approximation selection rules can be derived on the basis of symmetry alone since γ μ (k, q → 0) can be expanded into the set of basis functions Φ μ (k) Figure where, as in the case of FeBCs, k effectively takes into account all contributions from different bands. This type of calculation was conducted for Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 and Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 in Refs. A1g rather than γ A1g to be relevant for presumably most of the FeBCs. If, for the sake of simplicity, we omit the contribution from any additional excitations (e.g. phonons) as well as interactions, the first-order diagram on the right hand side of Fig. B1g ) one may expect to probe electron pockets, whereas both electron and hole pockets may be probed in A 1g symmetry (γ A1g ). The dependence of the Raman response on γ 2 μ (k) directly explains the selectivity in k-space. The selection rules for BS modes depend on the symmetry of the subleading interaction. The first proposals considered a ground state being driven by spin fluctuations thus having an s-wave gap with opposite sign on the electron and hole bands. Then, if the sub-leading channel originates from orbital fluctuations, predominantly along the (π, 0) direction Alternatively, the next strongest pairing interactions can have the same origin as the ground state resulting from spin fluctuations between the electron bands along (π, π) thus entailing a BS mode in B 1g symmetry. The symmetry selection rules for the Leggett modes depend on the interactions included and thus on the band structure and the coupling. If two concentric bands or interactions with wave-vector (π, 0) are included the Leggett mode appears in the fully symmetric A 1g channel The phase diagram (Fig. Above the magnetic ordering temperatures there are various structural transitions which typically go along with electronic anisotropies such as substantial differences in the resistivities measured along inequivalent directions While itinerant and localized magnetism cannot easily be distinguished by neutron scattering, Raman scattering offers clear criteria Early experiments on Fe chalcogenides and pnictides reported excitations in the range 2 000 to 4 000 cm -1 in all symmetries. The results were interpreted in terms of local spins Recent experiments in FeSe support scattering from localized spins. The B 1g spectra at high (300 K) and low (20 K) temperature are dominated by the broad peak centred at approximately 500 cm -1 , whereas near the T S an additional sharp peak appears in the range 100-200 cm -1 There are experimental and theoretical arguments for this assessment. Very generally, antiferromagnetically ordered local spins give rise to two-magnon excitations close to 3J For the low energy and the temperature dependence of the B 1g excitation in FeSe, the response was studied also theoretically by diagonalizing a 4 × 4 cluster carrying spin 1 using J 2 = 0.528J 1 and J 3 = 0 Signatures of the SDW in the Raman spectra of BFA were first discussed by Chauvière et al. Figure A much more pronounced redistribution of spectral weight was reported for Sr122 Recently Zhang et al. The analysis of the Raman spectra in the SDW state shows that the typical gaps induced by ordering of the magnetic moments of itinerant electrons are in the range of 100-150 meV or 8 k B T SDW . This ratio is in the same range as that of the superconducting gap, and one cannot conclude that T SDW is suppressed by fluctuations, as, for instance in the tritellurides There are various types of instabilities in the FeSCs which can drive the phase transitions. While some groups consider magnetic ordering the dominant interaction A contribution from fluctuations to the Raman spectra of FeBCs were first reported by Choi et al. Several detailed studies of fluctuations were presented more recently in Refs. The low-energy Raman response in differently doped BFCA was extensively studied by Gallais et al. The authors argue that the nematic susceptibility is observable in the B 1g channel and originates from charge fluctuations for symmetry reasons since inelastic light scattering couples preferably to the charge. They observe a strong enhancement of the B 1g response χ B1g (Ω ≈ k B T, T ) upon cooling towards T S and a collapse thereof in the orthorhombic/SDW state, whereas the B 2g response is essentially temperature independent. First, χ B1g (Ω = 0, T ) was determined. Second, it is shown that this quantity is equal to the quasistatic nematic susceptibility and, in fact, compares well to the Young modulus c 66 (T ) derived from thermal expansion Kretzschmar et al. The fluctuations and the particle-hole continuum can only be considered additive if they get excited through independent scattering channels such as, e.g., phonons and charge excitations. If two fluctuations are excited simultaneously (AL mechanism) the response from fluctuations exists independent of other excitations, otherwise the excitations are entangled. In order to separate the fluctuation contribution, the high temperature particle-hole continuum (T > T f ) was extrapolated down to low temperatures by varying Γ 0 (T ) in a way that the initial slope of the spectra matches the transport results and was subtracted from the respective total Raman response. It is considered the key observation of that paper that the fluctuations do not disappear directly below T S but continuously lose spectral weight with the peak maximum staying pinned. This indicates a nearly constant correlation length between T S and T SDW . The persistence of the fluctuations down to T SDW and their immediate disappearance below T SDW favours their magnetic origin. The spectral shape of the fluctuations can be described quantitatively in terms AL-type of diagrams if electron-phonon interaction is included In FeSe, having a structural transition at T S ≈ 90 K and short-ranged but no long-ranged magnetic order above 4 K Massat and coworkers apply an analysis similar to that in BFCA for studying FeSe at ambient There is no consensus yet on the leading instability in the FeBCs, and there are arguments in favor of both orbital and spin ordering. This controversy characterizes also the interpretation of the Raman data, in particular of the fluctuation response. It is true that photons couple to the charge, and if the vertex has the same symmetry as the fluctuations, there is coupling. However, this does not exclude other types of fluctuations to couple to the light; in other words, the selection rules and the coupling argument are not sufficient for deciding between spin and charge. Coupling to the charge does not mean that the photons couple directly to low-energy charge excitations. Rather, the effective scattering Hamiltonian for particle-hole excitations close to E F is an approximation derived for photon energies much smaller than the gaps in the band structure The second open question pertains to the nature of the short-or long-ranged spin ordering (which exists beyond any doubt): In the pnictides the spins of itinerant electrons order because of a Fermi surface instability Yet, there are two considerations which are hard to reconcile with charge (particle-hole) excitations: (i) Since the energy of the band does not vary significantly upon cooling from 300 to 4 K, only momentum scattering having a scattering rate of approximately 500 cm -1 and a temperature independent intensity On the other hand, the semi-quantitative agreement of the spectra in all symmetries with simulations The identification of the pairing mechanism remains one of the major challenges in all unconventional superconductors. The momentum dependence of the gap magnitude (and phase, if possible) is among the important observables for addressing this question since ∆ k and the pairing potential V k,k are interrelated via the BCS gap equation 6.1. Gap spectroscopy 6.1.1. Results from canonical methods From the beginning, a substantial band and momentum dependence of the energy gap was observed. Yet, sign changes of the gap on individual bands or between the bands could not be pinned down unambiguously although tunneling experiments with an applied magnetic field [170] or neutron scattering experiments Further complication arises since the gaps vary strongly between the families and with elemental substitution In Table Raman results for the energy gap were first presented and discussed by Muschler et al. In Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 , differences between the spectra above and below T c which are associated with the opening of the superconducting gap are observed only in A 1g and B 1g symmetry. In A 2g the intensity is generally low for the absence of excitations having the right symmetry. In B 2g symmetry little spectral weight is expected since the vertices are small close to the Fermi surface crossings of the bands. Surprisingly, the intensity becomes comparable to that in A 1g and B 1g symmetry at approximately 300 cm -1 but there are no indications of an energy gap. There are essentially Table Tc (Color online) Symmetry-resolved Raman response of Ba(Fe 1-x Cox) 2 As 2 (x = 0.061) for in-plane light polarizations. (a) Here, the 2 Fe unit cell was used for the symmetry assignment implying that the out-of-phase Fe phonon at 214 cm -1 is observed in the proper B 1g symmetry. (b) In A 1g symmetry there is a small increase for Ω → 0 from insufficient rejection of the laser light. The A 2g signal can safely be neglected at low energies. From three explanations for the absence of gap structures: (i) The intensity originates from excitations other than electron-hole pairs such as spins. The slow increase of the B 2g intensity indicates either that (ii) states far away from the Fermi surface are projected consistent with the vertices or that (iii) the relaxation rate is much higher than expected from transport. Such an anisotropy may occur if the quasi-particle relaxation is strongly momentum dependent for the presence of Co scatterers in the Fe plane. Then the gap excitations are suppressed for specific symmetry projections In superconducting BFCA Similar spectra were reported for doping levels in the range 0.045 < x < 0.10 The discussion about the details of the interpretation of the spectral shape in superconducting BFCA is not finally settled although the data agree and the basic features are clear. Chauvière et al. Muschler et al. The observation of gap features in other pnictides and in chalcogenides was delayed by sample and surface issues. In chalcogenides the observation of pair breaking succeeded first in Rb 0.8 Fe 1.6 Se 2 after cleaving the sample in situ at low temperature In Ba 0.6 K 0.4 Fe 2 As 2 continua and gap structures are observed in all symmetries and are by and large in agreement with the results from other methods The spectra of Ba 0.6 K 0.4 Fe 2 As 2 clearly show a small but true gap of approximately 30 cm -1 indicating, among other things, that the contributions from luminescence are negligible here. The largest gaps reside on the middle hole band and on the electron bands and are rather sharp as opposed to BFCA. The gap maximum 2∆ max reaches almost 10 in units of k B T c In addition to the pair-breaking features, the B 1g spectra show unexpected structures below 2∆ max which, as opposed to the pair-breaking features, are nearly resolution limited and will be discussed in detail in the following section. Here we first wrap up observations of the energy gaps by Raman scattering in other compounds. A pair-breaking peak was also observed in the A 1g spectrum of BaFe 2 (As 0.5 P 0.5 ) 2 However, the small value of the thermodynamically derived gap indicates a substantial anisotropy also for BaFe 2 (As 0.5 P 0.5 ) 2 which may be conceiled by the notion of a single (average) gap. Very recently, pair-breaking features were observed in CaKFe 4 As 4 The lowest order gap excitations in the electronic Raman spectra essentially reflect the magnitude of the energy gap. Yet, some caution is appropriate when numbers are to be derived (see table There is general consensus that collective modes exist in at least some of the pnictides having sufficiently clean gaps Indications of collective modes were also reported for K 0.75 Fe 1.75 Se 2 and discussed along with a theoretical model There is a lively discussion on how the collective modes are to be explained in terms of one of the essentially three possibilities (see section 4.6): (i) Leggett modes, (ii) fluctuation modes which become undamped in the presence of a gap and (iii) BS modes. Here, the distinction between particleparticle and particle-hole modes (i) Leggett modes They may contribute to the Raman intensity at the gap edge and are thus indistinguishable from the pair-breaking effect (ii) In NaFe 1-x Co x As, when excited with blue light (476 nm), a very strong and narrow B 2g mode (B 1g in the 1 Fe unit cell) appears below T c at approximately 56 cm -1 close to the gap edge derived from ARPES The continuous temperature dependence across T c , the narrowing below T c and the independence of the mode energy of T c support the interpretation in terms of a quadrupolar fluctuation of charges between the electron and hole bands which becomes undamped inside the superconducting gap. In A 1g symmetry a broad peak is observed which cuts off softly below the maximum at approximately 70 cm -1 thus indicating a finite density of states inside the gap. The maximum -as an integal part of the peak -is interpreted in terms of the particlehole collective Bardasis-Schrieffer mode predicted by Chubukov, Eremin, and Korshunov Since the relatively broad peak includes several excitations, the gap energy can be extracted only with difficulties from the smoothed A 1g spectra. For x = 0.0175 and 0.05 the humps on the high-energy side are close to the ARPES gaps. The authors also used red photons (646 nm) for excitation but show only B 2g spectra, making a comparison with the spectra obtained for blue light less stringent. For 646 nm, the B 2g excitation at 56 cm -1 becomes much weaker in the underdoped range, x ≤ 0.0175, and two new modes appear. These modes are compared to the BS mode in the A 1g spectrum measured with excitation at 476 nm and are tentatively assigned to p-h and p-p collective modes without experimental substantiation or a phenomenological theory. Therefore, more work is needed to disentangle the complex but very interesting Raman spectra of NaFe 1-x Co x As. Whereas the normal-state data of NaFe 1-x Co x As are rather similar to those of BFCA several differences are observed below T c . For instance, the gap anisotropy on the individual bands is larger in BFCA than in NaFe 1-x Co x as can be inferred from the Raman spectra Given the rather anisotropic gap in BFCA, it is not entirely surprising that no sharp in-gap modes comparable to those in NaFe 1-x Co x As are observed. On the other hand, the peak maximum in B 1g symmetry is quite sharp in optimally doped BFCA and may be alternatively interpreted in terms of a nematic resonance near a quantum critical point Na111 and BFCA seem to be the two material classes with the strongest interaction between superconductivity and nematic fluctuations. In contrast, the fluctuations can hardly be observed in BKFA (iii) Finally, we discuss the possibility of subleading pairing interactions having d x 2 -y 2 symmetry and the related BS modes inside the gap in the B 1g Raman spectra. The BS modes display various properties which distinguish them from other collective modes [see Eq. All B 1g peaks observed in Ba 0.6 K 0.4 Fe 2 As 2 were suggested to be BS modes Doping x or pressure P can be used as non-thermal control parameters being relevant in the context of quantum phase transitions. Here, doping x proves useful for the assignment of the in-gap modes and for scrutinizing the anisotropy of the pairing potential V k,k through the evolution with x of the related ingap modes in BKFA. This will be the main focus of this subsection, but prior to this discussion the results on BFCA and BFAP will be summarized. For Na111 the reader is referred to section 6.2. The parent compound Ba122 can be driven superconducting in various ways. Both chemical substitution, using isovalent phosphorus substitution for arsenic, and applied pressure lead to T c values in the 30 K range Due to the doping dependent changes of the band strucure, (π,π) scattering is expected to gain strength in BFCA in comparison to BKFA, and one would expect enhanced sub-dominant coupling channels. Rather, the anisotropy of the gaps grows, and the resulting density of states below the gap maximum leads to overdamping of potential in-gap modes similar to what has theoretically been shown to happen for d-wave gaps In what follows we assume that the modes observed below the maximal gap in BKFA are excitonic in origin This interpretation is not entirely accepted, although many criteria were tested experimentally (see above) and found to be in agreement with the theoretical prediction whereas counterarguments were not presented yet. The doping dependence adds another piece of evidence to this assignment. Although BKFA is superconducting for 0.1 < x ≤ 1 the range without magnetic order or changes of the Fermi surface topology is rather small, 0.25 < x < 0.6. For x < 0.25 BKFA develops an SDW which gaps out part of the Fermi surface. For x > 0.6 the Fermi energy dives below the bottom of the inner electron band and for x > 0.7 hole-like bands appear around the X points The doping dependence of the Raman spectra in superconducting BKFA was studied by two groups. Wu and coworkers Regarding the experiments in the doping range 0.35 ≤ x ≤ 0.48 studied in Ref. For 0.35 ≤ x ≤ 0.48 the spectra of all symmetries Here all temperature independent features drop out. Apparently, there are no temperature-dependent phonons. As an artifact, the intensity becomes negative inside the gap. The respective zero-intensity lines are indicated (dashes). From can be described consistently Very recently, CKFA was studied. CKFA is a stoichiometric version of BKFA since the Ca and K layers alternate in a regular fashion. From the viewpoint of valence count it should be slightly overdoped, and the T c values are indeed close to the maximum found for BKFA. The ARPES Even though there is no agreement among the experimental groups about the details of the interpretation and, in particular, the doping dependence in BKFA, the question arises as to whether or not the idea of competing pairing channels may be a relevant contribution from Raman scattering to directly support the microscopic considerations. For addressing this question the hierarchy of pairing interactions was studied. In conventional superconductors, the ground state has a much lower energy than potential competing pairing tendencies. Unconventional superconductors have typically various instabilities in close proximity, all of which may be intertwined with Cooper pairing. The ways to study the related phase diagrams include Hubbard-like models In contrast to the Hubbard-Holstein model, which predicts an s ++ state The agreement of experiment and theory is remarkable in the case of fRG and still qualitative for RPA. The RPA results are offset to lower coupling strengths by 10 to 20%. Since RPA neglects contributions other than spin-fluctuations, the observed discrepancy may indicate the existence of weak contributions from other coupling mechanisms such as charge fluctuations Whereas the recent RPA and fRG studies favor spin fluctuations, an s ± -wave gap and two subleading pairing channels having d x 2 -y 2 symmetry the Hubbard-Holstein model leads to different conclusions and finds an s ++ ground state driven by electronphonon coupling and orbital fluctuations However, if the sub-leading interactions in this model would be identified to have d x 2 -y 2 symmetry the resulting Raman spectra would be indistinguishable from those observed in BKFA and CKFA. Thus the case for spin fluctuation induced pairing depends crucially on the reliability of the hierarchy of pairing tendencies derived from fRG and RPA. Other experimental probes such as the study of quasi-particle interference effects in magnetic fields Raman scattering in iron pnictides and chalcogenides has provided a host of information on the electronic, magnetic and lattice properties of these systems. We focused on the the spin and charge degrees of freedom in this review. In all cases the spectra consist of a superposition of several types of excitations. To which extent luminescence (as an a priori undesired contribution) plays a role is not entirely clear, but the comparison of a large amount of results shows that luminescence decreases substantially with improved sample quality and may be neglected at least at low energies. Particle-hole excitations are important in all compounds and for all doping levels. They are partially gapped out in the SDW state (section 5.2) where the materials remain metallic and fully gapped out in superconducting BKFA, for instance, when the surfaces are sufficiently clean (see section 6.1 and Ref. In B 1g symmetry, a strong contribution from fluctuations (see section 5.3) is observed below room temperature at energies of order k B T which softens with decreasing temperature, has the strongest spectral weight directly at the structural transition T S , and loses intensity below T S without, however vanishing so long as the material does not order magnetically. Raman scattering is particularly useful here since other spectroscopies have generic difficulties in observing the fluctuations: In the case of neutron scattering, the fluctuations appear only in the notoriously weak four-particle correlation, NMR spectroscopy cover only a small energy range well below k B T . The same holds true for thermodynamic methods We argue that the temperature dependence identifies the Raman response as critical fluctuations which are expected to vanish at the related transition temperature. The persistence of the excitation below T S is, therefore, considered an indication of spin rather than charge fluctuations. Yet, there is no consensus in the published literature on this point. However, if this controversy could be settled the driving force behind the phase transitions would be identified. In all pnictides, the response of the SDW is clearly observed (section 5.2). Although the gap energies are in the range 6-8 k B T SDW , the spectra are by and large described by weak-coupling physics including band reconstruction in the ordered state. This indicates that the magnetism here results from a Fermi surface instability of itinerant electrons. The relevant gap energies are in the range 100-150 meV in the parent compounds and decrease with doping or substitution along with the gradual suppression of the magnetically ordered phase. In the chalcogenide Fe(Se 1-x S x ) the B 1g response is distinctly different at all temperatures In the superconducting state gap excitations are observed in all sufficiently clean systems independent of the concentration of substitutional atoms (see section 6.1). Only Co substitution gradually suppresses the pair-breaking features. In all FeBCs there is a strong band dependence of the gaps. In FeSe the gap can be resolved in the Raman spectra but its small magnitude prevents a reliable analysis. In BFCA, the gaps on the electron bands exhibit a strong modulation with momentum and may even have accidental nodes at optimal doping. Here, Raman scattering and transport measurements arrive at similar conclusions Below the gap edges narrow, nearly resolutionlimited lines are observed in the B 1g spectra Microscopic model calculations using fRG and RPA (see section 6.4) show that the pnictides have indeed a hierarchy of pairing channels with very similar eigenvalues, an s ± ground state, and two subleading d x 2 -y 2 instabilities of different order In summary, the most significant contributions from light scattering experiments to the physics of the FeBCs pertain to the analysis of fluctuations and of the superconducting pairing states. The fluctuations can be compared to the evolution of the elasticity 