The presence of magnetic noise in magnetoresistive-based magnetic sensors degrades their detection limit at low frequencies. In this paper, different ways of stabilizing the magnetic sensing layer to suppress magnetic noise are investigated by applying a pinning field, either by an external field, internally in the stack or by shape anisotropy. We show that these three methods are equivalent, could be combined and that there is a competition between noise suppression and sensitivity reduction, which results in an optimum total pinning field, for which the detection limit of the sensor is improved up to a factor of ten. * Electronic mail: julien.moulin@cea.fr Thanks to a typical detection level of a few nanoteslas and a large frequency range, magnetoresistive sensors are widely used for weak magnetic fields measurements In order to experimentally investigate the pinning of the free layer, we use spin valve sensors deposited by sputtering on thermally oxidized (500 nm SiO2) silicon wafers. Two types of stack structures are used to test the aforementioned three ways of free layer pinning. A typical spin valve sensor stack (stack 1) allows studying the effect of the external field and shape anisotropy pinning. A batch of pinned spin valve sensors (stack 2) is deposited to investigate the intrinsic pinning. The pinning strength is applied in the direction of free layer and therefore at 90° from the direction of the reference layer. This reference layer direction is also the GMR sensitivity axis, as depicted in the insert of FIG. The spin valves are patterned by optical lithography. All our sensors are yoke-shaped devices The three curves shown in FIG. For a more complete picture, the influence of the pinning field on the sensitivity and on the noise level at 30 Hz is shown in FIG. FIG. FIG. The detectivity optimization by a pinning field is only possible when magnetic 1/f and RTN noise are present. An optimum can then be found for the entire magnetic noise frequency range. We relate the presence of the magnetic noise to the presence of hysteretic behaviour of the MR sensor response (see FIG. Besides the results with method 1 discussed above, FIG. It is important to mention that the shape anisotropy is present for each strategy and has to be taken into account in the effective pinning estimation. Importantly, it is possible to combine the pinning strategies and to adapt it to the application targeted. When a small permanent magnet could be pasted close to the GMR, in terms of size and sample stray field perturbation Despite the fact that all three methods contribute equally to the effective pinning, it is important to highlight that the shape anisotropy pinning creates an axial pinning whereas the external field and the internal stack pinning create a directional pinning. Hence, sensors pinned by shape anisotropy are more sensitive to magnetic history due to the presence of two stable magnetic positions contrary to the two other methods. Targeting practical uses, we will now describe how to design the sensor for a given stack and a chosen pinning method. As the effective field is just the linear sum of the various fields applied on the free layer, the principle is simply to apply an effective total field equal to the optimal pinning field. For method 1, the best field intensity in terms of detectivity is 2.75 mT and corresponds to the 1.15 mT shape anisotropy field for a 5 μm sensor added to a 1.6 mT external field which then needs to be applied. For method 2, it is essential to determine the proper thickness of Ru in order to obtain the intern field value of 1.1 mT, which corresponds to the 2.25 mT optimal pinning for this second stack minus the 1.15 mT shape anisotropy field for a 5 μm sensor. Fig. FIG. For method 3, we need to extract the critical width L c associated to the optimal detection limit H pinning opt using the following equation M s and t are the saturation magnetization and the thickness of the free layer, respectively. If we perform that calculation for stack 1, we obtain 2.25 μm as optimal width for a pinning of 2.75 mT. FIG. If the stack is strongly modified, the curve given in FIG. The pinning strategy, that can be a combination of methods 1, 2 and 3, is then chosen depending on the application targeted. For further insight into the magnetic noise in our devices, we estimated the size of the magnetic fluctuators responsible for RTN by using a model that relates the amplitude of the RTN voltage fluctuation by a magnetic oscillator of volume V to the magnetoresistance value of the entire GMR device where θ is the angle between the two magnetization states of the fluctuator. The dependence of the lifetimes τ 1 and τ 2 of the two magnetic states as a function of the magnetic field follows an Arrhenius law Where ∆m ⃗⃗ 12 is the magnetization variation vector between the two RTN states. In a crude approximation, its amplitude is equal to 2M s Vsin 2 (θ 2 ⁄ ). By tracing the statistics of individual fluctuators as a function of the applied field, the two unknown variables V and θ in equations ( In summary, we explored the effect of introducing a well-controlled pinning on the free layer, perpendicular to the sensitivity direction, on magnetoresistive sensing performance, focusing on the magnetic noise behaviour. In particular, we found the presence of an optimal pinning field that does not depend on how the pinning is performed. In this way, the magnetic noise is suppressed before losing sensitivity due to over-pinning of the free layer, which results in an enhanced detection limit up to a factor of 10. The effective pinning field is a linear sum of all pinning fields created by shape, structure and external field sources. For a specific sensing application, we can thus combine either of these methods to "build" the best-adapted sensor. We acknowledge the following organisms for funding: -The CEA for the internal funded projects MIMOSA and CALM and the PhD Grant "Phare Amont-Aval". -The Swiss National Science Foundation for a mobility fellowship (165238 and 177732) to A. Doll. -ANR funding through grants n°ANR-17-CE19-0021-01 (NeuroTMR) and n°ANR-18-CE42-0001 (CARAMEL). -This work was supported by the EMPIR JRP 15SIB06 NanoMag through EU and EMPIR participating countries within EURAMET.