We investigate the dynamics of a delay differential coupled Duffing-Van der Pol oscillator equation. Using the Lindstedt's method, we derive the in-phase mode solutions and then obtain the slow flow equations governing the stability of the in-phase mode by employing the two variable perturbation method. We solve the slow flow equations using series expansion and obtain conditions for Hopf bifurcation and studied stability of the in-phase mode. Finally, we studied stability and bifurcations of the origin. Our interest in this system is due to the fact that it is related to the coupled laser oscillators. In this paper we study the dynamics of coupled Duffing-Van der Pol oscillators with delay coupling. The problem of two Van der Pol oscillators with the delay coupling was investigated by Rand and Wirkus in The system of coupled delayed Van der Pol-Duffing oscillators we consider are given by The in-phase mode of this coupled system occurs when x 1 = x 2 for which we have the common equation ÿ + ǫ(y 2 -1) ẏ + yǫy 3 = αǫ ẏ(t -T ). (2.3) To find a periodic solution of this equation we use the Lindstet perturbation technique and set τ = ωt where ω = 1 + ǫk + O(ǫ 2 ). This gives the equation where the primes denote differentiation with respect to the variable τ . Next we expand y is a power series in ǫ i.e., set and equate the coefficients of various powers of ǫ to get y ′′ 0 + y 0 = 0 (2.5) Assuming a solution of the form y 0 = R cos τ of (2.5) we substitute this into (2.6) to obtain By demanding the secular terms to vanish we obtain the solutions for the amplitude R and k as given below Consequently for the in-phase mode we have (2.9) In order to study the stability of the in-phase mode we set and linearise the system (2.1)-(2.2) about w 1 = w 2 = 0. This leads to the following system of coupled linear delayed differential equations (DDE), namely (2.11) The above system is easily decoupled by the transformation (2.13) The decoupled system given in the last two equations have the generic form where u = z 1 for β = 1 and u = z 2 for β = -1. To investigate the presence of different time scales in the delayed equation (2.14) we take recourse to the two variable perturbation method involving the times scales τ = ωt and η = ǫt. It follows that (2.15) Expanding u and ω in a power series in ǫ, viz we have upon inserting the expression for k using (2.8) and (2.9) and retaining terms up to the first-order in ǫ: u 0τ τ + u 0 = 0 (2.16) Next assume that (2.16) has the solution u 0 (τ, η) = A(η) cos τ + B(η) sin τ so that the delayed term has the form where Inserting the above solution into (2.17) and requiring that the secular terms vanish gives the following system of equations for the amplitudes viz ) The last two equations represent the slow flow system of delay differential equations. The first step to analysing the system (2.18)-(2.19) consists in setting A = P e λη , B = Qe λη and A d = P e λ(η-ǫT ) , B d = Qe λ(η-ǫT ) in (2.18) and (2.19) which gives Considering the case β = -1 we are led therefore to the homogeneous system of equations: For non-trivial solutions it is necessary that the determinant vanishes. We set λ = iΩ and equate the determinant to zero to obtain We separate the real and imaginary parts of the last equation to get Real Part: -Ω We expand T and Ω in a power series in ǫ, viz, Substituting these expansions into the equations (2.23) and (2.24) and equating terms of the various orders of ǫ we obtain, Coefficient of ǫ 0 : Coefficient of ǫ 1 : ) (2.25) The higher order terms can also be found in a similar manner. The expressions for Ω and T gives the conditions for the Hopf bifurcation of the solution y(t). If consider only the first order then the condition is given as α = -1 cosT 0 . To check the stability of the limit cycle, originated out of this Hopf bifurcation, let λ = R + i Ω and expand λ in the neighbourhood of the limit cycle. As the real part R would be zero at the cycle, The stability could be checked by noticing the sign of the first derivative. From the calculations, it was found that the first order term is given as R = 1 2 (-1 -3 α cosT ). This expression is expected as it reduces to the Hopf condition for R = 0. However, one point to keep in mind is that these conditions are not exact and true only for first order and with higher orders, corrections will be added to the expressions and more precise conditions could be obtain as shown by Gluzman and Rand in The β = 1 case gives the conditions for the birth of in-phase periodic mode , corresponding to the independence of A and B on η. The condition is given as There are no correction terms involved in this expression as we considered the case for λ = 0. Also, there is no ǫ dependence, which is evident as these are slow flow equations and only dependence on ǫ is in the delay. In the next section, we will see that this condition corresponds to the change in stability of the origin itself. The Duffing-Van der Pol oscillator defined in (2.1, 2.2) possesses an unstable fixed point at origin and a stable limit cycle around it in uncoupled case. Coupling the system without delay does not affect the limit cycle and it continue to exist for all parameter values. However, with delay coupling, the stability of the origin changes for some parameter arrangements. To study the stability of origin, assume the variation of the coordinates in the neighbourhood of the origin proportional to e m t which gives the characteristic equation for the stability of origin as The characteristic equation is transcendental in nature and could not have closed form solutions. To analyse it for periodic orbit, consider the λ = i m I which on solving gives the delay curves as . and satisfies Condition in (3.2) gives the condition for Hopf Bifurcation of the origin. The delay curves could be expanded for small ǫ and approximated as which, for the first order, gives α = -1 cosT . This is what we got from the slow flow analysis of the periodic solution. The higher order corrections were not present in the slow flow, however the stability analysis of the origin provides some higher order corrections. Now, the characteristic equation the conclusions of the studies are given in the following theorem Theorem 3.1 For T ± (n) defined as (3.2), there is a positive integer n such that there are n switches from stability to instability to stability, i.e., when all roots of (3.1) have negative real parts. The theorem is part of The origin for α > 1 shows transition as in the case for α < -1. It is stable for some sets of delay values and unstable for other. The unstable phases corresponds with the stable limit cycle. Figure In previous sections, we derived the conditions for the Hopf bifurcation of the origin which corresponds with the birth of in-phase periodic solution. Further, we have seen that the origin is stable for α 2 > 1 which corresponds to the case of amplitude death of the oscillator. In this section, we numerically simulate the coupled system. From theorem 4.1 we have conditions for the stability of the origin. We simulated the system for α = 1.5, & ǫ = 0.1 with initial conditions x(0) = 0.5, y(0) = 0.5, ẋ(0) = 0.5, ẏ(0) = 0. In this paper we studied coupled Duffing-Van der Pol oscillators by velocity delay terms. At first we used Lindstedt-Poincaré method to obtain an approximate expression for the in-phase mode. Then we studied the stability of the in-phase mode by applying the two variable perturbation method to ü + ǫ(y 2 -1) u + (1 + ǫ(2y ẏ -3y))u = βαǫ u(t -T ), where u = z 1 for β = 1 and u = z 2 for β = -1. This resulted in the DDE slow flow. This resulted in a system of modified ODEs which possessed Hopf and saddle-node bifurcations. The vanishing of the determinant of the slow flow of DDE yields the nontrivial solution, but it is harder to solve. So, motivated from Gluzman-Rand work, we sought a series solution. Further, the stability of the in-phase mode was analysed. This stability corresponds to change in stability of the origin which was shown in section 4. The coupled system was also numerically studied and it was observed that numerical results are in sync with the analytical calculations.