The discovery of infinite layer nickelate superconductor marks the new era in the field of superconductivity. In the rare-earth (Re) nickelates ReNiO2, although the Ni is also of d 9 electronic configuration, analogous to Cu d 9 in cuprates, whether electronic structures in infinite-layer nickelate are the same as cuprate and possess the single band feature as well are still open questions. To illustrate the electronic structure of rare-earth infinite-layer nickelate, we perform first principle calculations of LaNiO2 and NdNiO2 compounds and compare them with that of CaCuO2 using hybrid functional method together with Wannier projection and group symmetry analysis. Our results indicate that the Ni-dx 2 -y 2 in the LaNiO2 has weak hybridization with other orbitals and exhibits characteristic single band feature, whereas in NdNiO2, the Nd-f orbital hybridizes with Ni-dx 2 -y 2 and is a non-negligible ingredient for transport and even high-temperature superconductivity. Given that the Cu-dx 2 -y 2 in cuprate strongly hybridizes with O-2p, the calculated band structures of nickelate imply some new band characters which is worth to gain more attentions. Since the discovery of high-TC cuprate superconductor in 1986 Although the mechanism of HTSC in the cuprates remains a puzzle, there is a general consensus that the key structural unit CuO2 plane, which exhibits characteristic quasitwo-dimensional (2D) physics of the dx 2 -y 2 orbital, plays a central role in HSTC. The Cu in cuprate has d 9 electron configuration and the crystal field of CuO2 plane strongly lifts the degeneracy of the eg orbital with dx 2 -y 2 located above dz 2 . The dx 2 -y 2 hybridizes with oxygen 2p bands, forming an effective singlet band with zero spin moment known as the Zhang-Rice singlet (ZRS) Designing and fabricating an analogue of cuprate superconductor is one of the key steps towards identifying the key ingredients and unraveling the mechanism of HSTC. Nickelates are one of the ideal systems to mimic cuprates. In bulk perovskite ReNiO3 system, the Ni is of d 7 configuration with one electron in the doubly degenerate eg orbitals. One idea to generate cuprate-like electronic structure is to remove the degeneracy of eg orbitals and deplete the dz 2 orbital, which leads to a half-filled dx 2 -y 2 band similar to the parent compound of cuprates. This is the idea behind the theoretical proposal of LaAlO3/LaNiO3 hetero-structures by To remove the apical oxygen in nickelates and then flip the orbital configuration to lift up the dx 2 -y 2 against the dz 2 is another path to mimic orbital configuration in cuprates We performed the DFT calculations within the generalized gradient approximation The infinite layer ReNiO2 is isostructural to CaCuO2, which can be derived from removing the apical oxygen of the octahedra in ReNiO3. In detail, it is stacked by Re A small Δ and a large t will lead to strong hybridization. In the case of weak hybridization, the system can be simplified as a single band. Our results also indicate weak hybridization between Ni-dx 2 -y 2 and La-d orbital. The hopping terms from Ni-dx 2 -y 2 to La-dxy/z 2 orbitals are zero due to the orbital orthogonality By replacing La with Nd, the partially filled f electrons are introduced into the system. point. These characters make the electronic structures of NdNiO2 differ strongly from LaNiO2. The physical origin of this unusual phenomenon is explained by our symmetry analysis, for details please see Fig. S6 In summary, we have performed the DFT calculations of infinite layer ReNiO2 (Re=La, Nd) with hybrid functional method and group symmetry analysis. Our results suggest that the Ni-dx 2 -y 2 sub-band in LaNiO2 can be treated as an isolated single band due to its weak/no hybridization with other orbitals. As a consequence, the 2D single band character in LaNiO2 becomes even stronger than that of CaCuO2. Meanwhile, the La-d electrons have two non-negligible impacts. One is the self-doping effect, which might lead to the redistribution of charge and alter the magnetic properties of The HSE functional was used in calculations. Table (0,0,0) (0,0,1) (0,1,0) (0,1,1) (1,1,0) (1,1,1) (0,0,2) (0,2,0) t(R) (eV) 0.482 -0.055 -0.482 -0.001 0.110 0.014 0.001 -0.051 When the hybridization becomes strong, extra treatment of the band and theoretic model should be considered. A typical example is the modified effective single band model, such as Zhang-