Lithium-ion batteries have attracted enormous interests recently as promising power sources. However, the safety issue associated with the employment of highly flammable liquid electrolyte impedes the further development of next-generation lithium-ion batteries. Recently, researchers reported the use of electrospun core-shell fiber as the battery separator consisting of polymer layer as protective shell and flame retardants loaded inside as core. In case of a typical battery shorting, the protective polymer shell melts during thermal-runaway and the flame retardants inside would be released to suppress the combustion of the electrolyte. Due to the use of a single precursor solution for electrospinning containing both polymer and flame retardants, the weight ratio of flame retardants is limited and dependent. Herein, we developed a dual-nozzle, coaxial electrospinning approach to fabricate the core-shell nanofiber with a greatly enhanced flame retardants weight percentage in the final fibers. The weight ratio of flame retardants of triphenyl phosphate in the final composite reaches over 60 wt.%. The LiFePO4-based cell using this composite nanofiber as battery separator exhibits excellent flame-retardant property without compromising the cycling stability or rate performances. In addition, this functional nanofiber can also be coated onto commercial separators instead of being used directly as separators. Lithium-ion battery (LIBs) has been considered as one of the most promising energy-storage devices recently Considerable efforts have been devoted to tackle the aforementioned issues, including the utilization of: (1) non-flammable organic electrolytes or co-solvent Encapsulating flame retardants into separator provides a novel strategy. Recently, Cui et al. has developed a novel electrospun core-shell microfiber structure with protective polymer layer as the shell and triphenyl phosphate (TPP), a popular organophosphorus-based flame retardant confined inside as the core Herein, by using a dual-nozzle, coaxial electrospinning method, we developed a flexible fabrication method of core-shell nanofiber with large quantity of TPP up to more than 60 wt.% encapsulated inside as separators for safe LIBs. In addition, the as-prepared fibrous material displays a very uniform flame retardants distribution, with almost no noticeable agglomeration observed. We further tested and confirmed the flame-retardant capability of the electrospun fiber compared with commercial separator. Finally, the constructed half-cell using lithium iron phosphate (LiFePO4) as cathodes, lithium metal as anode, and this electrospun fiber as separator delivered good cycling and rate performance, with a stable specific capacity of 130 mAh g -1 at 1 C. And this indicates the improvement of battery safety is achieved without compromising the battery performances too much. Poly(vinylidene fluoride-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP, average Mw ≈ 455,000, average Mn ≈ 110,000, pellets), dimethylacetamide (DMAc, 99.8%), N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP, 99.5%) and acetone (99.9%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. TPP was purchased from Energy Chemical. All of these reagents were used without further purification. Electrolyte (1M lithium hexafluorophosphate (LiPF6) dissolved in a mixture of ethylene carbonate (EC) and dimethyl carbonate (DMC) (v/v = 1:1), moisture ≤ 10 ppm), poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF, 99.5%), lithium metal foil (99.9%), copper foil (12 μm, 99.8%), aluminum foil (16 ± 2 μm, 99.54%), carbon black C45 and coin-type cell CR2032 was purchased from MTI Shenzhen Kejing Star Technology. Two types of commercial separators were used in this work. The commercial separator type I is a Celgard 2320 separator with polypropylene (PP)/polyethylene (PE)/PP trilayer and 20-μm thickness. The commercial separator type II is a Celgard 2500 separator with PP layer and 25-μm thickness. Nanoapparatus China, with inner radius 0.18 mm and outer radius 0.59 mm. In order to fabricate desired fibrous materials with high content of flame retardant, the electrospinning precursor solution for polymer shell was prepared by adding 18 wt.% PVDF-HFP in the mixture of DMAc/acetone (w/w = 3:7), then the solution was stirred at room temperature for 6 h, followed by ultrasonic treatment for 30 minutes. Meanwhile, the precursor solution for the core was prepared by dissolving TPP (the mass percentage can be up to more than 60 wt.%) in the mixture of DMAc/acetone (w/w = 3:7). During dual-nozzle coaxial electrospinning, the flow rates of the core and shell solutions were 1.08 mL h -1 and 0.54 mL h -1 , respectively, and the needle-to-collector distance was about 15 cm. A high voltage of 15 kV was applied to the nozzle to start the spinning process and the electrospun fibers were collected on a copper foil coated rotating drum (rotational speed was about 150 r/min). The obtained membrane was washed by ethanol and dried at room temperature. The thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA, Netzsch, STA 409 PC) measurement was carried out in air flow at a heating rate of 10 o C min -1 . The morphology and elemental analysis of the fibrous material were characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Hitachi, HT7700), scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi, SU-8010) and its energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS, Hitachi, SU-8010). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, ULVAC-PHI, PHI Quantro SXM) was used to characterize the as-prepared samples. The electrochemical performance was examined using CR2032 coin-type half-cells assembled in an argon-filled glove box with LiFePO4 as the working electrode and lithium foil as the counter electrode. To prepare the LiFePO4 electrode, LiFePO4, Carbon black C45 and PVDF with a mass ratio of 8:1:1 were dissolved in NMP to form a homogeneous slurry. The slurry was coated onto current collector via a common doctor-blade coating method, which was dried in a vacuum oven at 120 o C for 2h. The electrolyte is 1M LiPF6 in a mixture of ethylene carbonate (EC) and dimethyl carbonate (DMC) (v/v = 1:1). The galvanostatic discharge-charge cycling was performed in land system (CT2001A) over a range of applied voltage of 2.5-4.2 V at a constant C-rate of 0.25 C in the first 3 cycles for activation and at 1 C in the following cycles. For the ignition experiments, firstly, all the separators/fiber networks were folded four times and clamped with glass plates. Then the electrospun fibers were heated in air from room temperature to 180 o C to release the flame retardants inside. After cooling to room temperature, these fiber networks were wetted by a flammable electrolyte (1 M LiPF6 in a mixture of EC and DMC (v/v = 1:1)). The fabrication process for our proposed core-shell nanofiber with high content of flame retardants was vividly presented in Figure Morphology of the as-prepared electrospun fibers with high content of flame retardants was examined by scanning electron microscope (SEM) as shown in Figure In order to confirm the core-shell structure of our electrospun fibers (noted as TPP@PVDF-HFP), transmission electron microscope (TEM), energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) were utilized. As illustrated in Figure Theoretically, the concentration of TPP in the core solution can be related to the overall concentration of TPP in the entire composite fiber according to our calculations. Specifically, the TPP concentration in the core solution of 33.3 wt.%, 50.0 wt.% and 66.6 wt.% can be correlated to the final composite fibers with 48 wt.%, 58 wt.% and 65 wt.% weight percentage of TPP (Figure In order to prove the flame-retardant property of the as-prepared core-shell composite fibers, ignition experiments were carried out on our TPP@PVDF-HFP composite fibers compared with two types of commercial separators (Celgard 2320 and Celgard 2500) (Figure The effects of the TPP@PVDF-HFP (30 μm) and TPP@PVDF-HFP@commercial separator (35 μm) on the electrochemical performances of LIBs when used as battery separators were examined in the following section. Figure In conclusion, we have fabricated an electrospun fibrous material which could either be directly adopted as flame-retardant separator or be coated on a commercial separator for LIBs. This electrospun nanofiber network has a thermal-triggered flame-retardant property for LIBs such that in case of a battery thermal-runaway, it will release its flame-retardant core component out and suppress the combustion of the organic electrolyte. Unlike the previous methods to fabricate the flame retardants containing fibers based on single-nozzle electrospinning from a single precursor solution, our proposed approach involves dual-nozzle coaxial electrospinning out of two different precursor solutions, with one for polymer shell and the other for flame retardants. As a result, the concentration of the flame retardants in the precursor solution is independent of the polymer solution and can be tuned to a relatively high level. The as-prepared core-shell fibers contain a large quantity, more than 60 wt.% of flame retardants out of the entire composite fiber, which is a significant improvement compared with previous versions. Since the nonflammability of the electrolyte would increase drastically with the increasing flame retardants weight ratio, our developed electrospun fibers with more than 60 wt.% enable excellent flame-retarding property. In addition, during normal battery cycling, the outer protective shell confined flame retardants inside and prevent the exposure and dissolution of flame retardants into liquid electrolyte, which otherwise would have negative influence on battery performances. Therefore, when used as battery separators, our developed coaxial electrospun core-shell fibers reduce risks of safety hazards without compromising the battery performance. The following are available online. Figure 