We study the Josephson current in two types of lateral junctions with spin-orbit coupling and an exchange field. The first system (type 1 junction) consists of superconductors with heavy metal interlayers linked by a ferromagnetic bridge, such that the spin-orbit coupling is finite only at the superconductor/heavy metal interface. In the second type (type 2) of system we assume that the spin orbit coupling is finite in the bridge region. The length of both junctions is larger than the magnetic decay length such that the Josephson current is carried uniquely by the long-range triplet component of the condensate. The latter is generated by the spin-orbit coupling via two mechanisms, spin precession and inhomogeneous spin-relaxation. We show that the current can be controlled by rotating the magnetization of the bridge or by tuning the strength of the spin-orbit coupling in type 2 junctions., and also discuss how the ground-state of the junction can be tuned from a 0 to a π phase difference between the superconducting electrodes. In leading order in the spin-orbit coupling, the spin precession dominates the behavior of the triplet component and both junctions behave similarly. However, when spin relaxation effects are included junction of type 2 offers a wider parameter range in which 0-π transitions take place. The interplay between superconductivity and ferromagnetism leads to triplet superconducting correlations The prediction of LRTC in S/F hybrid structures has stimulated multiple experimental works In this work we present a study of the Josephson current in lateral geometries with SOC of Rashba and Dresselhaus type and how to control it via external fields in the diffusive regime. We focus on two types of junctions: One consists of two superconducting electrodes on top of a ferromagnetic film, see Fig. We focus on the control of possible 0-π transitions. With the help of an analytical solution for type 1 junction in the case of small SOC, we first show that in leading order the LRTC is generated only by the spin-precession term and the junction remains in the 0-state independently of the direction of the exchange field. The next leading order contribution to the current is due to the inhomogeneous spin relaxation with a negative sign, such that for certain directions of the exchange field the junction can switch to the π-state. In junctions of type 1 this only occurs if both, the Rashba and Dresselhaus SOC are finite. In a second part we present numeric calculations of the current for arbitrary SOC strength that confirm these findings. In addition these calculations reveal that type 2 junctions allow for 0π transitions in a wider range of SOC parameters. Specifically the transition can be induced by a pure Rashba or Dresselhaus SOC by changing their strengths. This is a new possibility to induce 0-π transition by tuning the Rashba SOC strength, which is experimentally achievable by gating the SOC active material. Besides the interesting applications of such lateral junctions as 0-π switchers, they can also be used to detect the LRTC by measuring the changes of the Josephson current as a function of the direction of the applied field or magnetization in a single junction. The work is organized as follows: In the next section II we present the basic equations describing diffusive Josephson junctions and we adapt these equations to the lateral junctions type 1 and 2. In section III we derive the analytical expression for the Josephson current in junction type 1 perturbatively, up to second order in the SOC parameter for semi-infinite leads. In section IV we present numerical results for the Josephson current for both types of junctions and compare them to the analytical results. Conclusions are given in section V. We consider two spatially separated superconducting electrodes on top of a non-superconducting material with either an intrinsic exchange field, as in a ferromagnet, or a Zeeman field induced by an external magnetic field. We distinguish two different types of junctions: one with SOC active layers just below the superconductors, Fig. We assume that the proximity effect, i.e. the induced superconducting correlations in the bridge, is weak and that the system is in the diffusive regime. In this case spectral and transport properties of the junction can be accurately described by the linearized Usadel equation 29 generalized to linear in momentum SOC. This equation provides the spatial dependence of the induced superconducting correlations in the non-superconducting region which is described in terms of the anomalous Green's function f 10,1130 : x < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " X b 2 g Here D is the diffusion constant, ω n is the Matsubara frequency, ∇k = ∂ ki[ Âk , . . . ] is the covariant derivative with the SU(2) vector potential, Âk = σa 2 A a k , describing the SOC and ĥ = σa h a is the exchange field. Symbols with a ˆstand for operators in spin space and σa are the Pauli matrices. We use the Einstein summation convention and sum over repeated indices. The general form of the condensate function in spin space is where f s is the singlet component and f a t are the triplet components. In our representation the short (long)-range triplet component corresponds to the component parallel (orthogonal) to the exchange or Zeeman field. In order to describe hybrid interfaces between the superconductor and a substrate one needs boundary conditions for the Green's functions. We use here the Kupriyanov-Lukichev ones 31 generalized for materials with SOC. In its linearized form at an S/X interface they read where X denotes any non-superconductor material. Here N i is the i-th component of the interface normal, γ is the interface transparency, is the anomalous Green's function in the bulk S region with the amplitude of the superconducting order parameter ∆ and its phase φ i in the i-th electrode. At the interface with vacuum (V) no current flows and the boundary condition reads: Below we determine the Josephson current density in the bridge region for the two setups depicted in Fig. where N 0 is the density of states and f = σy f * σy . We now re-write Eqs.( The SOC fields are finite only in the SOC layers thus for the junction type 1 (Fig. and for the junction type 2 with the SOC in the bridge region (Fig. with constant A a k . We restrict ourselves to SOC of the Rashba and Dresselhaus type defined by the following vector potential: Âx = β/2σ xα/2σ y and Ây = α/2σ x -β/2σ y . Rashba SOC corresponds to terms proportional to α , while Dresselhaus SOC corresponds to terms proportional to β. For both junctions the exchange field has only finite components in the xy plane and is present in the region F, ĥ where h = √ h a h a . To distinguish components that are parallel and perpendicular to the exchange field, i.e. short -and longrange components, it is convenient to rotate Eqs.( Thus in our notation the long-range triplet components are those polarized in y and z direction. Assuming for simplicity, that the thickness d of the SOC interlayers (if present) and the bridge W is small against the typical length on which f changes, we can integrate the Usadel equation along the z-direction Here we illustrate how the z-integration is carried out. Besides the first term in Eq.( In the first step we have use the translational invariance in y-direction and our choice of the SOC, which is stepwise constant. In the second step we use the continuity of f in the z-direction and the boundary condition Eq.( After performing the z-integration, and the rotation of Eq.( where we introduced the Kronecker-Delta δ i,j , the components of the averaged spin precession tensor and averaged Dyakonov-Perell (DP) spin relaxation tensor The averaged coupling constants are defined as ha = h a W/(W + d), ᾱ = αd/(W + d), β = βd/(W + d) and γ = γ/(W + d). The spatial dependence of the SOC fields, exchange field and order parameter in x-direction is not explicitly written, and is defined in Eqs.( The solution of Eqs. ( The equations ( For the junction type 2 the SOC coupling and the exchange field are finite over the whole bridge. Conse-quently ha = h, ᾱ = α, β = β and γ = γ/W . Thus the z-integrated Usadel equation is like in Eqs.( and the DP spin relaxation tensor The spatial dependence of the SOC fields is now given by Eq.( Thus for type 2 junctions, the condensate function is determined from Eqs.( Her we focus on type 1 junctions in the case when the exchange interaction is the dominant energy scale, Dα 2 , Dβ 2 , Dαβ, T h. The junction is larger than the magnetic length, ξ h , and hence the current is solely determined by the LRTC, f y t and f z t . The other two components decay over ξ h in the F region. We solve Eqs. (12-13) perturbatively up to second order in the SOC fields, A a k . In zeroth order only the singlet and triplet component parallel to the field, f x t,0 , are finite. Their explicitly form is given in the appendix, Eq.(A13). In first order in the SOC the component f z t appears as a consequence of the precession term. Specifically it is determined by The component f y t appears in second order of the SOC and satisfies: The explicit expressions for these components are given in the appendix, Eqs.(A20), (A24). From these solutions we obtain the current density in the F region. The current density Eq.( where we define κ ω = 2|ω n |/D and is the value of f x t for zero SOC, in the F region below the superconducting electrodes far from the bridge region. The first term in the second line of Eq.( In the next order of the SOC the contribution to the current is negative, second term in the second line of Eq. ( Thus, the sign and magnitude of the critical current is determined by two competing contributions, namely spin precession and anisotropic spin relaxation For either pure Rashba or pure Dresselhaus SOC the dependence of the critical current on θ is simply shifted by π/2 for the same magnitude of the SOC parameter. This can be already inferred from Eq. ( Eq. ( By inspecting Eq. (33) we see that the current reversal appears every-time the SU(2) electric field strength disappears in the left or right lead F L/R x,0 = 0, as long as α L β R = α R β L . When all couplings are non vanishing this takes place at the angles θ The interval, where the current is reversed with respect to the symmetric case, is maximized when there is only Rashba SOC in one lead and only Dresselhaus SOC in the other as then j c ∝ αβ sin(2θ). To summarize this section, for low SOC strength, the long-range supercurrent is mainly determined by the spin precession. If the S-electrodes are symmetric and only one type of SOC is active, the current can be switched on and off by rotating the exchange field in the xy plane, but no 0-π transition takes place. A reversal of the current only appears if both SOC types are finite and originates in a competition of the spin precessionand the spin relaxation effects. A current reversal due to spin precession effects can only be achieved by choosing leads with different SOC parameters. In this section we compute numerically the Josephson current for both types of junctions with finite S- electrodes. The total length of the system is L tot = 2L S + L, where L S is the length of the S-electrode, and is set to L tot = 10L. The systems of equations ( The resulting critical current density for the junction type 1 is shown in Fig. When increasing the SOC strength for j type 1 junction we observe the competition between the two LRTC generating mechanisms. Comparing the upper and lower panels of Fig. By further increase of the SOC the numerical results shown in Fig. (2) f) differ qualitatively from the analytic ones: there is a strong increase of the critical current in two negative dips around θ = π/4. The two negative dips move closer to θ = π/4 by increasing the SOC strength. Also there is a flattening of the curve at θ = 3/4. The 0π transition due to spin precession effect in junction type 1 with asymmetric SO interaction obtained analytically in the previous section is confirmed by the numerics as shown in Fig. We present a study of the effects of Rashba and Dresselhaus SO interaction in two types of diffusive lateral Josephson junctions. In the first type the bridge linking the superconducting electrodes is a ferromagnet and the SOC fields originated from heavy metal interlayers placed between the S leads and the F bridge. In the second geometry the exchange fields and SOC fields are finite over the whole bridge. In a realistic setup this can be realized by a a 2D semiconducting bridge in an external magnetic field. In both cases we determine the long-range triplet Josephson current. We show how the magnitude and sign of the supercurrent can be controlled by varying the direction of the exchange field as well as tuning the strengths of the SOC. Besides their relevance for application as supercurrent valves such lateral junctions can be used as a unequivocal way of detecting the long-range triplet component of the condensate in lateral setups. Note added: During the preparation of the manuscript we became aware of the very recent work Ref. As in the main text we consider the junction type 1 assuming semi-infinite leads. Solving the above system of equations for vanishing SOC gives the following zeroth order solution for the function f λ + e λ + x -B2 λ + e -λ + x + B3 λ -e λ -x -B4 λ -e -λ -x - (A13) where and the bulk solutions for the singlet and triplet x component with ξh = D/ h. The Ansatz for the solution of Eq.( where Keeping only leading order terms when h T, max Γab and assuming L ξh we find 