The density of states of the disordered s-wave superconductor is calculated perturbatively. The effect of Coulomb interaction on diffusively moving electrons in the normal state has been known before, but in the superconducting state both diffuson and the screened Coulomb interaction are modified. Therefore, the correction to the density of states in the superconducting state exhibits an energy dependence different from that of the normal state. There is a dip structure in the correction part because the interaction has a peak at twice the energy of the superconducting gap. The Coulomb interaction and the superconducting fluctuation cannot be treated separately because the density fluctuation is coupled to the phase fluctuation in the superconducting state. This coupling results in the absence of divergence around the gap edge in the correction part, which suggests the validity of this perturbation calculation. The conventional s-wave superconductor is not affected by the impurity scattering itself because nonmagnetic impurities do not break the symmetry of s-wave superconductors. Studies on correlation between the Coulomb interaction and impurity scattering have been mainly conducted in the normal state, and physical quantities such as specific heat and conductivity have been calculated not only in the three-dimensional case, In this study, we calculated the correction to the DOS in the superconducting state of a three-dimensional system. We considered the weakly localized regime in which the expansion parameter of the perturbation is 1/k F l (k F and l being the Fermi wave number and the mean free path, respectively). We also assume the dirty limit (∆τ ≪ 1. ∆ and τ being the superconducting gap and the relaxation time, respectively). In the calculation the Coulomb interaction is included consistently with the superconducting correlation. Although the Altshuler-Aronov effect in the superconducting state has been studied with use of the Coulomb interaction and diffuson of the normal state, The Hamiltonian is given by ξ k and ω q are the dispersions of electrons and phonons, respectively. The third and fourth terms represent the interaction between electrons and phonons and the effect of impurity scattering, respectively. We assume that ω q does not depend on q and that it takes a constant value ω q = ω E . The fifth term represents the Coulomb interaction between electrons and v q = 4πe 2 /q 2 . N 3 is the number of sites. We consider the threedimensional system, and k and q are wave number vectors in this space. We set = 1 in this paper. The correction to the DOS is given by Hereafter, we use the notation k = (k, ǫ n ), where k is a wave number vector in the three dimensional space and ǫ n = πT (2n -1) is the Matsubara frequency with T the temperature. The term Im indicates the imaginary part, and iǫ n → ǫ + i0 + means the analytic continuation, with 0 + an infinitesimal positive quantity (i = √ -1). Ĝk is the Green function of electrons and includes the effects of the impurity scattering and the electron-phonon interaction with Born and mean-field approximations, Here, ǫn and ∆ are determined by the following equation: where τ3 = ( 1 0 0 -1 ) and τ1 = ( 0 1 1 0 ). (n i and u represent the concentration of impurities and the magnitude of the impurity potential, respectively.) ∆ is the superconducting gap determined by the gap equation, The effects of interactions beyond the mean-field approximation are included in Ĝ′ k , and its diagrammatic representation is shown in Fig. in which i, j, i ′ , j ′ are indices specifying rows and columns of 2 × 2 matrices; hereafter the summation is taken over repeated indices. γij,i ′ j ′ k,k-q is given by where δ i,s is Kronecker's delta function. γ ij,i ′ j ′ q and M ij,i ′ j ′ ǫn,ǫn-ω l are given by the following equations. and These equations are solved by introducing 4 × 4 matrices such as Then, for example, and By solving Eq. ( Here, τ0 = ( 1 0 0 1 ), and ρ 0 = mk F /π 2 is the noninteracting density of states at the Fermi level. (the second term is necessary when the integration over ξ k is performed before the summation over ǫ n and α is related to the relaxation time by the impurity scattering: ( F S indicates the integration over the Fermi surface.) In the case of a dirty limit with the diffusion constant . The indices i of χ i correspond to those of Pauli matrices (τ i ). Using Eq. ( and ). These equations indicate that the density fluctuation (τ 3 ) couples to the phase fluctuation (τ 2 ) in the presence of a finite value of the superconducting gap (the mixing term χ ′ vanishes when ∆ = 0), and the amplitude fluctuation (τ 1 ) decouples from other modes in the presence of a particle-hole symmetry. Then, the solution for Eq. ( Here, and Here, p := mk F g 2 ph /2πω E indicates the coupling constant between electrons and phonons and c q := mk F v q /2π. Using the above results, the correction to the DOS is written as follows. -1 (x = D α q 2 .) Here we use the approximate expression Eq. ( In fact, 1/(1 -2X ǫn,ǫn-ω l ) ≃ 1 in this range, and the correction term is reduced to the usual Fock term because the diffuson propagator is absent.) In this subsection, we show that the expressions previously studied in the normal state (T c is the superconducting transition temperature) and χ ′ = 0. Then, Γ i (q) and Γ ′ (q) are given by and Γ ′ (q) = 0. The correction to the DOS in the normal state is given by the following equation: and and the screened Coulomb interaction enhanced by diffuson, In this subsection, we show that the temperature dependence of the correction to DOS is small at low temperature T ≪ ∆. After analytic continuation, Eq. ( with χ ′ is obtained by replacing κ i ss ′ in Eq. ( Here, s, s ′ = + (retarded) or -(advanced), g s ǫ = -ǫ/ζ s ǫ , and From Eq. (37), Re(κ i ++ -κ i +-) takes finite values only for |ǫ + ω| > ∆ and |ǫ| > ∆. Then, Imχ i is exponentially small for |ω| < 2∆ except for T ≃ T C , and is negligible in this region. We consider the correction to the DOS for |ǫ| < ∆ and |ǫ| > ∆ separately in the following. First, we consider the case of |ǫ| < ∆. After performing the analytic continuation of Eq. ( In this equation the coefficient of coth(ω/2T ) is exponentially small for |ω| < 2∆ owing to the existence of ImΓ i and ImΓ ′ , and the coefficient of tanh[(ǫ -ω)/2T ] vanishes for |ǫ -ω| < ∆ (the imaginary part is absent). This indicates that the dependence of ρ ′ (ǫ) for |ǫ| > ∆ on temperature is weak for T ≪ ∆. This small dependence of ρ ′ (ǫ) on temperature is consistent with exponentially small values of ρ ′ (ǫ) for |ǫ| < ∆ at low temperature. Thus, we perform the numerical calculations at T = 0 and ǫ > ∆ in Sect. 3.3. The diffuson propagator is usually represented by 1/(D α q 2 -iω). However, in the superconducting state [Eq. ( In this subsection, we illustrate that the divergence by this additional pole is absent when the particle-number conservation is preserved in the integration of Eq. (43). By performing the analytic calculation, (ω > 0) and there are following relations between χ i (i = 0, 1, 2, 3) and χ ′ at q = 0: With use of a relation c q = πω 2 p τ /2D α q 2 ≫ p (ω p is the plasma frequency: ω 2 p = 4πn e e 2 /m with n e = k 3 F /3π 2 electron density and m the electron mass), Eqs. ( and This expressions show that Γ 3 ,Γ 2 , and Γ ′ are proportional to 1/x = 1/(D α q 2 ) because the denominator of these quantities vanishes at q = 0. The above relations between χ i (i = 3, 2) and χ ′ indicate that Γ 3 /Γ ′ = -ω/2∆ and Γ 2 /Γ ′ = -2∆/ω at q = 0. Then, in Eq. ( After the integration over x with use of Γ ∝ 1/x, Eq. ( Both the numerator and the denominator of this expression vanish at ω = 2ǫ, and then the integration over ω results in a finite correction to the DOS. Therefore, by preserving the particle-number conservation, we obtain a finite result even when an additional singularity exists in the diffuson propagator in the superconducting state. (As for the case of the pole at ω = 0 in Eq. ( The relation between Γ 3 , Γ 2 and Γ ′ is irrelevant in this case.) In the case of Γ 0,1 , the long-range part 1/x is absent. As for the terms containing Γ 0,1 , the integration over x is proportional to 1 , which results in a finite value after the integration over ω is performed. As discussed above, the dependence of ρ ′ (ǫ) on temperature is weak for T ≪ T c , and so we perform a numerical calculation at T = 0. We consider the superconducting gap at T = 0 as the unit of energy (∆ = 1). p is determined by the gap equation. The dependences of Γ i (q) and Γ ′ (q) [Eqs. ( The dependences of Γ i (q) and Γ ′ (q) [Eqs. ( Next, we calculate the correction to the DOS numerically. From Eq. ( In the case of the normal state, δρ ǫ = ρ ′ (ǫ)/ρ 0 from Eqs. ( When we change the upper limits of |ω| and x, only the magnitude of |δρ ǫ | is shifted. We consider the weak-coupling case for the interaction between electrons and phonons. This interaction is taken to vanish outside the cutoff frequency (ω c ), and then Γ i (q), Γ ′ (q) = 0 in the numerical calculation. We specify the relation between α = 1/2τ and k F l in Eqs. (35), ( The calculated results of the correction to the DOS are shown in Fig. and "N" are the results calculated in the superconducting state and the normal state, respectively. "N 0 " is the calculated result with only the term Γ 3 (q) included in Eq. (36). The dependence of δρ ǫ on ǫ changes slightly with increasing α, and it is written as δρ ǫ ∝ √ ǫ for "N 0 ". As for the dependence of the magnitude of δρ ǫ on α, δρ ǫ ∝ 1/(k F l) 2 holds in both the superconducting and the normal states. This is related to the ǫdependence of δρ ǫ because the equation is derived from Eq. ( The ǫ-dependences of δρ ǫ are not exactly written as δρ ǫ ∝ √ ǫ for "SC" and "N". The result for "SC" shows that a dip structure appears around ǫ = 3∆. This structure is resulted from the peak in Γ(q) around ω ≃ 2∆. The reason for the overall suppression in "SC" as compared to "N" is the enhancement of Γ 2 and Γ ′ owing to the coupling of the phase fluctuation to the density fluctuation. The result for "N" shows that the superconducting fluctuation suppresses the DOS at low energy. The δρ ǫ values of "SC" and "N" approach that of "N 0 " at high energy owing to the weakening of the superconducting correlation for ǫ ≫ ∆. The difference in magnitude between Γ i and Γ ′ shown in Fig. To clarify the reason for the absence of this divergence in Fig. (43) as follows: with and ]. The DOS with the correction included is written as follows: The calculated result of this expression is shown in Fig. In this study, we calculated the correction to the DOS perturbatively. The correction term is given by the Coulomb interaction and the electron-phonon interaction, with vertices of these interactions modified by the impurity scattering. The modification enhances these interactions at low energy. The energy dependence of the correction to DOS in the superconducting state is different from that in the normal state, and a dip structure appears at low energy. This structure is caused by the interaction which has a peak at about twice the energy of the superconducting gap. (The dip structure in the one-particle spectrum is also observed in cuprates, but its origin is different. There are two differences between the superconducting state and the normal state. First, the diffuson is modified because the opening of the superconducting gap changes the dispersion of quasiparticles. This gives rise to another pole in the diffuson propagator, and this pole is treated correctly by including the coupling of the density and phase fluctuations. Second, the correction to DOS does not affect the gap-edge singularity in the superconducting state. This is because the cancellation between the retarded and advanced parts occurs around the gap edge. In the normal state, the superconducting fluctuation and the Coulomb interaction separately contribute to the retarded and advanced parts, respectively. In the superconducting state we cannot treat them separately and need to include both parts simultaneously in the correction to DOS. Regarding the validity of perturbation expansion, if we consider the perturbation expansion in the case of the scattering by nonmagnetic impurities, the correction to DOS is proportional to Im k,k ′ Tr[ Ĝk τ3 Ĝk ′ τ3 Ĝk ] = 0. The nonmagnetic impurities do not affect the DOS in the Born approximation. In contrast, for paramagnetic impurities, the This means that the perturbation expansion is invalid around |ǫ| ≃ ∆, and the gap edge in the DOS changes qualitatively. We calculated the Fock term with its vertices modified by diffuson (for example, Fig. The singular part Γ q ∝ 1/q 2 (which majorly contributes to the correction to DOS in our calculation) is weakened when the summations are performed. Thus, we can omit this type of diagram. There is a similar term in the case of the Hartree diagram modified by diffuson or Cooperon. (In the case of the Fock term modified by diffuson, This study considers the case of low temperatures (T ≪ ∆). The superconducting gap ∆ was taken as the unit of energy, and we did not consider the interaction effect on the superconducting gap. When the temperature is comparable to the superconducting gap, the self-consistency through the gap equation becomes important. Finally, we comment on the possibility of observing a dip structure in experiments. Experimentally, it is known that the superconducting state becomes inhomogeneous with decreasing k F l, when the overall factor |ǫ|/ √ ǫ 2 -∆ 2 is removed. The dip structure originates from the interactions in the superconducting state, and therefore the difference between our calculation and the calculations using the Coulomb interaction and diffuson of the normal state The numerical computation in this work was carried out at the Yukawa Institute Computer Facility.