Topological superfluid 3 He, with unconventional spin-triplet p-wave pairing 1-3 , provides a model system for topological superconductors 4 , which have attracted significant interest through potential applications in topologically protected quantum computing 5-7 . Hall systems, the surface/edge states, arising from bulk-surface correspondence and the momentum space topology of the band structure, are robust 8 . Here we demonstrate that in topological superconductors the surface Andreev bound states, which depend on the momentum space topology of the emergent order parameter, are fragile with respect to the details of surface scattering. We confine superfluid 3 He within a cavity of height D comparable to the Cooper pair diameter 0  . We precisely determine the superfluid transition temperature c T and the suppression of the superfluid energy gap, for different scattering conditions tuned in situ, and compare to the predictions of quasi-classical theory 9 . We discover that surface magnetic scattering leads to unexpectedly large suppression of Tc, corresponding to an increased density of low energy bound states. The spin-triplet superfluid phases of liquid 3 He provide a benchmark for topological superconductivity. So far topological superconductors are the missing "elements" in the periodic table of quantum matter 10 ; while candidates exist, such as Sr2RuO4 11 , UPt3 12 , doped Bi2Se3 13 , UTe2 14 , no bulk material has yet been unambiguously identified as a topological crystalline superconductor Recently we have shown that it is possible to cool Surface scattering dominates the properties under strong confinement. NMR determines the superfluid transition temperature, the pairing state, and the superfluid energy gap Over the Fermi surface pairs form with the same direction of their orbital angular momentum, and in an equal-spin state comprising just  and  pairs. The B-phase is time-reversal invariant, comprising all three components of the spin triplet, with broken spin-orbit relative symmetry. The relative stability of these phases is profoundly altered by confinement. In our experiment, superfluid , where F v is the Fermi velocity and 0 c T the bulk superfluid transition temperature. Measurements were made at a series of pressures from 0 to 5.5 bar, over which 0  decreases from 77 to 40 nm. We determine the shift in the NMR resonance frequency f relative to the Larmor frequency L f , L f f f    , which occurs in the superfluid state. The onset of this shift identifies Tc in the cavity. This is determined precisely relative to 0 c T by also observing frequency shifts in small volumes of bulk liquid incorporated in the cell design, Fig Supplementary Figure The relatively strong confinement in the 192 nm cavity stabilizes the A phase at all temperatures and pressures, consistent with the phase diagram determined in previous work In quasiclassical theory the surface scattering can be characterized in terms of a single parameter: specularity S, Fig. In general, the measured frequency shift is related to the spatial average of the suppressed gap within the cavity via 2 2 2 () , where  is an intrinsic material parameter which is pressure dependent but temperature independent (Supplementary Note 1). In the Ginzburg-Landau regime, sufficiently close to Tc0, the A-phase bulk gap maximum A  is given by   , where / An CC  is set to the measured heat capacity jump at Tc0. This expression thus incorporates strong-coupling corrections to the gap near Tc0 (Supplementary Note 4). For "specular" boundaries, the measured cavity frequency shift corresponds to the unsuppressed, bulk gap, Fig , establishing the consistency of the experimentally determined gap suppression and Tc suppression within the framework of quasi-classical theory. We now turn to the results where no We invoke magnetic surface scattering to explain this stronger Tc suppression in the presence of a magnetic solid Magnetic scattering by localized 3 He 38 strongly influences the observed superfluid phase diagram of The structure of the order parameter is such that the phase shift φ experienced by the scattered quasiparticle, and hence the energy of the surface bound states, will be influenced by spin-dependent scattering processes. To account for extra pair breaking we need to include quantum spin dynamics of randomly oriented localized quantum spins, allowing for their spin flips. Exchange coupling between such spins and incident quasiparticles gives rise to interference between the singlet and triplet scattering channels. In our experimental configuration we find this to be the only viable mechanism resulting in enhanced Tc suppression. We find that for a surface with momentum scattering specularity S , the suppression of Tc corresponds to an effective specularity between bounds eff S S S    , depending on strength of exchange coupling. Thus this process is only detectable for nondiffuse surfaces, but can give rise to Tc suppression exceeding that for a diffuse surface, as observed. In order to reach the detected eff 0.4 S  , the required underlying specularity for momentum scattering from the atomically smooth silicon surface with solid The specular surfaces we have demonstrated open the investigation of cavities of arbitrarily small height towards 0 D   entering the quasi-2D limit, in which thermal and spin analogues of the Quantum Hall effect are predicted In conclusion, our results show experimentally the sensitivity of ABS to the details of quasiparticle scattering from the surface. A superfluid In more complex topological superconductor architectures designed to realize, detect and manipulate MZMs for topological quantum computation, it is necessary to eliminate the excess low energy ABS arising from the interface scattering processes such as we have identified here. Meanwhile our result is a crucial step in the quest to produce and identify Majoranas in liquid Silicon nanofluidic cavity fabrication. The experimental cell was fabricated by direct wafer bonding of two silicon wafers. The confinement region and supporting pillars are defined lithographically on one of the wafers using a process similar to that used in a previous generation of cells NMR measurements. The cooling of the 3 He within the cell, the thermometry and the SQUID NMR spectrometer were as used in previous work In situ tuning of surface scattering. Magnetic scattering. Pure 3 He, with He was added to the empty cell and silver heat exchanger at 30K, followed by cooling to below 1K over 30 hours, and a subsequent anneal at 2K for several hours. This coverage is below that necessary to see a superfluid transition in the surface Experimental work was carried out by P.J.H and L.V.L with contributions from A.C. The nanofabricated cells were prepared and assembled by N.Z, X.R and A.C. X.R carried out the FEM simulations of the cell. The analysis and presentation was carried out by P.J.H, L.V.L and A.V with contributions from J.S. A.V performed calculations of gap profile and superfluid transition temperature. A.V developed the theory of magnetic scattering with contributions from P.S. The work at Cornell was supervised by J.M.P, and the work in London was supervised by J.S, A.C and L.V.L, who had the leading roles in formulating the research. P.J.H, J.S and A.V had leading roles in writing the paper, with contributions from all authors. The cavity is filled through a fill line via a sintered heat exchanger and cooled through the column of 3 He within it. Small volumes of bulk liquid at each end of the cavity provide markers for the bulk superfluid transition 0 c T , and eliminate errors due to temperature gradients. The NMR coil set around the sample is shown in Supplementary Fig. Here we restrict the discussion to linear spin dynamics relevant to our NMR experiments with small spin tipping angles β. The following discussion covers the observed frequency shift in the cavity; the frequency shifts observed in the bulk marker volumes are discussed in Supplementary Note 2. In normal We have H 0 ẑ and ŝ ẑ. The magnetic field defines the orientation d ⊥ ẑ and the small height of the cavity (D ξ D ) forces l ẑ everywhere in it. This dipole-unlocked configuration maximises the dipole energy, resulting in a negative NMR frequency shift in the A phase [3, 4]: Here Ω A is the A-phase Leggett frequency (the longitudinal resonance frequency) depending on both the temperature and the pressure, and energy gap ∆ A refers to the maximum A-phase energy gap in the momentum space at p ⊥ l. Here λ D ∼ 10 -6 sets the relative scale of the dipole energy, N F is the density of states at the Fermi level, and χ N is the normal state spin susceptibility equalling the susceptibility of equal-spin-paired 3 He-A. All pre-factors of ∆ 2 A depend only on the normal state properties of In a cavity with non-specular quasiparticle scattering at the walls, the gap acquires a spatially inhomogeneous suppression ∆ A (z) as seen in Supplementary Fig. where ∆ 2 A (z) refers to the spatially averaged value of the squared energy gap, the experimental determination of which we now discuss. For compactness we write is a pressure-dependent, temperature-independent constant. In bulk in the Ginzburg-Landau (G-L) regime, near bulk transition temperature T c0 , ∆ Now clearly ζ = IS bulk /IS bulk ∆ . For our "specular" (S = 0.98) surface, which shows essentially no T c suppression, the measured frequency shift corresponds to the spatially uniform and unsuppressed bulk gap ∆ A , Supplementary Eq. (S1). Thus, we have for the precession frequency in the cavity where T c = T c0 to a good approximation. Here IS spec slab ≈ IS bulk is determined as a slope of a linear fit between the cavity frequency shift and temperature close enough to T c where the dependence is expected to be nearly linear [4]: Similarly, IS bulk ∆ is determined from a linear fit to the calculated bulk gap over equivalent temperature range: The choice of this temperature range is a suitable compromise between precision and accuracy and justifies calling the proportionality constants IS as initial slopes, see Supplementary Fig. This expression determines the average gap suppression for arbitrary surface scattering at all temperatures. The procedure described here eliminates any systematic errors that might arise from the use of literature values of the bulk frequency shift. To compare the experimental and theory-based specular and non-specular initial slopes we can use the dependence: where the superscript 'diff' refers to any non-specular boundary condition. This dependence holds as long as the suppressed gap ∆ 2 A (z) = IS diff ∆ (1 -T /T c ). Supplementary Fig. Helium in the bulk liquid compartments on both ends of the cavity can nucleate either into 3 He-B or where Ω B is the B-phase Leggett frequency, ∆ B is the isotropic B-phase energy gap, χ B is the temperature-dependent B-phase spin susceptibility, and β n is the angle between H 0 and spinorbit rotation axis n [2]. The preferred orientation in bulk is such that β n = 0. However, at vertical walls of the bulk marker compartments, dipolar energy forces β n ≈ 63.4 • leading to sin 2 β n = 0.8 and to positive frequency shift from Larmor value detected at superfluid transitions. Since the frequency shifts in our experiments are small compared to the Larmor frequency, we use correspondence f 2 -f 2 L ≈ 2f L ∆f for a straightforward conversion between calculated energy gap and frequency shift. Examples of detected frequency shifts against temperature are presented in Supplementary Fig. Possible temperature gradient across the cavity is seen as different measured temperatures of the silver plate, T Ag , during the superfluid transitions in the bulk volumes. These two silverplate temperatures are denoted by T fill c and T far c . After the correction for the thermal gradient across the heat exchanger (Supplementary Note 7), T fill c ≈ T G c . The small measured temperature gradient as a function of pressure and temperature hysteresis as a function of temperature sweep rate are presented in Supplementary Fig. Supplementary Figure The theoretical procedure to obtain the spatial profile of the order parameter and the corresponding density of states (DOS) in the cavity is based on the quasiclassical theory of superfluid The multi-component order parameter is determined self-consistently together with the quasiclassical quasiparticle correlator (Green's function) g(R, k; m ), which describes propagation of quasiparticles with energy m along straight classical trajectories. In cavities thinner than D ∼ 10ξ 0 , not only the symmetry of the order parameter, but also the nature of the quasiparticle scattering on surfaces determine the behaviour of the quantum condensate. The spectrum of the sub-gap states in the vicinity of the surface is different depending on whether the scattering is specular, diffuse, retroreflecting [16] (maximally pair-breaking in odd-parity superfluid), or a mixture of these, resulting in the different suppression of both the order parameter and the transition temperature. The boundary conditions for the quasiclassical propagator at the surface encode the scattering processes with high momentum transfer δk ∼ k F . We adopt the random S-matrix scattering model [17-19] with unitary scattering matrix for particle-like excitations, where {q, q } are in-plane vectors, and the scattering is from q (in) to q(out). For hole-like excitations one has Sq q = S * qq (final and initial states exchanged), and the entire particle-hole space is covered by Random Hermitian matrix η has properties where overline refers to statistical average. The correlation cumulant is taken as a constant, κ(q -q ) = 2W/ q 1 [18]. Matrix η depends on a particular surface scattering picture and for example can be expressed in terms of parameters of the randomly rippled wall model [17]. The S-matrix model allows a continuous description of surface scattering from specular to fully diffuse limit by tuning the W -parameter, which we further generalize to include retroreflection by multiplying S by the overall retro delta function δ -q,q . The amplitude of the specular reflection is given as with surface self-energy σ determined from self-consistency equation σ = η 1 1+σ η = 2W 1+σ . This allows one to define 'specularity', i.e., the probability of specular scattering, of the surface as S = ±(1 -σ) 2 /(1 + σ) 2 . The negative sign indicates retroreflection. For W = 0 one has σ = 0 with either completely specular S = +1 or retroreflective S = -1 surface; for W = 1 we get σ = 1 and fully diffuse surface S = 0 with suppressed T c (D) that exactly follows [18] the original result for diffuse T c suppression given by Kjäldman et al. (KKR) [20]. The boundary condition that connects the propagators of the incoming (p in ) and outgoing (p out ) trajectories at the surface is written as [19] A g(p out ) = g(p in ) A, The surface self-energy σ is momentum-independent and computed self-consistently from Here the surface propagator for specular (or retro) reflection is averaged over the momenta parallel to surface, which we can write as integration over incoming or outgoing momenta on the Fermi surface (FS) The integral is normalised with the area of FS in the reflective plain, πp 2 F , i.e., In the normal state g surf = g N = -i sgn( n ) τ 3 , and solution for surface self-energy is σ = σ g N with (1 + σ)σ = 2W . In the presented calculations we assume that the quality of both surfaces of the cavity is approximately equal and thus characterised by the same specularity parameter S, as is true with silicon-silicon sample containers having even The mixing of all pairs (S m = 0, ±1) in our experimental configuration becomes possible if the direction of magnetization in the solid layer is random. The average over m-angles gives partial suppression of all amplitudes at the surface: In this case the magnetic suppression cannot take the total suppression beyond diffuse due to non-negative coefficient for the triplet components. The only scenario increasing pair breaking enough in this model in order to get more than diffuse suppression of T c in 3 He-A, is to allow for correlated spin-orbital scattering, where backscattering quasiparticles experience phase difference due to orbital part of the order parameter alone, and the forward-scattering quasiparticles are affected by magnetic depairing. The latter part would also require a certain orientation of magnetization in the solid layer, inconsistent with the experimental geometry. From the physical angle, this scenario also appears to be unlikely due to absence of plausible spin-orbital coupling mechanism in the layer. Another way to formulate the boundary condition for the coherence amplitudes is to model the magnetic layer by a net of polarized or unpolarized scattering centres with potential and exchange interaction u 0 +JS imp •σ with a classical magnetic moment S imp of the centres ("impurities") and liquid-solid exchange coupling coefficient J. These act to randomize the directions of scattered quasiparticles, but introduce in general different relaxation times for quasiparticles of different spins. In this modification of Ovchinnikov-Kopnin model of thin dirty layer [43, 44] with thickness d, one again encounters vanishing diffuse average over directions γ = 0 that does not further contribute to the magnetic pair breaking. The coherent scattering part is given by spin-dependent relaxation lengths , e.g., Γ(p out ) = γ(p in )e -2d/ with v F / ± = 2πn imp N F (u 0 ± JS imp ) 2 for S z = ±1 pairs, or v F / 0 = 2πn imp N F (u 2 0 + (JS imp ) 2 ) for S z = 0 pairs, where n imp is the density of scattering centres in the magnetic layer. These expressions are consistent with previous work on bulk systems in aerogel, and they may lead to effects such as A 1 -A 2 phase splitting [45], but will not result in an excess of zero-energy states because e -2d/ coefficients are all positive. The maximal allowed pair breaking is diffuse, |S| = 0, in the limit d with no magnetic effects discernible. We propose to extend the boundary conditions to take into account the quantum interference of spin states of the (identical) solid and liquid 3 He atoms. They will include spin-flip processes and more subtle scattering effects that are missing in the classical magnetic moment approaches. A rough model for the scattering of a liquid 3 He quasiparticle in the solid layer of thickness a is given by the Hamiltonian in the solid layer Supplementary Figure where U 0 is the potential height of the barrier, Ŝs is the /2 spin operator of solid layer atom, and 2 σ is the spin operator of liquid quasiparticle. Below the layer, we set up an impenetrable wall so that all particles are reflected back. The total spin of the quasiparticle and the solid atom participating in scattering can be in the singlet or triplet state, S tot = 0, 1, with the standard eigenvalues for the product Ŝs 2 . The scattering matrix e -ikz → -e iα e ikz is (omitting overall -1 factor) where the phases of the singlet and triplet scattering channels are given by with definitions We transform to the basis labelled by z-projections of liquid (σ, σ ) and solid (S s z , S s z ) spins before and after the scattering event using Clebsch-Gordan matrix C, In the assumption of unpolarized solid layer, P(+ 1 2 ) = P(-1 2 ) = 1/2 (i.e., the NMR field is not strong enough to orient significant fraction of the spins), the triplet components upon scattering from the magnetic layer are multiplied by an additional factor: independent C A or C B satisfactorily corrects all the measurements within error limits from T G c . The uncertainty limits of C A and C B increase the uncertainty of the corrected temperatures as compared to the small error in the original measured temperatures. We assume that the upper bound of the boundary resistance with a solid 3 He surface boundary layer is set by that of a solid 4 He layer in order to quantify uncertainties in temperature in this case. , where A  is the A-phase gap maximum,