In a process where the temperature of a type I superconductor in a magnetic field changes, the conventional theory of superconductivity predicts that Joule heat is generated and that the final state is independent of the speed of the process. I show that these two predictions cannot be simultaneously reconciled with the laws of thermodynamics. I propose a resolution of this paradox. Within the conventional London-BCS theory of superconductivity Figure where J 0 is the Bessel function of order 0 and ẑ is along the cylinder axis. To lowest order in λ L /R, B(r) = H 0 e (r-R)/λL ẑ. ( The London penetration depth is a decreasing function of temperature, hence a decreasing function of time in the process of cooling. In the process shown in Fig. Critical magnetic field versus temperature for a type I superconductor. We will consider the process where a system evolves from point 1 to point 2 along the direction of the arrow. The magnetic field near the surface is changing in this process, therefore a Faraday electric field is generated. We assume cylindrical symmetry throughout the process. The electric field at radius r at time t is determined by the equation which yields The electric field points counterclockwise. At any given temperature there are both superfluid and normal electrons, of density n s and n n , with n s + n n = n constant in time, in a two-fluid description with within a Drude description with relaxation time τ , with m * the transport effective mass. The energy dissipated per unit time per unit volume is and the energy per unit time dissipated over the entire volume is If the process extends from time t = 0 to t = t 0 the total Joule heat dissipated is and the Joule entropy generated during this process is where T (t) is the temperature at time t. We assume the process is sufficiently slow that T (t) is well defined at all times. Note that Q J and S J depend on the speed of the process. If we assume for simplicity that ∂λ L /∂t is constant, we have for any F , so Q J and S J are directly proportional to ∂λ L /∂t . In addition, Q J and S J are proportional to the Drude relaxation time τ , or equivalently to the normal state conductivity. reservoir T 2 system T 1 Q wall κ FIG. We consider the situation shown in Fig. We put it in thermal contact with a heat reservoir at temperature T 2 < T 1 through a wall with thermal conductivity κ. Heat will flow and eventually the system will reach temperature T 2 and be in thermal equilibrium with the heat reservoir. We assume the entire assembly is thermally and mechanically insulated from its environment. The magnetic field originates in external permanent magnets, no work is performed on those magnets during the process. We also assume the process is sufficiently slow that no electromagnetic radiation is generated. Under these conditions, the initial and final states of BOTH the system AND the reservoir are uniquely determined. Given the initial and final states, we can compute various thermodynamic quantities. The total heat Q transferred from the system to the reservoir during the process is where C(T ) is the equilibrium heat capacity of our system. The change in entropy of the system in this process is and is of course negative since T 2 < T 1 . The change in entropy of the universe in this process is and is of course positive since we are dealing with an irreversible process, heat conduction between systems at different temperatures. The quantities Q and ∆S univ depend only on the initial and final states of the process, not on the speed at which the process happens. The Joule heat Q J and associated entropy S J discussed in the previous section depend on the speed of the process, which will depend principally on the thermal conductivity of the heat conductor, κ, connecting the system and the heat reservoir. It would appear that the existence of Joule heat violates both the first and second law of thermodynamics. In the next section we will show that even if it may be possible to 'save' the first law by some contrived assumption, the second law is necessarily violated. Let us consider a small step in the process, starting with the system at temperature T , where the system supplies heat ∆Q to the reservoir which is at temperature T 2 < T -∆T . The system will change its temperature from T to T -∆T . Assume we connect and disconnect the thermal connection between system and reservoir at the beginning and the end of this step, and wait at the end until equilibrium has been attained. Consider two different ways to do this step: (a) Infinitely slowly (b) In a finite amount of time, ∆t. According to the previous discussion, for (b) finite Joule heat will be generated in the system during this process. First, let's realize that the change in temperature of the system, ∆T , has to be the same for (a) and (b). The reason is, the energy transferred to the reservoir was ∆Q for both (a) and (b), and the final state and hence final temperature of the system is uniquely determined by its energy, which is the same for (a) and (b), namely (initial energy -∆Q). Note also that the energy in the electromagnetic field is also the same in the final state of processes (a) and (b). We discuss the electromagnetic field in detail elsewhere For process (a), we have where C(T ) is the equilibrium heat capacity of the system. For process (b), assume Joule heat ∆Q J is generated. If we were to assume that the heat capacity of the system is still given by C(T ), it would be impossible for the system to reach the same final temperature T -∆T upon transferring energy ∆Q to the reservoir, instead it would reach final temperature T -∆T ′ , with But, as argued in the above paragraph, the system reaches the same temperature T -∆T in processes (a) and (b). Or alternatively, if the heat capacity doesn't change and the system in process (b) changes its temperature by the same amount ∆T as in process (a), it would have to transfer a different amount of heat to the reservoir instead of ∆Q, again in contradiction with the assumptions. So let us instead assume that the heat capacity of the system is different than the equilibrium one when the process occurs at a finite rate and involves Joule heat, let's call it C r (T ) < C(T ). We will then have for process (b) transferred from the system to the reservoir, the same as in process (a), with the same change in temperature of the system. So under this assumption the first law of thermodynamics is not violated, energy is conserved. However, let's consider the change in entropy of the universe. In process (a) it is In process (b), Joule heat ∆Q J is generated. Quantitatively, we obtain from Eqs. ( and ∆Q J = (∂W/∂t)dt is given, using that by with and V = πR 2 h is the volume of the cylinder, d the thickness of the wall connecting the reservoir and system and A its area, and σ n as given by Eq. ( Note that ∆Q J and hence ∆S J is O(∆T ) and not O((∆T ) 2 ). Second, the transfer of the heat ∆Q from the system to the reservoir generates at least as much entropy as given by eq. ( ∆Q out of the system lowers its entropy by -∆Q/T or less, by Clausius inequality, if the process takes a finite time. Therefore, the change in entropy of the universe in process (b) is univ . (24) However, entropy is a function of state. Therefore, the second law of thermodynamics is violated by Eq. ( The time the process actually takes for finite κ is finite, inversely proportional to κ and to T 1 -T . The Joule heat generated ∆Q J is given by Eq. ( will be generated by the decay of the normal current that is added to the entropy Eq. ( It has been suggested that one crucial flaw (1) in my argument may be the implicit assumption that the sample at intermediate times can be characterized by a uniform temperature T Regarding ( Let us consider the objection Still, let us assume that for some unknown reason this does not happen. Considering the heating process of Fig. To counter this argument, we may simply assume that the sample is not heated from the surface but from the interior. Assume the sample is a hollow cylinder, with no magnetic field in the interior nor in the hollow cavity, so that supercurrent only flows near the outer surface as before. The heat ∆Q is added through the inner surface, so there is no mechanism for the outer surface layer to heat up beyond the bulk before generating Joule heat. As the heat ∆Q is coming in, the London penetration depth will increase, with a corresponding change in magnetic flux and associated Faraday field generated, and the generated Joule heat ∆Q J will generate Joule entropy ∆Q J /T thus violating the second law. Regarding the suggestion (2) that assigning a welldefined temperature to the region where normal current is flowing may not be possible, we argue that even if so it does not eliminate the inconsistency. Particularly in the scenario described in the preceding paragraph. Furthermore one has to keep in mind that the thickness of the region where the current flows could even be a significant fraction of the volume of the system, at temperatures sufficiently close to T c and with sufficiently small magnetic fields, and if the thermal conductivity of the sample is large and the process not very fast there is no reason to assume that a large portion of the system would have an undefined temperature. Regarding the suggestion ( Regarding the suggestion (6) that the final state of the reservoir is not unique because the reservoir is an infinite system [8], the suggestion is also wrong and reveals a deep lack of understanding of thermodynamics. It is easy to see that in the scenario discuss in this paper the final state of the reservoir is unique whether the reservoir if infinite or finite. The system starts at temperature T 1 , the (finite) "reservoir" starts at temperature T 2 < T 1 , when they have reached thermal equilibrium they will both attain temperature T 3 , with T 2 < T 3 < T 1 . If the "reservoir is large, T 3 will be very close to T 2 , if not it will not, but it doesn't matter. The key point is that the value of T 3 cannot depend on whether Joule heat was generated or not, by conservation of energy. To prove this we just have to remember that energy is a function of state. The energy of the system at temperatures T 1 and T 3 are fixed, so are the energies of the "reservoir" at temperatures T 2 and T 3 . The "system plus "reservoir"" is the universe, there is nothing else. So by conservation of energy If, by having the process go at different speed, with different Joule heat generated, the system plus reservoir would attain an equilibrium temperature T 4 , we would have by conservation of energy Therefore combining ( hence from (29) If T 3 is not identical to T 4 , this equation ((30)) implies that either the system or the reservoir have a negative heat capacity. I.e. for example, if T 3 > T 4 and the left side of (30) is positive, the right side is positive hence E res (T 3 ) -E res (T 4 ) is negative, hence the 'reservoir' has negative heat capacity. But thermodynamic systems with negative heat capacity can't exist. Therefore, T 3 = T 4 . Therefore, the system plus the (finite) 'reservoir' have to reach a unique final equilibrium temperature, independent of how much Joule heat is generated in the process. Therefore, all the arguments in this paper apply to the system plus reservoir reaching a unique final temperature Referees of this paper and ref. I have not studied these issues for the case of magnetic systems, so I don't know for sure but strongly suspect that the same problem doesn't arise there. There are important differences between ferromagnetism and superconductivity. (i) There is hysteresis in ferromagnets, there is none in type I superconductors; (ii) The ferromagnetic transition is 2nd order, the superconducting one (type I in a magnetic field) is first order; (iii) The Clausius-Clapeyron equation applies to superconductors, not to ferromagnets. So the superconducting transition is more analogous to the water-ice or water-vapor transition than to the ferromagnetic transition; (iv) in magnetic systems there are necessarily other dissipation mechanisms at play: if a magnetic field is applied to a magnetic moment not parallel to the field, the magnetic moment will precess around the magnetic field direction, and its component along the field will not change, hence the magnetization will not change, unless there is a damping mechanism, which will generate entropy. So it is possible that the Joule heating from the Faraday field and this other dissipative mechanism combine to give a total change in entropy that depends only on initial and final states and not on the speed of the process. In this connection I would also like to quote from Fritz London's 1950 book on superconductivity Finally, in connection with the many comments I have received from referees pointing to the many successes of the conventional theory of superconductivity, I would simply like to point out that it is sufficient that there is one situation where the inconsistency pointed out in this paper clearly exists to validate our argument. Achilles' heel doesn't have to be more than a tiny fraction of the entire body area. The Faraday electric field is a consequence of Maxwell's equations and is unavoidable. The fact that electric fields in superconductors give rise to dissipation is well known from experiments with ac currents or electromagnetic waves incident on superconductors If the processes occurs always infinitely slowly, the Joule heat and associated entropy go to zero and the in-consistency is resolved. However, there is no mechanism to make these processes proceed infinitely slowly if κ is large. Furthermore, we know from experiments that superconductors in magnetic fields can be cooled or heated and reach equilibrium states at the new temperatures in finite time. Another way to resolve this inconsistency would be to assume that the final state depends on the process. Neither I nor (I suspect) anybody else is willing to go back to that notion, that was discarded in 1933. The contrary notion is an integral part of the conventional theory. I argue that the only other way to resolve this inconsistency is to assume that in the particular situation considered here, where the electric field arises from a change in temperature, the superconductor behaves differently than in other situations with electric fields, namely here no normal current is generated and no dissipation takes place. That is not predicted by the conventional theory where I is the total current, yielding where h is the height of the cylinder. Therefore, the total current I is independent of temperature. However, the Faraday electric field transfers momentum to the supercurrent, as well as to the body as a whole. In order for the current to stay the same, there has to be a mechanism for momentum transfer between electrons and the body as a whole. Within the conventional theory of superconductivity, the only way to transfer momentum between electrons and ions is through scattering processes involving normal electrons, the same processes that give rise to normal resistivity and Joule heat in the normal state The only way to transfer momentum between electrons and ions without dissipation other than infinitely slowly is if electrons have negative effective mass. If so, an external force acting on the electron gives rise to acceleration in opposite direction to the force because the difference in momentum is transferred to the body, without scattering processes and associated dissipation. This then implies that to resolve the inconsistency pointed out in this paper charge carriers in superconductors have to be holes 