We present a study of the first and second switches (SWs) with nearly identical switching current I SW in Bi 2 Sr 2 Ca 0.85 Y 0.15 Cu 2 O y intrinsic Josephson junctions (IJJs). In contrast to early studies where a large difference between I 1st SW and I 2nd SW was observed, a crossover temperature T cr to the quantum phase escapes for the 2nd SW is strongly reduced (∼2.8 K) and agrees with that for the 1st SW. This confirms that the anomalous enhancement of T 2nd cr , commonly observed in the IJJs with I 1st SW < I 2nd SW , originates from the phase running state after the 1st SW. Detailed analysis of the microwave-induced escapes strongly suggests that nonlinear bifurcated phenomena possibly occurs in IJJs. Macroscopic quantum tunneling (MQT) phenomena discovered in the intrinsic Josephson junctions (IJJs) of Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O y (Bi2212) superconductors 1) have attracted much interest for more than a decade because of the unusual properties on the MQT rate. However, the anomalous increase of T 2nd cr was found to be independent of the device structure of IJJs with different heat-transfer environment 7) and the order of phase switches, rate for the 1st to the 4th SWs suggested that the phase-running state in the resistive branches enhances the phase retrapping effects in the higher order SWs rather than the self-heating effects. An important fact leading to the above proposal is that the switching current I SW for the 1st SW often becomes smaller than that for the 2nd SW (I 1st SW < I 2nd SW ), because of the proximity effect of the normal-metal electrode in the mesa-type IJJs, In this paper, we present a comparative study of the 1st and 2nd SWs in stacked IJJs made of Bi 2 Sr 2 Ca 0.85 Y 0.15 Cu 2 O y , where I 1st SW and I 2nd SW are nearly identical. We confirm that an effective escape temperature T esc for the 2nd SW shows almost the same temperature dependence as that for the 1st SW, indicating that T cr for the 2nd SW is not enhanced but close to that for the 1st SW (∼2.8 K). This result sharply contrasts to the previous results for IJJs with I 1st SW ≪ I 2nd SW , strongly supporting that the anomalous enhancement of T 2nd cr is attributed to the influence of the phase-running state after the 1st SW. We also observe that the microwave-induced resonant escapes for both SWs manifest almost the same behaviors up to ∼15 K. The detailed analyses indicate that the decrease of the Josephson plasma frequency ω p with increasing the microwave power is stronger than that of ∆U, in contrast to the previous studies. Y-doped Bi2212 crystals were grown by the floating zone method and annealed in the same condition as the optimal doped Bi-2212. (nominally, 15%) decreases the carrier concentration to the underdoped region with the superconducting transition at ∼65 K. A stack of IJJs was fabricated in a narrow bridge by using FIB milling techniques. The values of I c0 for both SWs are 13.3 μA at 0.8 K, showing no temperature dependence up to 6 K. At temperatures above 8 K, I c0 for the 2nd SW slightly becomes larger than that for the 1st SW, presumably due to the above-mentioned slight differences between both SWs in P(I) and Γ(I). A critical current density j c0 is estimated as 736 A/cm 2 for both SWs at 0.8 K, which is roughly 1/5 ∼ 1/4 of the obtained values for the optimally doped Bi2212-IJJs. Such a strong suppression of j c0 by underdoping is also reported in the previous study of the interlayer tunneling spectroscopy with the mesa-type IJJs. The formation of ELQ in the MQT regime is often investigated by the double-peaked distribution of the switching current under microwave irradiation, since the microwave absorption due to single-or multi-photon process stimulates the phase escape from the excited energy levels. The left and right panels represent the 1st SW and the 2nd SW, respectively. First of all, we have an interest in the common results to both SWs. As the microwave power is increased at T = 1.7 K below T cr , the distribution of P(I) becomes double-peaked near P MW = -15 dBm (-13 dBm) for the 1st (2nd) SW. The applied microwave frequency corresponds to the fourphoton process (n = 4) for both SWs, assuming that the resonant peak is derived by the phase escape from the first excited state of ELQ. Rather it incidentally occurs by a large reduction of the switching current for the 1st SW. Thus, we deduce that a large reduction of the switching current observed at P MW ∼ -13 dBm is a sign of the resonant phase escape for the 2nd SW. This irradiation power is stronger than the power (∼ -15 dBm) for the 1st SW. Such a difference between both SWs can be successfully explained by the large reduction of the switching current occurring in the 1st SW, which keeps the phase-running state after the 1st SW going for a longer time. This generates the ac Josephson current giving a stronger oscillation in the washboard potential to describe the 2nd SW. Thus, the stronger irradiation power is needed to induce the resonant phenomena in the 2nd SW. We also performed the numerical fittings of P(I) and Γ(I) for both SWs under the microwave irradiation, by using the single-junction model used in the analyses without irradiation. In particular, we focus on the changes of ∆U(I) and the Josephson plasma frequency, ), where C (∼90 fF) is a capacitance for each junction in IJJs, as a function of microwave irradiation power. Figures In connection with this discrepancy, the energy level numbers within the potential wells, calculated by using the previous approach, Our results also imply that a similar bifurcated oscillation possibly occurs in the 2nd and higher order SWs for the IJJs with I 2nd SW ≫ I 1st SW , since the ac Josephson current generated in the phase running state plays a role similar to the microwave irradiation. This means that the nonlinear bifurcation possibly gives another answer to the anomalous enhancement of T cr in the 2nd and higher order SWs. Note that this interpretation is not obtained by the Josephson radiation, where its frequency is chirped upward with increasing voltages. The upchirp radiation does not seem to induce the nonlinear bifurcation suggested in this work, since it is usually observed by the down-chirp pulses in the conventional nonlinear systems. Thus, it is interesting to clarify which scenario between the nonlinear bifurcation or the chirped Josephson radiation explain the anomalous enhancement of T cr more successfully. We will discuss about this issue in another paper in the near future. In summary, we experimentally studied the 1st and 2nd SWs in the Y-doped Bi2212-IJJs, where I 1st SW and I 2nd SW were nearly identical. We confirm that the behaviors of T esc and I c0 observed for the 2nd SW are coincident with those for the 1st SW, which is contrast to the previous studies on Bi2212-IJJs with I 2nd SW larger than I 1st SW . From these contrasting results, we conclude that the anomalous enhancement of T cr for the 2nd and higher order SWs is essentially derived from the phase-running state after the phase switches. As a possible mechanism for such an enhancement, the effective reduction of ∆U for the 2nd SW, It also implies that a similar bifurcated oscillation can be induced by the ac Josephson current after the 1st SW. The nonlinear bifurcation effects provide an important viewpoint to understand the complicated phase dynamics in IJJs, including the comprehension of the anomalous enhancement of T cr for the 2nd and higher order SWs. We thank I. Kakeya for fruitful discussion. This work was partly supported by MEXT- 