We report on the synthesis and physical properties of FeSe 1-x Te x single crystals with a low Te content (x = 0.17, 0.21, 0.25), where the replacement of Se with Te partially suppresses superconductivity. Resistivity and Hall effect measurements indicate weak anomalies at elevated temperatures ascribed to nematic transitions. A quasi-classical analysis of transport data, including in a pulsed magnetic field of up to 25 T, confirms the inversion of majority carriers type from holes in FeSe to electrons in FeSe 1-x Te x at x > 0.17. The temperature-dependent term in the elastoresistance of the studied compositions has a negative sign, which means that for substituted FeSe compositions, the elastoresistance is positive for hole-doped materials and negative for electron-doped materials just like in semiconductors such as silicon and germanium. FeSe is one of the most intriguing compounds among iron-based superconductors (IBS), first of all because it undergoes a transition to the nematic phase at T s = 90K (structural transition from the tetragonal at ambient conditions to the orthorhombic low temperature phase) as well as to superconductivity at T c = 9K, and shows no evidence of a striped antiferromagnetic phase (AFM) Substitution of sulfur for selenium suppresses the low temperature nematic order in FeSe Here we present a method of the synthesis which allow to grow high quality single crystals of FeSe 1-x Te x with a low Te content, and discuss the properties of FeSe 1-x Te x crystals with x=0.17, 0.21, and 0.25 which shed light on the origin of the nematic state in the FeSe family. The paper is constructed as following. We start with the description of the sample preparation and its characterization. Then we discuss the magnetotransport data obtained on these crystals and present the data on their elastoresistivity. Finally, all the results are summarized in the Discussion and Conclusion sections. The tetragonal FeSe 1-δ phase coexists with a pure iron or a hexagonal Fe 7 Se 8 phase Summary of the studied FeSe 1-x Te x samples properties. The value of x L is the Te content in the FeSe 1-x Te x precursors load. The value of x EDS is the Te content in the crystals determined by an energy-dispersive spectroscopy. T c is the superconducting critical temperature determined from ρ xx (T ). The mematic transition critical temperature T N is determined from the temperature dependence of dρ xx /dT . The parameters a, c, and V are the lattice constants and cell volume respectively (for FeSe, this parameters are taken from Ref. The series of FeSe 1-x Te x single crystals was prepared using the AlCl 3 /KCl/NaCl eutectic mixture in evacuated quartz ampoules in a constant temperature gradient The chemical composition of the grown crystals was determined using a Tescan Vega II XMU scanning electron microscope equipped with an INCA Energy 450 energydispersive spectrometer; the accelerating voltage was 20 kV. The determination of the unit cell parameters was performed by an automatic procedure on a four-circle Oxford Diffraction Xcalibur diffractometer (graphite-monochromated Mo-Kα radiation, λ=0.71073 Å) equipped with an Xcalibur S-area detector. The exposure time varied from 4 to 8 sec depending on crystal size. For unit cell determination at least 4-5 crystals of a square plate-like morphology only were studied from each batch. The initial chemical composition of batches, chemical composition of crystals obtained and their crystallographic characteristics along with the properties of pure FeSe are listed in Table Quasiclassical multicarrier (three-band) analysis of the field dependencies of the conductivity tensor components is used to extract the carriers mobilities and concentrations. The details of the used analysis method are published elsewhere Figure Pure tetragonal crystals, suitable for further transport investigation, were found in three batches hereinafter referred to as the x = 0.17, x = 0.21, and x = 0.25 batches according to Te content in crystals. A detailed discussions of the quality of the obtained crystals, their superconducting properties and used method of extraction of the carriers band parameters are given in the supplementary materials. Here we present the results confirming the nematic transitions in the studied crystals and results of the quaisiclassical analysis of their electronic properties. Fig. The Fig. At temperatures T L = 70 K for x = 0.17 and T L = 60 K for x = 0.21 and x = 0.25 the Hall coefficients have kinks. With lowering of the temperature the Hall coefficients strongly increases in absolute values, suggesting a Lifshitz transition at these temperatures. The sign of the Hall coefficients indicates that new electron pockets emerge. Temperature dependence of the Hall coefficient for studied FeSe 1-x Te x crystals and for the reference FeSe crystal. The Fig. In the Fig. Thus, the temperature-dependent part of the elastoresistivity of the studied compositions can be described by the same type of dependence, which is usually used for FeSe. This leaves no doubt about the nematic nature of the FeSe 1-x Te x under study. To study the carriers properties in FeSe 1-x Te x we applied the quasiclassical multicarrier analysis to the experimental magnetotransport data. The experimental data and details of analysis we describe in supplementary materials section. The similar method reviled a strong increase of the carriers concentration in FeSe with sulfur substitution The mobility of the main carriers in FeSe 1-x Te x is substantionaly lower than in FeSe. This means that for the same accuracy in determining the parameters, significantly higher values of magnetic fields are required. To achieve the required accuracy, we carried out measurements of the magnetotransport properties of compositions with x = 0.17 in pulsed fields at low temperatures. The optimal relation between the induced noise and the field range value for the studied samples was reached at about 25 Tesla. The results of the multi-carrier analysis of the transport data in DC and pulsed magnetic fields are listed in Table The FeSe family exhibits many unusual features in the electronic properties The origin of the carrier-type inversion in FeSe family is not clear and needs further study. The angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) study of the strained FeSe films On the other hand the change in the electronic properties of bulk samples can be a simple consequence of the variation of the synthesis conditions. For example, the temperature of synthesis for FeSe 1-x Te x is normally much higher than for FeSe 1-x S x which can yield other type of structural defects. Regardless of the microscopic reasons, our study indicates that the synthesized FeSe 1-x Te x with low Te content are nematic compounds with opposite sign of majority carriers as compared to FeSe. The Fig. The study of the nematic properties of FeSe 1-x Te x compounds weth a low Te content provides new important experimental materials about elastoresistivity and other electronic properties of the iron-based superconductor, In addition to the main batches of samples, second series of FeSe 1-x Te x crystals was also prepared at the same temperature conditions by a gas transport method using AlCl 3 as a transport reagent At room temperature, X-ray unit cell determination of FeSe 1-x Te x samples with x = 0.17, 0.21, and 0.25 confirmed their belonging to the tetragonal modification. The values of lattice constants and volumes are close to those that were observed by Zhuang et al. for so-called phase B in thin films of FeSe 1-x Te x To prove the quality of the crystals, the study of magnetization was used. The crystals with hexagonal and tetragonal symmetries are different by their magnetic properties. While the hexagonal phase is magnetic, Magnetization was measured using a Quantum Design MPMS SQUID in a magnetic field of 10 Oe under zero-field cooled conditions and 10 kOe for the χ(T ) dependence in the temperature range 10-300 K. Magnetic measurements were performed for the samples consisting of several (10-20) crystals for each of the batches. The crystals ab planes were roughly ("by eye") oriented to be parallel to the direction of magnetic field. The temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility for crystals with tetragonal symmetry and the samples containing both crystals with tetragonal and hexagonal symmetry are presented in Fig. ??. The susceptibility of the samples containing the crystals with hexagonal symmetry is divided by 30 to show all details in one graph. The χ(T ) dependences for the samples with tetragonal only crystals are very similar to those of pure FeSe and Fe(SeS) compositions. They show a slow and almost linear increase over a wide temperature range. For these samples, the χ(T ) slope changes the sign at temperatures below 25 K which indicates the presence of paramagnetic impurities. It is more pronounced for the x = 0.17 sample where χ increases by approximately 1×10 -6 emu/g•Oe at 4 K. To provide the observed increase of χ(T ), the concentration of the free Fe ions (the most probable source of the magnetic moment in the supposed paramagnetic impurities) in this sample was estimated to be only 5×10 -4 mol -1 . This clearly indicates that the investigated crystals from x = 0.17, x = 0.21, and x = 0.25 batches are composed almost entirely of the tetragonal phases of FeSe 1-x Te x and have a negligible amount of magnetic impurities. The inset of Fig. We studied the transport properties only for those crystals whose quality was confirmed by magnetic measurements. Besides, for each of x = 0.17 and x = 0.21 batches three different crystals were measured to verify the homogeneity of the batches. Electrical measurements were done on cleaved samples with contacts made by sputtering of Au/Ti layers through a precisely machined mechanical mask which minimizes relative errors of xx and xy components of the measured resistivity tensor. The crystal sizes were carefully measured by an optical microscope to accurately determine the resistivity values. The Fig. ?? shows ρ xx (T ) dependencies around the superconducting transition temperature. The transitions are narrow and the difference in the values of T c for one batch is substantially less than the difference between batches. This again shows a good homogeneity of properties of crystals in batches. To further study the quality of crystals, we measured the field dependence of T c for a field oriented perpendicular and parallel to the surface of the plate-like sample but perpendicular to a current direction in both cases. For a polycrystalline sample, no significant difference is expected. For the samples studied, H C2 (T ) for H//c and H//ab differ significantly (see the inset in Fig. In the Fig. The Fig. For tetragonal crystals: where σ ij are the conductivity tensor components and ρ ij are the resistivity tensor components The conductivities of bands are additive, and within the relaxation-time approximation for an arbitrary number of bands, we can write: where i is the band index, e is the electron charge, σ i is the conductivity at B = 0, μ i is the mobility, n i is the carrier concentration, and l is the number of bands. To determine μ i and n i we minimize the residual φ: Results of the multicarrier analysis are listed in Table The Fig. Table Fit n h μ h n e1 μ e1 n e2 μ e2 φ (10 19 cm -3 ) (cm 2 /Vs) (10 19 cm -3 ) (cm 2 /Vs) (10 . Experimental data at 12 K and the simulation of the fitting results for σ xy (a) and σ xx (b). For DC data in field up to 7 T, the curve "a" is the best fit for FeSe 0.83 Te 0.17 sample , the curve "b" is the fit with an almost equal electron and hole concentrations in main bands, and the curve "c" is the fit with an almost equal electron and hole mobilities in main bands. The curve "d" is the best fit for FeSe 0.79 Te 0.21 sample,. Experimental data in pulse field and the best three-band fit for FeSe 0.83 Te .