Magnetic-responsive composites that consist of soft matrix embedded with hard-magnetic particles have recently been demonstrated as robust soft active materials for fast-transforming actuation. However, the deformation of the functional components commonly attains only a single actuation mode under external stimuli, which limits their capability of achieving tunable properties. To greatly enhance the versatility of soft active materials, we exploit a new class of programmable magnetic-responsive composites incorporated with a multifunctional joint design that allows asymmetric multimodal actuation under an external stimulation. We demonstrate that the proposed asymmetric multimodal actuation enables a plethora of novel applications ranging from the basic 1D/2D active structures with asymmetric shape-shifting to biomimetic crawling and swimming robots with efficient dynamic performance as well as 2D metamaterials with tunable properties. This new asymmetric multimodal actuation mechanism will open new avenues for the design of next-generation multifunctional soft robots, biomedical devices, and acoustic metamaterials. Recent rapid advances in stimuli-responsive materials has enabled new devices and structures with programmable properties and configurations at a wide range of length scales Under a switching magnetic field (from downward to upward), the actuation shows mirror symmetry. This has been used for interesting applications, such as providing propulsion force for soft robots The symmetry-breaking mechanisms could potentially bring new opportunities in designing multifunctional materials and structures. However, this is very challenging to achieve in smart materials, largely due to the material homogeneity and isotropy. To address this limitation, we propose a transformative mechanism for multimodal deformation that breaks the deformation symmetry through a mechanics-guided design of shifting the neutral axis in the material systems. Here, a symmetry-breaking concept is adopted to our new material system, which consists of two magnetic unit cells bonded by a soft thin film as either a symmetric joint (Figure Theoretical analysis of the asymmetric deformation. To investigate the behaviors of the asymmetric joint induced by a magnetic field applied perpendicular to the beam's programmed magnetization direction, we analytically calculate the deflections and strain energies (See Supplementary Information (SI) for details). Here, we define Gf, Gc, Tf, Tc to be the shear moduli and thicknesses of the film and the magnetic unit cell, L, W, Mc to be the length, width, and the magnetization of the magnetic unit cell, and B to be the applied magnetic field. By normalizing the deflection and the applied magnetic field as max and defining the modulus ratio and thickness ratio as =Gc/Gf and =Tc/Tf, the normalized deflections for bending and folding are ( ) Figure Tc/Tf increases, both bending and folding deflections increase, but the bending deflection reaches a plateau. This is because of the significantly increased bending stiffness of the magnetic unit cells. In general, when Tc/Tf > 2, folding exhibits larger deflection than bending, indicating a strong asymmetric deformation under the switching magnetic field with the same magnitude. To validate the theoretical calculations, FE simulations (see Figure ones are designed and fabricated as shown in Figure For the S-S-S combination (Figure Figure When the magnetic field is reversed to B = -10 mT (Figure The synergic effort of the folding and bending behaviors, coupled with the change of contact conditions with the substrate, generates synchronous actuations that allow the crawling motion. The translational strain per cycle, which is defined as the crawling distance δ divided by the total length of the system (60 mm), is measured to be 10%, under the peak magnetic field of 28 mT. shows an increase of the translational strain with the increase of the peak magnetic field. The measured (blue squares) and the simulated (black curve) single-cycle translational strains are in good agreement. Guided by Figure Furthermore, the asymmetric actuation can be used to achieve a dual-direction crawling robot. Here, a five-cell system (with a total length of 75mm) with a "+/-/-/+" asymmetric joint allocation is designed as illustrated in Figure As discussed above, the ability of asymmetric shape-shifting can be easily found in nature and has brought new opportunities in designing functional devices through the asymmetric thrusts illustrates the biomimetic swimming legs with an A-S-A joint combination and the programmed magnetizations. The symmetric joint connects two magnetic unit cells working as the muscles and two non-magnetic cells on the sides. When the magnetic field is in the positive direction, the joints are in folding mode, which has a relatively low water resistance due to the low bending stiffness provided by the film and the small area exposed along the moving direction. When the magnetic field is switched to the negative direction, the joints switch to the bending mode, which ensures a large area as well as a stiff bending mode that pushes the water with a large reaction force for effective propelling. By such a simple design, our biomimetic swimming robot achieves asymmetric water resistance and thus a net propulsion during a motion cycle. To ensure stability in the water, we use a "four-leg" design with eight unit cells (two cells for each leg), as To provide a quantitative comparison, we calculate the normalized displacement, defined as the actual displacement divided by the robot length (the maximum vertical extension, 15 mm), of both systems by measuring the robots' positions during multiple swimming cycles from Video S5. As shown in Figure In addition to swimming, more interesting motions like floating on the surface of the water and controlled sinking can be achieved, as shown in Figure By utilizing multimodal deformation, our untethered biomimetic swimming robot provides an effective propulsion mechanism and outperforms many existing swimming robots. Notably, our swimming robot reaches a large average velocity of 23 mm/s and 1.53 times body length/s, which is much faster compared with the existing untethered stimuli-responsive swimming robots (< 0.69 body length/s) where most reported swimming robots swim horizontally. Paired with the rational design of the multimodal deformation and the advanced control in 2D and 3D magnetic fields, we envision potential routes for developing biomimetic robots with complex yet controllable motions and the ability for completing multitasks at different length scales. Two-dimensional (2D) multimodal system. We now explore two 2D geometries with different joint combinations and allocations that lead to shape transformations and tailorable properties. We start with a square ring with the joint allocation and magnetizations illustrated in Figure Next, a different set of multimodal deformation is demonstrated by using a square ring with same overall dimensions and magnetizations, but a different joint allocation (Figure Under a negative magnetic field (Figure For the same "star" shape, the bending one (Figure As seen above, when we place square unit cells next to each other, the adjacent cells directly contact. This prevents the expansion of the whole system. To overcome this limit, another active metamaterial system is introduced by placing the same square unit cell at the interval of its own dimension (Figures In summary, the multimodal deformation of the magnetic-responsive soft materials is demonstrated through the introduction of the asymmetric joint, which breaks the intrinsic symmetry of the material system by shifting the neutral axis under directional actuations. The multimodal deformation is further harnessed by the design of soft robots with effective motion and demonstration of active metamaterials with tunable properties. While in this paper we focus on simple geometrical forms, the proposed concept of multimodal deformation can be transformed into a variety of complex 3D geometries by strategically assembling the basic structures. Empowered by the emerging 3D printing technology Fabrication of the basic material system: The basic material system consists of magnetic unit cells and soft thin films made from silicone rubbers. The magnetic unit cells were fabricated by mixing PDMS (Sylgard 184, DowCorning, Inc., Midland MI, USA, weight ratio of PDMS base and curing agent as 20:1) with NdFeB microparticles (Magnequench International, LLC) with a volume fraction of 20%. The mixture was then poured into a mold and cured in the oven at 70C for 30 minutes. The thin film was fabricated by spin-coating a layer of Ecoflex (Ecoflex TM 00-30, Smooth-On, Inc., Macungie, PA, USA) at 400 rpm for 20 s on top of the magnetic materials. The resultant thickness of the thin film was measured to be 0.3 mm. The whole system was cured again in the oven for 30 minutes at 70  C to ensure chemical crosslinking. The body of the biomimetic swimming robot was fabricated in a 3D-printed mold (Formlabs, Inc., Somerville MA, USA). The magnetic and nonmagnetic unit cells were fabricated by using PDMS with a weight ratio of base and curing agent to be 15:1. For the magnetic unit cells, NdFeB powder with a volume fraction of 3% was added to the mixture before curing. A layer of Ecoflex thin film was spin-coated under the rate of 450 rpm for 30 s, giving a measured thickness of 0.15 mm. The density of the whole robot was measured to be 1.17 g ml -1 . The shear moduli of the fabricated material parts were measured by using a universal material testing machine (Model 3340, Instron, Inc, Norwood, MA, USA). The samples were uniaxially stretched at a low strain rate 0.01s -1 . The moduli were obtained by fitting the measured stress-stretch curves by the neo-Hookean model (see Figure Finite element simulation: To predict the magnetic-actuated deformation of the hard-magnetic soft active material, a user-defined 8-noded element subroutine (UEL) was implemented through the commercial software ABAQUS 2018 (Dassault Systèmes, France) The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: xxx. Additional data, figures including: Analytical solution for bending and folding behavior of asymmetric and symmetric joints, calculation of the effective stiffness of the magnetic-actuated metamaterial, Simulations of a two-layer composite beam bending, Image of the single-axis