A novel scheme for tunable optofluidic optical coupler is proposed, by using directional coupling waveguide structure and microfluidic channel with two tapers at end points. The normalized optical power at two output ports can be dynamically manipulated by controlling the refractive index of liquid mixture in microfluidic channel. The optical performance of the designed device is numerically investigated by employing the beam propagation method (BPM). The simulated results demonstrate that large dynamic range and low optical loss for both TE and TM mode can be easily achieved, and furthermore the dependence of polarization states and operation wavelength is very low in our designed device. In addition, the tunable optofluidic coupler has advantages including simple structure and large fabrication tolerance. Accordingly, our proposed device offers a new approach for manipulation of optical power output, which has wide potential application in optofluidic systems. Optofluidics, called as the marriage of photonics and microfluidics, is a rapidly developing research field, and has attracted increasing attention in recent years The optical coupler is an important optical component, which is widely used in photonic integrated systems as optical function devices, including optical switch, optical modulator, optical router. For these reported devices, the desired optical functions have been achieved, by generally using electro-optical effect, or thermo-optical effect etc. However, these optical couplers are inappropriate for application in optofluidic systems. Therefore, it is very essential to exploit the tunable optofluidic coupler used in optofluidic systems. In the past several years, some approaches for optofluidic couplers have been demonstrated. In 2012, Marius Vieweg et al. presented a tunable optofluidic optical coupler based on Kerr nonlinearity effect and thermo-optics effect by using photonic crystal fiber filled with liquid CCl4, which has advantages such as rapid tunability speed and large dynamic range In this work, we propose a novel scheme for tunable optofluidic optical coupler, in which the directional coupling waveguide structures are employed, and microfluidic channel with two tapers at end points is introduced. The liquid mixture with controllable refractive index is injected into the microfluidic channel, used as a part of the upper cladding of waveguide at modulation region. The optical power output can be dynamically changed by controlling the refractive index of the liquid mixture. Through numerical simulation, the proposed device exhibits excellent optical performance, which includes large dynamic range, low optical loss, low dependence of operation wavelength and polarization state, so it is strongly preferred in optofluidic systems. Consequently, we believe that the optofluidic optical coupler has wide potential application in optofluidic systems. For instance, it could be used as refractive index sensor, optical attenuator, optical power splitter in optofluidic platform. The schematic structure of tunable optofluidic optical coupler is depicted in Fig. The designed configuration includes the waveguide structure and microfluidic channel structure. For the former, it consists of one input port and two output ports, in which the straight waveguide and bending waveguide are together employed in this configuration. In this structure, the waveguide structures are composed of top cladding, the core and the bottom cladding, whose refractive indices are n1, n2 and n3, respectively. Correspondingly, the slab height, rib height and the core width are denoted by d, h and w, respectively. At the coupling region, the two waveguides are parallel, and their gap width is equal to g. For the proposed device, the microfluidic channel with taper shape at two end points are introduced to be filled with liquid mixture as the top cladding, whose refractive index can be adjusted by manipulating the concentration of liquid mixture. The operation mechanism of the proposed device is given in the following. The liquid mixture with controllable refractive index is injected at input port Q1 by using syring actuated by pump, and then it flows across the microfluidic channel. Afterwards, the liquid flows out at the output Q2. Seen from Fig. (1), the liquid mixture at coupling region is employed as its upper cladding. The optical signal is coupled into waveguide input by using tapered lens fiber, and it propagates forward along waveguide. At the coupling region, the coupling mechanism is based on evanescent field coupling in our designed configuration, and its coupling efficiency is commonly determined by structure parameters and the refractive index profile. As a result, the optical power at two output ports A and B can be dynamically manipulated by changing the refractive index of the liquid mixture. As is well known, the liquid generally has high tunability of refractive index by controlling the concentration or temperature of liquid mixture. In our layout, the proposed optofluidic coupler has potential for achieving the large dynamic range of optical splitting ratio. As mentioned above, the dynamic range of optical splitting ratio is a crucial parameter used for evaluating the optical performance of the optofluidic optical coupler. For TE and TM mode input, the dynamic ranges are defined below, respectively, where Max and Min stand for the maximal and minimum value in the bracket, respectively. Here, R and R denote optical splitting ratio for TE and TM mode input, respectively, which are given as follows, where P and P are the optical power of TE mode at output ports A and B, respectively, and P and P represent its optical power of TM mode at output ports A and B, respectively. In addition, its optical excess loss for TE and TM modes is written as, L = -10 log(P + P ) /P ], L = -10 log(P + P ) /P ], where in TE P and in TM P indicate the optical power of TE and TM mode input, respectively. Seen from Fig. In numerical simulation, the operation wavelength is assumed to be 1550nm. The polymer materials UV-15, SU-8 and PMMA are chosen as the bottom cladding, the core and the top cladding of waveguide structure, respectively, whose refractive indices are 1.500, 1.575 and 1.492, respectively. For simplicity, the refractive index of the liquid varies from 1.490 to 1.535, by controlling the concentration of liquid mixture. The related other parameters are given as follows. The waveguide width, slab thickness and rib height are 5.0 μm, 0.9 μm and 0.7 μm, respectively. At the coupling region, the gap width is 3.0 μm, and coupling length is 640μm. For TE mode input, the effective refractive indices in the gray and black region are 1.5438 and 1.5256, respectively. For TM mode input, however, the effective refractive indices in the gray and black region are 1.5423 and 1.5234, respectively. The liquid mixture, which is injected into the microfluidic channel, acts as the upper cladding of waveguide structure in the coupling region, and its refractive index can be controlled by manipulating its concentration of liquid mixture. Fig. Broadly speaking, spectrum width of laser source is about several to several decade nanometers. In the following, the optical performance dependence on operation wavelength is numerically investigated. In this case, the optical source is supposed to have spectrum width from 1500 nm to 1600 nm. It is worthy to be mentioned that the dispersion of refractive index of polymer materials and the liquids are generally weak in near infrared region. For example, the refractive index of PMMA changes from 1.49256 to 1.49237 in the wavelength scope from 1500 nm to 1600 nm. While the optical wavelength varies from 1500 nm to 1600 nm, normalized optical power at output port A and B, for the TE and TM mode, are given in Fig. In the fabrication process, there always exists fabrication error, which always has a negative effect on the optical performance of the proposed device. Here, the optical performance affected by fabrication error of waveguide width, gap distance, rib and slab thickness are numerically investigated in the following. In this case, the optical signal is assumed to be TE mode, since the polarization dependence is very weak. The refractive index of liquid mixture is supposed to be 1.510, and the other parameters are same to those in the Fig. In this work, a novel tunable optofluidic optical coupler has been proposed, by utilizing directional coupling waveguide structure, and microfluidic channel with two tapers at end point. The refractive index of liquid mixture in microfluidic channel can be controlled to achieve the tunability of optical power output. The simulated results indicate that our designed optofluidic coupler has excellent optical performance, which includes large dynamic range, low optical loss, and weak dependence of wavelength and polarization states. Additionally, the fabrication error effect on the optical performance has also been briefly analyzed, and the simulated results reveal that the device has a relatively large fabrication tolerance. Accordingly, our proposed device has potential for application in the integrated optofluidic system, which can be used as optofluidic functional device such as refractive index sensor or biophotonic sensor in optofluidic platform. 