Microwave photonic systems are compelling for their ability to process signals at high frequencies and over extremely wide bandwidths as a basis for next generation communication and radar technologies. However, many applications also require narrow-band (∼ MHz) filtering operations that are challenging to implement using optical filtering techniques, as this requires reliable integration of ultra-high quality factor (∼ 10 8 ) optical resonators. One way to address this challenge is to utilize long-lived acoustic resonances, taking advantage of their narrow-band frequency response to filter microwave signals. In this paper, we examine new strategies to harness a narrow-band acoustic response within a microwave-photonic signal processing platform through the use of light-sound coupling. Our signal processing scheme is based on a recently demonstrated photon-phonon emitter-receiver device, which transfers information between the optical and acoustic domains using Brillouin interactions, and produces narrow-band filtering of a microwave signal. To understand the best way to use this device technology, we study the properties of a microwave-photonic link using this filtering scheme. We theoretically analyze the noise characteristics of this microwave-photonic link, and explore the parameter space for the design and optimization of such systems. As we seek to utilize an ever-increasing portion of the electromagnetic spectrum for next generation communications and radar systems, microwave-photonic signal processing platforms show great promise for their ability to manipulate signals at high frequencies and over extremely wide bandwidths 1-3 . Rapid progress in the field of silicon photonics has also enabled the integration of high-speed modulators 4,5 , amplifiers 6-8 and detectors 9 with electronic and photonic circuitry Narrow-band filtering operations can also be realized by accessing long-lived acoustic phonons through stimulated Brillouin scattering (SBS), a nonlinear three-wave interaction that produces coupling between optical waves and GHz-frequency elastic waves. While Brillouin interactions have been used to implement an array of filtering and delay operations bandwidth, out-of-band rejection, and stop-band range Alternatively, Brillouin interactions can produce narrowband filtering without using an amplification process through use of a recently demonstrated photonic-phononic emitreceive (PPER) device design. Within this PPER device, the signal is converted to an acoustic wave that transfers information between two spatially distinct waveguides over a narrow spectral band. The transfer function of a PPER filter is synthesized by tailoring the acoustic-wave response to produce narrowband (3 MHz) multi-pole filters with high (70 dB) outof-band rejection In this paper, we present a systematic analysis of a microwave-photonic filter designed around a PPER device, and identify the key characteristics of the system that dictate the link performance. Our model of the system includes the effects of noise associated with the laser sources and optical detection, as well as excess noise produced by sponta-neous Brillouin scattering within the PPER device. Our analysis reveals that the spontaneous Brillouin scattering from thermally-populated acoustic phonons is the dominant noise source within the system over a range of operating conditions. Nevertheless, we show that this strategy holds the potential for high performance based on commercially available modulators and detector technologies. Furthermore, with the development of new electro-optic modulator technologies In what follows, we explore the properties of a narrow-band microwave photonic filter based on a PPER device of the type described above. Throughout this paper, we consider the operation of a PPER device within a microwave-photonic link of the type seen in the block diagram of Fig. We begin by describing how the input RF signal is shaped as it is converted between the microwave, optical, and acoustic domains when passing through the system depicted in Fig. Next, we outline the analytical form of the signal wave as it traverses the photonic filter, which allows us to identify key parameters of the system. At the microwave input, the input RF voltage with amplitude V in and frequency Ω modulates an optical carrier with power P (A) and optical frequency ω where V π is the half-wave voltage of the modulator. This field is then directed into waveguide A, where it drives a coherent acoustic field through forward Brillouin scattering showing a pure phase modulation of the optical tone. The modulation index is determined by the system and device parameters, given by where Γ is the acoustic dissipation rate, χ(Ω) is the frequency response of the acoustic resonance, and J 1 (•) denotes a Bessel function of first order, describing the power in the sidebands of the intensity modulated input field. G B is the Brillouin gain, a metric for the strength of the light-sound interaction, and L the length of the region where the Brillouin coupling takes place. The phase of this response is denoted φ = arg (χ), giving an overall phase shift to the phase modulation, as seen in Eq. ( While numerous schemes can be used to demodulate this phase modulated signal where R out is the output impedance, H pd is the photodiode circuit efficiency The frequency response of the filter χ(Ω) is shaped by the acoustic resonances taking part in the signal transduction, and can be tailored through the geometry of the device and acoustic mode engineering This multi-pole response exhibits a sharp frequency roll-off, resulting in high out-of-band rejection, as demonstrated in Fig. A PPER device utilizes the optical, acoustic and RF domains to implement filtering. Hence, for a full description of the device properties, noise sources from all the different domains need to be considered. Following the standard convention in RF photonics This formulation captures noise contributions from the optical, microwave, and acoustic domains. The first term in Eq. ( The last term in Eq. ( where T is the temperature, k B the Boltzmann constant, and χ N (Ω) the frequency spectrum of the spontaneous Brillouin scattering. For a single acoustic mode, the spontaneous scattering follows a Lorentzian lineshape When analyzing high-order filters, all of the acoustic modes taking part in the filtering process contribute to the spontaneous scattering ), which exhibits a modified frequency response as a result of the two resonances, but decays as a single pole Lorentzian away from the pass-band. While spontaneous Brillouin scattering does occur in the emit waveguide, it does not degrade the signal-to-noise of the system. This is because only intensity modulated light fields contribute to the coherent transduction of information, while the spontaneous scattering results only in phase modulation, independent of the driving field in the emit waveguide. As illustrated in Fig. Analyzing the performance metrics of a RF-photonic link is important for practical deployment and interfacing it with other components in a microwave system. In order to calculate useful RF link properties, we start by looking at the linear small-signal gain of the PPER filter. We express the output RF power in terms of the input RF power P RF in = V 2 in /(2R in ) where R in is the input impedance of the intensity modulator. Eq. ( Next, we analyze the noise floor of the RF link, assuming the thermal phonon noise is the dominant noise source. We use Eqs. ( To assess the non-linearity of the device, we first calculate the 1 dB compression point, i.e. the RF input power at which the output power is 1 dB lower than the linear response predicts. Setting the ratio between Eqs. ( and the linear dynamic range, defined as CDR 1dB = gP 1dB in /P N and illustrated visually in Fig. In this calculation we have assumed that the compression is a result of the intensity modulator at the link input, consistent with parameters of recently demonstrated devices. A similar expression can be derived for the distortion resulting from the Brillouin process in the case of high nonlinear gain. Another important measure of the performance of an RF filter is the third-order intercept point, denoting the power at which the linear signal is equal to the third-order spurious tone 0 L, where the Bessel function is of order three as we are now interested in the third harmonic. Plugging into Eq. ( To find the third-order intercept point, we equate Eqs. ( and plugging back into Eq. ( We can now calculate the spurious free dynamic range, describing the range of RF power between the minimum detectable signal, up to appearance of the third-order spur, and given by SFDR 3 = (OIP 3 /P N ) 2/3 . Using Eqs. ( showing higher dynamic range with higher optical power, device length and Brillouin gain. We also look at the signal to noise ratio (SNR) for a given RF input signal with power which can be improved by using a low V π modulator as well as high optical power. An important metric for an RF link is the noise figure, quantifying the noise added by the RF link to an input signal, by analyzing the ratio of the input to output SNR, F = SNR in /SNR out . Using the result from Eq. ( Analyzing a two-pole filter, with the frequency responses of signal (χ In this work, we analyzed an RF-photonic link which utilizes a Brillouin-active PPER device, and show how this system can be used to implement an RF bandpass filter. In our analysis, we have described the output RF signal in terms of the optical, RF and acoustic parameters of the system. The fact that the RF link can be tailored through optical power, material properties, device geometry, as well the intensity modulator and photo-diode parameters, enables design flexibility and lends itself to multiple practical system schemes. The PPER device in the heart of this RF-photonic link provides the acousto-optic interaction that enables the RF-link to achieve narrow-band filtering, and directly affects the link performance. For example, designing PPER devices with a lower acoustic dissipation rate can yield sub-MHz filter lineshapes. Further improvements to the link performance can be achieved through mode-engineering of the optical waveguides, resulting in stronger Brillouin-gain, as well as designing devices which can support higher optical power. The ability to design a multi-pole frequency response using a PPER device, yielding out-of-band rejection of 70 dB Analyzing the noise sources of a PPER-based RF link, we have seen that the dominant noise is the result of thermally excited phonons, when operating at room temperature. Hence, limiting the thermal occupation of the acoustic modes by working in cryogenic temperatures or using higher frequency acoustic modes, will improve system performance. The separation of the emit and receive waveguides gives the flexibility of enhancing the link gain without adding noise to the link, resulting in a lower noise figure and larger dynamic range. This can be achieved by tailoring the properties of the emit waveg-uide, increasing the Brillouin coupling rate, launching higher optical power, or increasing the interaction length by designing longer devices or utilizing resonant structures Since the dynamic range of this system is limited by distortion originating from the electro-optic modulator response, significant enhancement of the spur-free dynamic range can be possible with the availability of linearized intensity modulators This new type of RF-photonic link offers a variety of strategies for trimming and tuning of the bandpass frequency, and can be used in multiple frequency multiplexing schemes. The resonant frequency of the PPER can be tuned through the geometry of the device, as it sets the boundary conditions for the a. An RF signal is modulated on an optical carrier (blue) and combined with a second optical tone (purple). By tuning the optical wavelength, the filter passband is shifted, as the acoustic resonance (green) overlaps with different spectral bands of the modulated RF information. b. Cascading multiple filters in series allows to filter different frequency bands simultaneously, without the need to split the signal and with no signal degradation. c. Cascading multiple PPER devices with different resonant frequencies can be used as an on-chip sensor. A swept source allows spatial resolution of the different segments, enabling distributed sensing on chip. acoustic modes taking part in the signal transduction Another intriguing property of the PPER RF-filtering scheme is the ability to cascade multiple filters in series without degrading the RF signal modulated on the optical field. The phonon field generated in the device phase-modulates the emit optical field as it propagates in waveguide A, but does not affect the intensity modulation that encodes the input RF signal, as discussed in Appendix A. Hence, the field coming out of waveguide A has an identical intensity modulation profile as the input field and will drive another PPER filter cascaded in the system exactly in the same manner An alternative cascading scheme is illustrated in Fig. In this scenario, a single optical receive tone propagates through multiple cascaded PPER segments, while an RF signal generator performs a frequency sweep through the range of acoustic frequencies. By designing the geometry of each PPER segment to have a different resonant frequency, the swept RF source at the input will result in multiple peaks measured on an RF spectrum analyzer, corresponding to the different segments. The high-Q acoustic resonances, combined with the high SNR of the PPER scheme, make this an ideal candidate for on-chip sensing applications. Brillouin scattering is widely used in fiber-optic sensors, as external perturbations such as strain and temperature result in a measurable change of the acoustic resonance While these recent demonstrations of single-and multi-pole devices were implemented in suspended silicon waveguides, the PPER concept can be realized in other systems where distinct optical fields are coupled to mutual acoustic resonances. Potential systems include multi-core fiber We analyze the case where the input into waveguide A is an optical carrier at frequency ω or alternatively, using the Jacobi-Anger expansion can be expressed as (A2) Since the field is comprised of an array of optical tones spaced apart by frequency Ω, we write the amplitude of each tone as a and assuming a CW input into waveguide B, we have The equations of motion of the optical and acoustic field amplitudes propagating through a PPER device can by described by where b describes the acoustic field with a resonant frequency Ω 0 and dissipation rate Γ, and v is the optical group velocity assumed equal in both waveguides A and B, and constant over the bandwidth in which optical scattering occurs. We neglect optical loss in the waveguides, and the fluctuations associated with the loss of the acoustic mode will be treated in Section C. and plugging this expression back into Eqs. (A5) and (A6) yields A9) for each of the waveguides A and B, where χ = [i(Ω 0 -Ω) + Γ/2] -1 , and φ = arg (χ). In terms of Brillouin gain and optical power we can express this as where the Brillouin gain corresponds to small-signal amplification such that ∂ z P sig (z) = G B P p P sig (z). The gain has units of (Power×Length) -1 , and can be expressed in terms of the coupling rate as The recurrence relation obtained in Eq. (A10) is consistent with a modified Bessel function following I n = 1 2 (I n-1 + I n+1 ), such that the optical fields can be written as a linear combination a n (z) = e iφ n ∑ m c n,m I m i (Γ/2) |χ| G B P (A) J 1 (πV in /V π ) z . We can find the coefficients c n,m by using the identity I m (0) = δ m,0 , such that c n,m = a n-m (0)e -iφ (n-m) , and by using the relation I m (x) = i -m J m (ix) we have for both waveguides A and B, where We can now plug in the initial conditions from Eq. (A4) to calculate the field in waveguide B The power of the different optical tones in the two waveguides as a function of β in , following Eq. (A11) and the initial conditions for each waveguide is shown in Fig. -i ω (B) 0 +nΩ t , and using the Jacobi-Anger expansion, ∑ n i n J n (z)e ixn = e iz cos x , we can rewrite the field in waveguide B as revealing the phase modulation that the tone in waveguide B experiences as it propagates through the device, discussed further in Ref. Summing all the mode amplitudes, E (A) out (t) = hω and by using Eq. (A2), this can also be written as showing that the input undergoes pure phase-modulation. Calculating the beat-note at frequency Ω reveals that it is unchanged as the field propagates in waveguide A, i.e. Appendix B: Balanced-detection demodulation The information in the form of phase modulation of the light at the output of waveguide B needs to be demodulated back into the RF domain. We assume a phase demodulator consisting of a Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI), illustrated schematically in Fig. which are each directed at a detector, as illustrated in Fig. and plugging in the output field from the device, obtained in Eq. (A13), yields where we are using the notation Using trigonometric and Bessel function properties, this can be rewritten as We can isolate the term oscillating at frequency Ω by keeping only the n = ±1 terms in the sum and using the Bessel function property 1 (x) = -J -1 (x), giving us which can also be expressed as We will assume the MZI is operating at quadrature, such that ω 0 τ = π(m + 1/2) for an integer m. The RF power at frequency Ω is now given by where we have used P RF out = I 2 Ω R out |H pd | 2 , and R out , H pd denote the output impedance and the photodiode circuit efficiency, respectively Appendix C: Balanced-detection thermal-phonon noise When an optical tone propagates through a Brillouin-active region, the thermally occupied phonon population results in light scattering to sidebands spaced Ω 0 around the optical frequency ω 0 where the amplitudes a -1 and a 1 are the sidebands generated by the spontaneous scattering, given by where η(z,t) is the Langevin force corresponding to the phonon dissipation, such that η(z,t) = 0 and η † (z,t)η(z ,t ) = nth Γδ (zz )δ (tt ), where nth is the mean thermal phonon occupation number. At room temperature, when nth 1, this thermal occupation can be approximated using nth ≈ (k B T )/(hΩ 0 ). For the MZI balanced-detection scheme described earlier, we can calculate the photo-current by plugging Eqs. (C1) and (C2) into Eq. (B3). The noise power spectral density can then be calculated using the Wiener-Khinchin theorem, , and keeping terms oscillating around frequency Ω 0 yields where we have assumed the MZI is operating at quadrature, such that e -2iω 0 τ = -1. We now set the time delay for maximum transmission on resonance, such that Ω 0 τ/2 = π(m + 1/2), yielding For a narrow RF bandwidth B RF centered around Ω, the integrated power will be where B RF is in units of Hz, and we have re-written the power as a single-sideband spectrum. We describe another demodulation scheme, where the first sideband of the phase modulated output at frequency ω (B) 0 -Ω is optically filtered to turn the phase fluctuations into an intensity signal that can be detected using a single photodetector. This scheme was implemented in Ref. 0 +nΩ t , and directing the output light to a photodiode will result in a photo-current I = η|E The RF output average power at frequency Ω, given by where again H pd is the photodiode circuit efficiency and R out the output impedance Assuming the input intensity modulator is in the smallsignal linear regime, we can linearize the Bessel function in β in to first order β in ≈ (Γ/4) |χ| (πV in /V π ) G B P (A) L, and drop the second-order Bessel function, yielding Sideband filtering demodulation thermal-phonon noise After filtering out one of the sidebands in the demodulation process, the field describing the spontaneous scattered light (Eq. C1) has only one sideband E out (t) = hω 0 v a 0 e -iω 0 t + a 1 e -i(ω 0 +Ω 0 )t . and integrating a narrow bandwidth B RF around frequency Ω, the single-sideband power spectral density is In terms of RIN which is four times lower than the balanced detection result shown earlier in Eq. 7. The filtering of the optical sideband turns the phase fluctuations into intensity, resulting in the laser phase noise being converted into intensity noise, with a RIN given by where B is the bandwidth of the optical filter used to reject one of the sidebands, and γ is the laser linewidth resulting from its phase fluctuations. As with the MZI demodulation case, using typical values, the thermal phonon scattering contribution is still the dominant noise source In the small-signal limit we can expand the Bessel functions to first order, J 0 (x) ≈ 1, J 1 (x) ≈ x/2. Writing in terms of input RF average power 37 P RF in = V 2 in / (2R in ), where R in is the input impedance, yields (D10) We observe that the RF link gain g = P RF out /P RF in is four times smaller than obtained by the interferometric demodulation approach described in the previous sections, shown in Eq. ( Next, we calculate the 1 dB compression point, i.e. the input RF power at which the output is 1 dB lower than the linearized response. Setting the ratio between Eqs. (D3) and (D10) to 1 dB, we solve numerically to find the input power where the output is compressed by 1 dB, yielding We now calculate the third-order intercept point In this case we have β 3Ω/3 in = (Γ/2) |χ| J 3 (πV in /V π ) G B P (A) 0 L, and plugging into Eq. (D2), expanding the Bessel functions to first order yields (D12) Expanding J 3 (πV in /V π ) to the first non-vanishing order, J 3 (x) ≈ x 3 /48, leaves us with To find the third-order intercept point, we equate Eqs. (D10) and (D13), and solve for the input RF power, giving the input intercept point (IIP 3 ) As we have shown, the signal and the noise both change by the same factor using the alternate demodulation scheme, and the noise figure and spur-free dynamic range will not change. However, different demodulation schemes may have different signal compression, yielding a difference in the linear dynamic range.