In this manuscript we introduce cubic bubbles that are pinned to 3D printed millimetric frames immersed in water. Cubic bubbles are more stable over time and space than standard spherical bubbles, while still allowing large oscillations of their faces. We found that each face can be described as a harmonic oscillator coupled to the other ones. These resonators are coupled by the gas inside the cube but also by acoustic interactions in the liquid. We provide an analytical model and 3D numerical simulations predicting the resonance with a very good agreement. Acoustically, cubic bubbles prove to be good monopole sub-wavelength emitters, with non-emissive secondary surfaces modes. Introduction.-Spherical air bubbles in water are known to be excellent acoustic resonators If large vibration amplitudes are possible in water, the experimentalist is quickly facing two important issues with spherical bubbles in water. First their stability in space is not insured because of buoyancy Here we would like to introduce cubic bubbles, designed in order to overcome the issues of stability in position and in size, while still performing large amplitude of vibrations. Our approach is to pin the bubbles within 3D printed frames, resulting in bubbles with flat faces, and therefore no capillary overpressure. Methods.-The 3D printed frames are crafted in photoresist polymer with a stereolithographic technology (Kudo3D, 50 μm in horizontal resolution and 100 μm in vertical resolution). We chose the simplest shape for these frames: a cube (Fig. and looking for the frequency f = f res such that | Â(f )| is maximal (inset of Fig. Stability.-Having designed cubes with different lengths, we found that air bubbles are trapped if the opening length does not exceed 2a max = 2.1 mm. Above this length, water enters the frame. This is simply explained by the fact that at larger lengths the hydrostatic pressure induced by gravity overcomes surface tension σ preventing water from entering. The cross-over occurs for a size of the order of the capillary length l c = (σ/ρ l g) 1/2 2.7 mm, which is indeed in the millimetric range of our observations. Because the interfaces are pinned to the exterior of the edges after immersion (Fig. A crude model can be made assuming the volume of gas (inner space calculated using the cube dimensions V g = (2a) 3 + 6(2a) 2 e) can be reshaped into an equivalent sphere of radius R eq given by V g = 4πR 3 eq /3. The Minnaert formula for resonance of spherical bubble Here our goal is to present an analytical model that fully takes into account the geometry dictated by cube edges. Such a model should predict the effect of varying the number of open faces. We will present also numerical calculation of the propagation of sound through this complex geometry, to consolidate our analytical predictions. We will see that the presence of the cubic frame modifies the frequency, and it is therefore not just a matter of volume of gas. Model for a cubic bubble: 6 coupled oscillators.-Each of the 6 interfaces can be modeled as an individual oscillator, with a mass m and stiffness k. For this purpose we describe the displacement of interfaces monitored by the displacement at the center of the interface ξ i (see Fig. According to A single interface is therefore a mass-spring system with a resonance frequency (k g /m) 1/2 /2π. To verify this prediction, we designed a variation of our cubic bubble adding solid walls instead of the openings, resulting in N open faces with mobile interfaces and 6 -N walls. We find there is a very good agreement between this prediction and the experiment with only one open face (N = 1, first point of the curve in Fig. We found that these oscillators excited by the incoming acoustic pressure P ac are actually coupled through the gas and the liquid. The couplings are: • a gas coupling, because when other faces j also move they compress the common volume of gas, each face changing the gas pressure by -k g ξ j /πa 2 ; • an acoustic coupling through liquid, because other faces generate an oscillating flux Q = πa 2 ξj resulting in a monopolar acoustic pressure that decays with the distance to the center of the face r: P = ρ l Q/4πr = ρ l a 2 ξj /4r (near field limit), modi-fying the pressure on other openings. The size being small compared to the wavelength we neglect retardation effects, and retain the far-field monopolar expression. Overall, if we write the sum of forces acting on each interface labeled i (displacing the effective mass m), we obtain the following set of coupled harmonic oscillators (2) with P ac applied acoustic pressure and r ij the distance between the centers of faces i and j. Because of the rotational symmetry of faces on a cube, all faces are equivalent, leading to a distribution of the distances r ij between one face i and the five other ones independent of i. The last term on the right hand side of equation Eq. 2 is therefore independent of the face number i for N = 6 (with a restriction for N < 6 that we will discuss just below). Under the same applied pressure it is reasonable to consider that all faces oscillate with the same amplitude and phase: ξ i = ξ j . The previous equation becomes that of simple harmonic oscillator with an effective mass and an effective stiffness since all oscillators compress the same gas volume, demultiplying the resulting overpressure. On a cube geometry the distances between the centers of adjacent faces is r ij = √ 2(a + e). Since wave travel in the liquid, we found it more appropriate to take the shortest path in liquid, that is r ij = 2(a + e). If only N faces are opened (chosen to be adjacent) it is straightforward to find by geometry that a good approximation of Eq. 3 is m eff = m + (N -1)∆m with ∆m = πρ l a 3 a 8(a+e) . This approximation is exact when N = 1, 2, 3 adjacent faces and a slight deviation occurs when N = 4, 5, 6 because of the presence of an opposite face distant from r ij = 4(a + e) in terms of liquid path. Note that strictly speaking this opposite face breaks the rotational symmetry for N = 4, 5, since not all faces have the same coupling terms (depending in r ij ) to the other ones, and the single oscillator model is not valid anymore. The resonance frequency of the coupled oscillators is (k eff /m eff ) 1/2 /2π and writes Note the gas volume is given by the inner volume plus the space in between the pillars V g = (2a) 3 + N (2a) 2 e. Equation 5 is the main prediction of this letter: it gives the resonance frequency (Fig. With this formula we can predict in addition the effect of a varying number of of open faces plotted on the experimental curve (Fig. The present arrangement with N = 6 provides a remarkable rotational symmetry that insures that all interfaces oscillators are equivalent (namely the system is symmetric when changing the face indices), contrary to a planar (or volumic) arrangement of monopole oscillators, since in the latter case oscillators on the edges are not equivalent to the ones in the center. Another difference with separate wells in a planar arrangement Monopole emission of a cubic bubble.-In order to specify the precise distribution of sound and verify the validity of our assumptions we conducted 3D numerical simulations of sound propagation through the cubic bubbles. The simulations were implemented with a finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) resolution of the elastodynamic equation for both fluid and solid structure, based on a freely available software developed in our group A side effect: capillary surface modes.-At much larger amplitudes of acoustic pressure, we observed resonant surface modes with nodes and antinodes across the square interface (see Fig. In order to reach such higher acoustic pressures we designed a specific set-up: a steel tank with glass windows (see Supplementary Fig. We interpret those modes as standing capillary waves. The modes are probably directly excited by the contact line on the edges, without any parametric instability. Note these modes are not emissive: there is no signature of them in the frequency spectrum from hydrophone recordings. Conclusion and perspectives.-We have shown that cubic bubbles are good candidates for the design of acoustic meta-materials: they are sub-wavelength resonators, with a good quality factor and an isotropic emission field close to the one of spherical bubbles. Furthermore they are easy to assemble in a large number using 3D stereolithography, allowing for stability in space and time. Because they have flat interfaces, there is no capillary over-pressure that would tend to speed up dissolution. Moreover there is no rectified diffusion under oscillations that would inflate the gas volume, as is the case with spherical bubbles As introduced briefly in the main text, we perfomed numerical simulations of ultrasound propagation through cubic bubbles via a finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) approach. The numerical scheme implemented in this work is based on a leap-frog finite-difference resolution of the elastodynamic equations as first proposed by Virieux in a seminal work in the field of geophysics 