We derive the effective single-band Hamiltonian in the flat NiO2 planes for nickelate compounds Nd1-xSrxNiO2. We first implement the first-principles calculation to study electronic structures of nickelates using the Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof hybrid density functional and derive a three-band Hubbard model for Ni-O pdσ bands of Ni + 3d x 2 -y 2 and O 2-2p x/y orbitals in the NiO2 planes. To obtain the effective one-band t-t -J model Hamiltonian, we perform the exact diagonalization of the three-band Hubbard model for the Ni5O16 cluster and map the low-energy spectra onto the effective one-band models. We find that the undoped NiO2 plane is a Hubbard Mott insulator, and the doped holes primarily locate on Ni sites. The physics of the NiO2 plane is a doped Mott insulator, described by the one-band t-t -J model with t = 265 meV, t = -21 meV and J = 28.6 meV. We also discuss the electronic structure for the "self-doping" effect and heavy fermion behavior of electron pockets of Nd 3+ 5d character in Nd1-xSrxNiO2. The layered high-temperature superconductors in copper oxides and iron pnictides have motivated the search for new superconductivity compounds with layered structures In this paper, we first implement the first-principles simulations to derive a three-band Hubbard model for Ni-O pdσ bands of Ni + 3d x 2 -y 2 and O 2-2p x/y orbitals in the NiO2 planes. Based on the three-band Hubbard model, we perform the exact diagonalization for the Ni 5 O 16 cluster and obtain the low-energy one-band effective Hamiltonian for the NiO 2 planes. We also discuss the electronic structure for the "selfdoping" effect and the heavy-fermion behavior of electron pockets of Nd 3+ 5d character in Nd 1-x Sr x NiO 2 . We present our main results in the two successive stages in Sec. II. We discuss the physics of the one-band t -J model in the NiO2 planes in Sec. III. In the Appendix, we present the results for La 1-x Sr x NiO 2 , implying the generic electronic structures of RNiO 2 series. We also include other supplementary results for Nd 1-x Sr x NiO 2 in the Appendix. The main results are summarized as follows. In Sec. II A, we first perform DFT calculations of Nd 1-x Sr x NiO 2 within the Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof (HSE) hybrid density functional. We notice that in the previous study of the nickelates RNiO 3 , the HSE hybrid functional method is essential to reproduce the experimentally observed magnetic ground state We performed first-principles calculations based on DFT We use the bulk lattice constants a = b = 3.9208 Å, c = 3.281 Å16 for Nd 1-x Sr x NiO 2 and didn't optimize the crystal structure during the DFT simulations. In this setup, the NiO 2 plane remains flat in the doped case Nd 0.75 Sr 0.25 NiO 2 . We didn't consider the lattice distortion effect upon doping in the doped nickelate oxides. tions and three-dimensional extended. The two electron pockets around Γ and A points of the Nd 5d orbital character have the Ni orbitals mixing. However, such mixing is not quickly resolved in Fig. The GGA band structure of NdNiO 2 in Appendix A is quite similar to the LDA band structure of LaNiO 2 6 , indicating a generic electronic structure in the RNiO 2 family. Compared with the GGA band structure (Appendix A), for the nonmagnetic state, the mixing of the exact exchange in the HSE06 hybrid functional separates the two bands crossing the Fermi energy E F away from other bands, without significant change of dispersions and relative positions of the bands far from E F . The separation of two bands can also be reproduced in the LDA+U results The magnetization measurement and neutron powder diffraction didn't reveal the long-magnetic order in LaNiO 2 and NdNiO 2 ; however, the paramagnetic susceptibilities imply the (at least short) spin correlations To demonstrate the correlation and magnetism in NdNiO 2 , we calculate the magnetic moment and compare the ground state with the non-magnetic one within different functionals (GGA, SCAN, and HSE06). To save computation time, we consider the ferromagnetic spin configuration in the primary unit cell. The results are list in TABLE Even though there is no long-range magnetic order, we still impose static magnetic configurations on Ni ions in Nd 1-x Sr x NiO 2 to mimic the spin correlations in the DFT simulations for electronic structures. We find the G-type AFM magnetic state has the lowest ground state energy within the GGA DFT simulations. Therefore, in the HSE06 simulations, we adopt the G-type AFM spin configurations on Ni using the √ 2 × √ 2 × 2 supercell to study the electronic structures of Nd 1-x Sr x NiO 2 (x = 0, 0.25). Therefore, the Brillouin zone is folded by the G-type AFM spin configuration. However, without any confusion, we still use notations, Γ, X, M, Z, R, A, for high symmetry k-points in the folded Brillouin zone. sults, the AFM magnetic configuration not only folds the band structure, but also dramatically change the bands near the Fermi energy E F , very different from the GGA result for the G-type AFM magnetic configuration in the Appendix A. The significant change of band structures in the AFM states between GGA and HSE06 implies strong correlations in Nd 1-x Sr x NiO 2 . In the G-type AFM state of NdNiO 2 (Fig. When one Sr 2+ ion substitutes Nd 3+ in NdNiO The Nd 5d xy band goes up above the Fermi energy level, and the band minimum locates 0.2 eV. We can expect that Nd 5d xy band contributes Hall coefficient at high temperatures at low dopings The presence of the electron pockets of Nd 5d bands suggests the "self-doping" effect, implying a small charge transfer from these pockets to the Ni-O sheets even without chemical doping. The "self-doping" effect also exists in the cuprate family, e.g., YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 and Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 where a kσ creates fermion with momentum k on the electron pockets and s i and S 4f i are the spin operators for the 5d electrons and 4f local moments, respectively. We now turn to the physics of the NiO 2 plane with the hole doping, following the process for the CuO 2 planes in cuprates We assume a vacuum state d 10 p 6 and introduce the operators d † iσ and p † lσ creating the Ni 3d Here • • • denotes the nearest neighbor bonds. The tight-binding parameters t dp , t pp , and can be obtained from the Wannier fitting We follow the process in the cuprates with the nearest neighbor and next nearest neighbor exchange interactions J = 28.6 meV and J = 0.4 meV well reproduces the low-energy spectrum for the three-band Hubbard model as shown in Fig. We map the three-band Hubbard model in Eq. ( where c iσ is the electron operator on the Ni sites connected by the solid (t and J) and dashed (t and J ) lines in Fig. width around 58 meV, approximately twice of the exchange strength J = 28.6 meV, in a good agreement with t-J model calculations for the cuprate, which show that, independent of the value of t, the dressing of the hole moving in the antiferromagnetic back-ground reduces the quasi-particle bandwidth to the twice of J 41 . We also map the low-energy spectra onto one-band Hubbard model with t = 254 meV, t = -30 meV and U = 6 eV in Fig. From the above derivation of the effective one-band tt -J model Hamiltonian, we find that the physics of NiO 2 planes in Nd 1-x Sr x NiO 2 is a doped Mott insulator, even further away from a conventional Fermi liquid than the superconducting cuprates. The undoped CuO 2 plane in the cuprate is a charge-transfer type Mott insulator, but the undoped NiO 2 plane in the nickelate is a Hubbard Mott insulator. Both the NiO 2 and CuO 2 planes have the same effective one-band t-t -J model Hamiltonians, and they have the similar physics of the superconductivity. The discovering of the superconductivity in the nickelate oxide In conclusion, we have explicitly derived a single-band effective t-t -J model Hamiltonian for Ni-O based compounds starting from a three-band model based on the density functional theory. Note added -At the stage of finishing the manuscript, we noticed related theoretical works for nickelates As Nd 3+ in Nd 2 CuO 4 Figure According to Fig. In this subsection, we present the band structures for Nd 1-x Sr x NiO 2 within GGA and SCAN functionals without/with spin-orbital couplings in Fig. 