There is a huge interest in developing super-repellent surfaces for anti-fouling and heat-transfer applications. To characterize the wetting properties of such surfaces, the most common approach is to place a millimetric-sized droplet and measure its contact angles. The adhesion and friction forces can then be inferred indirectly using the Furmidge's relation. While easy to implement, contact angle measurements are semi-quantitative and cannot resolve wetting variations on a surface. Here, we attach a micrometric-sized droplet to an Atomic Force Microscope cantilever to directly measure adhesion and friction forces with nanonewton force resolutions. We spatially map the micron-scale wetting properties of superhydrophobic surfaces and observe the time-resolved pinning-depinning dynamics as a droplet detaches from or moves across the surface. Water droplets can easily bounce and roll off superhydrophobic surfaces, enabling many important applications, ranging from water-repellent coatings to dragreduction in ships There are a few reasons for the popularity of contact angle measurements. Firstly, they are relatively easy to implement, requiring only good lighting and a highresolution camera. Moreover, the adhesion and friction forces can be inferred, albeit indirectly, from the advancing and receding contact angles θ adv, rec There is, however, a growing debate as to whether contact angles adequately describe the surface wetting properties To overcome these limitations, there have been several attempts to develop more sensitive surface characterization techniques. The most common approach is to use a cantilever force sensor to directly measure the friction and adhesion forces (with a typical 0.1 μN resolution) acting on a millimetric droplet Since its invention in 1986, Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) has become a standard and powerful surface characterization tool In this paper, we replace the solid tip with a microdroplet and use this modified droplet probe AFM technique to map local wetting properties of superhydrophobic surfaces We first investigated the wetting properties of the Morpho butterfly wings, well-known for their brilliant blue colour and excellent water repellency (Fig. Conventionally, the forces required to remove the droplets are inferred indirectly from the advancing and receding contact angles θ adv, rec where r is the droplet's base radius, γ is the surface tension, and ∆ cos θ = cos θ rec -cos θ adv is the contact angle hysteresis To overcome the limitations outlined above, we propose using droplet probe AFM to directly measure adhesion and friction forces F adh, fric by monitoring the flexular and torsional deflections of an AFM cantilever, respectively. This is done by shining a laser light (infra-red, wavelength of 980 nm) onto the cantilever, which is reflected into a four-quadrant sensor. To convert the raw voltage signals V vert, lat into forces F adh, fric , we use the Sader's method Figure Figure It is also possible to relate the force spectroscopy measurements with the evolution of the microdroplet's contact angle with time. The shape of the droplet u(z) is described by the axisymmetric Young-Laplace equation The droplet contact area on the cantilever is fixed by the cantilever's width 2a = 28 μm (Supplementary Fig. For example, during snap-in (time point 1), the droplet has a base radius of r = 4.5 μm and contact angle of θ = 161.3 • , respectively; whereas at the maximum F = F adh , r = 3.2 μm and θ = 137.0 • . See Supplementary Figs. S7 and S8 for details of the numerical method used, as well as During the force spectroscopy measurements, the flexular deflections can be monitored with high speeds (up to hundreds of kHz). This allows us probe the fast pinningdepinning dynamics (and stick-slip motion) of the contact line with unprecedented details. As the droplet retracts, both r and θ decreases gradually; except at certain time points (which correspond to discrete force jumps δF ∼ nN), where there are sudden discontinuities in r and θ over a timescale ∆t ∼ ms. The magnitudes of the discontinuities δr, δθ can be as small as fractions of a micron and a degree, respectively (Fig. We also note that there is no single value of θ rec for the microdroplet. If we consider the retraction curve up to F adh , where the contact line retracts at a relatively constant speed of |dr/dt| ≈ 0.7 μm/s, θ rec varies between 137 • and 150 • (shaded area in Fig. We repeated the force spectroscopy measurements for a total of 66 different wing-scales (with 670 depinning events), whose results are summarized in Fig. In general, higher F adh translates also to higher F snap and W adh values, though there are large variations (Fig. The force spectroscopy measurements therefore provide us with a wealth of information that is not easily obtained using conventional contact angle measurements. Note that while the results vary between wing-scales, the force spectroscopy curves for each scale are reproducible (Supplementary Fig. We can take advantage of the raster scanning capability of the AFM and perform force spectroscopy measurements over a grid array of points to map micronscale wetting variations on surfaces. To illustrate this, we chose a superhydrophobic surface with well-defined micro-/nano-structures, which consists of a square array of 10 μm-diameter pillars decorated with smaller 2 μm pillars, spaced L = 20 μm and l = 3.5 μm apart, and with a total height H = 2.5 μm (Fig. Figure It is likely that the 30-μm-sized droplet is touching the base at area 1, where the gap between the pillars is the largest. In fact, when the experiment is repeated on a micropillar surface with the exact same lateral dimensions but taller H = 12 μm, there are no longer high adhesion areas in area 1 (Supplementary Fig. We have therefore demonstrated the ability of droplet probe AFM to map wetting variations in the micronscale, despite the droplet's size being much larger. This is because the lateral resolution is determined the droplet's base diameter 2r ∼ 1 μm (rather than its outer diameter 2R) just before it detaches (Supplementary Movie 1). We can measure the friction force F fric by moving the droplet laterally and monitoring the resultant torsional deflection of the cantilever ∆φ, since F fric = k φ ∆φ/h, where k φ = 69.3 nN m is the torsional spring constant. Figure The force required to detach from one pillar can vary between F fric = 1.3 ± 0.3 μN (pillar 1) and 2.7 ± 0.2 μN (pillar 5). A closer look at the force spectroscopy measurements also reveal force jumps spaced l = 3.5 μm apart, due to depinning from the smaller 2-μm-sized pillars (Fig. To conclude, we are able to use droplet probe AFM to map micron-scale wetting properties of the superhydrophobic surfaces and also to probe the fast pinningdepinning dynamics during droplet detachment. In addition, we are able to relate the force spectroscopy measurements to conventional contact angle values by solving the Young-Laplace equation. While we have confined our discussion to superhydrophobic surfaces, the technique described in this paper can easily be adapted for other liquid probes (e.g. oil droplet) and other classes of liquid-repellent surfaces (e.g. underwater superleophobic surface). Droplet probe AFM technique described here will greatly complement other ultra-sensitive surface wetting characterization tools previously reported, such as the droplet force apparatus The technique developed here has direct relevance in many applications, e.g. in developing anti-fogging surfaces, in understanding surface condensation processes, and in emulsion science, where the wetting properties are dominated by droplets that are micron or even smaller in size. In short, the potential of droplet probe AFM as a surface wetting characterization tool remains largely unexplored and we hope this work will simulate further development of the technique and result in new insights in wetting science. IP-Dip photoresist was purchased from Nanoscribe Inc, Germany. Propylene glycol monomethyl ether acetate (PGMEA, > 99.5 %), (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane (APTES), perfluorodecyltrichlorosilane (FDTS), glycerine, isopropyl alcohol and ethanol were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Chromium (Cr) target (99.994 %) was purchased from Kurt J. Lesker Company, USA. Aluminum (Al) target (99.99 %) was purchased from Zhongnuo Advanced Material (Beijing) Technology Co. Ltd, China. All chemicals were used without further purification, unless otherwise stated. The tipless AFM cantilever was purchased from NanoWorld (Switzerland) and has dimensions of 225 × 28 × 1 μm (length, width, and thickness). Micropillar fabrication. The hierarchical micropillar surface is created by direct-write, two-photon lithography using the Nanoscribe R Photonic Professional instrument (Nanoscribe Inc., Germany). The photoresist used (IP-Dip) is a proprietary negative-tone resin from Nanoscribe that can be used to create submicron feature. To improve the adhesion of the resin to the fused silica substrate, we first cleaned the substrate with oxygen plasma for 5 mins at 100 W. The silica substrates were then submerged in 2 % (v/v) APTES in ethanol for 5 mins, followed by rinsing with a 50 % (v/v) water/ethanol mixture. Subsequently, the substrates were blown dry with nitrogen gas and dried in an oven at 65 • C. The micropillars were designed using computer-aided design (CAD) software SolidWorks R and their dimensions were defined using the DEScribe software. The structures then written on fused silica substrate by direct laser writing (DLW) using an inverted microscope with an oil-immersion lens (Zeiss Plan Apochromat, 63×, NA 1.4) and a computer controlled piezoelectric stage. The DLW process was performed with an erbium-doped, femtosecond laser source with a centre wavelength of 780 nm, pulse repetition rate of 80 MHz and pulse length of 100 fs. The average laser power was around 40 mW and writing speed was 30 mm/s. After writing, sample substrates were developed in PGMEA, followed by isopropyl alcohol for 30 min each, and then air-dried. Surface treatment of micropillar. 2 nm of Cr film was coated on the substrates, followed by deposition of Al film up to 100 nm with a thermal evaporator system (Syskey, Taiwan) operating under high vacuum of 10 -6 -10 -7 Torr. The micropillar with the Al coating was then boiled in DI water close to 100 • for 20 minutes. This converts the Al coating into nanostructured boehmite layer. We then submerge the surface in a solution of 1 wt% FS-100, 5 wt% water in ethanol for 1 h at 70 • C. This fluorinates the boehmite layer and hence renders the micropillar surface superhydrophobic Droplet probe AFM. To create the microdroplets, we forced the 40 wt% glycerine solution through the nozzle of a conventional spray bottle onto a superhydrophobic surface. This generates multiple droplets with diameters between 10-80 μm. To ensure that the microdroplet does not spread on the AFM cantilever, we hydrophobize the surface by vapour-phase silanization with fluorinated silane FDTS. Once the cantilever is fluorinated, we can then pick up a microdroplet of the desired size to perform force spectroscopy measurements on another surface of interest. Note that the microdroplet is attached to cantilever much more strongly than to the superhydrobic surfaces. As described in the main text, there is little or no evaporation of the glycerine droplet.