Surface of quantum materials often exhibits significantly different behavior than the bulk due to changed topologies and symmetry protections. The outstanding problem is to find out if the exoticity of a material is linked to the changed topology at the surface or it is a bulk property. Hard x-ray photoemission spectroscopy (HAXPES) is a significantly bulk sensitive technique (escape depth of valence electrons is about 40 Å for 6 keV photon energy) and the probing depth can be tuned by changing the electron emission angle. Therefore, HAXPES is often used to reveal the surface-bulk differences in a material. Here, we show that the delineation of surface-bulk differences in the valence band spectral functions using this method is highly non-trivial due to the complexity arising from linear dichroic effect in addition to the change in surface sensitivity. We show that core level spectra can be used to reveal the surface-bulk differences in the electronic structure. The Ca 2p spectra exhibit evidence of significant hybridization with the conduction electrons revealing their importance in the electronic properties of the system as also found for the charge reservoir layers in cuprate superconductors. The Fe 2p core level spectra as a function of bulk sensitivity and temperature reveals an unusual scenario; while the surface electronic structure corroborates well with the observed phase transitions of the system, the bulk spectra exhibit signature of additional structural phases providing a rare evidence of structural anomaly to be a bulk property. Study of high temperature superconductors continues to attract tremendous attention due to various unresolved longstanding puzzles in these materials important for both fundamental physics and technological applications. Most of these materials forms in layered structure separated by an insulating layer, which is often called charge reservoir layer. High quality single crystals of CaFe 2 As 2 were grown by high temperature solution growth method using Sn flux. In Fig. From the electronic structure calculations and various ARPES studies, it is well known that the valence band in the vicinity of the Fermi level is constituted primarily by Fe 3d states. Contributions from As 4p states is large in 3 -4 eV binding energies relative to that in the other energy regimes. The photoelectron cross-section The simulated spectra at two different emission angles following this simple method reproduces the experimental scenario remarkably well. This suggests that the changes observed in the valence band spectra at different emission angles have large contribution from the linear dichroic effect in addition to the change in escape depth. The escape depth of the valence electrons in normal emission geometry of HAXPES (hν ∼ 6 keV) is close to 40 Å and the bulk contribution in the normal emission spectra is about 86% considering top 4 layers near the surface provide the upper limit of the surface layer thickness. At the emission angle of 60 o , the escape depth becomes 20 Å, which is still quite large providing a bulk sensitivity of ∼74%. All these observations suggest that it is difficult to probe the surface-bulk differences in the valence band of this material simply by changing the emission angle due to polarization induced effects. Change in photon energy is even more complex for such covalent system Thus, we look for other method to find the evidence of differences between the surface and bulk electronic structures. It is well known that the photoemission spectra of the core levels are also derived by the eigenstates of the final state Hamiltonian containing interaction between the photo-hole and the valence electrons. In Fig. Ca 2p spectra shown in Fig. In order to explore the underlying physics of these scenarios, we have simulated the experimental spectra using asymmetric Gaussian-Lorentzian product functions within the least square error method; the results are shown in Fig. In addition to these features, another set of features were required to simulate the intensities between 350-360 eV binding energies; signature of these features could also be seen in the experimental data (see arrows in the figure). This indicates that there are multiple final states associated to the Ca 2p core level excitations in addition to the plasmon peaks. Such features in the core level spectra appear due to final state effects involving transfer of charge to screen the core hole. The simulation of Fe 2p spectrum shown in Fig. In order to investigate the influence of structural and magnetic phase transition on the electronic structure, we have collected data at varied temperatures such as 210 K, 118 K and 25 K. Since, the valence band, in particular, near Fermi energy states are dominated by the Fe 3d contributions and primarily derive the electronic properties, we focus on the evolution of the Fe 2p core level spectra with temperature; As 3p spectra (not shown here) do not show noticeable change with the change in temperature. Fe 2p spectra shown in Fig. It is well established that the valence electrons are involved in screening the core hole -electrons from ligand levels hops to the unoccupied part of the local electronic structure of the photoemission site. Thus, the width of the valence band will get convoluted resulting into additional width of the screened core level peaks. The larger width at 210 K observed here can be attributed to the larger valence bandwidth in the tetragonal structure possessing C 4 symmetry. Below the structural phase transition, the system evolves to orthorhombic structure having C 2 -symmetry (nematic phase). Consequently, the bandwidth reduces -shrinking of Fermi surface at lower temperatures due to structural transition has indeed been observed in earlier studies. Recent ARPES study 7 discovered signature of the energy bands related to the cT phase even in ambient conditions of the valence bands. The Fermi surface remain almost unchanged down to about 100 K. At lower temperatures (< 100 K), one of the three hole pockets around the Γ-point vanishes and the overall band structure assume effective three dimensionality. In conclusion, we studied the electronic structure of CaFe 2 As 2 using hard x-ray photoemission spectroscopy. Although the surface sensitivity of the technique could be changed by changing photoelectron emission angle, the experimental valence band spectra exhibit complexity due to the linear dichroic effect that makes it difficult to delineate the surface-bulk differences of the valence band. The core level spectra, however, is less influenced by such effect and we observe significantly different surface and bulk features in the Ca 2p and Fe 2p core level spectra. The surface peaks appear at higher binding energies, which is attributed to the surface potential created by 50% occupancy of the Ca-layer on the cleaved surface. The Ca 2p spectra exhibit signature of satellites indicating significant Ca 4s-As 4p hybridization. The temperature dependence of the Fe 2p linewidth reveals unusual scenario. While surface is usually expected to be anomalous due to defects, surface reconstruction, symmetry protection, etc., the surface electronic structure of CaFe 2 As 2 found here follows observed structural/magnetic transition and the hidden structural phases appears to be a bulk property. Authors acknowledge the financial support under DST-DESY program and thank Dr. Andrei Gloskovskii for his support during the experiments. KM acknowledges financial assistance from the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India under J. C. Bose Fellowship program and the Department of Atomic Energy under the DAE-SRC-OI Award program. T. H. Geballe, B. Y. Mayzhes, and P. H. Dickinson, arXiv; cond-mat/9904435 (1999); T. H. Geballe and G. Koster, Handbook of High Temperature Superconductiv-