The single-crystal growth, stoichiometry, and structure of Rb 1-x Fe 2-y Se 2-z S z crystals with substitution of Se by S are reported. The variation of the magnetic and thermodynamic parameters of samples was studied by differential-scanning calorimetry, magnetic susceptibility, conductivity, and specific heat. The experimental results are discussed within a T-z phase diagram, which includes vacancy-ordered and vacancy-disordered antiferromagnetic (AFM), superconducting (SC), and non-superconducting phases. The structural study revealed change in the local environment of the Fe tetrahedrons depending on substitution: a reduction of the Fe-Fe and Fe-Ch(chalcogen) bond lengths and a tendency for the six out of eight bond angles to approach values for a regular tetrahedron suggesting a reduction of structural distortions with substitution. With increasing substitution, a lowering of the superconducting transition temperature T c was observed; the percolation threshold for the SC state is located at the substitution z = 1.2. The SC state was found to coexist with the AFM state that persists in all samples independent of substitution. The temperature of the transition into the AFM state T N shows a monotonous decrease indicating a weakening of the AFM interactions with increasing substitution. The AFM phase exhibits an iron-vacancy-ordered structure below the structural transition at T s . The temperature T s shows a non-monotonous variation: a decrease with increasing z up to 1.3, followed by an increase for further increasing z. The suppression of the superconductivity with substitution is accompanied by a significant reduction of the density of states at the Fermi energy and a weakening of the electronic correlations in the studied system. In recent years, alkali-metal intercalated iron selenides A 1-x Fe 2-y Se 2 (with A = K, Rb, Cs) have attracted significant attention due to their unusual structural and electronic properties which are highly contrasting to other groups of Fe-based superconductors The insulating phase exhibits an antiferromagnetic (AFM) spin ordering with a Néel temperature T N above 500 K and a large local magnetic moment of 3.3 μ B per Fe ion arranged in clusters of four iron ions Similarly, the critical temperature T c for all three A 1-x Fe 2-y Se 2 systems is only weakly dependent on variations of their composition within the existence range of superconductivity Moreover, the SC behavior in these materials is observed only in a narrow range of iron nonstoichiometry making it difficult to unravel the correlations between structural and electronic properties. An attempt to overcome these problems was demonstrated by Lei et al. In the present paper, a complete macroscopic characterization of single crystalline samples of the Rb 1-x Fe 2-y Se 2-z S z studied earlier in Single crystals of the anion-substituted Rb 1-x Fe 2-y Se 2-z S z have been grown by the Bridgman method. The chemical composition of the samples was determined by electron-probe microanalysis (EPMA) applying wavelength dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (WDS) with a Cameca SX50 microprobe. The single crystal x-ray diffraction was performed at room temperature with an Xcalibur E diffractometer equipped with a CCD area detector and a graphite monochromator utilizing MoK α radiation. Samples for x-ray experiments were cut from large crystal pieces and protected with Paratone-N oil. Final unit cell dimensions were obtained and refined for the entire data set. After collection and integration, the data were corrected for Lorentz and polarization effects and for absorption by multi-scan empirical correction methods. The structures were refined by the full matrix least-squares method based on F 2 with anisotropic displacement parameters. All calculations were carried out by the programs SHELXL2014 Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements were performed using a PerkinElmer DSC-8500 system. The data were collected during temperature sweeps for heating and cooling with a rate of 5 K/min. The samples were encapsulated in standard Al crucibles. During the experiments, Ar or He gases were used as protecting media. The heat flow was normalized to the mass of the samples. Magnetic characterization was performed using a commercial SQUID magnetometer (MPMS-5, Quantum Design) for temperatures between 1.8 K and 700 K, in external magnetic fields up to 5 T. The resistivity and specific heat were measured with a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design) in a temperature range from 1.8 to 300 K. The preparation conditions and regimes of the single crystals growth by the vertical Bridgman method were similar to those for the non-substituted Rb 1-x Fe 2-y Se 2-z S z The concentration of the elements in the studied samples was measured on freshly cleaved samples. The EPMA data are also given in Table An important observation concerns the microstructure of the studied samples. As reported earlier for non-substituted samples (z = 0) in Ref. Since the WDS analysis is an absolute and accurate method of compositional determination, we assume that our result can be considered to be most reliable. It was further observed that for samples even with the lowest substitution z = 0.1, it was not possible to detect any stripe structure in the μm range (see Fig. Both parameters show a linear decrease with increasing sulfur content following Vegard`s law and indicating the formation of continuous solid solutions in this system due to substitution of S for Se. This fact together with the absence of any additional changes in the lattice symmetry with substitution indicates statistical substitution of Se by the S ions in the anion positions. FIG. In addition to the initial structural model, the structural refinement of all samples was also performed within the generally accepted √5 × √5 × 1 cell, in the space group I4/m. This allows a direct comparison of the structural data for our Rb 1-x Fe 2-y Se 2-z S z system with the related data for K x Fe 2-y Se 2-z S z in . The observed variations of the Fe-Fe distances with substitution are in good agreement with those reported for K x Fe 2-y Se 2-z S z In Figs. Looking for a possible optimization of the structural parameters, we have analyzed the variations of the anion height with substitution. Both anion heights of the Ch1 to the Fe2 plane and of the Ch2 to the Fe1-Fe2 plane were found to exhibit a continuous decrease with substitution as shown on the lower panel of Fig. Figs. For the non-substituted sample (Fig. anomaly at T N shows the smallest hysteresis (2 K) as expected for the second-order magnetic transformation. The structural anomaly at T p was found to exhibit a complex appearance. In samples with substitution z ≤ 1.0 this anomaly was discernible in the DSC signal as a small step or pronounced maximum on heating (see Figs. It was further observed that, while the anomaly at T s is well separated from the anomalies at T p and T N for the whole range of substitution, the values of T p and T N in the range 1.1 < z < 1.4 become close to each other making it difficult to distinguish the anomaly at T N due to its lower intensity in the DSC curve than that of the anomaly at T p . Therefore, to have an additional proof of the origin of the anomalies at T N and T p , susceptibility studies of our samples in the temperature range 300-600 K were carried out. The respective data are given in the Supplemental Material (Figs. Fig. Figs. 9 (a) and 9 (b), respectively, present the temperature dependencies of the magnetic susceptibility, χ || , for superconducting and non-superconducting samples with different substitutions measured in a magnetic field H = 10 kOe applied parallel to the c axis. For the substituted samples, χ || shows a non-linear growth with temperature similar to pure Rb 0.8 Fe 1.6 Se 2 Thus, our magnetic studies revealed that the percolation threshold for the appearance of superconductivity in Rb 1-x Fe 2-y Se 2-z S z crystals is placed between z = 1.2 and 1.3. It differs essentially from the K x Fe 2-y Se 2-z S z system where the SC state extends up to a substitution z = 1.6 Figs. 12 and 13 show the temperature dependent resistivity of superconducting and nonsuperconducting samples, respectively. The resistivity for both types of samples exhibits nonmonotonic temperature dependence with semiconductor-like behavior at high temperatures, a broad maximum at a characteristic temperature T m on decreasing temperature followed by a metallic-like behavior below T m . The temperature T m shows a general trend to lower values with increasing substitution, however, with exception of z = 0.25 and 1.4. In fact, such non-monotonic variation of T m with substitution is hard to understand; still we have registered a higher value of Supplemental Materials (Fig. for samples with different substitution level estimated by using the criterion of a 90% drop of the normal-state resistivity. The estimation of the upper critical field H c2 (0) for T = 0 K was performed with the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg model Fig. 18 . An important problem for the calculation of C el is related to determination of the phonon, C lat , and magnetic, C m , contributions. In Ref. ) ) The value of the Sommerfeld coefficient in the normal state γ n for superconducting samples was calculated from the temperature dependence of the electronic specific heat using the constraint of entropy conservation at the onset of T c , i.e., The values of γ n are also given in Table Under assumption that the values of C el for different samples with z = 0 are the same and in order to minimize the errors when subtracting phonon and magnon contributions, we averaged the experimentally determined specific heat data over seven measured samples. The calculated values of the parameters for the average data are given in Table Fig. 1. The superconducting state exists up to z = 1.2. With increasing z, the temperature of the SC transition T c shows a non-monotonic drop from 32.4 K for z = 0 to 10 K for z = 1.2. Similar non-monotonic behavior with substitution exhibits the second critical field H c2 (0), which reaches a value of 35 T for a substitution z = 0.25. The anisotropic AFM state is a characteristic feature for all samples of Rb 1-x Fe 2-y Se 2-z S z independent of substitution. With increasing substitution, the transition temperature into the AFM state T N shows a continuous decrease from 515 K for z = 0 to 472 K for z = 2. The SC and AFM phases are coexisting in a phase-separated arrangement. For nonsubstituted samples (z = 0), the SC stripes are of μm size. Their composition corresponds to Rb 0.705(25) Fe 2.017(10) Se 2 , while that of the AFM matrix corresponds to Rb 0.8 Fe 1.6 Se 2 . For the substituted samples, the phase separation of the SC and AFM phases is obviously realized on lower length scales. Above the SC transition and below 140 K, the samples with substitutions z ≤ 1.2 manifest a metallic-like conductivity, while at higher temperatures, a metal-to-semiconductor transition takes place. The ground state of the samples with higher substitution, including z = 2, is also metallic. A significant reduction of the  anomaly in the specific heat at the SC transition with increasing substitution indicates a reduction of the density of states at the Fermi energy that can account for the observed suppression of the superconducting state. 