Using an Electrically Focus Tunable Lens (EFTL), an integrating sphere and a tunable femtosecond-pulse laser (Mai Tai HP), we were able to measure the degenerate two-photon absorption coefficient (in transmission) of CdS and ZnSe in a long range of wavelengths (690-1040 nm), with a 5 nm resolution, in less than 30 minutes. We compared our results with theoretical approaches for the dispersion relations of the non-linear properties of semiconductors, and found excellent agreement with the experimental results. The system has no moving parts, is highly compact, and is fully automated. Characterization of nonlinear optical properties of solids is based primarily on the use of experimental techniques that are based on single wavelength lasers, with only a few examples on the use of broadband lasers. Balu et al. [6], the problem with WLC systems is that they require complex optical paths. Instead, Steiger et al. used a broadband tunable femtosecond laser for the open aperture Z-scan setup, to measure the two-photon absorption (TPA) in photoinitiator materials. To achieve this, they emphasize the necessity of having, for each wavelength, all the experimental parameters (beam waist, laser power, pulse duration, etc.) fully characterized in order to avoid inaccuracies in the determination of the TPA values. In this work, we have accomplished this in an F-scan setup where β is the TPA coefficient, I0 is the maximum irradiance of the beam at z = 0, R is the reflection coefficient at normal incidence, L eff = (1 -e -αL )/α is the effective length, α is the linear absorption, L is the sample thickness, x = z/z 0 , z is the position of the sample with respect to the beam waist, and z0 is the Rayleigh range. By taking the highest and lowest transmittance, using Eq. ( and the TPA coefficient for wavelength λ can be found from the relation Although we use an F-scan setup instead of a Z-scan setup, because we only need the highest and lowest transmittance for each wavelength, it is true that TL/TH= LI/HI (see Fig. From the above experimental analysis in Fig. A and Eg have been used as fitting parameters and H corresponds to the Heavyside step function. From the above model we have found an excellent agreement within the experimental error of the bandgap. The linear absorption for the two semiconductors was measured using an Ocean-Optics spectrometer (USB-400, USA) (see Fig. where C is a constant that accounts for unknown contributions to the nonlinear refraction of the unknown TPA part of the spectrum, and that can be adjusted from already known values of n2. This is an advantage as compared to the linear case where the absorption has to be known for a very large range of optical frequencies. In Fig. In conclusion, we have determined the two-photon absorption for CdS and ZnSe using a compact, fully automated system and with a broad spectral range (690 nm-1040 nm) nonlinear absorption spectrometer. The system has no moving parts and each spectrum can be obtained in less than 30 minutes. The resolution of the system can be reduced down to 1 nm. One critical element is the use of an Electrically Focus Tunable Lens (EFTL) that eliminated the need for a translation stage reducing dramatically the vibrational noise typical in Z-scan. The results are in excellent agreement with the predictions of a two-band model and with the experimental value reported in the literature. We have also extended the analysis for the case of nonlinear refraction using Kramers-Kronig and found good agreement with the theoretical results taking into consideration that the theoretical model and the experimental data deviated at high frequencies. We are in the process of using the same system to measure the nonlinear refraction in an open aperture reflection mode for thin films where bulk TPA contributions can be neglected. The goal is to implement this system to measure the nonlinear absorption in transmission mode, and the nonlinear refraction in reflection mode for thin films, in this way the full nonlinear spectrum of the film can be obtained. This technique will open the doors for the development of a nonlinear spectrometer.