This Letter is a micromagnetic simulation-based study on the GHz-frequency ferromagnetic resonances for the detection of magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) using spin current nano-oscillator (SCNO) operating in precession mode as a spintronic biosensor. The magnetic stray fields from the MNPs in an antibody-antigen-MNP complex on the SCNO surface modify the ferromagnetic resonance peaks and generate measurable resonance peak shifts. Moreover, our results strongly indicate the position-sensitive behavior of the SCNO biosensor and ways to eradicate this effect to facilitate better bio-sensing performance. Additionally, a study has been made on how nanoparticles with different sizes can alter the SCNO device performance. This simulation-based study on the SCNO device shows a promise of frequency-based nano-biosensor with a sensitivity of detecting even a single MNP, even in presence of thermal noise. It has been two decades since Baselt et. al 1 has designed the Bead Array Counter (BARC) that first showed the experimental possibility of bio-detection for multilayer giant magnetoresistance (GMR) with MNPs as biomarkers. Ever since then, magnetic biosensing for point-of-care (POC) detection of diseases using magneto-resistive (MR) sensors 2-13 have been explored intensively and has been subjected to extensive reviews However, these MR sensors tend to suffer from high background noise levels at room temperature performance which causes to compromise the sensitivity of the device. Thus, recently, frequency-based approach for detection of magnetic field In this regard, spin torque nano-oscillators (STNO) There are two conditions to trigger self-oscillations in SHNO devices: first, the dynamic damping must be completely balanced by spin current; second, the current to balance the spin torque and the damping torque in the self-oscillation state should be larger than the critical current to destabilize the initial state. Since the first condition is not satisfied, SHNOs with perpendicular magnetized anisotropy (PMA) are not feasible as was proved theoretically by Tomohiro Taniguchi 49 . The spin-orbit effects from the HM/PMA-FM bilayer system that contribute to the current-induced phenomena including the spin Hall effect, the Rashba effect 50 , and the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) 51 , all of which originate from the broken inversion symmetry at the HM/PMA-FM interface. A combination of all these interactions contribute to a far more stable oscillator system in comparison to in-plane SHNO systems. It is this possibility to induce dynamical states of HM/FM bilayer or alter their static configuration by the current-induced spin torque (ST) devices. However, the detailed investigation of SCNOs in terms of frequency-based nanobiosensors have not been made. As per our best knowledge, for the first time, we investigate the feasibility of spin current nano-oscillator (SCNO) device as a frequency-based spintronic biosensor through micromagnetic simulations on Mumax3 where, m = M/M s is the normalized magnetization, γ 0 = 1.85 × 10 11 rad T -1 s -1 is the gyromagnetic ratio, h eff = H eff /M s is the reduced effective field, t is the thickness of the ferromagnetic (FM) layer, m p is the current polarization vector, u = γ 0 ( ђjP 2eM s ), and j is the density of the spin current. The values of parameters Ms, P, α along with dimensions of the magnetic thin film are listed in Table For a bilayer of PMA ferromagnet (FM) and heavy metal (HM), under an externally applied current and uniform DC magnetic field, the device operates in precession mode. It is with a precession frequency that the bare SCNO device oscillates (see Supplementary Movie SM1), referred to in this Letter as the 'peak frequency' or in other words the frequency which has the maximum intensity. We have demonstrated how the peak frequency shifts with respect to regularly and/or randomly spaced single and/or a cluster of MNP(s). In addition, how different sized MNPs can affect the peak frequency shift of the SCNO device have been investigated (see Supplementary Movie SM2 & SM3). Finally, discussions follow on how we can optimize the SCNO device performance for it to be best fit in magnetic biosensing application. Figure In Figure 