The successful development of future photonic quantum technologies heavily depends on the possibility of realizing robust, reliable and, crucially, scalable nanophotonic devices. In integrated networks, quantum emitters can be deployed as single-photon sources or non-linear optical elements, provided their transition linewidth is broadened only by spontaneous emission. However, conventional fabrication approaches are hardly scalable, typically detrimental for the emitter coherence properties and bear limitations in terms of geometries and materials. Here we introduce an alternative platform, based on molecules embedded in polymeric photonic structures. Three-dimensional patterns are achieved via direct laser writing around selected molecular emitters, which preserve near-Fourier-limited fluorescence. By using an integrated polymeric design, record-high photon fluxes from a single cold molecule are reported. The proposed technology allows to conceive a novel class of quantum devices, including integrated multi-photon interferometers, arrays of indistinguishable single photon sources and hybrid electro-optical nanophotonic devices. Polymers are used in a wide application range, from nanotechnology and biomedicine, to clothing and food packaging In particular, the realization of Anthracene nanocrystals doped with Dibenzoterrylene molecules (DBT:Ac NCXs) exhibiting photostable singlephoton emission and Fourier-limited line-widths at 3 K Single PAHs are excellent candidates as non-classical light sources In the following more accurate experiments are discussed, which characterize the emission at the single molecule level and in a cryogenic environment, using as test bed the geometry depicted in Fig. We choose the micro-dome design as a case study to investigate its performances in terms of light extraction from single molecules. The total height of the structure is given by h = (1 + 1/n)r, where n is the polymer refractive index and r the radius of curvature. This design provides redirection via refraction at all upwards angles and efficiently compresses emission into a small numerical aperture. It also offers advantages in terms of simplicity of fabrication and robustness against imperfections. In Fig. Based on such theoretical results, the fabrication of the micro-dome on gold embedding a single DBT:Ac NCX was optimized and characterized by means of atomic force microscopy (AFM). A typical AFM image is displayed in Fig. solved AFM map of the top 4x4 μm 2 surface area. From the dome profile we estimate the experimental dimensions of the structure, with a total height h = 9.1 ± 0.1 μm and a radius r = 5.0 ± 0.1 μm, in good agreement with the nominal values set by the numerical optimization. From the AFM map, the average surface roughness to be ∆r = 41 ± 4 nm. Finally, Fig. As expected, a saturation curve is observed in all three cases as a function of the pump power, expressed in logarith-mic scale. The detected counts are fitted according to the formula R(P) = (a + bP) + R ∞ P/(P + P s ) , with R ∞ being the maximum detected count rate, P the laser power, P s the saturation power and (a + bP) accounting for the residual laser scattering as a linear contribution. We obtain a maximum measured photon flux at the detector equal to R ∞ NC = (0.18 ± 0.01) Mcps, R ∞ dome = (0.66 ± 0.02) Mcps and R ∞ Au-dome = (2.38 ± 0.11) Mcps, respectively. The detected count rate from a single cold molecule in the optimized micro-dome design is to our knowledge the highest reported to date and appears particularly significant when associated with the long excited state lifetime of DBT molecules ( 4.5 ns). Furthermore, taking into account the efficiency of the detector (η det ), of the optical path (55%) and the objective transmission (70%), the real photon flux at the detector is ∼ 10 Mcps. In particular, with respect to the nude nanocrystal, we measure a factor 3.7 ± 0.2 improvement in the collected photon flux for the micro-dome on silica, and a factor 13 ± 1 in the case of the optimal configuration for the micro-dome on gold. Moreover a reduction in the saturation power by about two orders of magnitude is observed, passing from a value of (56 ± 10) W/cm 2 to (0.10 ± 0.02) W/cm 2 . Indeed, the presence of the modified SIL has the primary effect of increasing the effective numerical aperture of the optical system, hence improving its focusing efficiency. The reflective layer underneath further increases the intensity at the emitter position for a given input power. In order to probe the emission pattern of the devices, we perform back focal plane (BFP) measurements of the emitted fluorescence, providing the power distribution in mo- mentum space. In Figures Fiber-coupled Fluorescence 51% Cryogenic station Normalized field intensity x (μm) Fiber-collimator Figure the high detected count rate achieved with the micro-dome device are particularly suitable for the efficient coupling into a fiber, within the perspective of a compact fibercoupled single photon source. With the experimental setup schematically shown in Fig. We have demonstrated the fast, efficient integration of single molecule quantum emitters in 3D polymeric structures, thus realizing a novel flexible photonic platform, leveraging the versatility of polymeric materials. The experimental results entail deterministic positioning of the source, fabrication on different substrates (dielectric, metallic) as well as integration in suspended designs. Furthermore, the compatibility of direct laser writing with organic nanocrystals is demonstrated by showing close-to Fourier-limited emission from a single embedded dibenzoterrylene molecule at 3 K. As a first example of the performances attainable by our platform, we show unequalled collection efficiency for single organic emitters at low temperatures, reaching photon fluxes above 2.3 Mcps. This value approximately dou-bles the state of the art for the detected count rate from a single molecule, with the improvement rising to a factor 5 considering the specific case of DBT The Direct laser writing process is based on two-photon polymerization induced by a strongly focused laser beam. We employed a commercial DLW workstation (Nanoscribe) and the commercially available negative-tone IPphotoresists (IPs). IPs provide high resolution and high mechanical stability for structures in the micro-and submicron range and are chemically compatible with the Ac crystalline matrix. Moreover they require low exposure and developing time for the writing process Topological images were performed by SEM (Phenom Pro, PhenomWorld) and AFM (home-built equipment based on piezo XYZ positioning system (PI-527.3CL from Physik Instrumente) and R9 controller (RHK Technology)) equipped with a soft silicon probe CSG01 (NTMDT). In particular, for SEM contrast images, after optical characterization, the samples were sputter-coated with a ∼ 50 nm gold film. Numerical simulations of the collection efficiency for nonintegrated nanocrystal on silica and for the NCX inside the micro-domes on silica and on gold respectively, were performed using a commercial software (Comsol Multiphysics) implementing the 2D Finite Element Method (FEM). The nanocrystal is modelled in each configuration as a 800 nm x 400 nm platelet of Ac (n = 1.7) with the molecules modelled with an in-plane dipole source at the centre of the nanocrystal, 100 nm from the substrate. A layer of 200 nm of PVA (n = 1.475) covers the whole considered area, including the nanocrystal.In the integrated configurations the micro-dome consists in a hemisphere of radius 5.3 μm placed on a cylindrical base with the same radius and height h = 3.4 μm. For the optimal configuration on reflective surface, the silica substrate is covered with a 180 nm-thick layer of gold. The collection efficiency is evaluated by integrating the far fields within the acceptance angle defined by the numerical aperture of our setup (42 • ), and normalizing by the integrated far fields on the whole 2π angle. The collected photon flux is calculated as the ratio between the power radiated by a dipole in the far field within the maximum acceptance angle given by the numerical aperture NA ∼ 0.62 and the power radiated by the same dipole in a homogeneous medium with the refractive index of 1.7. The optical characterization of DBT molecules within the Ac NCX was performed with a versatile home-built scanning fluorescence confocal microscope. The set-up is equipped with a closed-cycle helium cryostat (Cryostation by Montana Instruments), capable of cooling samples to 2.7 K. Molecules can be excited off-resonance at 767 nm by a CW laser (Toptica DL110-DFB) or alternatively at cryogenic temperature with a resonant tunable narrowband CW laser (Toptica, LD-0785-0080-DFB-1), which is centered at 784.6 nm and can be scanned continuously in frequency over a range of 800 GHz. All laser sources are fibercoupled and linearly polarized by means of a half-wave plate in the excitation path to allow optimal coupling to single DBT transition. The laser intensities reported in the main text are calculated from the power measured at the objective entrance divided by the measured area of the confocal spot at the substrate. For low-temperature measurements, the excitation light is focused onto the sample by a glassthickness-compensation air objective (OptoSigma 50 x, N.A. = 0.65, W D = 10.48 mm) and can be scanned over the sample by a telecentric system and a dual-axis galvo-mirror. For room temperature measurements, a long-distance air objective (Mitutoyo 100 x Plan Apochromat, N.A. = 0.7 , W D = 6 mm) is used to focus light onto the sample, which is mounted on a piezoelectric nanopositioner (NanoCube by Physik Instrumente). The Stokes-shifted fluorescence is collected by the same microscope objective used in excitation, separated from the excitation light through a dichroic mirror (Semrock FF776-Di01) and a long-pass filter (Semrock RazorEdge LP02-785RE-25), and detected by either an EMCCD camera (Andor iXon 885, 1004 x1002 pixels, pixel size 8 μm x 8 μm) or by a SPAD (τ-SPAD-50 single photon counting modules by PicoQuant). For the HBT configuration, we employ two fibred SPADs (fiber-coupled photon counting modules by Excelitas) and a time correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) card (PicoHarp, Pi-coQuant). A converging lens can be inserted in the excitation path to switch between confocal and wide-field illumination, while a converging lens is added in the detection path before the EMCCD camera to study the wave-vector distribution of the light emitted by single DBT molecules via BFP imaging. For the fiber-coupling configuration, a single-mode fibre, a fiber-collimator and a telescope were employed to match the fluorescence mode to the fibre. Measurements of laser throughput in the waveguides were performed by focusing the laser at one coupler, through the substrate, and evaluating the transmitted light at the opposite coupler. The measured signal was then normalized to the direct reflection of the input laser on a mirror. Finally, the value was corrected for the overlap integral between the laser spatial mode and the waveguide spatial mode, which were not optimally matched in the experiment.