Simulating the propagation of elastic waves in multi-layered media has many applications. A common approach is to use matrix methods where the elastic wave-field within each material layer is represented by a sum of partial-waves along with boundary conditions imposed at each interface. While these methods are well-known, coding the required matrix formation, inversion, and analysis for general multi-layered systems is non-trivial and time-consuming. Here, a new open-source toolbox called ElasticMatrix is described which solves the problem of acoustic and elastic wave propagation in multi-layered media for isotropic and transverse-isotropic materials where the wave propagation occurs in a material plane of symmetry. The toolbox is implemented in MATLAB using an object oriented programming framework and is designed to be easy to use and extend. Methods are provided for calculating and plotting dispersion curves, displacement and stress fields, reflection and transmission coefficients, and slowness profiles. Matrix models of wave propagation in multi-layered elastic solids have had a significant contribution to research areas such as acoustics, geophysics and electromagnetics. A few examples include: structural health monitoring Matrix methods, in particular the partial-wave and global matrix method, represent the stress and displacement fields as a sum of partial-waves for each material of the layered-structure. Each partial-wave represents an upward or downward travelling (quasi-)compressional or (quasi-)shear wave. By invoking boundary conditions at the interfaces of adjacent layers, the partial-wave amplitudes and field properties of the first layer can be related to the last in the form of a 'global' matrix. The resulting matrix equation can be used in two different ways. Firstly, the roots of the equation can be found which give the modal solutions or dispersion curves. Secondly, a subset of partial-wave amplitudes can be defined and the remaining amplitudes solved for. This can be used to calculate the displacement and stress fields within the multi-layered structure when a plane wave is incident. This method will be discussed further in Section 2. Despite its usefulness, there are few available implementations of the partial-wave method. The current state-of-theart implementation is Disperse In this paper, a new open-source toolbox called ElasticMatrix is introduced which uses the partial-wave method for multi-layered structures with an arbitrary number of isotropic and transverse-isotropic materials. Where possible, it is validated against existing literature and has been implemented so that it is both easy to use and extend. Some potential uses of this software are: 1) plotting the slowness profiles of materials, 2) determining the reflection and transmission coefficients of multi-layered structures, 3) finding the dispersion curves of multi-layered structures, 4) plotting the displacement and stress fields, 5) extending the toolbox for other applications, for example modelling the directional response of Fabry-Perot ultrasound sensors A brief overview of the underlying mathematical model is described in Section 2. A selection of code snippets and examples are shown in Section 3. (More extensive examples are available with the toolbox documentation.) The impact and conclusions are described in Section 4. ElasticMatrix uses the partial-wave method to model wave propagation in multi-layered elastic solids. The method describes elastic plane-wave propagation along a plane of symmetry for n-layers of rigidly bonded transverse-isotropic materials. An example of an isotropic material is glass, where the material properties are the same when measured from every direction. An example of a transverse-isotropic material is a bundle of fibres, where the properties have translational symmetry axially along the fibre, and are isotropic in the plane perpendicular to this. ElasticMatrix can model layered transverse-isotropic materials if they are aligned such that they have rotational symmetry about the axis perpendicular to the plane of each layer and the wave-vector of the propagating wave lies in the plane of symmetry. In this case, the multi-layered structure can be modelled in two-dimensions. This is illustrated in Fig. Each partial-wave represents the superposition of waves that have been multiply reflected or transmitted at the interfaces between each layer in a steady-state. The polarisation vector and wave-vector of each of these partial-waves can be found from the Christoffel Equation which is described in Section 2.2. The degree of reflection and transmission depends on the boundary conditions at the interfaces and material properties of each layer. The coupled equations that arise from the boundary conditions can be combined into a 'global-matrix' which allows them to be solved simultaneously, which is discussed in Section 2.3. This global matrix approach can be used to tackle various problems in elastic wave propagation. For example, the singularities of the global matrix give the dispersion curves, and by specifying an incident wave, the resulting wave-field throughout the structure can be calculated. More detailed descriptions of the partial-wave and global-matrix method can be found in Firstly, the solution for a plane wave propagating in an unbounded medium is derived. This is needed to calculate the polarisation and wave-vectors for each partial-wave component and the process is repeated independently for every layer. The wave-equation for an anisotropic unbounded medium is where the indices i, j, k, l ∈ {1, 2, 3}, x and t are the spatial and temporal variables and Einstein summation notation is used. The variable u i is the displacement in direction i. The elastic properties of each material are described by the density ρ and the stiffness-tensor C ijkl . The stiffness tensor has 81 components which can be reduced to 21 independent coefficients to describe a fully-anisotropic medium The phase velocity ν along the x 1 axis is calculated from the relation ν = ω/ζ. Solving Eq. (4) admits three solutions for α 2 and therefore 6 solutions for α. From here, the notation α q , where q ∈ {1, 2, ..., 6}, will be used to indicate each solution. It can be seen from Eq. ( These describe upwards and downward travelling quasi-shear-vertical (qSV) and quasi-longitudinal (qL) waves with the displacement restricted to the (x 1 , x 3 ) plane. The remaining two solutions (q = 5, 6) are found from Γ 22 = 0, and correspond to upward-and downward-travelling quasi-shear-horizontal (qSV) waves. The notation A iq will be used to indicate polarisation vector for each solution q. The displacement field can now be written as where B q is the amplitude of each partial-wave. Additionally, the stress field within the unbounded medium can be found using Hooke's law where i, j, k, l ∈ {1, 2, 3}. For a multi-layered medium, the Christoffel equation Eq. ( As mentioned previously, the wave-vector of the plane waves are constrained to a plane of symmetry of the transverseisotropic material reducing the analysis to two dimensions, (x 1 , x 3 ). The normal and transverse displacement and stress describing (quasi-)longitudinal and (quasi-)shear-vertical waves for a single layer is written in the form where Only the first four solutions of α q are needed as the motion is restricted to two dimensions (x 1 , x 3 ). The left hand vector of Eqs. ( Here, F N n is the 4 × 4 field matrix and B n a 4 × 1 vector of partial-wave amplitudes of layer n at interface N . By assigning values to four of the partial-wave amplitudes, Eq. ( 3 ) and shear (B n 4 ) waves in the last (nth) layer are set to zero. Finally, the downward-travelling partial-wave amplitude relating to a compressional wave in the first layer is set to an arbitrary value (B 1 1 = 1). In this case, the solved amplitudes describe the solution for an incident single-frequency plane-wave at an angle θ or wavenumber ζ and frequency f . For a four-layered medium this would be Here, + andsuperscripts indicate the upwards and downwards travelling partial-wave amplitudes and their respective columns in the field matrices. For example, F 1+ 1 would be the third and fourth columns of F 1 1 , and B + 1 would be the third and fourth elements of B 1 . In the example described above, the first element of B - 1 is 1 and all the elements of B + 4 and the second element of B - 1 are 0. Additionally, once the remaining wave-amplitudes for each layer are found, Eq. ( Shear-horizontal waves propagate independently of (quasi-)shear-vertical and (quasi-)compressional waves and their propagation is analogous to compressional waves in a liquid where By setting the properties of a new medium C so that C 11 , C 22 , C 33 = C 44 and setting the remaining coefficients to zero, Eq. ( To construct the global matrix, Eq. ( The computation of dispersion curves follows the algorithm described in Slowness profiles are calculated by defining a range of phase-speeds and calculating the horizontal and vertical component of wavenumber by solving the Christoffel equation Eq. ( 3 Software Description and Examples The ElasticMatrix toolbox implements the partial-wave method using an object-oriented framework in MATLAB. This allows the toolbox to be used with either a simple scripting or command line interface, and makes it easy to use and expand. The software is divided into three classes. The first class, Medium, defines the multi-layered geometry and material properties of each layer. The second class ElasticMatrix is initialised by a Medium object. This class contains the partial-wave method implementation and methods for extracting additional details such as dispersion curves and reflection coefficients. By default, all the calculations use 64 bit precision. The final class, FabryPerotSensor, is an example of how numerical models can be built from the ElasticMatrix and Medium objects. This class inherits ElasticMatrix and can be used to model the directional response of a Fabry-Pérot ultrasound sensor. More details can be found in This section presents a small selection of code snippets and examples. More detailed examples can be found in the ElasticMatrix ./examples folder and html documentation can be accessed through the MATLAB help and clicking ElasticMatrix toolbox. There are three steps to using the toolbox. Firstly, the geometry of the layered medium must be defined. Secondly, the input parameters to the model should be defined, which are generally a range of angles, frequencies or wavenumbers. Finally, the model can be solved and details such as the reflection coefficients and dispersion curves can be extracted. Note, for clarity in the code implementation, the x 1 and x 3 coordinates are referred to as x and z, respectively. The Medium class is used to define the material properties and thickness of each layer. The class is initialised by calling the class constructor with input arguments of the material name followed by its thickness. However, the thickness of the first and last layers are semi-infinite and their values should be set with the Inf keyword. The Medium class will automatically set the thickness of the first and last layer to Inf if another value is used. An example is given below. my_medium = Medium('water', Inf, 'blank', 3e-3, 'PVDF', 1e-3, 'glass', Inf); Here, my medium is an object array and every index in the object array corresponds to a different layer in the medium. In the current example, my medium(3) will return a object with the material properties and thickness associated with PVDF. The 'blank' keyword can used for a material which is not predefined. The material properties and names can be set using their respective set functions. User defined materials can be added to the script materialList.m. Slowness profiles are a plot of the inverse-phase velocity of each bulk wave component. They can be used to determine the angles of reflection and transmission between multi-layered media as well as the direction of energy propagation and skew angle which is an implementation of Eqs. ( my_medium = Medium('glass', Inf, 'beryl', Inf); my_medium.calculateSlowness; my_medium.plotSlowness; Figure The medium class is used to initialise the ElasticMatrix class which runs the partial-wave method over a range of frequencies, wavenumbers, phasespeeds and angles. Two of these must be defined using the .set functions. The .calculate method is then used to run the partial-wave procedure. If the properties are not set before the .calculate method is called, the model will run over a predefined range of frequencies and angles. The .calculate method constructs, rearranges and solves the global-matrix, Eq. ( This function takes input arguments of the material properties and the parameters to calculate over (angles, frequencies, wavenumbers). It returns the determinant of the system matrix and the stresses and displacements at the layer interfaces. Each individual field-matrix is calculated using the function calculateFieldMatrixAnisotropic(...) which is an implementation of Eq. ( For a plane wave incident at an oblique angle on a multi-layered structure, the reflection and transmission coefficients determine the amplitude of the wave that is reflected and transmitted at each interface. Knowing these coefficients is useful for a number of applications. For example, selecting the appropriate launch angle when coupling energy into particular modes in a wave-guide, or determining the thickness and material properties of matching layers for ultrasonic transducers The angles of refraction at the interfaces between multi-layered media can be found by studying the slowness profiles. However, slowness profiles do not take into account the boundary conditions at the interfaces. Consequently, the magnitude of each of the refracted waves cannot be calculated directly. For a plane wave incident on a multi-layered structure, the magnitude of the reflection and transmission coefficients are found by normalising the partial-wave amplitudes B n i by the incident plane wave amplitude B 1 1 . This is automatically calculated when using the .calculate method. An example of the reflection and transmission coefficients at a PVDF-aluminium interface is given below and shown in Fig. Dispersion curves describe the modal solutions of the multilayer structure and describe a wave-mode which propagates parallel to the layer-interfaces independently of a bulk wave. As one example, exciting these modes is essential in ultrasonic inspection. Knowledge of the dispersion curves is useful for determining the most appropriate modes to excite and for optimising the inspection process. As mentioned in Section 2.5, the modal solutions are found when the global matrix becomes singular. The ElasticMatrix software can calculate dispersion curves for simple layered structures (i.e., a plate in a vacuum or water). However, it is not robust for very-leaky cases, for example a plate embedded in soil. For these types of cases either Disperse, or other techniques based on the spectral-collocation method or semi-analytic finite element method are more appropriate More information about the wave-physics and guided wave structures can be taken from dispersion curves by plotting the displacement and stress fields at different points. In the ElasticMatrix software implementation, the x and z ranges over which to plot the displacement or stress fields must be specified. The .calculateField(...) method returns a structure with the input ranges and field values at each point of the resulting grid. The values of the structure can be plotted independently or given as an argument to the .plotField method. An example is given below for the displacement field within an titanium plate for a symmetric and anti-symmetric mode. The resulting plot can be seen in Fig. One application of the toolbox is to model the directional response of Fabry-Pérot ultrasound sensors This paper introduces a new open-source toolbox called ElasticMatrix which models elastic wave propagation in multi-layered media with anisotropic materials with isotropic or transverse-isotropic symmetry. The toolbox uses the partial-wave method which allows the calculation of slowness profiles, reflection and transmission coefficients, dispersion curves and stress and displacement fields. The software has been implemented using the object-oriented capabilities of MATLAB allowing for a simple command line or scripting interface. The implementation allows researchers to add functionality and integrate the software into other projects. For example, this toolbox has already been used to model the directional response of Fabry-Pérot ultrasound sensors + (C 13 + C 55 ) ∂ 2 u 1 ∂x 1 ∂x 2 ,(2)where Voigt notation has been used to contract the indices of the stiffness-matrix (where 11 → 1, 22 → 2, 33 → 3, 23 → 4, 13 → 5, 12 → 6). A single-frequency plane wave can be written in the formu i = A i exp(i(ζx 1 + ζαx 3 -ωt)),(3)where i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, ω is the circular frequency, α is the ratio of the vertical and horizontal (ζ) wavenumbers, and A i is the polarisation unit vector which describes the direction of displacement relative to the direction of wave propagation. Substituting Eq. (3) into Eq. (2) gives the Christoffel equationΓ ij (α)A j = 0,(4)where the components of the Christoffel matrix (Γ) are Γ 11 = (C 11 -ρν 2 + C 55 α 2 ) Γ 22 = (C 66 -ρν 2 + C 44 α 2 )