Low ice adhesion surfaces are a promising anti-icing strategy. However, reported ice adhesion strengths cannot be directly compared between research groups. This study compares results obtained from testing the ice adhesion strength on the same surface at two different laboratories, testing two different types of ice with different ice adhesion test methods at temperatures of -10 o C and -18 o C. One laboratory uses the centrifuge adhesion test and tests precipitation ice and bulk water ice, while the other laboratory uses a vertical shear test and tests only bulk water ice. The surfaces tested were bare aluminum and a commercial icephobic coating, with all samples prepared in the same manner. The results showed comparability in the general trends, surprisingly, with the greatest differences for bare aluminum surfaces at temperature -10 o C. For bulk water ice, the vertical shear test resulted in systematically higher ice adhesion strength than the centrifugal adhesion test. The standard deviation depends on the surface type and seems to scale with the absolute value of the ice adhesion strength. The experiments capture the overall trends in which the ice adhesion strength surprisingly decreases from -10 o C to -18 o C for aluminum and is almost independent of temperature for a commercial icephobic coating. In addition, the study captures similar trends in the effect of ice type on ice adhesion strength as previously reported and substantiates that ice formation is a key parameter for ice adhesion mechanisms. AMIL -Anti-icing Materials International Laboratory A -ice-solid contact area ARF -Adhesion reduction factor BWI -Bulk water ice CAT -Centrifuge adhesion test F -Centrifugal force IC -Icephobic coating MVD -Median volume drop diameter m ice -Mass of detached ice NTNU -Norwegian University of Science and Technology PI -Precipitation ice r -Radius of the beam at the center of mass for the ice sample τ -Ice adhesion strength VST -Vertical shear test ω -Angular velocity at ice detachment Anti-icing surfaces, or icephobic surfaces, are a promising technique for passive ice removal and may help mitigate and avoid dangerous situations and unwanted icing in our daily life In this experimental study, the research groups at the Anti-icing International Materials Laboratory (AMIL) at the University of Québec in Chicoutimi and the Nanomechanical Lab at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) collaborate to compare obtained ice adhesion strength measurements. Both have laboratory facilities able to measure internally comparable ice adhesion strength in controlled environments. At AMIL, the ice adhesion strength is measured with a centrifuge adhesion test (CAT), which is illustrated in Figure When comparing reported ice adhesion strengths, it is also necessary to include the type of ice tested. Measured ice adhesion strength is highly dependent on the ice tested The comparison of ice adhesion strength measured at the facilities of AMIL and NTNU for the two types of ice showed that all results are comparable within the general trends between NTNU and AMIL, with the greatest differences for aluminum surfaces at -10 o C. However, there are considerable differences between different laboratories. The study provides further evidence that the ice formation is a key parameter in predicting the ice adhesion on different surfaces. The ice adhesion strength of two surfaces were tested by both AMIL and NTNU in their respective facilities. The surfaces tested were bare aluminum 6061-T6, and aluminum covered with EC-3100, a two component, water-based, icephobic, non-stick coating from Ecological Coating, LLC. The testing of these surfaces has been reported previously The samples tested at AMIL were in the form of bars fit to the CAT apparatus, with the iced area on one side and a counterweight on the other. The bars had length 340 mm and thickness 6.3 mm, with icing occurring over an area of about 1100 mm 2 . This area was measured more precisely after the ice adhesion test in order to have the exact ice-surface detached surfaces. PI was created through a freezing drizzle in a cold room of constant temperature and a relative humidity of 80% ± 2%. Six samples were iced simultaneously, with water of a median volume drop diameter (MVD) of 324 μm and an initial temperature of 4 o C at the exit of the sprayer nozzle. The surfaces had initial temperature of the testing temperature, meaning either -10 o C or -18 o C. As the water hits the sample surface, it has become supercooled and freezes on contact. Water impact speed is due to gravity as the water droplets fall from the nozzle, and is estimated to about 5 ms -1 . The samples were iced for 33 minutes and kept in the cold room for 1 hour between icing and ice adhesion test to allow the ice to thermally stabilize. BWI was created in the same cold room by freezing water in silicon molds from MoldMax30 by Smooth-On The ice adhesion strength was measured with the CAT apparatus The surfaces tested at NTNU were approximately square surfaces of width 7.3 cm, height 7.2 cm and thickness 25 mm. The ice sample was frozen in the middle of the surface for testing. Both water and surfaces where initially at room temperature for the testing at NTNU. The ice tested at NTNU was BWI. For temperature of -18 o C, the ice samples were frozen in a freezer, while for temperature of -10 o C, the ice was frozen in a cold room situated at a slight distance from the ice adhesion test. For both temperatures, the ice was frozen ex situ, and required transportation through room temperature to the testing rig where the samples were again placed in the original temperature for ice adhesion tests. For temperature -18 o C, the transport time was about one minutes and 30 seconds, while for temperature -10 o C, the transport time was about three minutes. To account for the transport from the cold room, the samples were transported in a box made of expanded polystyrene with freezer elements. Both the box and freezer elements were placed in the cold room for thermal equilibration before and after the transportation. After the transportation, the ice samples were placed in the ice adhesion test chamber for 15 minutes before testing to achieve thermal stability. The BWI samples were frozen on the tested surfaces in a polypropylene centrifuge tube mold with wall thickness of 1 mm and inner diameter of 27.5 mm. Silicone grease The measured ice adhesion strengths are shown in Figure From Figure When comparing the two surface types for all ice types, all tests show larger error bars for aluminum than for the icephobic coating. This high standard deviation is in accordance with other studies of ice adhesion strength, and may be an inherent property of the ice removal mechanisms In general terms, this study shows that there are large differences between different laboratories, and that the differences do not seem to be systematic. It seems that for higher ice adhesion strengths, the difference between different ice adhesion tests and ice types increases. It follows that more tests with a larger range of ice adhesion values are needed to explore this relation more fully. As two different ice types were tested at AMIL, the similar trend from Rønneberg et al. When comparing the results from AMIL and NTNU, some general comments about different ice adhesion measurement set-ups can be made. At low ice adhesion, the two test methods give similar results, while the VST seems to give larger deviations than the CAT methodology. However, the VST is easier to implement, and has a slightly lower standard deviation for low ice adhesion surfaces with BWI. An alternative might be the lap shear test, as studied recently Lastly, some additional sources of error present in the experiments reported here must be mentioned. For the tests performed at NTNU, the ice adhesion tests were performed ex situ and the ice samples and tested surfaces were moved between the freezer to the testing apparatus. Especially the tests performed at -10 o C were subject to a long transport between two different laboratories, and to account for this thermal variation, a polystyrene container was used. The effect of this container compared to the shorter transport at room temperature for the tests performed at -18 o C cannot be determined exactly. However, despite the transport which was assumed detrimental for ice adhesion, the NTNU VST methods yields higher ice adhesion for both coatings, compared to AMIL results where the experiments were performed in situ. This observation may indicate that the transportation did not significantly affect the ice adhesion. The ice sample size differed between AMIL and NTNU, with an iced area of about 1100 mm 2 at AMIL while only 594 mm 2 at NTNU. While at AMIL, the ice sample covers the entire tested surface as seen in Figures In this study, the ice adhesion strength of two different surfaces has been tested at two laboratories with different ice adhesion test methods and two types of accreted ice. Despite the differences between the laboratories, the experiments capture the overall trends in which the ice adhesion strength surprisingly decreases from -10 o C to -18 o C for aluminum and is almost independent of temperature for a commercial icephobic coating. For BWI, the NTNU VST method systematically yields higher ice adhesion strength than AMIL CAT method. The standard deviations were approximately constant when testing PI at AMIL and seems to scale with the absolute value of ice adhesion at NTNU. The VST has higher deviations than CAT methodology for high ice adhesion values, but are more similar when testing low ice adhesion surfaces. The experiments in this study were performed with a focus on keeping the conditions similar, both within each lab and between AMIL and NTNU. However, the results still show significant differences and variations. As a result, more data from several more laboratory facilities are needed as well as more tests within each laboratory facility. Furthermore, the study provides further evidence that the ice formation is a key parameter in predicting the ice adhesion on different surfaces, as well as for the investigation of the mechanism of the ice detachment from different surfaces and the occurrence of cohesive failures during ice adhesion testing. -Temperature relates to both freezing temperature and testing temperature -Initial temperature of both surfaces and water was room temperature for bulk water ice -All surfaces were only tested once 