Cooperative phenomena stemming from radiation-field-mediated coupling between individual quantum emitters are presently attracting broad interest for on-chip photonic quantum memories and longrange entanglement. Common to these applications is the generation of electro-magnetic modes over macroscopic distances. Much research, however, is still needed before such systems can be deployed in the form of practical devices, starting with the investigation of alternate physical platforms. Quantum emitters in two-dimensional (2D) systems provide an intriguing route because these materials can be adapted to arbitrarily shaped substrates to form hybrid systems where emitters are near-field-coupled to suitable optical modes. Here, we report a scalable coupling method allowing color center ensembles in a van der Waals material -hexagonal boron nitride -to couple to a delocalized high quality plasmonic surface lattice resonance. This type of architecture is promising for photonic applications, especially given the ability of the hexagonal boron nitride emitters to operate as singlephoton sources at room temperature. Van der Waals materials in the form of thin sheets (1-50 nm) or single atomic layers have received a great deal of attention as a light source due to their unique mechanical, electronic and optical properties Particularly, their ability to conform and integrate with other material systems offer unprecedented control over their electronic and optical response From among the many van der Waals systems presently attracting attention, here we focus on hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), a semiconductor featuring a wide band gap (of approximately 6 eV Recent studies have shown that hBN grown via chemical vapor deposition (CVD) can contain a high density of point defects that can be "activated" (i.e., transformed into a fluorescent state) either by thermal annealing or substrate-engineering Processing information with quantum emitters requires scalable methods for deterministically placing these emitters in integrated photonic circuits and subsequently coupling to structures that can direct, amplify, and potentially modulate the emitted photons. Small ensembles of independent emitters coupled to a cavity have recently gained attention with an eye on applications in quantum memory storage and its ability to act as entangled systems In our experiments, we start with the fabrication of arrays of silver nanopillars via e-beam lithography. To this end, a PMMA film (positive resist) was patterned on a glass substrate to produce regular, square arrays of cylindrical holes of variable diameter and separation (pitch). Then, a 100 nm layer of Ag was deposited on the patterned PMMA film via electron beam evaporation. Afterwards, a lift-off process was used to remove the Ag-coated PMMA via acetone, leaving behind arrays of silver nanopillars with different diameters and inter-site separations. Subsequently, a 10 nm conformal coating of alumina was deposited on the sample so as to passivate the Ag structure as well as to provide the spacing required to prevent silver-induced emitter quenching. To study the interaction between the hBN emission and the plasmonic arrays, we fabricated pillar structures with pitches varying from 220 nm to 2000 nm and with pillar diameters from 50 nm to 400 nm for each pitch. Generally, pillar arrays with a pillar-to-pillar spacing less than 100 nm were found to fuse together, hence imposing a practical limit in the type of systems we could probe. Each array was 50×50 μm 2 in size, large enough to allow for a collective SLR mode while still compatible with optical inspection. The hBN used in the experiment was a CVD-grown 20-nm-thick film commercially available from Graphene Supermarket. The hBN flake had an approximate size of ~5×5mm 2 , large enough to cover the entire patterned area with a continuous film. The hBN was deposited on the Ag pillar substrate via a wet transfer protocol described in Ref. In order to obtain angle-resolved spectra in Figures Photoluminescence (PL) spectra were collected via an infinity-corrected 50×, 0.83 numerical aperture (NA) objective (Olympus). The confocal PL experiments in Fig. SLRs are hybrid plasmonic diffractive modes found in one-and two-dimensional periodic arrays of plasmonic nanoparticles. They are formed by the coupling of the localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPRs) of the discrete metal particles to in-plane diffraction orders known as Rayleigh anomalies (RAs) For the geometry in Fig. The bright field microscope images of the Ag pillars arrays in Fig. Fig. To study the interplay between emitter fluorescence and the SLRs, we look at the optical characteristics of the hBN-covered array already characterized in Fig. In summary, we presented a method for engineering room temperature quantum emission in a scalable platform where the emitters are activated at the array sites via substrate engineering. For suitable array parameters, the defect emission couples to the optically active plasmonic substrate and undergoes a modification in its directionality and spectral intensity. Coupling of emitter systems with photonic structures that support delocalized or propagating modes permits the mutual interaction between these distinct and spatially separated color centers. Such structures could facilitate long range energy transfer between individual emitters. Future work could focus on controlling the number of emitters coupling to the SLR mode via the size of the active region, through the number of intrinsic defects present in the material, or by spectral filtering N.V.P. 