Graphene nanoflakes (GNFs) were synthesized by atmospheric pressure chemical vapour deposition of propane (C 3 H 8 ) employing Ni (salen) powder without the introduction of a substrate. The graphitic nature of the GNFs was examined by an X-ray diffraction method. Scanning electron microscopy results revealed that GNFs were stacked on top of one another and had a high aspect ratio. Transmission electron microscopy studies suggested that the GNFs were made up of a number of crystalline graphene layers, some of which were even single crystalline as evident from the selected area diffraction pattern. Finally, Raman spectroscopy confirmed the high quality of the GNFs. Graphene is an atomically thin carbon nanomaterial made up of a single sheet of sp 2 hybridized carbon atoms. It has a unique nanostructure with fascinating chemical and physical properties In this paper, an efficient and facile process to synthesize graphene nanoflakes (GNFs) using APCVD of propane employing Ni powder without the introduction of the substrate is described. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were employed to characterize the overall growth morphology and the internal structure of the GNFs, respectively. Information regarding the crystallographic structure and chemical composition was obtained from X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Raman spectroscopy. Ni (salen) powder (yellow in colour) was poured into a quartz boat and inserted into the quartz tube furnace as shown in figure Figure SEM was used to analyse the morphology of the GNFs. The SEM micrographs (figure The internal structure of GNFs was examined using TEM measurement. The sheet-like nature of the flakes was clearly apparent from the TEM micrographs (figure The crystalline nature of the GNFs was also evidenced by the normal-incidence selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns shown in figure Raman spectrum (figure The intensity ratio of the D peak to the G peak was 0.22, suggesting that the grown GNFs were crystalline. To evaluate the in-plane sp 2 crystallite size (L a ) for the nanographitic material, the formula suggested by Caņado et al The value of L a calculated from the above formula was found to be 61 nm. Moreover, the intensity ratio of the 2D peak to the G peak was 0.55 which indicated that the grown material belongs to the few layer graphene (FLG) system In this paper, a facile and efficient method for the simple and scalable synthesis of GNFs using Ni(salen) powder without the introduction of a substrate has been described with highly reproducible features. GNFs were synthesized by the APCVD method and characterized using standard techniques such as XRD, SEM, TEM and Raman. The graphitic nature of GNFs was predicted from the XRD result. SEM and TEM analyses confirmed that the grown material consists of multilayered graphene sheets with a flaky morphology. Raman spectroscopy confirmed the good quality of the sample and suggested that the sample belonged to the FLG system. This simple, scalable, efficient and low cost (since no substrate is required) technique for the synthesis of GNFs will open up scope for further exploration in the subject.