Superconducting resonators interfaced with paramagnetic spin ensembles are used to increase the sensitivity of electron spin resonance experiments and are key elements of microwave quantum memories. Certain spin systems that are promising for such quantum memories possess 'sweet spots' at particular combinations of magnetic fields and frequencies, where spin coherence times or linewidths become particularly favorable. In order to be able to couple high-Q superconducting resonators to such specific spin transitions, it is necessary to be able to tune the resonator frequency under a constant magnetic field amplitude. Here, we demonstrate a high-quality, magnetic field resilient superconducting resonator, using a 3D vector magnet to continuously tune its resonance frequency by adjusting the orientation of the magnetic field. The resonator maintains a quality factor of > 10 5 up to magnetic fields of 2.6 T, applied predominantly in the plane of the superconductor. We achieve a continuous tuning of up to 30 MHz by rotating the magnetic field vector, introducing a component of 5 mT perpendicular to the superconductor. Superconducting co-planar microwave resonators allow for a variety of compact designs in conjunction with high-quality factors, and find applications in the sensitive readout of individual quantum systems and small ensembles The study of spins coupled to superconducting microwave resonators typically requires static magnetic fields in the range of several 100 mT to tune the spin Zeeman energy into resonance with the resonator. Superconducting resonators often exhibit limits in the quality factor (< 10 5 ) under the influence of such static magnetic fields In this Article, we present a superconducting thin-film lumped element resonator (LER) tailored for a high resilience to static in-plane magnetic fields (up to 2.6 T), and show how its frequency may be tuned by introducing an additional magnetic field component, perpendicular to the superconducting thin-film. In this way, we demonstrate frequency tunability of up to 30 MHz (arising for a perpendicular magnetic field component of 5 mT) while maintaining high-quality factors (Q L > 10 5 ). The resonator frequency ω res = 1/ √ LC, where L and C are respectively the inductance and capacitance of the resonator where L G is the geometric inductance and L kin is the kinetic inductance Figure The resonator shown in Fig. Figure Figure As B is increased from zero, Q L of the resonator drops from about 3 × 10 5 to a minimum of about 4 × 10 4 at a magnetic field of 234 mT. We attribute this to the presence of paramagnetic dangling bond defects at the Si/SiO 2 (natural oxide) interface, with g-factors ≈ 2, inductively coupling to the resonator. Dangling bond defects Finally, we investigate the tunability of the resonator frequency by introducing an additional field, B ⊥ , and rotating it by the angle α, as shown in Figure Although the primary motivation of the methods presented here is the relatively slow tuning of the resonator frequency to match a desired spin transition, it is also worth reflecting on potential applications in fast-tuning of the resonator frequency within a quantum memory pulse sequence In summary, we presented a design for a high-quality factor, co-planar superconducting lumped element microwave resonator made of NbN, which can be operated at high static magnetic fields (up to 2.6 T in-plane of the superconductor), while maintaining a high-quality factor (> 10 5 ). We observe a significant drop in quality factor arising from coupling to g ≈ 2 spins, most likely dangling bond defects at the Si/SiO 2 interface. We demonstrated the tuning of the resonator frequency by applying a small magnetic field perpendicular to the superconducting film, and we see near non-hysteretic frequency tuning up to 30.63(3) MHz, while maintaining the high-quality factor. The tuning range can be further increased with higher perpendicular fields, however, the resonance frequency tuning becomes hysteretic and the quality factor drops. Similar tuning can be performed using significant in-plane fields (e.g. 1 T). This type of resonator is therefore well suited to study the spin-resonator coupling at specific combinations of magnetic field magnitudes and resonance frequencies, e.g. magnetic field noise resilient transitions, and has a high potential for devices such as quantum memories. See the Supplementary Information for a detailed description of the modelling of the resonator power dependence, the resonator fabrication finite element simulations, the experimental setups, the reproducibility of the resonator parameters between cooldowns and a characterization of additional device. This research has received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 688539 (MOS-QUITO), as well as from UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council, Grant No. EP/P510270/1. Tuning high-Q superconducting resonators by magnetic field reorientation: Supplemental Information Here, we discuss the microwave power dependence of the loaded quality factor Q L . In Fig. We use the following model where δ TLS,0 represents the loss tangent for the unsaturated TLS in the low temperature and low power limit, ω res /2π the resonator resonance frequency, k B the Boltzman constant, n the average number of microwave photons in the resonator, n c the critical photon number for saturating the TLS, β the rate of saturation of the TLS, and δ other comprises the loss tangent of other power independent losses, like quasiparticle losses, radiative losses etc. Figure Our resonators are fabricated by electron beam lithography (Raith 150-TWO) and reactive ion etching (Oxford Plasma Pro NGP80) into a ≈ 50 nm thick NbN film, sputtered on a 250 μm thick high-resistivity (ρ > 5000 Ωcm) n-type Si substrate. Prior to the metal deposition the natural oxide layer on the Si substrate is removed by a 10 sec HF dip and directly transferred into the sputter chamber (less than 1 min). The NbN film was sputtered in a SVS6000 chamber, at a base pressure of 6.5 × 10 -7 mbar, using a sputter power of 200 W in an 50:50 Ar/N atmosphere held at 5 × 10 -3 mbar, with the gas flow for both elements set to 50 SCCM. The resulting NbN films showed a critical temperature of T c = 11.6 K. Using the same deposition conditions 20 nm thick NbN films were deposited on sapphire and have been previously demonstrated to have internal quality factors at high power (low power) of over 10 6 (4 × 10 5 ) in a quarter wave coplanar waveguide resonator, with T c ∼ 10 K S1. The difference in T c between that work and the devices studied here are ascribe to film thickness. We use the finite element simulation software CST Microwave Studio to simulate the superconducting resonator design, presented in the main text. Using the eigenmode solver, we plot the distributions of the E-fields and the H-fields of the resonant mode in Fig. The experiments presented in the main text were performed in two different dilution refrigerators. Both are of the same model (BlueFors LD400), but they differ in their American Magnetics Inc 3D vector magnet system and their total microwave circuit attenuation. The magnet system used for the tuning experiment (Fig. Figure The superconducting lumped element resonator, presented in the main text, is characterised in two different dilution refrigerators (see section IV). This allows us to compare the resonator parameters from two distinct cooldowns and quantify the device's reproducibility. Figure Here, we present additional data acquired on a similar device as presented in the main text. Figure 