We present a scheme to entangle two microwave fields by using the nonlinear magnetostrictive interaction in a ferrimagnet. The magnetostrictive interaction enables the coupling between a magnon mode (spin wave) and a mechanical mode in the ferrimagnet, and the magnon mode simultaneously couples to two microwave cavity fields via the magnetic dipole interaction. The magnon-phonon coupling is enhanced by directly driving the ferrimagnet with a strong red-detuned microwave field, and the driving photons are scattered onto two sidebands induced by the mechanical motion. We show that two cavity fields can be prepared in a stationary entangled state if they are respectively resonant with two mechanical sidebands. The present scheme illustrates a new mechanism for creating entangled states of optical fields, and enables potential applications in quantum information science and quantum tasks that require entangled microwave fields. Many quantum information tasks, e.g., quantum teleportation In this Letter, we present a mechanism, distinguished from all previous approaches, for creating continuous-variable (CV) entanglement of MW fields by using the nonlinear magnetostrictive interaction in a ferrimagnet. Specifically, two MW cavity fields couple to a magnon mode in a ferrimagnetic yttrium-iron-garnet (YIG) sphere We first present a general model of the scheme, then solve the system dynamics by means of the standard Langevin formalism and the linearization treatment, and study the entanglement in the stationary state. Finally, we show strategies to measure/verify the optical entanglement, and provide possible configurations for experimental realizations. The model. The system consists of two MW cavity modes, a magnon mode, and a mechanical mode, as shown in Fig. where a j (m) and a † j (m † ) are, respectively, the annihilation and creation operators of the cavity mode j (magnon mode), satisfying [O, O † ] = 1 (O = a j , m), and q and p are the dimensionless position and momentum quadratures of the mechanical mode, thus [q, p] = i. ω j , ω m , and ω b are the resonance frequencies of the cavity mode j, the magnon mode, and the mechanical mode, respectively, and the magnon frequency can be adjusted in a large range by altering the external bias magnetic field H via ω m = γ 0 H, where the gyromagnetic ratio γ 0 /2π = 28 GHz/T. G 0 is the single-magnon magnomechanical coupling rate, and g j denotes the coupling rate between the magnon mode with the cavity mode j, which can be (much) larger than the dissipation rates κ j and κ m of the cavity and magnon modes, g j > κ j , κ m , leading to cavity-magnon polaritons For convenience, we switch to the rotating frame with respect to the drive frequency ω 0 , and by including input noises and dissipations of the system, we obtain the following quantum Langevin equations (QLEs) where ∆ j = ω j -ω 0 , ∆ m = ω m -ω 0 , γ is the mechanical damping rate, and a in j , m in are input noise operators with zero mean value acting on the cavity and magnon modes, respectively, which are characterized by the following correlation functions The Langevin force operator ξ, accounting for the Brownian motion of the mechanical oscillator, is autocorrelated as , where a Markovian approximation has been taken valid for a large mechanical quality factor Q m = ω b /γ 1 , with k B the Boltzmann constant and T the environmental temperature. Because the magnon mode is strongly driven, it has a large amplitude | m | 1, and further owing to the cavity-magnon beamsplitter interactions the two cavity fields are also of large amplitudes. This allows us to linearize the system dynamics around semiclassical averages by writing any mode operator as a c-number plus its fluctuation operator O = O + δO, (O = a j , m, q, p), and neglecting small second-order fluctuation terms. Substituting those linearized mode operators into Eq. ( -ig j i∆ j +κ j m , and m is given by with ∆m = ∆ m + G 0 q the effective detuning of the magnon mode including the frequency shift caused by the magnetostrictive interaction. It takes a simpler form when Let us introduce the quadratures of the quantum fluctuations (δX 1 , δY 1 , δX 2 , δY 2 , δx, δy, δq, δp), where √ 2, and δy = i(δm † -δm)/ √ 2, and the input noise quadratures are defined in the same way. The QLEs of the quadrature fluctuations can be cast in the matrix form where u(t)= δX 1 (t),δY 1 (t),δX 2 (t),δY 2 (t),δx(t),δy(t),δq(t),δp(t) T , 2κ m y in (t), 0, ξ(t) T is the vector of noises entering the sys-tem, and the drift matrix A is given by where G = i √ 2G 0 m is the effective magnomechanical coupling rate. By using the result of Eq. ( which shows that the coupling can be significantly enhanced with a strong magnon drive. We are interested in the quantum correlation of two MW fields in the steady state. The steady state of the system is a four-mode Gaussian state due to the linearized dynamics and the Gaussian nature of input noises. Such a state is fully characterized by an 8×8 covariance matrix (CM) C with its entries defined as C i j (t) = 1 2 u i (t)u j (t ) + u j (t )u i (t) (i, j = 1, 2, ..., 8). It can be obtained straightforwardly by solving the Lyapunov equation where ) is the diffusion matrix, whose entries are defined through n i (t)n j (t ) + n j (t )n i (t) /2 = D i j δ(tt ). We adopt the logarithmic negativity where ν-= min eig|iΩ 2 Cmw | (with the symplectic matrix Ω 2 = ⊕ 2 j=1 iσ y and the y-Pauli matrix σ y ) is the minimum symplectic eigenvalue of the CM Cmw = PC mw P, with C mw the CM of the two MW fields, which is obtained by removing in C the rows and columns associated with the magnon and mechanical modes, and P = diag(1, -1, 1, 1) is the matrix that performs partial transposition on CMs MW entanglement and its detection. In Fig. . See text for the other parameters. ± ω b , where "±" sign is taken due to the symmetry of the two cavity fields. And the magnon mode resonant with the blue sideband ∆m ω b corresponds to the anti-Stokes process, which significantly cools the phonon mode, thus eliminating the main obstacle for observing entanglement MHz, and T = 20 mK. We use a strong magnon-phonon coupling G > κ m to create magnomechanical entanglement. This means that a strong magnon driving field should be used, and in order to avoid unwanted magnon Kerr effect Alternatively, one can also verify the entanglement by using the Duan criterion where X + = X 1 + X 2 , and Y -= Y 1 -Y 2 . Figure Experimental implementations. We now discuss possible configurations that could realize the proposal. Two MW cav-X Y 45°L oop antenna FIG. ities and each cavity containing a cavity mode are preferred. In this situation, the frequencies of the cavity fields can be adjusted flexibly to match the two mechanical sidebands. The two cavities could be placed perpendicularly in the horizontal plane with the YIG sphere located in the intersection (near the maximum magnetic fields) of the cavity fields. This can be realized in a planar cross-shape cavity Conclusions. We present a new mechanism for creating MW entangled states based on magnetostrictive interaction in a ferrimagnetic YIG sphere. The mechanism makes use of the nonlinearity of such a magnomechanical interaction. The entanglement is in the steady state and robust against cavity dissipations and environmental temperature. We show strategies to detect the entanglement and a possible configuration that is promising to realize the proposal. We analyse in detail various practical imperfections which would help future experimental realizations. This work may find applications in quantum information science, quantum metrology, and quantum tasks that require entangled CV MW fields.