We comment on the electronic structure of Nickelate system NdNiO 2 which shows superconductivity on doping. The doped system Nd 0.8 Sr 0.2 NiO 2 shows (most probably unconventional) superconductivity with transition temperatures ranging from 9 K to 15 K[1]. The resistivity of the parent compound NdNiO 2 shows a minimum at around 60K, and an up-turn at lower temperatures. In the current understanding it is thought to be originating from a Kondo like coupling between mobile d-states of the Nd 5d bands and unpaired electrons in Ni3d x 2 -y 2 -O2p hybrid orbitals of Ni 1+ and O 2-ions. In this note we offer alternative possibilities of the observed resistance minimum in LaNiO 2 . We attempt to construct a "road-map" of various possibilities to comprehend the observed behaviour and suggest further experiments to prove or disprove a given explanation. We also compare and contrast Nickelates with Cuprates. Comparison points towards unconventional superconductivity in Nickelates. Recent discovery of 9 K to 15 K superconductivity in the compound Nd 1-x Sr x NiO 2 [Ar]3d ilar to d 9 configuration of Cu in Cuprates. This similarity was recognized roughly two decades ago Ni spins via 2p -3d hybridization and the system (LaNiO 3 ) should lead to heavy fermion Kondo type behaviour which was later found to be so Authors in the recent discovery In the present note we would like to comment about the behaviour of resistivity of the parent compound and on the mechanism of superconductivity in the doped system. Resistivity of the parent compound NdLiO • Weak localization effects: This is unlikely, as the system (NdNiO 2 ) prepared is reasonably good crystalline material (figure • As suggested in Kondo system like behaviour and resistivity minimum. This is quite plausible. Experiments to prove or disprove this explanation are proposed at the end of this section. • tive to position at that temperature (figure We return back to the "Kondo system like behaviour" possibility. If 5d states of Neodymium atoms are involved in electrical transport and there is a coupling of these degrees of freedom with un-paired electrons in Ni 1+ , then it can lead to Kondo system like behaviour and resistivity minimum can be understood in the undoped system (1) It weakens the Kondo Coupling, and (2) another conducting channel is opened up (our parallel resistance idea (figure These are some of the possibilities to comprehend the observed behaviour. The field of Nickelate superconductivity is at a very early stage of development. With more experiments in future the "actual picture" will emerge. Actually, all the experimental arsenal used to analyze Cuprates can be used in the case of Nickelates. Below we suggest some of the experiments that will be useful to resolve the cases: (1) Pairing is assumed a-priori through superexchange interaction J and (2) RVB approach gives continuous behaviour across the quantum critical point p * where pseudogap boundary ends On the other hand if quantum criticality is found in Nickelates, then the mainstream approach "superconductivity from repulsion" will be more appropriate. Thus, superconductivity in Nickelates can be rationalized through point We end this note with some more comments: • More experimental work related to study of superconductivity at various doping levels is much needed (which is extremely difficult in Nickelates). Question is whether there is a dome type structure? • Whether there is a quantum critical point at a special doping level of Sr? Measurement of heat capacity and hall coefficient at that point can establish more connections with cuprates (or can rule out). • Heat capacity/Quantum oscillation measurements to rule out (or in) the heavy fermion behaviour (as suggested in ref Actually, all the questions which were asked in Cuprate superconductivity can be asked in the case of Nickelates. Clear differences are (1) the lack of magnetism, and (2) the role of spacer layer (Nd layer) in electrical conduction, in the case of prepared Nickelate compounds. 3+ ([Xe]4 f 3 ) Ni 1+ ([Ar]3d 9 ) [O 2-([He]2s 2 2p 6 )] 2 . in oxygen p orbitals (Ni 3+ O 2-→ Ni 2+ O 1-)