Spin-based memories are attractive for their non-volatility and high durability but provide modest resistance changes, whereas semiconductor logic transistors are capable of large resistance changes, but lack memory function with high durability. The recent availability of multiferroic materials provides an opportunity to directly couple the change in spin states of a magnetic memory to a charge change in a semiconductor transistor. In this work, we propose and analyze the spin-orbit torque field-effect transistor (SOTFET), a device with the potential to significantly boost the energy efficiency of spin-based memories, and to simultaneously offer a palette of new functionalities. The understanding of spin transport in heterostructures In contrast, non-magnetic semiconductor field-effect transistors (FETs) achieve orders of magnitude resistance change in each switching event. The field effect converts a linear change in the gate voltage into an exponential change in the mobile carrier density in the semiconductor, and consequently modulates its resistance. Thus, a material that can transduce the change of the spin/magnetic state in a SOT structure into the charge of a semiconductor channel could significantly boost the resistance change of a magnetic memory. This requirement would be met by recently developed magnetoelectric multiferroic materials, which simultaneously possess magnetic order and ferroelectricity in a manner that these order parameters are coupled due to the magnetoelectric effect Inspired by these recent advances in SOT and multiferroic materials, we propose a new magnetoelectric memory device, the spin-orbit-torque field-effect transistor (SOTFET). This device aims to combine the virtues of magnetic memories with the large resistance change of FETs, providing both memory a) Electronic mail: xl633@cornell.edu and logic functionalities. Analysis of the memory aspect indicates that the SOTFET can offer orders of magnitude increase in the on-off resistance ratio compared to existing magnetic memories, which can potentially lower the operation energy significantly. The potential logic aspect of the SOTFET would also enable new circuit architectures for efficient logic or search functions The working principle of the SOTFET is illustrated in Fig. The SOTFET differs from the conventional SOT-MRAMs in the read mechanism. Coupling the M of the FM with the semiconductor channel would be achieved by the magnetoelectric multiferroic layer. Due to the exchange coupling between the FM and the MF The resulting switching of P gates the semiconductor channel by shifting the surface potential, similar to the effect in ferroelectric-gate FETs To prove the feasibility of the SOTFET, we quantitatively analyze the dynamical coupling across each interface, and the entire device. The analysis to follow shows that the SOTFET behavior is achievable, but requires magnetoelectric multiferroics of specific magnetism and polarization, along with an appropriate hierarchy of strengths for the exchange coupling, DMI, and anisotropy energies within the gate stack. Because the FM/MF heterointerface is the least explored, instead of a generic case, we use experimental results of the CoFe/BiFeO 3 heterostructure The magnetization M of the FM layer is switched by spinorbit torque (SOT). For simplicity we assume single-domain macrospin behavior. The switching dynamics of this process are captured by the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert-Slonczewski (LLGS) equation where m is the normalized magnetization of the FM, H e f f is the effective magnetic field acting on m, γ is the electron gyromagnetic ratio, μ 0 is the vacuum permeability, α is the Gilbert damping factor, M S is the saturation magnetization and τ SOT = τ AD + τ FL is the spin-orbit torque, the sum of the antidamping torque τ AD and field-like torque τ FL , which are given by Here h is the reduced Planck constant, e is electron charge, t is the thickness of ferromagnetic (FM) material, j = J SO is the charge current density in the SO layer, θ AD(FL) is the spin Hall angle of the anti-damping (AD) or field-like (FL) torque from the SO layer, and mp is the normalized spin polarization. The effective field H e f f = H ext + H a + H demag + H DMI , where H ext is any external magnetic field and H a is the anisotropy field with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) calculated by , where K is the anisotropy constant. H demag is the demagnetization field as calculated in Beleggia et al. Switching of M in the FM switches the electric polarization P of the MF due to the exchange coupling and DMI. The dynamics of P are captured by the Landau-Khalatnikov (LK) equation where γ FE is the viscosity coefficient, P i (i = x, y, z) is the x/y/z component of P. F is the total ferroelectric free energy where α 1 , α 11 , α 12 are the phenomenological Landau expansion coefficients, K strain is the strain energy, u is the axis of substrate strain, F ext is the external electric field and F DMI is the effective electric field from DMI. The strain term, K strain (P• u) 2 , in Eq. 5 arises from the substrate-induced strain In our model, the exchange coupling, which couples M C in BiFeO 3 and M in CoFe, and the DMI, which couples P and M C in BiFeO 3 , are merged into one effective DMI term that directly captures the interaction between the M in CoFe and P in BiFeO 3 , with an effective Hamiltonian where E DMI,0 is the energy coefficient of DMI, P is the polarization of BiFeO 3 , N is the Neel vector, and M is the magnetic moment in CoFe. All vectors in the equation are normalized vectors. The effective magnetic and electric fields that enter the equations of motions are then: and where H DMI,0 is the effective DMI magnetic field magnitude and F DMI,0 is the effective DMI electric field magnitude. Both fields have constant magnitudes for specific material combinations, because they originate from the energy and material parameters: FIG. With the direction of N defined as N = -P × M, all vectors in the CoFe/BiFeO 3 FM/MF system (P, N and M) are connected by the DMI. The method of implementing the dynamic evolution of the M and P described above is shown schematically in Fig. For the CoFe/BiFeO 3 FM/MF heterostructure and taking P S =100 μC/cm 2 of BiFeO 3 The natural next step is to explore reduced P S in the MF layer. Reducing P S in BiFeO 3 is experimentally feasible, for example, by La-substitution of Bi in BiFeO 3 Reducing P S of the BiFeO 3 could help the switching of P successfully for two reasons. First, as shown in Eq. 9, for a fixed H DMI,0 and M S , lowering P S for the same E DMI,0 implies an enhanced F DMI,0 to switch the polarization. Second, a reduced P S leads to a weaker polarization anisotropy as described in the free energy equation Eq. 5. This lowers the energy barrier between polarization equilibrium states, making the switching easier. Figures The switching of P with a reduced P S =10 μC/cm 2 shown in Figs. An electrically insulating magnetic (FM) layer is more desirable for SOTFET application in order to reduce the shunting current from SO layer, and boost the torque efficiency Another challenge in the development of ferroelectric memory devices has been the presence of the depolarization field that can destabilize the ferroelectric polarization over time In addition, by the virtue of simultaneously being a FET, the SOTFET can also provide logic functionality by a gate voltage controlling the channel. As a merger of memory and logic, the SOTFET is capable of process-in-memory (PiM) functionalities that significantly lower the energy consumption and physical size of computation, comparing to a von Neumann architecture where logic and memory are separated. Some examples are explored in In summary, the SOTFET, a new magnetoelectric memory device is proposed, in which a change in magnetization of a SO/FM layer is transduced to control the semiconductor channel by using a magnetoelectric multiferroic layer, so that a readout with several orders of magnitude change in resistance can be achieved. We establish a quantitative model of the dynamics of the magnetization and polarization of the layers of the SOTFET. From the model, the materials needs for the successful operation are identified and the feasibility of the SOT-FET is proved in a properly designed CoFe/BiFeO 3 gate stack. Supplementary Material -Key parameters for numerical simulations and the validation of the model are provided in supplementary material.