Manipulating micro-scale object plays paramount roles in a wide range of fundamental researches and applications. At micro-scale, various methods have been developed in the past decades, including optical, electric, magnetic, aerodynamic and acoustic methods. However, these non-contact forces are susceptible to external disturbance, and so finding a way to make micro-scale object manipulation immune to external perturbations is challenging and remains elusive. Here we demonstrate a method based on new trapping mechanism to manipulate micro-scale object in a gas flow at ambient conditions. We first show that the micro-droplet is entrapped into a trapping ring constructed by a particular toroidal vortex. The vortex works as tweezers to control the position of the micro-droplet. We then show that the micro-droplet can be transported along the trapping ring. By virtue of the topological character of the gas flow, the transport path is able to bypass external strong perturbations automatically. We further demonstrate a topological transfer process of the micro-droplet between two hydrodynamic tweezers. Our method provides an integrated toolbox to manipulate a micro-scale object, with an intrinsic mechanism that protects the target object from external disturbances. Manipulating micro-scale object is always a challenging issue in various fundamental researches and applications. Because methods based on direct mechanical contact fail at micro-scale, various non-contact methods have been developed in the past decades, including optical Topological phenomena have been observed in various physics systems recently, involving charge In fluid dynamics, the vorticity Ω is a pseudovector field that describes the vortex field, and is defined as the curl of the flow velocity υ, i.e., Ω = ∇ × υ. For an incompressible fluid, vorticity has the special property that its field lines never cross. This indicates an important topological property that knotted or linked loops in the fluid will remain knotted or linked even in the presence of viscosity or external local perturbations Besides fundamental interest, whether such topological properties have any practical application remains to be explored. Here, we generate a particular toroidal vortex using a tapering micro-nozzle, which works as tweezers to manipulate the micro-droplet at ambient conditions. In this trapping mechanism, the particle released in gas flow is entrapped in the vortex core under the action of Stokes drag force from the vortex flow and a restoring force in gravity direction. And by taking advantage of the nonlocal topological property of the vortex flow field, we have further demonstrated the transport and transfer of the object in a controllable way that is intrinsically protected from external disturbance. For a micro-particle released in a non-uniform flow, determining the drag and lift forces arising from both inertia and unsteady effects at low Reynolds number is a long-standing open question in fluid dynamics Before building practical hydrodynamic tweezers, three issues need to be addressed. First, the size of object to be trapped is dependent on the characteristic scale of fluid flow, and so it is possible in principle to realize the control of an arbitrarily small object. However, as the system scales down, the condition of continuous fluid would fail and the molecular behaviors would emerge. The typical value of mean free path is tens of nanometers for gas phase flow in practical realization, and is sub-nanometer when liquid phase fluid is used. The second issue is the fluctuation of the fluid field. As the fluid flows past an object, the object also exerts a back action onto the fluid. This effect is characterized by the Reynolds number (Re). When Re is large enough, turbulence occurs and the system becomes unstable. For micro-objects, however, the typical Re is usually small enough to avoid turbulence. The third issue is related to the viscosity. As a vortex in a non-ideal fluid will eventually spread and damp out, suitable external pump is necessary to maintain the main structure of the vortex. The scheme of our hydrodynamic tweezers is shown in Fig. The generated flow field is symmetric around the z axis. So the flow patterns can be clearly demonstrated by the streamlines The stream function is defined by where v z is the magnitude of velocity of the gas flow in z direction. The stream function is obtained by a numerical simulation of the flow field which is described in detail in Sec. I of the supplemental material [31]. As indicated in Fig. The Reynolds number of the flow is Re = dυρ/μ, where d is the diameter of the nozzle, υ is the magnitude of velocity of fluid flow, ρ and μ are the fluid's density and viscosity coefficient respectively. For the micro-nozzle in our scheme, Re is much less than 10, which is far from turbulent condition. Similarly, the particle Reynolds number Re p = aυ s ρ/μ is around 0.001. Here, a is the radius of particle and υ s is the magnitude of relative velocity of particle and fluid measured on the streamline through the center of particle (i.e. v s = v pv). In our setup, a liquid micro-scale droplet is released in a gas flow at ambient conditions. So the buoyancy and the classical pressure gradient of the unperturbed flow can be ignored comparing with Stokes drag force. The force analysis of the droplet in fluid flow is shown in Fig Re p , where T a = a 2 ωρ/μ is the Taylor number, the correction to the Stokes drag force F D is in fact the time-dependent history force F H on the particle Hence, a droplet under the stable balance of an external force F ext and the trapping force stays stably at one position away from vortex center. Increasing flow velocity can strengthen the trapping force, so the tweezers are stronger to overcome external interactions. This adjustable trapping force lets the hydrodynamic tweezers have more practical applications. To further analyze the dynamic process of trapping, we choose the rotating reference frame of angular velocity of ω x, with the origin point at the vortex core, as shown in It is noted that now (y, z) is the position of the particle in the rotating frame. The first two terms in the righthand side (RHS) of Eq. ( Now, we consider the buffer gas cooling of a penning trap Hence, the trapping mechanism of the particle can be understood as a gas damping process of a Penning trap using (ω c +ω m ) parametric coupling. And then the condition necessary to achieve trapping is obtained as follows: where k 0 = 3k/(4πa 3 ). When ω = ω max , it is the critical condition that the parametric term offsets the damping term exactly at any moment, then the particle keeps perpetual radial motion as in an ideal classic Penning trap. Turning back to the laboratory reference frame, this critical condition is that the particle travels around the vortex center in a periodic orbit with ω = ω max . An angular velocity ω < ω max makes the particle spiral into the trapping center as desired; while a larger ω leads to the escape of the particle. In the experimental realization schematically shown in Fig. To create a droplet in the fluid flow, we use a piezo setup to generate a mist of water with diameter less than 5 μm. These small droplets spiral into the trapping ring to condense into a bigger one, the trajectories can be seen in Supplementary Video 1 The micro-nozzle used to generate gas flow is made of a glass tube with inner diameter 1 mm, and is fabricated by heating-pulling process. The nozzle with outlet diameter d being about 20 μm can generate a trapping ring with a radius around 210 μm, which is insensitive to the flow velocity and droplet size. The nozzle is mounted on a manual positioner so that the position of the gas flow field can be tuned. We build the diamagnetic trap using an array of 16 pieces of micro-machined NdFeB permanent magnets of the same structure (see Sec. II of the supplemental material [31]), and they are hold by a copper unit. The strength of the restoring force near the equilibrium is k = 4πa 3 k 0 /3, with k 0 = 4.69×10 7 Nm -4 . Theoretically, the droplet is steadily trapped at any position along the trapping ring, but in the presence of the diamagnetismgravity potential, there is only one trapping point close to the center of magnetic bound field. The position of the magnets can be slightly tuned to generate an external force F ext , which can be utilized to pull the droplet. So the equilibrium position of droplet along the trapping ring can be controlled. Fig. Having achieved the trapping of droplet, we continue to test transport behavior of the micro-droplet along trapping ring, the experimental process is shown in Fig. The fluid flow in the vicinity of the disturber develops boundary layers. In the boundary layer, the velocity of gas flow drops down to zero when approaching the disturber surface. This changes the trapping field regularly. On the other hand, the robustness of vortex field helps keep its topological structure that remains as a closed loop even when the disturber is approaching. This ensures that the trapping ring also keeps its topological structure. Numerical simulations affirm that, when the needle comes close from the outer or inner sides of the trapping ring, the ring is always pushed away from the disturber but remains as a closed loop. Figs. 4(b)-4(e) plot the numerical simulations of the velocity and the vorticity fields, where the droplet can still be trapped in the ring under influence of the disturber. As shown in Figs. In order to check the proposed mechanism, an external force F ext is generated by tuning the position of external magnetic field and a glass needle with diameter 20 μm is used as a disturber. We can pull the droplet along trapping ring with or without a disturber. When there is no disturber, the droplet can travel along the ring smoothly (see Supplementary Furthermore, we explore the transfer process of the droplet between two hydrodynamic tweezers. As described above, a trapping ring exists as a closed loop that does not break. So in the presence of the second tweezers, there are only two topologies, one is two independent trapping rings and the other is a single loop that is created by merging two rings. With such topologies, we achieve the transfer of a droplet from one tweezers to the other, as schematically shown in Fig. In summary, we have explored and realized a noncontact method to manipulate micro-objects in an easycontrollable way and have shown that the topological property of fluid flow can be utilized for practical applications. The special character of the hydrodynamic tweezers is that the target object is protected from external disturbances, such as avoiding attaching to a surface. And with an adjustable trapping force, the microobject manipulation techniques demonstrated here will be useful in those scenarios where strong interactions are involved like scanning microscopy To calculate the fluid field, we employed the Navier-Stokes momentum equation of a subsonic compressible fluid where ρ, υ, t, p and μ are the density, flow velocity, time, dynamic pressure and dynamic viscosity, respectively. In addition, there is the mass continuity equation: and the energy conservation equation: In the last equation, E is the total energy of the fluid, including internal energy and kinetic energy. T is the temperature, k e is the effective coefficient of heat conduction, τ e is the effective deviatoric stress tensor, h is the enthalpy of the gas, and J is the diffusion flux. We conducted numerical computations by employing the commercial CFD software AN-SYS FLUENT, which simulates the subsonic incompressible gas flow field with the Laminar viscous simulation model. Because the Re number in our experiment is so small, we treated the gas flow as incompressible flow. We enabled viscous heating option. So the Energy equation option is also activated, and we chose the gas density as constant in the material module. The computation domain is a cylinder with a half of a nozzle dipped inside. The cylinder's height is 1200 μm, and its radius is 600 μm. This domain is composed of around 2×10 6 mixed cells including tetrahedron cells and hexahedron cells. The amount of cells was chosen on the basis of convergence analysis using x, y, z velocities and continuity condition. The mesh was refined near the model surface to provide y + ≈ 1, so as to resolve viscous layers more accurately. For boundary conditions, the velocity inlet boundary condition was employed. We set the inlet velocity around 0.05 m/s to be consistent with experimental results. The pressure outlet boundary condition was used. The Gauge pressure was set as 1.0 × 10 5 Pa. Average pressure specification and non-reflecting boundary options were activated. No-slip boundary condition was applied on the solid walls, the surface of droplet and disturber. In the simulation of double nozzles condition, nothing is different from the single one except that we add another nozzle with the same size parallel to the original one. By changing distance between the two nozzles which is in the x direction, we can get different fluid fields. The design of the permanent magnets array was also assisted by numerical calculations based on finite element simulations. The diamagnetism force of an object in magnetic field can be expressed as Here χ is the magnetic susceptibility, V is the volume of the droplet, μ 0 is the permeability of free space and B(r) is the magnetic field vector. According to the fundamental property of magnetic field, it is impossible to generate stable trapping according to Earnshaw's theorem. However, in the presence of gravity, such stable levitation is achieved. The designing of magnets is similar to that reported previously The magnetic-gravity trap can be described as a harmonic potential near the equilibrium position, i.e., U (r) ≈ 1 2 kz 2 + 1 2 bx 2 + 1 2 by 2 . In the region where typical gas flow exists, the tweezers from the dispenser and condenses into a single large droplet, whose size can be readily regulated by controlling the duration of atomization. As the experiments are carried out at room temperature in nitrogen gas, the droplet evaporates gradually after the atomization process. A droplet with a diameter of 100 μm typically has a life span less than 30 s, which depends on environment condition such as the humidity. And the evaporation speeds up as the droplet size decreases. Measurements are performed using a microscope, and a charge-coupled device (CCD) camera with maximum speed of 1000 frames per second was used to record the position and motion information.