We present a simple, efficient method, which combines uniaxial compression and subsequent poling, to produce piezoelectric polyvinylidene fluoride-based epoxy composites. The values of the piezoelectric factors obtained are slightly higher than those of neat piezoelectric polyvinylidene fluoride. The composites respond rapidly and reach a saturation voltage output, to the application of mechanical stimulus quickly. The composites are promising for the creation of bulk piezoelectric devices, different from the usual stretched films, exploiting the physic-chemical a of the epoxy matrix. The piezoelectric factor d 31 versus the mechanical stimulus for the specimens studied, scale according to a double logarithmic representation. Polymer-based composites are being investigated widely due to their ceaseless expansion of application potentials. PolyVinylidene DiFluoride (PVDF) in particular, relishes an overgrowing heed ascribable to its remarkable pyroelectric and piezoelectric attributes (iii) the optimization of the fraction of PVDF, while the composite shares the advantageous physicchamical features of its matrix (epoxy). The resulting instances will be easily prepared, moldable, durable, efficiently adhesive to different substrates, non-corrosive and remarkably sensitive to mechanical stimuli devices. The protocol followed is uncomplicated compared with that commonly reported for receiving the piezoelectric δ-phase for PVDF microstructure We prepared a test sample of neat PVDF (sample A), an epoxy based PVDF composite (sample B) and another one, loaded with nano-graphene platelets (NGPs) (sample C), the mass ratios of which are given in Table The specimens were uniaxially compessed under by using an Enerpack RC 504 hyraulic press for about 5 seconds. The force was applied along axis-1 perpendicular to the parallel surfaces of the composite, while the side free surface area of the sample was un-cofined during deformation; thus, directions perpendicular to axis-1 are indistinguishable and isotropic (axis-3 is labeled any of these axes. The compressed pellets were subsequently polarized within a corona-like schedule; i.e., placed between a couple of parallel springloaded platinum electrodes and polarized by an electric field of about for a time duration of about 5 hours. The advantages of the method applied in the present workare the following: (i) while, in the literature, PVDF is available in films that are stretched to become piezoelectric, in the present work, bulk specimens of any size and shape can be formed, and, (ii) the equipment required to attain the piezoelectric phase is simple and inexpensive. To ensure that the above mentioned procedure drives PVDF from the non-piezoelectric α-phase) to its piezoelectric one (based on the literature, it is identical to the δ-phase, induced by axial compression The typical dimensions of the disk shaped specimens studied, are a few cm in diameter and about 0.5 mm in thickness. A couple of electrodes permanently silver pasted on the specimen's surface (fig. were connected to a digital Keithley 617 electrometer. Each device was placed inside a Faraday cage for electromagnetic shielding. Real-time voltage or current were recorded as a function of time, while axial force-stimulus covering three orders of magnitude (i.e., , respectively) could be applied. The sample capacitance was measured directly using Solartron 1260A impedance analyzer controlled by the Novocontrol® WinDETA software. Voltage and current responses to externally applied force for sample B are depicted in figs. 2 and 3, respectively. The force F 1 was applied perpendicular to the parallel surfaces of the disk-shaped composite (see fig. where denotes the sample's capacitance and is the piezoelectric coefficient. We measured both the response and relaxation for 10 s intervals, for rectangular pulses of mechanical stimuli depicted by dash line in figs. The piezoelectric coefficient d 31 is obtained from eq. ( However, after thorough experimentation, we led to the conclusion that a time interval between two successive force pulses, such as that depicted by the dash line in figs. 2 and 3, was optimally adequate for the specimen relax compared with the time-scale of the piezoelectric response; the latter is actually immediate to external force triggering. We observe that, for all samples, d 31 is a decreasing function of F 1 , in accordance with experimental observations and theoretical modeling for heterogeneous piezoelectric composites. The phenomenon was attributed to the distribution of internal stresses to the piezoelectric inclusions, the local change of the topology and variable degrees of physical contacting of the piezoelectric domains. The piezoelectric coefficient of neat PVDF is comparable or slightly larger than those reported for its piezoelectric phases developed with experimental schemes different than ours (i.e., uniaxial compression and poling). Moreover, epoxy-based composites exhibit d 31 values compable with those of neat PVDF (specimen A), suggesting that, despite their low content in PVDF (5 wt %), have equal or slightly better efficiency than neat PVDF. The piezoelectric coefficients were were determined with an error than 8 % for samples A and B and 6 -12 % for sample C. A remarkable feat is the high reproducibility of the results, indicative of a stable structure and predictable behavior of the samples. The d 31 (F 1 ) data points collapse on a single master curve when plotted in a double logarithmic diagram (fig. with correlation factor R 2 >0.99. The description of the experimental results through a common function evidences for a common underlying process for electromechanical coupling and a unified scaled behaiour of the three different composites. A functional piezoelectric device is characterized by its ability to requires both strong and rapidly produced voltage output signals. A piezoelectric coefficient is a measure of the ratio of the saturation voltage over stress and is a measure of energy conversion. The increase of voltage to saturation upon applying a mechanical stimulus is described by: ( where is a time constant, which tells how fast a saturation voltage value is attained. The values of τ obtained by fitting eq. ( In the present work, we developed a simple, reliable and low cost procedure to obtain piezoelectric PVDF and epoxy composites. The piezoelectric d 31 parameter was determined with high accuracy compared to that usually reported in the literature. Epoxy composites exhibit equal or slightly stronger piezoelectric factors than neat PVDF, probably stemming from their heterogeneous structure. A universal acaling law has been found for d 31 (F 1 ), evidencing for a common electro-mechanical coupling mechanism underlying the piezoelectric properties of different samples studied in the present work. Rapid response to applied stimulus is observed. 