Four-dimensional (4D) printing, a new technology emerged from additive manufacturing (3D printing), is widely known for its capability of programming post-fabrication shape-changing into artifacts. Fused deposition modeling (FDM)-based 4D printing, in particular, uses thermoplastics to produce artifacts and requires computational analysis to assist the design processes of complex geometries. However, these artifacts are weak against structural loads, and the design quality can be limited by less accurate material models and numerical simulations. To address these issues, this paper propounds a composite structure design made of two materials -polylactic acid (PLA) and carbon fiber reinforced PLA (CFPLA) -to increase the structural strength of 4D printed artifacts and a workflow composed of several physical experiments and series of dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) to characterize materials. We apply this workflow to 3D printed samples fabricated with different printed parameters to accurately characterize the materials and implement a sequential finite element analysis (FEA) to achieve accurate simulations. The accuracy of deformation induced by the triggering process is both computationally and experimentally verified with several creative design examples, and the 95% confidence interval of the accuracy is (0.972, 0.985). We believe the presented workflow is essential to the combination of geometry, material mechanism and design, and has various potential applications. Starting from the last century, fused deposition modeling (FDM) with additive manufacturing (3D printing) has become a widespread approach to build new structures While the 3D printing industry has been introduced for both micron-length fibers and continuous fiber composites Despite the possibility of designing programmable structures with 4D printing techniques, there exist several limitations. From the designer's perspective, there are two main limitations related to the 4D printing workflow: materials not being stiff enough and numerical simulations not being accurate enough. For materials usually used in 4D printing, thermoplastics is one of the most popular shape memory polymers (SMP), which is renowned for its high flexibility and material property transition under high temperature. However, many printable thermoplastics, including polylactic acid (PLA), have poor mechanical performance, which is not favorable in structural design. For numerical simulations, finite element analysis (FEA) is a commonly used technique to predict the deformation of the designed structure Carbon-fiber PLA (CFPLA) is known for its high stiffnessto-weight ratio and is commonly used as a reinforcement material. PLA is soft and easy-to-deform when heated above the glass transition temperature (T g ), which enables PLA to be the most widely used thermoplastics in 3D printing. To maintain the merits of flexibility and easy-processing, meanwhile elevating its mechanical performance, we devise the use of CFPLA. With CFPLA, the designed structure can be strengthened along the direction of carbon fiber alignment; since the matrix material of CFPLA is still PLA, it can be easily 3D-printed with slightly higher extrusion temperature. In addition, based on 4D printing techniques, CFPLA can be easily combined with PLA to form bi-layer fiber-reinforced composite (FRC), which is relatively more difficult to adopt traditional fabrication approaches Precise material characterization is important to ensure the accuracy of FEA. A lot of research has been conducted to characterize polymeric material properties In this paper, both PLA and CFPLA are tested based on repeated dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA), and specific models are subsequently proposed to characterize their material properties. Another cause of low FEA fidelity is the influence of residual stress and body force on 4D-printed samples during the triggering process. To improve the precision of simulation, we devise a new sequential FEA, which takes the influence of residual stress and body force into consideration, and minimizes the necessity of test-printing intermediate designs with an accurate prediction of the final shape from simulation results. With a high accuracy of the final configuration prediction, we propose a forward design process -or workflow -to summarize the iterative process from the material characterization to the FEA, and the design finalization and fabrication can be achieved by going through this proposed workflow. The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows: 1. A novel workflow is proposed for forward design, with ac-curate material property characterization and precise FEA simulation. This workflow supports robust and accurate fabrication of the designed object through an iterative optimization process and accurate control of the final configuration. 2. The material properties of 3D printing polymers, including both PLA and CFPLA, are characterized in a precise way based on the DMA experiments. The characterization results are effectively incorporated into FEA with accurate mathematical models. 3. A sequential FEA is developed to achieve accurate simulation results, considering both the residual stress releasing and the body force creeping. We simulate these two processes in a sequence to precisely derive the final deformation of the fabricated product. The layout of this paper is as follows. Section 2 overviews the workflow. Section 3 briefly introduces the geometric scope, structure design and fabricating parameter determination. Section 4 mainly discusses the physics behind material properties and precise material characterization of both PLA and CFPLA. Section 5 introduces simulation modeling and sequential FEA. Section 6 shows some simulations and design results derived from the proposed workflow. Section 7 draws conclusions and points out potential improvement and future directions. In this paper, a workflow is proposed to precisely simulate the self-morphing behavior of composite thermoplastic materials and structures. The proposed workflow consists of three major processes: material characterization, FEA modeling and simulation, and pattern design. As shown in Figure Material characterization. The material properties of PLA and CFPLA are characterized by using DMA experiments, which are conducted on strip samples under the temperature of 80°C, aiming to obtain the stress-strain curves and derive the material's hyperelasticity and viscoelasticity, respectively. The Mullins effect is taken into consideration to address material stress-softening FEA modeling and simulation. Based on the aforementioned material characterization results, the material definition is determined in each FEA model. The residual stress values of each actuator and constraint are obtained by matching the triggering experimental results with their corresponding simulation results. Then, a sequential simulation is implemented to include both the residual stress releasing and the body force creeping. In this way, the simulation precision can be ensured and maintained at a high level. Pattern design. With precise simulation results, designs can be created and refined iteratively. The simulation results from intermediate geometry can be obtained from the aforementioned FEA sequences, providing information on the difference between the current design and desired final configuration. An iterative process of forward design is then implemented from the initial geometry to the finalized design. The theorem behind the deformation of 4D printing structures and materials is the residual stress releasing in response to external stimulation. 3D printed PLA materials release embedded residual stress when treated with a temperature higher than T g ; see Figure In this paper, all the designed products consist of bending units. As shown in Figure Various structures and patterns are adopted in product design. In this study, the grid structure is implemented for our design workflow, and its pattern is formed by bending units. The distribution of bending units with different actuators and constraints determines the deformation and configuration of the grid structure. Figure 3D printing is the basic method we use for material processing and structure fabrication. The brand of 3D printer is Modix Big60. To effectively control the deformation of the printed structure, filament materials and printing parameters are both tested. The distribution of actuator blocks and constraint blocks and the design of the structure should also be studied. In this paper, three printing factors with dominating effects on morphing characteristics are studied: printing path orientation, printing layer thickness, and filament material property. Printing path orientation determines the shrinking direction of the thermoplastic material. During the FDM process, residual stress is embedded in PLA along the printing path as the filament is being extruded from the nozzle. As a result, the printed material shrinks along the specified printing path. Using this specific shrinking behavior of PLA material, different bending units can be created for design, as shown in Figure Printing layer thickness also affects the shrinkage ratio. Thinner layer thickness requires more printing layers during the FDM process, which means more residual stress is embedded into PLA structures. As a result, higher shrinkage ratio can be achieved by thinner layer thickness. By combining blocks with different layer thicknesses into one bending unit, different shrinkage ratios are introduced to achieve various bending performance. Filament material property significantly changes for different shrinkage ratios. The PLA and CFPLA filaments do not exhibit the same shrinkage ratio after the FDM process, because the CFPLA material is embedded with chopped up carbon fibers along the printing direction. The chopped-up fibers greatly improve the stiffness along the printing direction and significantly undermine the shrinking performance of the block. To characterize material properties for different printing parameters through DMA experiments, we studied three types of thermoplastic composites. All experimental samples are straight bending units with the dimension of 75 mm × 10 mm × 4 mm. Each sample consists of an actuator block at the top and a constraint block at the bottom. Actuator blocks are printed with a straight printing path that is along the sample's longitude direction, and constraint blocks are printed with a lateral printing path. After the printing process is completed, samples are fixed at one end and placed horizontally in a water bath at 80°Cwhich guarantees the homogeneous and stable heat transferring -to trigger the self-morphing process. In the experiments, three types of thermoplastic material designs were selected: PLA, CFPLA, and PLA-CFPLA combined bi-layer composite. Experiments are also conducted to study the effects of the printing layer thickness on material bending behaviors. All experimental samples are printed with 0.6 mm nozzle, 3, 000 mm/min printing speed, but different layer thicknesses. 0.1 mm, 0.2 mm, 0.3 mm, 0.4 mm, and 0.5 mm are chosen as the printing layer thicknesses for three batches of sample blocks, categorized by different material types. Figure Figure Concerning the flexural test, three-point bending and fourpoint bending are conducted on bending units. The dimension of each unit sample for three-point bending test is 60 mm × 4 mm × 1.6 mm, and the effective length of the supporting span is 40 mm. The dimension of each unit sample for four-point bending test is 100 mm×8 mm×8 mm, and the loading span and the supporting span are 23.56 mm and 70.68 mm, respectively. Testing samples of PLA, CFPLA, and PLA-CFPLA composite are designed and tested with residual stress pre-released under room temperature to observe the corresponding flexural modulus and strength. The experimental setup of the three-point bending test is shown in Figure Material characterization is important for precise simulation. Both PLA and CFPLA are characterized. The physics of PLA and CFPLA include their microstructure, anisotropic behavior and nonlinear and time-dependent material behavior. Based on the material physics, specific models are identified to facilitate FEA simulations. As a thermoplastic polymer, PLA is composed of numerous polymer chains The polymer chain networks of PLA usually have random orientations, and the material can be considered to be isotropic. Yet, when the filament material is extruded from the nozzle during the printing process, the polymer chains are stretched along the printing direction, causing the material to become anisotropic. CFPLA also undergoes the same process during 3D printing, and fibers within the printed blocks are aligned, increasing the material's stiffness along the printing direction. Figure Based on the material physics, PLA is expected to show both elastic and viscous behaviors. We adopted a hyperelastic consitituive model to describe the hyperelastic behaviors, and collect data by performing the uniaxial tensile test on both PLA and CFPLA with the RSA-G2 equipment. The PLA material is purchased from Polymax; the CFPLA material is purchased from Proto-Pasta, with the average length of carbon fibers less than 150 microns. The following are the detailed testing procedures for each property of interest. Thermal expansion and Poisson's ratio. Since the material and the structure are triggered in a high temperature, the material's thermal expansion rate (α t ) and the Poisson's ratio (μ) are considered in our workflow. These two parameters can be obtained by measuring the dimensional change of a 3D printed cubic sample before and after the uniaxial compression test. The cubic sample of size 5 mm × 5 mm × 5 mm is fabricated and subjected to a compressing load perpendicular to the top and bottom surfaces (Figure Plasticity. The plastic behavior of PLA is observed after cycles of force loading period. This behavior is described by identifying the anchor point, the intersection of the stress-strain curves and x-axis. Viscoelasticity. We use the viscoelastic constitutive model to characterize the viscoelasticity of PLA. In the experimental setup (Figure To successfully simulate deformation of designed products, FEA processes with different boundary conditions and initial conditions need to be implemented in order. In this paper, we propose two kinds of sequential simulations: the sequential residual stress estimation and the sequential deformation simulation. Since the deformation of a bending unit results from its embedded residual stress, identifying the initial residual stress is extremely important. Numerically identifying residual stress can be convenient and programmable by implementing the shooting method FEA modeling includes meshing, boundary condition setting and material definition. As discussed in Section 3, the block and grid structure are the main structures studied in this paper, thus the geometry of all designed products can be easily discretized into hexahedral elements for FEA simulations in Abaqus. The boundary condition settings are consistent with the triggering experiment. Since the bending unit structure can be divided into actuator and constraint components, they are assigned with different material properties. The boundary condition settings are shown in Figure In this paper, the material's hyperelasticity definition is assumed to be isotropic. To remove noise in the raw stressstrain data from experiments, a penalty spline based smoothing method By using the aforementioned anchor points data, the material's plasticity definition is also assumed to be isotropic. The unrecoverable deformation of the corresponding material can be obtained from the anchor points, and the Mises plasticity with an associated flow rule was implemented to model the material's plastic deformation The viscoelasticity definition is obvious especially for PLA and is characterized by the storage modulus, the loss modulus, and the tanδ derived from the DMA experiments (see Section 4). Based on the explanation in Section 4.2, the viscoelasticity is not the dominant mechanical property for CFPLA material, thus we decide not to include the viscoelastic behavior into CFPLA's material definition. Discussion 5.1. The Marlow model assumes that the strain energy potential is a function of the first strain invariant and is independent of the second strain invariant. Eliminating the second strain invariant from the strain energy potential has several benefits, as discussed in After quantifying the material properties, a simple simulation model of the strip sample in DMA experiments was created and tested to check how the simulation results match the DMA experimental results. The dimensions of the strip sample are shown in Figure To precisely estimate the initial residual stress and finalize the material property definition, an iterative process is programmed to implement the shooting method. To show different bending curvatures for different beams, the actuator ratio, which is the ratio of the actuator block length to the total length of the bending unit, is controlled from 0 to 1. The bending units with different actuator ratios should have different bending curvatures, which may help precisely identify the initial residual stress value from the shooting method. The triggering experiment was conducted on three batches of bending units with different actuator ratios and the same dimension of 100 mm × 7.2 mm × 4 mm, and the triggering environment is controlled at 80°C. The distance between two selected points on two ends of the triggered block is measured to represent the bending curvature and describe the bending extent. Meanwhile, the corresponding simulation model of the bending unit is built based on the aforementioned material property definition, and the boundary conditions are shown in Figure Aside from accurate residual stress and material property identification, we propose a sequence of the deformation simulations, which can help improve the simulation accuracy especially for the cases with both the body force and the initial stress considered. Since the residual stress is identified as the initial condition for precise simulation, and we assume that the temperature during the triggering (deforming) process is a constant, the sequential deformation simulation is not time-dependent and temperature-dependent. Assume there is a model α to be simulated, the sequence includes ( Three creative designs were completed using the proposed workflow to explore potential applications. Designers can use the workflow to create 2D grid structures in a CAD environment, and then simulate the grid deformation in the Abaqus software to visualize the final shape. With our workflow, the deformation of the grid structure can be altered toward the target shape by iteratively adjusting the initial 2D grid based on the intermediate simulation results. Numerous design iterations can be conducted without prototyping, and the accuracy of the simulation -the experiment to simulation ratio in terms of deformation -is verified by implementing the point-pair methodmeasuring the distance between any pair of two points in both experiment and simulation. The final design can be achieved with high efficiency at low cost, and the general accuracy of the simulation, whose 95% confidence interval is (0.972, 0.985), can greatly assist the forward design process. The modular lamp cover is the first implementation example. The purpose of creating modular designs is to test the accuracy of our simulation tool and to allow for large scale implementation. The lamp cover is divided into three pieces: a 2x4 grid as the top section, a 2x2 grid as the bottom left section and another 2x2 grid as the bottom right section. Each subsection design is constructed based on a 2x2 or 2x4 grid, and each grid consists of bending units and joints shown in Figures In this paper, we established a computational workflow that uses FEA to produce physically accurate results of the residual stress-induced morphing behaviors of mesh-like thermoplastic composite structures. To accurately conduct the simu-lation, experiments have been conducted to quantify the hyperelasticity and viscoelasticity of the thermoplastic component of FRC. These tests include uniaxial tensile and compression tests for the elastic component, DMA for the viscous component and uniaxial unloading-reloading with different strain levels for plastic deformation and the Mullins effect. This paper has also introduced the simulation sequence based on the triggering experiment and estimated the residual stress. The paper has validated the FEA modeling with an accurate matching between simulation and experiment for three creative designs. One of the main limitations of the presented workflow is the high computational cost of FEA simulations, which makes it impossible for real-time, interactive design. Here we consider Graph Neural Network (GNN) as a potential model to speed up the simulation. It is worth noticing that the underlying topology of the grid structure can be abstracted to an undirected weight graph that is well compatible with GNN This section includes the hyperelastic and viscoelastic data used in ABAQUS models. The main loading stress-strain data is provided in Table To evidence the decision of not considering the viscoelasticity of the CFPLA, correlated data and diagrams are provided in this section. CFPLA's storage modulus and loss modulus under different loading frequencies are obtained through the DMA experiment, and the damping ratios (loss modulus to storage modulus, which can also be abbreviated as tan(delta)) are also calculated based on the testing results. Table In Section 3.3 of the paper, we present the process and results of the three-point flexural test. However, due to the limited maximum load of the DMA equipment, the material's strength and fracture performance under large deflections cannot be accurately characterized by our three-point bending setup. Moreover, since the three-point flexural test may result in a sharp curvature at the loading point, the maximum stress point will locate at the mid-point of the specimen, which is not reliable in evaluating material strength and fracture, especially for brittle composites like CFPLA. To resolve these problems and provide more solid evidence for the material's flexural performances, we additionally conduct the four-point flexural test on the same three types of structures (i.e., PLA, CFPLA, PLA-CFPLA bilayer composite). The results of the four-point bending test are depicted in Figure The brand of the four-point bending equipment is MTS Corp. The dimension of each specimen for four-point bending test is 100 mm × 8 mm × 8 mm, and the loading span and the supporting span are 23.56 mm and 70.68 mm, respectively. The test is conducted under room temperature of 20 °C. From the slope comparison in Figure We randomly picked several more point pairs on the designed applications and measured the distance difference between experiment and simulation (Table Material