We report an investigation of the ferromagnetic semiconductor rare earth nitrides (RENs) for their potential for cryogenic-temperature electronics and spintronics application. We have indentified ohmic contacts suitable for the device structures that demand electron transport through interface layers, and grown REN/insulator/REN heterostructures that display tunnelling characteristics, an enormous 400% tunneling magnetoresistance and a hysteresis promising their exploitation in non-volatile magnetic random access memory. It is now well-established that the rare earth nitrides (RENs) form a series of intrinsic ferromagnetic semiconductors suitable for full exploitation of the coupled magnetic/electronic technology, so-called spintronics In this study, heterostuctures consisting of metal/GdN/metal thin layers and magnetic tunnelling devices consisting of metal/REN/insulator/REN/metal thin layers have been fabricated using a multi-step approach on 300 nm thick SiO2 layers thermally grown on silicon (100) wafers. The metal/GdN/metal structures were used as a model system to determine the nature of the contact, ohmic or Schottky, between a range of metallic layers, here Al, Au and Gd, and the GdN semiconductor layer. Due to their wide band gap and their chemical and structural compatibility with the RENs, GaN or AlN are used as insulating layers to form tunnel barriers. We have chosen GdN and SmN among the fourteen RENs due to their contrasting magnetic properties RENs have been recognized for decades to react rapidly in air, requiring careful capping. Within this scenario REN-based CPP structures require special attention to avoid oxidation from open edges exposed to air that then slowly react and degrade the device performances. Figure The REN (SmN, GdN), insulating (GaN, AlN) and top metal contact (Al, Gd) layers were grown at ambient temperature in a molecular beam epitaxy system with a base pressure <10 -9 Torr. The ambient growth temperature allows GdN and SmN layers to be smooth and strongly (111) textured. Au was used only as a bottom contact layer and was grown in a different physical vapor evaporator. Further details regarding the growth conditions (deposition rate, nitrogen precursor, etc) for the REN and insulating layers can be found elsewhere In view of the propensity for Schottky barrier formation across metal-semiconductor interfaces it is important to establish that the measured impedances of the tunnelling structures are dominated by the very thin tunnelling barrier layer, rather than the metal/GdN interfaces. We have thus investigated several structures in which the barrier layer was omitted to determine the resistance of metal/GdN/metal stacks. For technical convenience we have investgated contacts comprising Al, Au and Gd. Turning first to Al contacts, there is no sign of the nonlinearity commonly associated with Schottky barriers, and the linear resistance observed yields a resistivity of the 100 nmthick GdN layer of ∼3 Ω.cm at 4 K (not shown). That value is within the range that is commonly measured for in plane GdN layers, charactersitic of a carrier density of order 10 19 cm -3 We have previously reported that Au forms an ohmic contact in measurements of in-plane transport The assessment of Gd metal as a possible contact material is critical as the exchange interaction with GdN or SmN across the material interface provides the pinning of the GdN magnetisation allowing observation of switching behaviour in a magnetic tunnnelling junction Figure In Figure We have reported growth of thin films of ferromagnetic semiconducting rare-earth nitrides in layered structures, designed for the investigation of the electronic reponse in current perpendicular to plane (CPP) configurations. Special care was taken to ensure that the devices were small enough to show excellent CPP impedance. The work identified three contact metals (Au, Al, Gd) and investigated their susceptability to Schottky-barrier problems. Contacts comprising Au and Al show ohmic behaviour, while there is evidence of a depressed carrier concentration in GdN at an interface with Gd. Identification of suitable ohmic-contact metals facilitated investigation of structures in which insulating tunnel barriers, 1-2 nm of AlN or GaN, were introduced between two REN layers, thus forming a magnetic tunnel junction. The structures showed clear negative tunnelling magnetoresistance as large as 400% (i.e. a contrast factor of 5) between fields of 0 and 9 T. Finally the work has demonstrated clear tunnellingresistance hysteresis, opening the door to devloping tunneling magnetoresistance memory for cryogenic memory banks.