Understanding the origin of the magnetism of high temperature superconductors is crucial for establishing their unconventional pairing mechanism. Recently, theory predicts that FeSe is close to a magnetic quantum critical point, and thus weak perturbations such as impurities could induce local magnetic moments. To elucidate such quantum instability, we have employed scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy. In particular, we have grown FeSe film on superconducting Pb(111) using molecular beam epitaxy and investigated magnetic excitation caused by impurities in the proximity-induced superconducting gap of FeSe. Our study provides deep insight into the origin of the magnetic ordering of FeSe by showing the way local magnetic moments develop in response to impurities near the magnetic quantum critical point. FeSe presents intriguing properties in terms of the interplay among the lattice, charge, and spin degree of freedom. Its nematic phase transition occurs at TS = 90 K, below which the C4 lattice symmetry is reduced to C2 symmetry Although long-range magnetic ordering is absent in FeSe, there are experiments that suggest the ground state of FeSe is close to the magnetic quantum phase transition point. The hydrostatic pressure of ~1 GPa induces static stripe antiferromagnetic (AFM) orders in FeSe which are typically observed in other iron-based superconductors Despite intensive efforts in understanding the magnetism in FeSe, the direct observation of local magnetic moments emerging from impurities, which results from the quantum instability, has been challenging mostly owing to the lack of spatial magnetic resolution in the experiments. Here, we report a novel experimental approach to investigate the impurity-induced local magnetic moments in FeSe. Using molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), we grow FeSe film on Pb(111) substrate which is known to be an s-wave superconductor. We have observed a clear signature of the s-wave superconducting gap on the FeSe film, which is proximity-induced from the Pb. When magnetic moments are developed near impurities in FeSe, they respond to the s-wave superconductivity and provide exchange potentials to break Cooper pairs. This leads to strong bound states known as Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) excitation within superconducting gap In the growth of FeSe, we first grew a single layer (SL) of PbSe on Pb(111). Subsequently, we deposited Fe atoms on the PbSe at 490 K, which resulted in the formation of FeSe islands on Pb(111) (Supplemental Material Figure The apparent height of FeSe islands with respect to the Pb substrate is found to be ~ 1.7 Å (Fig. To study the electronic property of the FeSe, we performed a differential conductance (dI/dV) spectroscopy using a standard lock-in technique When the spectrum is zoomed in around the Fermi energy, a superconducting gap is found (the inset of Fig. The gap size (4.6 meV) is twice that of the Pb superconducting gap (2Δ ≈ 2.3 meV) because the tip is coated with Pb. Under the Tc of Pb superconductivity (~7.2 K), all electrons of FeSe are forced to participate in the proximity-induced s-wave pairing. Any electron pairs which are not in a time reversal symmetry (TRS) relationship will form YSR excitation states within the superconducting gap We have investigated the response of FeSe to proximity-induced s-wave superconductivity. Figure To study the impurity-induced quantum instability in FeSe, we have deposited Ag atoms onto the sample at 20 K (Fig. To understand the pattern of local magnetic moments, we measured dI/dV maps at the various energies (E = eVbias) of YSR states. Figure Several features are present regarding the magnetic patterns. First, the tendency of splitting is the same among the Ag atoms placed on the FeSe in Fig. Recent theory predicts that the local magnetic moments in FeSe reflect the momentum structure of the magnetic fluctuations in the bulk We occasionally found a dumbbell-shaped local defect in the FeSe before the deposition of Ag atoms (Fig. Figure In fact, the dI/dV map at E = -1.85 meV shows the axis of the magnetic pattern (yellow dotted line) is tilted from the mirror symmetry axis according to the theory. We find that the observed magnetic patterns are again consistent with the symmetry of the cAFM model. Figure Our STM experiment provides a novel method to study local magnetism in correlated superconductors, here exemplified through FeSe. The results lead to several important remarks. First, the magnetic quantum phase transition by non-magnetic impurities is microscopically observed in FeSe. Second, we show that the magnetic patterns of the local magnetic moments are consistent with the (, 0) AFM phase, implying that the orbital-selectivity is at play. Third, our experiment reveals the magnetic characteristics of impurities in FeSe. The sign-changing superconductivity responds to both magnetic and non-magnetic impurities, whereas the s++ superconductivity only responds to magnetic impurities Furthermore, it should be noted that the local magnetism can also be induced by non-magnetic impurities in FeSe. The data analysis described here is based on a simple and powerful symmetry argument. A theoretical work deserving further investigation is identifying the Fe orbitals responsible for magnetic patterns observed in the experiment. This will reveal the origin of the local magnetism in FeSe in conjunction with the orbitalselectivity. In future STM works, it will be interesting to study how the local magnetism develops into the bulk magnetism when the Ag impurities form networks, which can be accomplished by the STM atom manipulation. Nearby, it might be possible to detect strong orbital-selective spin fluctuations through inelastic tunneling spectroscopy, which could be in turn related to the anisotropic Cooper pairing in FeSe Finally, large-scale real-space calculations are facilitated by employing the Kernel Polynomial method where the electronic Greens function is expanded in a series of orthonormal Chebyshev polynomials [S11C, S11D]. We set the order of this expansion to N = 1000, use the Lorentz kernel to damp Gibbs oscillations, and iterate self-consistently until convergence of the spin resolved density mean fields (n ↑ , n ↓ ) is obtained. We model the Se vacancy as an effective plaquette impurity, i.e. by an onsite potential V on the four neighboring Fe sites of the vacancy on a given site where V Se is the potential applied to the four neighboring Fe sites indexed by j. Calculations of the induced local magnetic order are performed using such a plaquette impurity in the center of a 12 x 12 supercell. Our studies of edge magnetism are performed using open boundary conditions in the real-space system. This creates an isolated FeSe island with boundaries determined by the system geometry. In our calculations we modify the original periodic supercell structure to accommodate both (100), ( In Fig. We note that the included orbital selective effects also make the amplitude of the induced magnetization at 100 (extending along x) versus 010 (extending along y) edges distinct. † jseo@dgist.ac.kr