The outstanding photovoltaic performances of lead halide perovskite (LHP) thin film solar cells are due in particular to the large diffusion length of photocarriers. The mechanism behind this property and its dependence on the various anions and cations in the LHP material composition are still an active topic of debate. Here, we apply ultrabroadband terahertz spectroscopy with a time resolution ≤ 200 fs to probe the early carrier mobility dynamics of photoexcited perovskite samples of different chemical compositions. An increase in the carrier mobility with time constants in the range of 0.3 to 0.7 ps is observed for different LHPs, in which the signal amplitude is larger at shorter excitation wavelengths. This feature is assigned to the relaxation of hot carriers from low-curvature regions of the band structure to the bottom of the valley, where their effective mass accounts for the maximum mobility. The dependence of the mobility dynamics on the initial photogenerated carrier population shows that carrier cooling competes with a dynamic screening effect associated with polaron formation and relaxation. A kinetic model that considers all competing processes is proposed. Simulations based on this model allow us to fit the experimental data well and evidence a composition dependence of the dynamic screening lifetime. Lead halide perovskites (LHPs) have attracted much attention in recent years due to the outstanding photovoltaic performances of thin film solar cells based on these materials combined with their facile processability. The recombination rates in LHPs are, indeed, up to 5 orders of magnitude slower than that predicted from Langevin theory for a direct semiconductor. We aim to study the relationship between carrier-lattice interactions and carrier cooling from a mobility perspective using TRTS. Such a study can be achieved by exploiting the sensitivity of THz radiation transmission to the carrier mobility. In an optical pump-THz probe experiment applied to a semiconductor material, the pump generates charge carriers that absorb the incident THz probe pulse. The THz radiation absorptance is generally reported as the negative of the ratio between the change in the modulus of the THz electric field (ΔE) upon transmission through the sample and the modulus of the incident field (E). In the case of thin films, when ΔE << E, this ratio can be shown to be proportional to the photoconductivity (Δσ) generated by the photogenerated carriers, which is itself proportional to the carrier density (N) and the carrier mobility (μ) (Eq. 1). Above resonant energies, a second slower rise becomes increasingly apparent with increasing excitation energy. In terms of Eq. 1, the fast initial rise can be assigned to an increase in the carrier density N upon photoexcitation, while the latter rise is related to hot carrier evolution affecting the mobility μ. Such behaviour of the mobility has been previously reported, e.g., for GaAs ( Scheme 1 displays a simplified band structure of CH3NH3PbI3, where the spin-orbit coupling has been neglected. In addition, calculations suggest that a loss of parabolicity occurs as close as one-third from the minimum point along any direction (Scheme 1). and high mobility cold carrier (NC) populations. This simplified model (see details in SI, section S3a) gives rise to a single exponential time profile of the transient photoconductivity signal (Eq. 3): ( where B is the amplitude and τ is the lifetime. In such a simplified model, carriers can only be either hot or cold. However, a distribution of carriers with different excess energies and, thus, mobilities characterized by a certain temperature exists in reality. In addition, one should consider the possibility of polaron formation. Despite its limitation, fitting this initial simple model can be useful in evaluating the lifetime of the process involved. Parameter B in Eq. 3 is a measure of the average mobility of the ensemble with respect to the final situation. A convolution with a Gaussian of the full width at half maximum (FWHM) w accounting for the instrument response function (IRF) can be used to fit the data (see SI, Eqs. S7, S8). The results of the data fitting shown in Fig. Nonetheless, we expect it to be ca. 200 fs, close to the width of our THz pulse. As expected, the amplitude B increases with excess energy owing to the higher initial concentration of hot carriers. Surprisingly, however, the lifetimes from the measurements are fairly constant in the 480-680 nm excitation wavelength range, with values between 400 and 500 fs. Above 680 nm, the rise is almost negligible. The lack of an increase in the lifetime is surprising if we assign it to carrier cooling, as the higher the initial carrier temperature is, the longer cooling down should generally take. LO phonons are considered to be involved not only in the relaxation of hot carriers From the existing experimental evidence, polaron formation in the form of a dynamic screening process has been suggested to be in competition with carrier cooling. Indeed, the data show an increase in the magnitude of the mobility rise with increasing fluence. Our data do, nonetheless, suggest an intriguing possibility: the formation of polarons does not produce any change in mobility if the carriers are already cold. When exciting the samples at resonant energies or at low fluences, the slower rise is not observed (Figs. 1, 2 and SI, Fig. Furthermore, the hot polarons present a much slower cooling, which prevents us from observing any further dynamics due to the strong Coulomb screening of the lattice. Table Hot carrier dynamics LHPs of different compositions have been analysed from a THz mobility perspective. The results are compatible with competing cooling and dynamic screening processes. A model was proposed and applied to explain the observed fluence dependence and constant lifetime of the mobility rise. The composition was found to mainly affect the time constant of the dynamic screening process. In this regard, the Cs + inorganic cation was found to produce longer dynamic screening than the organic counterparts for a given halide composition. This result is probably due to a decrease in the degrees of freedom that allow for polarization of the lattice in the presence of a charge carrier. Last, low temperature measurements hint at implications of the phonon densities in the dynamic screening process. Thin film samples were prepared by spin-coating using an antisolvent method were prepared for deposition. In the case of CsPbIBr3, due to the low solubility, the saturated solution of the mentioned mixture was used. Spin-coating was carried out as follows: a sufficient amount of solution was extended over the substrate. The sample was spun at 1000 rpm for 10 s and subsequently at 6000 rpm for 30 s. Ten seconds before the end, 200 μL of chlorobenzene was poured onto the spinning substrate to act as an antisolvent and improve crystallization. Last, the sample was annealed at 100 °C to obtain a perovskite layer of the characteristic colour (see spectral characterizations of the films in SI, Fig. TRTS measurements were carried out on a previously described laser spectrometer, The data were fitted to the model using Wolfram Mathematica software. The differential equations were written following the model depicted in Scheme 3 and numerically solved for an interval covering the data. The signal was simulated as a normalized and weighted sum of the different carrier densities with the condition that it equals zero for times earlier than t ; . The result was numerically convoluted with a Gaussian function to account for the IRF. An interpolation function was fitted to the results to calculate the value at any times inside the calculated interval. A small time step of 0.005 fs was used for the calculation, which was shown to be sufficient to obtain results identical to those with simpler functions for which an analytical solution is possible. The function was programmed such that once the interpolation function had been obtained, for a given set of parameters, it could be called to obtain the values at different times. Therefore, the resulting overall function could be used not only to simulate the signal but also to fit the data. One of the main advantages of using an ultrabroadband TRTS spectrometer is the improved time resolution owing to the generation of shorter THz pulses. Measurements similar to those presented in this manuscript have previously been reported by Bretschneider et al. As a first attempt, we can consider a simple model taking into account only hot and cold carriers, whose populations NH and NC , respectively, evolve according to : With the initial conditions are NH (0) = N 0 H (0) and Nc (0) = 1 -N 0 H , we obtain: The assumption that both hot and cold carriers will give a signal, albeit proportionally different to the concentration due to the different mobilities, is reasonable. Thus, for a normalized dataset, we can define the following model for the sample conductivity S (t ) : where b is a proportionality constant due to the different mobilities. However, b and N 0 H are mutually dependent and cannot be determined through a fit. Thus, further simplification of the model with the substitution B = 0 H is necessary, yielding a single exponential : (S6) If b or N 0 H can be determined from a separate method, then the other parameter can be calculated. After convoluting the exponential equation (Eq. S6) with a Gaussian function of the form: (S7) representing the cross-correlation of the pump laser and the THz probe pulses, and where w is the full width at half maximum (FWHM), we obtain the following equation to be fitted to the observed dynamics: 