Recent reports of a large anomalous Hall effect (AHE) in ferromagnetic Weyl semimetals (FM WSM) have led to a resurgence of interest in this enigmatic phenomenon. However, due to a lack of tunable materials, the interplay between the intrinsic mechanism caused by Berry curvature and extrinsic mechanisms due to scattering remains unclear in FM WSMs. In this contribution, we present a thorough investigation of both the extrinsic and intrinsic AHE in a new family of FM WSMs, PrAlGe 1-x Si x , where x can be tuned continuously. From DFT calculations, we show that the two end members, PrAlGe and PrAlSi, have different Fermi surfaces but similar Weyl node structures. Experimentally, we observe moderate changes in the anomalous Hall coefficient (R S ) but significant changes in the ordinary Hall coefficient (R 0 ) in PrAlGe 1-x Si x as a function of x, confirming a change of Fermi surface. By comparing the magnitude of R 0 and R S , we identify two regimes; |R 0 | < |R S | when x ≤ 0.5 and |R 0 | > |R S | when x > 0.5. Through a detailed scaling analysis, we discover a universal anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC) from intrinsic contribution when x ≤ 0.5. Such universal AHC is absent when x > 0.5. Thus, we point out the significance of the extrinsic mechanisms in FM WSMs and report the first observation of a transition from intrinsic to extrinsic AHE in PrAlGe 1-x Si x . The Hall effect in ferromagnets is commonly characterized by the following empirical formula for the Hall resistivity ρ xy 1,2 : where R 0 and R s are ordinary and anomalous Hall coefficients, respectively. The ordinary Hall effect (ρ O xy ) is linearly proportional to the applied field (H z ) through R 0 which is simply determined by carrier concentration in a single-band metal. The anomalous Hall effect (AHE) ρ A xy , however, is proportional to the ferromagnetic moment M z through R S and can be due to a complicated combination of extrinsic and intrinsic mechanisms. The main extrinsic mechanisms are skew-scattering Crystal growth-Single crystals of PrAlGe 1-x Si x were grown using a self-flux method from Pr ingots (99.00%, Alfa Aesar), Al lumps (99.5%, Alfa Aesar) Ge pieces (99.999%+, Alfa Aesar) and Si lumps (99.999%+, Alfa Aesar). The starting chemicals were mixed with the mole ratio Pr:Al:Ge:Si = 1:10:1y:y, placed in a crucible inside an evacuated quartz tube, heated to 1000 • C at 180 • C/hour, stayed at 1000 • C for 12 hours, cooled to 700 • C at 6 • C/hour, and annealed at 700 • C for another 12 hours. Then, the tube was centrifuged to remove the excess Al flux. All crystals of PrAlGe 1-x Si x were plate-like with the surface of the plate normal to the caxis and its edges along the a-axis. The chemical composition of each crystal was determined by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) using a ZEISS Ultra-55 filed emission scanning electron microscope equipped with an EDAX detector. Our EDX analysis in Appendix A shows that x = y in PrAlGe 1-x Si x samples grown with y = 0, 0.5, and 1. However, samples with y = 0.75 and 0.9, turn out to have x = 0.7 and 0.85, respectively (Table I in Appendix A). We note that in the literature, single crystals of PrAlGe made by flux growth and floating zone technique show slightly different properties Measurements-Electrical resistivity was measured with a standard four-probe technique and the heat capacity was measured with a relaxation time method in a Quantum Design physical property measurement system (PPMS) Dynacool. The dc magnetization experiment was conducted on the vibrating sample magnetometer in a Quantum Design MPMS3. The high-field experiment was performed in a 35 T dc Bitter magnet inside a 3 He fridge at a base temperature of 300 mK, at the National High Magnetic Field laboratory in Tallahassee. All samples used for transport measurements were carefully sanded to remove the residual Al-flux and to have the ideal bar geometry for the determination of resistivity. Calculations-Electronic structure calculations were performed within the framework of density functional theory (DFT) using the experimental lattice parameters and a projector augmented wave (PAW) method implemented in the Vienna ab-initio simulation package (VASP) Second Harmonic Generation-The second-harmonicgeneration (SHG) data were taken at normal incidence on the [101] face of as-grown crystals for incoming/outgoing wave- lengths 1500/750 nm as a function of the incoming field polarization and measured for emitted light polarized parallel to [010] crystalline axis. In this geometry, all bulk contributions to SHG from a I4 1 /amd space group are forbidden, including bulk magnetic dipolar, electric quadrupolar, and electric-field induced SHG. A. Crystal Structure PrAlGe and PrAlSi are both WSMs due to broken inversion symmetry A combination of magnetization and heat capacity measurements reveal the FM order, hence the breaking of timereversal symmetry. The magnetic properties are similar among PrAlGe 1-x Si x samples as seen in Fig. We incorporated the crystalline and magnetic structures of PrAlGe and PrAlSi in our DFT calculation to arrive at realistic band structures. We compare the calculated band structures, Fermi surfaces, and Weyl nodes in PrAlGe (Figs. Consistent with the change of the Fermi surface, we observe considerable changes in the magnetoresistance MR(%) = 100 × ρ xx (H)-ρ xx (0) within the PrAlGe 1-x Si x series. Figures We present field dependences of both MR and Hall effect (ρ xy ) in Fig. Figure We present two separate analyses to investigate the AHE. The first analysis is based on Eq. 1 to differentiate the relative magnitudes of the ordinary and anomalous Hall coefficients (R 0 and R S ) in PrAlGe 1-x Si x . The details of extracting R 0 and R S are presented in Appendix D. We plot both R 0 and R S as a function of x in Fig. We follow the empirical analysis which was first proposed by Tian et al. where the coefficients α, β , and b parametrize the skewscattering, side-jump, and intrinsic contributions to ρ A xy . The first two parameters depend on the impurity scattering in a specific sample, but the parameter b is independent of scattering. In general, the side-jump mechanism could also contribute to b through the same ρ 2 xx dependence where σ xx0 = 1/ρ xx0 is the residual conductivity and σ A xy = -ρ A xy /ρ 2 xx is the anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC). The first term in Eq. 3 depends on the residual conductivity and is sample dependent. However, the second term (b) is sample independent and constitutes the intrinsic contribution to the AHC. Following Eq. 3, we measured two to three samples for each composition of PrAlGe 1-x Si x , and determined b from the intercept of a linear fit to σ A xy as a function of σ 2 xx . For example, the three data sets with green triangles in Fig. Finally, we compare the AHE in PrAlGe 1-x Si x family of FM WSMs to the one in Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 , which is also an FM WSM. Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 exhibits a very large AHE but its Weyl nodes are located at 60 meV above E F E. M. Pugh and N. Rostoker, "Hall Effect in Ferromagnetic Materials," Reviews of Modern Physics 25, 151-157 (1953).