Recent researches in thermal energy harvesting have revealed the remarkable efficiency of thermionic energy converters comprising very low work function electrodes. From room temperature and above, this kind of converter could supply low power devices such as autonomous sensor networks. In this type of thermoelectric converters, current injection is mainly governed by a mechanism of thermionic emission at the hot electrode which explains the interest for low work function coating materials. In particular, alkali metal oxides have been identified as excellent candidates for coating converter electrodes. This paper is devoted to the synthesis and characterization of potassium peroxide K2O2 onto silicon surfaces. To determine optimal synthesis conditions of K2O2, we present di-agrams showing the different oxides as a function of temperature and oxygen pressure from which phase stability characteristics can be determined. From the experimental standpoint, we present results on the synthesis of potassium oxide under ultra high vacuum and controlled temperature. The resulting surface is characterized in-situ by means of photoemission spectroscopy (PES) and contact potential difference (CPD) measurements. A workfunction of 1.35 eV is measured which and the expected efficiency of the corresponding converter is discussed. It is generally assumed that the decrease of the work function in the alkali/oxygen/silicon system, is attributed to the creation of a surface dipole resulting from a charge transfer between the alkali metal and oxygen. 1 Introduction Thermionic energy converters (TEC) are made of two parallel electrodes separated by a vacuum gap. Thermionic emission at the electrodes surfaces increases with temperature such that a temperature gradient results in a net current flow across the gap The thermionic current is governed by the Richardson equation and is therefore extremely sensitive to the temperature and electrode material work function where J is the thermionic current density (A.cm -2 ), A the Richardson constant (120 A.cm -2 .T -2 ),  the material work function (eV), q the elementary charge, V the applied bias, k the Boltzmann constant and T the absolute temperature. Since electrodes are often constituted of metal and semiconductors with work function typically ranging from 3eV to 6eV, the temperature window for efficient thermionic conversion typically lies in the 600-1000K interval Nowadays fast developments in nanotechnology enable thin film coating of metal electrode surface We present in a first part the calculated efficiency of an ideal TEC and its associated power output density as a function of the electrode work function for a range of temperatures. In a second part, volatility diagram of the potassium oxygen binary system are presented to target the synthesis conditions of potassium oxide thin film. In the last part, work function measurements at room temperature are discussed based on Kelvin probe and photoemission techniques. 2 Thermionic energy converter efficiency A TEC schematic is given in figure 3 Material volatility diagrams To determine optimal synthesis conditions of K2O2, we established the volatility diagram at 1000K as a function of potassium vapor pressure and oxygen pressure from which phase stability can be determined. From thermochemical data where and R are respectively the free Gibbs energy, the enthalpy of the reaction, the entropy of the reaction and the molar gas constant. Figure Table Eq. constant  at T Equation of the equilibrium line Log  at T * Log P O2 = 5 -Log 7 Log 7 = 0.489 * Log i is calculated using the numeric value of free Gibbs energy at the equilibrium state for each reaction 4 Experimental The p-doped Si (100) sample (5-10 .cm) was oxidized and cleaned using a hydrogen peroxide and sulfuric acid mixture (H2SO4 : H2O2 / 1:1 in volume) for 20 min. followed by a de-oxidation step in hydrofluoric acid (HF 5%) to get a H-terminated silicon (Si) surface. This process sequence is known to occupy Si dangling bonds as already verified by contact angle, XPS and STM techniques Figure These results are supported by CPD measurements of the Si-H surface before and after potassium oxide thin-film deposition (Figure where dK-O is the length of the potassium oxygen bond, K-O stands for the percent ionic character of the single chemical bond and q is the elementary charge. The percent ionic character and the dipole concentration are respectively given by the Eq. 4 and Eq.5: with,  the Pauling's electronegativities of the considered elements, O K N  the number of dipole per surface unit and 0 the permittivity of vacuum 6 Conclusion Low work function coatings have been synthesised by evaporating potassium in oxidant atmosphere on hydrogen passivated (100) p-type silicon at room temperature. Using CPD and photoemission techniques, work function values have been measured before and after deposition and are found to be equal to 4.70eV and 1.35eV, respectively. Assuming that the K-O compound is adsorbed on the silicon surface, the important decrease of the work function by 3.35eV can be explained by a surface dipole model 