The three-dimensional electronic structure and Ce 4f electrons of the heavy fermion superconductor CePt2In7 is investigated. Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy using variable photon energy establishes the existence of quasi-two and three dimensional Fermi surface topologies. Temperature-dependent 4d-4f on-resonance photoemission spectroscopies reveal that heavy quasiparticle bands begin to form at a temperature well above the characteristic (coherence) temperature T *. T * emergence may be closely related to crystal electric field splitting, particularly the low-lying heavy band formed by crystal electric field splitting. Heavy fermions (HF) have long been the focus of condensed matter physics due to their rich and interesting physical phenomena A characteristic temperature, T *, of HF materials, called the "hybridization temperature" or the "coherent temperature" is commonly defined. There are different views on the physics which underlies T * and what determines it. T * is currently believed to be collective hybridization onset between incoherent, localized f electrons and conduction band electrons We chose the AFM HF superconductor CePt 2 In 7 to study this concern. CePt 2 In 7 , discovered in 2008 High-quality CePt 2 In 7 single crystals were grown using an In self-flux method. Data presented in Figs. is perpendicular to the plane defined by the incident light and emitted electrons. The p-polarized light is parallel to this plane. CePt 2 In 7 FS topologies were obtained from photonenergy-dependent normal emission at a temperature of 15 K (Fig. Constant photon energy k x -k y FS mappings were taken to clarify FSs topological structures. Figs. The 4d → 4f on-resonant ARPES measurements were performed with 123 eV photons to strengthen the Ce 4f electron photoconduction matrix element. Figs. Fig. Compared with spolarization, the 4f 1 5/2 quasiparticle peak measured with p-polarization is sharper. The 4f 1 7/2 quasiparticle peak is less sensitive to polarization. Compared to s-polarization, the spectrum's overall intensity under ppolarization is reduced. Fig. The f electron properties of HF compounds, localized or itinerant, and how they transform as a function of temperature, have been critical issues in understanding HF underlying physics. Above a characteristic temperature, T *, f electrons are completely localized. But well below T *, f electron are described by the itinerant model. Below T *, f electrons exhibit a dual nature. They are partially localized and partially itinerant Two photon energies were selected. One at 85 eV. The other is on-resonance 121 eV. 85 eV photons are not as good at detecting Ce 4f electrons as on-resonance 121 eV, some information about Ce 4f electrons can still be obtained. Figs. Figs. 4(a)-(d) display the temperature-dependent Ce 4d → 4f on-resonant ARPES measurements along the M -Γ -M direction with 121 eV photons. Two flat bands with the Ce 4f electron character exist throughout the measured temperature range. They are weakened at high temperatures. The intensity of the two flat bands is strongly momentum dependent. Fig. Fig. Previous ultrafast experiments have reported that photoinduced transient reflectivity varies greatly around 60 K To summarize, the 3D electronic structure and 4f electron behaviors of the HF superconductor CePt 2 In 7 were studied by ARPES over a wide temperature range. The results provide clear evidence that (i) FSs have coexistence of quasi-2D and 3D topology, which is consistent with DFT calculations; (ii) f electrons begin to evolve into the formation of HF states at a temperature much higher than the characteristic temperature T *; and (iii) the CEF splitting, i.e., the low-lying heavy quasiparticle band caused by CEF, indicates the characteristic temperature T *.