We report the observation of low-frequency modes in the Raman spectra of thin-film superlattices of the hightemperature superconductor YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ and various manganite perovskites. Our study shows that these modes are caused by the backfolding of acoustic phonons due to the additional periodicity introduced by the superlattice. Such modes were previously only observed for ultra-pure semiconductor superlattices. They can be used to determine the bilayer thickness of the superlattice and its speed of sound. Moreover, we use the spatial resolution of Raman microscopy to map the film thickness inhomogeneity across a sample, making these modes a useful tool to characterize thin-film superlattices. Thin-film multilayers of metal-oxides host a wide range of emergent, tunable and potentially useful properties 1-10 beyond those observed in multilayers of more conventional semi-conductors such as Si or GaAs Besides the scientific challenge of understanding the properties of metal-oxide superlattices, there is the persistent technical challenge of maintaining the quality of crystal structure, interfaces and layer thickness in such samples Here we report on the observation of low-frequency Raman modes in metal-oxide superlattices, with a focus on superlattices of the high-temperature superconductor YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 and RMnO 3 manganites, which are exemplary multilayers for displaying the effects described above In particular, in the present work we focus on epitaxial (LSAT) substrates that are (0 0 1)-oriented (commercially available from Crystec) following the process described in Refs. To set the scene, Fig. In particular, we focus on two prominent features in the low-energy spectra which are marked by the arrow in panel (a) and highlighted in Fig. To quantitatively characterize these peaks, we fit them using a quadratic background and a pseduo-Voigt line shape as detailed in the supplementary material. An exemplary fit is shown by the magenta line superimposed to the z(X X )z superlattice data in Fig. In transition metal-oxides like those studied here, modes in this frequency range might be ascribed to magnetic excitations Furthermore, Fig. These observations show that the low-energy modes most probably arise from a back-folding of the Brillouin-zone, due to the superlattice periodicity, which brings new Raman-active excitations at low energies onto the Γ point. Such a situation has been well documented and analysed in superlattices comprising of GaAs-AlAs semiconductors for acoustic phonon branches where the subscripts 1 and 2 denote the two materials in the superlattice and v s = c 33 /ρ is the sound-velocity (with ρ the density of the material and c 33 is the elastic modulus along the c-axis direction). d 1 and d 2 are the thicknesses of the layers comprising the superlattice and κ ≡ v s,2 ρ 2 /v s,1 ρ 1 . This expression describes a folding of the phonon dispersions about d -1 , where d = d 1 + d 2 , and the opening of gaps at the zone center and boundaries. Figure This model describes accurately our observations. In particular, the straight line in Fig. A generalized relaxation time of the mode can be expressed as τ = γ - We now discuss the intensity of the peaks. Close to the Brillouin zone center, the upper and lower branches develop preferential A 1 or B 2 symmetry. The atomic displacement amplitude for the two symmetries are sketched in Fig. We also note that we observe similar low-frequency modes in superlattices grown in our laboratory where the YBCO is replaced for another metal oxide. These include SrFeO 3 /La 2/3 Ca 1/3 MnO 3 The results above show that these low-energy modes can be used to determine the spatial variation in a superlattice's bilayer thickness (or more generally its repeat-unit thickness), d, because (i) their position, ω 0 , is a function of d and (ii) the micro-Raman technique we use here has a 10 μm To exemplify the potential of our method, we performed measurements on a 7x7 points grid across the surface of a nominally LCMO(10 nm)/YBCO(10 nm) superlattice grown by PLD on an LSAT with surface area 10 × 10 mm 2 . The results are summarized in Fig. FIG. There is smooth gradient in d from one corner to the opposite. uniform across the approximate 9 × 9 mm 2 area that was measured. Instead, we identify a smooth gradient in the value of d from one corner to the opposite corner. Finally, we note that we observed only a subtle temperature dependence of the low-frequency modes between roomtemperature to 10 K, as shown in the supplementary information. This is despite the various electronic and magnetic phase transitions that our samples exhibit below 300 K In summary, we report systematic measurements of lowfrequency modes in metal-oxide superlattices grown by pulsed laser deposition. We show that these modes arise from a back-folded c-axis acoustic phonon branch. As such, their observation demonstrates the high quality of the thin-film superlattices. The modes can be used to characterize the bilayer thickness of the superlattice and/or the c-axis speed of sound. We utilized the spatial resolution of the Raman microscopy to map the film thickness inhomogeneity across a larger 10 × 10 mm sample. This information is important for monitoring and improving the quality of future metal-oxide superlattices which might comprise the elementary building blocks of next generation electronic devices. J. Chakhalian, J. W. Freeland, H.-U. Habermeier, G. Cristiani, G. Khaliullin, M. van Veenendaal, and B. Keimer, "Orbital reconstruction and covalent bonding at an oxide interface," Science 318, 1114-1117 (2007 ). 2 N. Reyren, S. Thiel, A. D. Caviglia, L. F. Kourkoutis, G. Hammerl, C. Richter, C. W. Schneider, T. Kopp, A.-S. Ruetschi, D. Jaccard, M. Gabay, D. A. Muller, J.-M. Triscone, and J. Mannhart, "Superconducting Interfaces Between Insulating Oxides," Science 317, 1196Science 317, -1199Science 317, (2007)).