Graphene quantum dots (GQD) are interesting materials due to the confined sizes which allow to exploit their optoelectronic properties, especially when they interface with organic molecules through physisorption. In particular, when interfaces are formed, charge transfer (CT) processes can occur, in which electrons can flow either from the GQD to the absorbed molecule, or vice versa. These processes are accessible by modelling and computational analysis. Yet, the presence of different environments can strongly affect the outcome of such simulations which, in turn, can lead to wrong results if not taken into account. In the present multiscale study, we assess the sensibility of the computational approach and compute the CT, calculated at interfaces composed by GQD and aminoacene derivatives. The hole transfer is strongly affected by dynamic disorder and the nature of the environment, and imposes stringent descriptions of the modelled systems to ensure enhanced accuracy of the transfer of charges. The rising of 2D materials have been boosted by the discovery of graphene and its derivatives, such as graphene nanoribbons (GNR) and graphene quantum dots (GQD), which present peculiar optoelectronic and transport properties due to the confinement of their size and the characteristic of being one-atom thick materials. In particular, GQD has been proven promising in application in the field of organic electronics due to their unusual properties; GQD are known to be superior in resistance to photobleaching, are low toxic and highly biocompatible. In this paper, the opto-electronic and charge transfer ability of interfaces of GQD and tetraaminoacenes (N-acenes) moieties are studied (Figure The geometries of the N-acenes have been optimized at the Density Functional Theory (DFT) level considering the CAM-B3LYP long-range corrected functional. To properly assess the optical properties of the N-acene molecules, an in-depth study of the excited state transitions has been performed by means of a high level correlated method, for which we selected the Algebraic Diagrammatic Construction scheme (ADC). Within the projective method, Electrostatic interactions were treated by the particle-Mesh Ewald method Being isolated (without the GQD) all these N-acenes have an energy gap in between 5-6 eV, which does not make them suitable for semiconducting applications (see Figure The CAM-B3LYP functional is not only used for the geometries of the N-acenes, but also for the analysis of their excited states, which are benchmarked against the ADC scheme of the second order in both strict (ADC(2)-s) and extended (ADC(2)-x) variants as well as the third order scheme (ADC(3)). The results of this benchmark are reported in Figure For these compounds with increased molecular backbones, TDDFT/CAM-B3LYP reports a steadily HOMO-2 to LUMO transition. For ADC(2) this assignment has only been found for N-penta, while for the other N-acenes the transition carries a HOMO to LUMO+2 character, yet high in energy. The same transition is found for the fourth excited state at the TDDFT/CAM-B3LYP level, which thus suggests that the use of the latter method can only be advised for low energy transitions. Next, the GQD/N-acene interfaces were built and optimized at the CAM-B3LYP/cc-pVDZ level of theory. Interestingly, this switch in orbitals is not present for virtual molecular orbitals. The different order of the FMOs is reflected in the different character of the transition from ground state to excited states. For interfaces up to GDQ/N-tetra, the first excited state transition has a localized character as the socalled -parameter of Peach et al. However, the delocalization over the GQD, which is visible for the most important frontier orbitals in this study (HOMO-1, HOMO, LUMO, LUMO+1see Figure were  denotes the reorganization energy and V the transfer integral between the initial and final states. For a fixed temperature, the large transfer rate can be attributed to the maximal transfer integral and the minimal reorganization energy. The transfer integral V characterizes the strength of the electronic coupling between two adjacent molecules, which can be written as: 69 with S being the overlap matrix and eAand eBthe diagonal elements of a Hamiltonian defined by the frontier molecular orbitals of the isolated molecule A and B in the dimer representation, respectively. JAB refers to the coupling of either holes or electron, from molecule A to molecule B. Namely, for hole (electron) transfer, the HOMO and HOMO-1 (LUMO) should be considered, due to the (quasi)degeneracy of the occupied energy levels. In an orthonormalized basis, these en (n= A, B) give access to specific site energies n (n= A, B). The correction by means of these site energies is necessary in view of the pronounced polar character of the N-acene moieties and the different nature of both monomers in the complex. A variation of the projective method was used to quantify the transfer integral V between the two non-equivalent components of the interface (more details in SI). In order to discuss a more realistic description of the interface, to take into account the dynamic disorder (thermal and geometrical fluctuations) present in a real case, as well as to account for the effect of an environment, the GQD/N-penta interface was selected and a 5 ns long classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulation was performed. The procedure used has been validated in a recent study of similar carbon nanodots (CDs) in different solvents. In summary, we described here the creation of novel GQD/N-acene interfaces in which the length of the N-acene backbone increases from N-naphta to N-hexa, and we calculated the transfer abilities of these interfaces by means of quantum chemical methods. We observed that the hole CT ability strongly decreases while increasing the N-acene length, while the electron CT abilities are more steady with values in between 20 and 40 meV. Considering the most commonly used acene (pentacene), we focus on the N-penta/GQD interface to study the effect of dynamic disorder (thermal and conformational fluctuations) and the presence on an explicit environment (liquid water) on the CT abilities of the selected interface. By means of the projective method, we assessed that both effects influence the change in CT abilities of the interface. In particular, we observed that hole transfer is strongly affected by dynamic disorder and the nature of the environment. It becomes even predominant with values in between 30 and 60 meV, while at the same time the electron transfer drops to 10-20 meV. Thus, neglecting both dynamic disorder and the environment lead to a wrong description of the CT abilities of the selected interfaces, going from an electron transfer to a hole transfer material. Therefore, efforts have to be done to both describe more realistic model systems and account for the different interactions exhibiting their influences in these environments, which are found to be indispensable to enhance the rational design of novel organic electronic materials.