In this study, we investigate the morphological, structural, and optical properties of both bulk-heterojunction and composite nanotubes that are composed of thiophene-based small molecules 1,4-bis (2,2'-bithiopen-5-yl)2,5-dihexyloxybenzene (BHBT2) and fullerene [6,6]phenyl C71 butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM). Mix-blended and template-assisted methods were used to fabricate the bulk-heterojunction and the composite nanotubes, respectively. A single material of BHBT2 thin films and nanotubes fabricated via spin-coating and templateassisted methods, respectively, were also studied. Two different formations between the bulkheterojunction and the composite nanotubes were compared to elaborate on their advancement in properties. The absorption spectra of the BHBT2:PC71BM bulkheterojunction and the composite nanotubes were found to have fallen within the ultravioletvisible (UV-vis) range. Field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) and highresolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) images showed that the carbon-rich of PC71BM, had successfully infiltrated into the BHBT2 nanotube to form the BHBT2:PC71BM Organic materials have been of interest to many researchers due to their extraordinary properties such as flexibility, abundancy of resources, and low production cost. Initially, the organic materials are only used as electric insulator of electronic devices. However, this has changed after the discovery of the metallic behavior of polyacetylene (PA) by Shirakawa et.al In addition, many other new organic materials have recently been discovered and used in applications involving electronic nanodevices (field effect transistor, light emitting diode) The small molecules based materials are promising as they have the properties of viscoelasticity, toughness, crystallinity, and optical when compared to polymer based materials Thiophene-based small molecules, namely 1,4-bis (2,2'-bithiopen-5-yl)2,5dihexyloxybenzene (BHBT2) is a pentamer that consists of four thiophene rings and one benzene ring that binds the two hexyl molecules and thiophene. BHBT2 has a profound solubility particularly in organic solvents such as chloroform, dichloromethane, and tetrahydrofuran. In addition, it is easily purified through column chromatography and recrystallization techniques. The terminal bithiophene groups in a BHBT2 pentamer are expected to provide good stability and excellent charge transport properties in the pentamer backbone. Therefore, the coupling of dihexyloxy-p-phenylene moiety with terminal bithiophene groups could improve the pi-electron conjugation path in the pentamer backbone without affecting their optical and electrochemical properties In this work, one of the key explorations of BHBT2 properties is on its nanostructures. Nanostructures of small molecules such as nanotubes, nanorods, nanowires, and nanoflowers have been commonly fabricated using the template assisted-method The template assisted-method is a low cost technique to produce nanostructured materials where the properties of the materials can easily be controlled As reported previously, a p-n core-shell junction nanowire that was applied to inorganic solar cells have been seen to have improved the efficiency performance of the device In this study, the p-n core-shell junction of composite nanotubes has been successfully produced via the template assisted-method. Composite nanotubes of BHBT2 and fullerene properties may provide informative and useful knowledge. Thiophene-based small molecules, 1,4-bis (2,2'-bithiophene-5-yl)2,5-dihexyloxybenzene (BHBT2) were synthesized and used directly as needed. As shown in Figure Prior to the spin coating process, the templates were first attached onto a glass slide using scotch tape on its right and left sides (Figure Figure These templates were stuck upside down on a copper tape (iv) before the dissolution of 6 h in 5 M of sodium hydroxide (NaOH) took place (v). In order to wash the remaining template thoroughly, it was rinsed several times using deionized water. Finally, the obtained nanotubes that remain stuck on the copper tape were ready to be characterized (vi). Schematic illustrations shown in Figure In this study, the properties of single material and composite materials comprised of BHBT2 (p-type) and fullerene (n-type) are reported. BHBT2 (1,4-bis (2,2'-bithiophene-5-yl)2,5dihexyloxybenzene) is a novel small molecule with pentamer Nanostructuring these materials into p-n composite may enrich knowledge in nanomorphology studies. In addition, the charge transfer between donor and acceptor materials can be better understood and digested when there is more information on the carrier's behaviors. Figure Figure Incorporating BHBT2 with PC71BM slightly shifted the intense absorption and rendered the absorption range broader at 320-350 nm and 400-460 nm. As shown in Figure In an organic material, once a photon bombards onto a donor material, exciton, which is a pair of electron-hole that binds with each other, will be generated. In order to generate a current, this exciton will need to be dissociated by dislodging the electron from its binding energy. One condition that has to be fulfilled is the affinity electron requirement of each donor and acceptor materials. In our study, to investigate the potential application of BHBT2 into a device, BHBT2 and electron acceptor of PC71BM were mixed. It should be possible to create a charge transfer phenomena via the HOMO-LUMO configuration of both materials since the electron affinity of the acceptor material is bigger than that of the donor. Charge carriers transfer will only occur when the binding energy of exciton is lower than the electron affinity energy difference between the donor and acceptor materials The photoluminescence (PL) measurement was carried out to investigate the effectiveness of charge transfer between the donor and acceptor for both the bulk heterojunction and the composite nanotubes. The PL provides information on how well the exciton can reach the donor-acceptor interfaces Recombination of exciton will lead to the emission of radiative photon (radiative recombination) which is shown as intensity in the PL spectra This phenomenon is indicated by the lower intensity exhibited by the PL peak (quenching) compared to the curve of the radiative recombination which always exhibit the higher intensity. Quenching is attributed to the charge carriers transfer that had occurred between the donor and acceptor, which are carriers produced from the dissociated excitons at the donoracceptor interfaces The morphology of BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotubes could be responsible for the better quenching of bulk-heterojunction where it could be predicted that most of the BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotube interfaces were unevenly constructed. Raman spectroscopy was applied to study the chemical and structural composition of materials. In its application, incident photons that interact with materials may lose or gain energy. The energy difference between the scattered photon and the incident photon is exactly similar to the energy difference in molecular vibration. Therefore, patterns of Raman spectra are generated from the molecular or lattice vibrations within the materials. A low frequency in the Raman shift corresponds to a low energy vibration of atoms which means that heavy atoms are held together with the weak bonds. On the other hand, a high frequency corresponded to light atoms which were held together with a strong bound Among the four Raman spectra (BHBT2 thin films, BHBT2 nanotubes, BHBT2:PC71BM bulk heterojunction, and BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotubes), BHBT2 nanotubes and BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotubes had somewhat a similar intensity although the highest peak intensity was dominated by BHBT2 thin films. BHBT2 nanotubes were synthesized via the template-assisted method. Figure Formation of nanotubes bundles could be due to the presence of attractive forces (van der Waals interactions) between the nanotubes During the infiltration, the solution that passes through the template nanochannels may experience two possible conditions along the process. The first possible condition is that the solution will spread and wet the nanochannels' wall, which will in turn produce the hollow nanotubes after the template dissolution. The other possible condition is the formation of nanorods, due to the existence of force interactions between the molecules (solution) during infiltration that are stronger than the adhesive force (wall). In this study, the growth mechanism of BHBT2 nanostructures was rendered by the first possible condition (Figure Figures These two different regions corresponded to the PC71BM (inner) and BHBT2 (outer), respectively. PC71BM was infiltrated into the center of the hollow BHBT2, which is shown as a darker region. PC71BM of carbon rich materials was successfully infiltrated into the BHBT2 nanotubes and wetted the inner wall of nanotubes, which led to the formation of p-n junction. If the assumption is that all of the PC71BM had totally infiltrated into the BHBT2 nanotubes, a more effective charge transfer will take place in composite nanotubes rather than in the bulkheterojunction. However, based on the morphological images, it was notice that not many PC71BM had been infiltrated into the BHBT2 nanotubes. In addition to that, the nanotubes were not homogeneously constructed in terms of size. The occurrence of this phenomenon may have been due to the spin coating rate. In the spin coating process, some of the substances may have been swept away, out of the alumina template surface. Ideally, PC71BM substances would have to fully infiltrate the BHBT2 nanotubes and to have a well-mixed of donor-acceptor interfaces in order to form the homogeneous composite nanotubes. Therefore, the composite nanotubes would provide the more effective way for the charges to be transferred into the acceptor material. We have successfully synthesized and characterized the properties of 1,4-bis (2,2'-bithiopen-5-yl)2,5-dihexyloxybenzene (BHBT2) as single material and composites. The comparison study between BHBT2 thin films, BHBT2 nanotubes, BHBT2:PC71BM bulk-heterojunction and BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotubes emphasized on their optical, structural and morphological properties. Nanostructuring the BHBT2 via template-assisted method had been successfully applied to produce nanotubes and composite nanotubes. Better quenching and improvement of charge carriers' transport was observed in BHBT2:PC71BM bulkheterojunction due to the poor interfaces morphology of unevenly constructed BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotubes. However, the enhancement of light absorption was observed in BHBT2 nanotubes and BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotubes. PC71BM had been successfully infiltrated into the BHBT2 nanotubes due to the wetting properties possessed by both materials, although the uniformity of infiltration is poor. MD is a senior lecturer at the Universitas Trisakti. TCH is currently on postdoctoral fellowship at the University of Malaya. AS is the senior lecturer and KS is an associate professor at the Department of Physics, University of Malaya, while RD is a professor at the National University of Malaysia. 