Until recently, the accepted paradigm was that the Ohmic electrical response of nanochannel-microchannel systems is determined solely by the nanochannel while the effects of the adjacent microchannels are negligible. Two, almost identical, models were suggested to rationalize experimental observations that appeared to confirm the paradigm. However, recent works have challenged this paradigm and shown that the microchannels contribute in a nonnegligible manner, and thus these two models are inadequate in describing realistic nanochannelmicrochannel systems. Two newer nanochannel-microchannel models were suggested to replace the nanochannel-dominant models. These models were limited to either very low or very high concentrations. Here, we review these four leading models. The most popular is shown to be incorrect, while the remaining models are unified under a newly derived solution which shows remarkable correspondence to simulations and experiments. The unifying model can be used to improve the design of any nanofluidic based systems as the physics are more transparent, and the need for complicated time-consuming preliminary simulations and experiments has been eliminated. [Figure Two decades ago, with the first observation One is then left with a set of questions: 1) Given that only one nanochannel-dominant model can be correct, which is the correct one and why is the other one incorrect? 2) Why do these models fail at lower concentrations when the effects of the microchannels are non-negligible? 3) Can the different models (nanochannel-dominant models and nanochannel-microchannel models) be reconciled? And if so, how? To answer these questions, we derived a new unifying solution (see supplement). This solution disqualifies one of the nanochannel-dominant models. It is then able to unify the three remaining models and show that they are all limiting cases of a more general solution. To highlight the advantages of the unifying solution, we review the four leading theories and discuss their inherent assumptions, advantages, and shortcomings. Thereafter, we introduce the novel model which unifies and resolves the nanochannel-microchannel electrical resistance paradigm. We believe that the findings of this work will substantially improve the design of nanofluidic based applications, many of which are pressing to society. To better understand the transition from an inversely linear dependence on the concentration, 1 0 Rc  , to a saturation (i.e. concentration independence, R const ), one needs to discuss how a property termed permselectivity changes with the concentration. Permselectivity is the ability of nanochannels to filter out ions of a particular charge (positive or negative) ) and vanishing permselectivity (high concentrations -1 N ). How much a system needs to be permselective (or not at all) depends on the desired applications. Regardless of application, both ideal and vanishing permselective systems share a common feature: at small currents and all concentrations, the current-voltage () IV  response is linear. For ideal permselectivity and larger currents, the response is no longer linear Resistance paradigm. For our analysis, three comments are in order. First, in the literature it is common to discuss the behavior of the electrical conductance of the system, denoted by  . In this work we will almost solely discuss the electrical resistance, which is reciprocal to the conductance 1 () The resistance formulation, as we will show, provides a more intuitive and simpler physical description. Second, throughout this work, for brevity, we will refer to the permselective region as the nanochannel. However, the 'nanochannel' could be replaced with any nanoporous material detailed above One-layer systemsuperposition model. Perhaps the most popularly used model is the one referred to here as the "superposition model" (dotted line in Figure It is known that the electrical current passing through the nanochannel depends on both the geometry and the local conductivity,  . This conductance, where only the bulk concentration varies, is commonly termed bulk conductance, bulk  , and is defined by , where d , h , and w are the length, height and width of the nanochannel, respectively [Figure where res  is the local resistivity and is given by . Here,  is the universal gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, D is the diffusion coefficient and 0 c is the bulk concentration. The subscript for the resistance, here and below, is comprised of two components, number and name. The number denotes the number of layers within the system (e.g. in this case it is one layer, only the nanochannel) and the name denotes the model (here, for brevity, we use the shortened subscript super to denote superposition). Advantages. The model is conceptually easy to understand. Eq. ( Advantages. Eq. ( Shortcomings. Unless the electrodes are placed exactly at the nanochannel interfaces, such that microchannel length is zero, 0 L  , the adjoining microchannels contribute additional resistors to the system Exact solutions can be derived for the two corresponding to ideal permselectivity ( 1 N ) and vanishing permselectivity ( 1 N ). It has become common to continue to use the terminology surface and bulk conductance. However, this terminology is oversimplifying and doesn't address changes in permselectivity with changes in 0 c . Hence, we adopt the notation of ideal and vanishing permselectivity. The expressions for the resistances are 37-39 where ), , Here L , H , and W are the length, height and width of the microchannels, respectively [Figure The transition of 3,vanishing R to 3,ideal R with decreasing concentration is attributed to the variation of the counterion transport number,  . The transport number, defined as the ratio of the flux of the counterions to the total current density, is a major transport characteristic of a permselective system. For an ideal binary system, only counterions are transported through the nanochannel, such that transport number equals unity ( . As can be expected, the solution in the ~1 N region, where the two models intercept (Figure Advantages. The advantages are numerous. First, the derivation of the exact solution from the Poisson-Nernst-Planck equations for the two extreme cases, ideal and vanishing permselectivity, is relatively simple and straight-forward and the transport number is given by Advantages. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first analytical expression for the two most essential properties of a permselective system, the Ohmic resistance [Eq. ( and / micro nano RR  . Thus, given the geometry and the surface charge, the transport and permselectivity can be easily calculated given the concentration. Further, Eq. ( Shortcomings. Albeit a conceptual complication, described below, there are no shortcomings. Eqs. ( To circumvent this issue, we suggest not to view the final result as a single equation, which perhaps over-simplifies the assumption. We note that, in Eqs. ( Conclusions. This work focuses on the Ohmic resistance of a permselective nanochannel flanked by two microchannels. We reviewed the shortcoming and advantages of four leading models whose properties are outlined in Table This novel model [Eqs. (7) and ( Table Model Derivation. Details are given in the Supplementary. Numerical Simulations. Data taken from Refs. (37,39). See Supplementary for simulation values. Experimental Data. Data taken from Ref. (39). See Supplementary for geometric values.