We experimentally demonstrate the worlds' first field-programmable gate-array (FPGA)-based real-time fiber nonlinearity compensator (NLC) using sparse K-means++ machine learning clustering in an energy-efficient 40-Gb/s 16-quadrature amplitude modulated (QAM) self-coherent optical system. Our real-time NLC shows up to 3 dB improvement in Q-factor compared to linear equalization at 50 km of transmission. Surging data traffic demands caused by bandwidth-hungry Internet services such as video streaming or cloud computing pose a significant challenge to the underlying fiber-optic communication systems. The only viable solution for increasing the data rates is the employment of advanced modulation formats (e.g. 16-QAM). The core difficulty on the transmission of such signals is the Kerrinduced fiber nonlinearity In this work, we experimentally demonstrate the first FPGA-based NLC using sparse K-means++ clustering for 40-Gb/s 16-QAM energy-efficient self-coherent systems K-means clustering is a method of vector quantization that has been popular for cluster analysis in data mining. It aims to partition n observations into K clusters in which each observation belongs to the cluster with the nearest mean, serving as a prototype of the cluster. However, K-means is computationally inefficient especially for real-time signal processing where many calculations are required for thousands or millions of data points in a very limited timeframe (msec). Here, we propose a sparse K-means++ based NLC for real-time self-coherent optical signals. In this algorithm, we take regular time intervals (sparsity) from the real-time incoming signal to update the centers of the clusters thus eliminating time delays and latency. The clustering algorithm is based on the Lloyd's approach . Where J, K, n, are the objective function, number of clusters, and number of symbols, respectively. x i is the i th symbol and c j is the centroid for a cluster j. The inside term in the norm ‖ . ‖ defines the distance function between a symbol and a centroid. In the algorithm, we have knowledge about the centers (i.e. the '++' term) of the adopted modulation format level to enable faster convergence and adaptivity. The steps of our algorithm are given below, while the conceptual diagram in Fig. 1. Initiate K cluster centers (centroids) by averaging the received data per cluster after linear equalization; 2. Compute point-to-cluster-centroid distances of all observations to each centroid; 3. Assign each observation to the cluster with the closest centroid (Batch update); 4. Compute the average of the observations in each cluster to obtain K new centroid locations; 5. Repeat steps 2 through 4 until cluster assignments do not change, or the maximum number of iterations is reached. In our NLC the number of iterations was fixed, as further iterations didn't improve the Q-factor. In Fig. In the last iteration of the process, we re-assign symbols until all of them are properly assigned, considering the minimum BER value has been reached (convergence). The FPGA used in our experiment was a Xilinx Virtex Ultrascale+VCU118 Evaluation FPGA Platform. The self-coherent system (Fig. N) were attached to meet the required 20 GHz bandwidth considering the available clock rate per channel is 312.5 MHz. From Ch. 1 to Ch. N, we only selected one channel and used it to update the information of the centers in K-means. However, for each channel we processed separately the I and Q components. Fig. We experimentally demonstrated a novel, practical fiber-induced nonlinearity compensator, the sparse K-means++, for 40-Gb/s real-time 16-QAM energy-efficient self-coherent systems. At 50 km of commercial fiber transmission, our approach improved the Q-factor by up to 3 dB over linear equalization. This is the worlds' first implementation of machine learning in an FPGA board for compensation of nonlinearities in optical networks. We believe our technique can be also valuable for other modulation techniques such as fast optical orthogonal frequency division multiplexing 