Controlled atomic scale fabrication of functional devices is one of the holy grails of nanotechnology. The most promising class of techniques that enable deterministic nanodevice fabrication are based on scanning probe patterning or surface assembly. However, this typically involves a complex process flow, stringent requirements for an ultra high vacuum environment, long fabrication times and, consequently, limited throughput and device yield. Here, a device platform is developed that overcomes these limitations by integrating scanning probe based dopant device fabrication with a CMOS-compatible process flow. Silicon on insulator substrates are used featuring a reconstructed Si(001):H surface that is protected by a capping chip and has pre-implanted contacts ready for scanning tunneling microscope (STM) patterning. Processing in ultra-high vacuum is thus reduced to only a few critical steps which minimizes the complexity, time and effort required for fabrication of the nanoscale dopant devices. Subsequent reintegration of the samples into the CMOS process flow not only simplifies the post-processing but also opens the door to successful application of STM based dopant devices as a building block in more complex device architectures. Full functionality of this approach is demonstrated with magnetotransport measurements on degenerately doped STM patterned Si:P nanowires up to room temperature. An early demonstration of the potential of scanning probe microscopy (SPM) in the area of atomic scale fabrication was the famous quantum coral One of the most promising SPM-based fabrication techniques is scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) based dopant device fabrication However, as with other probe-based fabrication schemes, STM dopant device fabrication is technically extremely challenging. It requires the use of dedicated UHV equipment and the process flow for the device fabrication is very time consuming, tedious and prone to failure. As a result, only a handful of groups in the world have successfully made devices with this technique To overcome these limitations we present a platform for STM based dopant device fabrication that is fully integrated with a CMOS process flow. It drastically reduces the fabrication time and complexity, and adds additional functionalities to STM fabricated dopant devices. The key features of this platform are outlined in Fig. After UHV fabrication and Si overgrowth, the devices can either be contacted from the top using optical or e-beam lithography or the chips can be re-integrated into the CMOS workflow using a chip-to-wafer bonding process (Fig. The pre-fabricated SOI substrates were made in a cleanroom at CEA LETI. A detailed process flow is provided in the Supplementary Information. We start with a 200 mm SOI wafer with a 200 nm thick device layer (B doped, resistivity ∼10 Ω cm) and 400 nm thick buried oxide (BOX). In the first step we etch the alignment marks. They are 50 nm deep and sidewalls are at an angle of 55 • which provides good marker visibility but does not represent a problem for scanning with the STM tip. Contact implantation is performed in a two step process: the deep implants (fluence of 3 × 10 15 cm -2 and ion energy of 20 keV and 80 keV for P and B, respectively) extend all the way through the device layer and allow contacting from the backside as required for CMOS reintegration In order to handle the SOI samples in the UHV STM setup we designed a specialized sample holder that clamps the substrate from the sides allowing for easy cap removal in UHV. After introducing the sample into the system, it is first degassed for 1 h at 300 • C in order to remove adsorbed chemical species. The capping chip is removed by pressing a molybdenum blade in a recess between the sample and the cap (see Fig. For this we use a commercial variable temperature STM from Omicron with custom control software and hardware. Alignment markers are used to position the tip close to the central device area which contains the contact implants (Fig. For STM imaging of the samples we typically use a sample bias of -2.5 V and tunneling current setpoint of 100 pA. In order to desorb hydrogen from the surface, we switch to writing parameters and scan over the desired areas with the feedback switched on. For patterning we apply a positive sample bias between +4.5 V and +7 V and tunneling current of around 4 nA. For slow writing of fine features we use tip velocity down to 10 nm s -1 , separation of lines in the desorption pattern of ∼0.5 nm and voltage from the lower part of the range (+4.5 V to ∼+5.5 V). For rapid, coarse patterning of large areas we use tip velocity up to 100 nm s -1 , line separation of ∼5 nm and voltage up to +7 V. We use Python scripts to generate the desired patterns for desorption and to programmatically control the STM tip movement along the pattern. After STM desorption of the pattern is complete, we typically image the desorbed area (or a part of it) in order to confirm desorption quality and check for desorption errors. Then we proceed with a doping procedure (similar to the one described in Compared to the conventional dopant device fabrication on bulk Si substrates, the contact fabrication procedure is facilitated by the presence of the large (10 μm × 10 μm) pre-implanted contact pads. There are two possibilities for the post-processing: I) direct e-beam lithography (or, alternatively, optical lithography) contacting on a single chip level or II) reintegration of the samples in the wafer scale CMOS process flow (see Supplementary Information). I) For the e-beam process, metal contacts are fabricated directly on the upper side of the samples. After overgrowth, the implanted areas are buried under a 20 nm thick layer of intrinsic Si. We first use reactive ion etching (RIE) to etch a grid of 1 × 1 μm 2 large and 50 nm deep holes into the implant pads and subsequently deposit 100 nm thick Al contacts in a standard lift-off process. The contacts are then annealed to 350 • C for 15 min in a reducing atmosphere (5% H, 95% Ar) at 200 mbar. In order to minimize leakage between the handle wafer (used as a gate in this case) and the device layer, we etch a frame around each device position isolating the active area from the rest of the device layer (particularly from the edges of the sample which often cause leakage). Finally, the sample is glued into a chip carrier using silver epoxy (Epotec H20e) and wire-bonded. In order to apply a gate voltage to the handle wafer, the back side of the sample is scratched with a diamond scribe prior to gluing in order to penetrate the oxide. II) For CMOS reintegration, the chips are first bonded to a new handle wafer (bulk Si wafer with 200 nm oxide layer on top) with the device layer (where STM device is located) facing towards the handle wafer. The original SOI substrate is then completely removed using a chemical-mechanical process, exposing the backside of the original BOX layer. In the next step we etch vias through the BOX exposing the bottom side of the deep contact implants in the device layer. Finally, we deposit aluminum silicon alloy contacts which connect the implants through the vias to wire-bonding pads. A custom lithography step was performed on the 30 nm NW sample to additionally define a metallic top gate. This could have been done in the reintegration step but was not foreseen in the mask-set that was used. Finally, the sample is also glued in a chip carrier and wire-bonded. Transport measurements on the samples were performed using standard lock-in techniques (Signal recovery -7265) in a four-point configuration. Low temperature measurements were carried out in a custom made variable temperature insert (VTI) cryostat allowing stable sample temperatures in a range from 2 K up to 300 K. For the e-beam processed samples the handle wafer was used as a gate. Due to its nondegenerate doping it becomes insulating at temperatures below ∼30 K. To circumvent this problem, we applied a short (200 ms) light pulse after every change of the gate voltage using a red LED (0402 surface mount LED, 632 nm peak wavelength) that was mounted in the chip carrier. This creates enough charge carriers to equalize the potential in the handle wafer and define a well defined voltage at the BOX interface. This was not necessary for the reintegrated samples which were equipped with a metallic gate. In the STM stage the pre-implanted contacts are localized using an optical microscope and large area scans that typically take less than 30 minutes (see Supplementary Information). A schematic of the device position with pre-implanted contacts is shown in Fig. Figure In a similar way we fabricated a 120 nm wide nanowire with the same length of 670 nm. This second sample was post-processed using e-beam lithography and by contacting the large implant pads from the front. This sample is referred to as 120 nm NW. A third sample containing no STM defined structures was post-processed together with the 120 nm NW sample. Two device positions with an implant separation of 670 nm and 1170 nm were contacted and are referred to as Blank 1 and Blank 2, respectively. An important advantage of the SOI substrate is that the charge carrier density in the device layer can be tuned by application of a voltage to the silicon substrate. For samples contacted from the top by e-beam lithography we find that the presence of trapped charges at the BOX interface shifts the Fermi level in a way that leakage occurs between contacts in the device layer. By application of a negative voltage to the substrate this can be fully suppressed and the charge compensated. In Fig. In summary, we have developed a platform which integrates STM-based nanoscale dopant device fabrication in the standard CMOS process flow. Performing STM lithography on pre-implanted and hydrogen terminated SOI substrates greatly reduces the fabrication time and complexity and it facilitates sample post-processing. The thin SOI device layer suppresses substrate current leakage and, with the assistance of a gate, allows room temperature operation of the dopant devices. Last but not least, the demonstrated CMOS compatibility opens the possibility to integrate atomic scale dopant devices with additional on-chip circuitry and may in the future be extended to other STM fabricated devices such as the ones resulting from molecular assembly. STM desorption is around 1-2 hours per pad. Including imaging, all required realignment steps and drift stabilization, writing of a typical dopant device therefore takes 6-8 hours. Using the new SOI platform requires an additional initial step -precise localization of the device position and implanted contacts. This procedure is described in detail later in section S4 and the typical duration is less than 30 min. Once the implanted contacts are localized, only the active device area is desorbed and no contact pads need to be defined. This shortens the entire STM writing procedure to about an hour and allows multiple devices to be written on one chip in a single run. After the STM lithographic step, the sample is dosed with the dopant precursor (typically phosphine at p =1.0 × 10 -7 mbar for 1 min), undergoes an activation anneal at 350 • C for one minute and then it is overgrown with a 20 nm intrinsic silicon layer. The substrate temperature during overgrowth is held at around 270 • C with the possibility to start with a so-called locking layer -to grow the first few monolayers at a lower temperature in order to prevent dopant segregation This procedure is essentially identical for the SOI samples and it takes less than an hour including temperature ramps and sample transfers between chambers. In order to contact the device we use e-beam lithography with several steps. In the first step, the sample is imaged with SEM to roughly localize the device. In the second step, platinum markers are defined in the vicinity of the device, and it is imaged together with the platinum markers in order to have an exact reference for its location. Then we use reactive ion etching to create an array of ∼30 nm deep holes with a diameter of 60 nm over the contact pads to penetrate the intrinsic Si overgrowth layer. In the final step, we deposit a 90 nm thick aluminum layer to electrically contact the device terminals. The post-processing usually takes at least 3 days, possibly more, depending on logistics and tool availability. Finally, the chip is glued in a chip carrier and wire-bonded. Post-processing is significantly different in the case of SOI substrates and is described in detail in section S2 below. The samples can be contacted either by e-beam lithography or can be reintegrated into the CMOS process flow. Both options have advantages over the conventional process. In the case of e-beam processing, no device imaging is necessary and the via etch and metal deposition steps are substantially easier due to the large size of the implants and their well defined position. This process could be conveniently performed by optical lithography as well. The CMOS reintegration process involves additional processing steps. On the other hand, it allows routine parallel processing of tens of chips at the same time and, most importantly, opens up a possibility to integrate additional circuitry and functionality to the device chips. In the device run from which data is presented in the main text, reintegration took place with many device chips but only two of them had an actual STM device on them. Figure The substrate preparation is performed on a wafer scale using Deep UV lithography. The detailed structure of the markers and implants is described in section S3. After the surface reconstruction step, the wafer is capped with another wafer using hydrophobic bonding before dicing into sample chips. This requires a fine-tuning of the bonding force to a such as to withstand dicing but still make removal of the cap in UHV straightforward. With the capping chip the sample surface is protected and samples can be kept in ambient conditions basically indefinitely (sample surface quality does not show any deterioration after about a one year period). Once inserted into the vacuum, the capping chip is removed and STM lithography is performed. The two distinct post-processing schemes are outlined in the third and fourth column of Fig. In the case of CMOS post-processing, the samples are first chemically oxidized and then bonded face-down to a new handle wafer using a hydrophilic (oxide to oxide) bonding process (the handle wafer Figure Alternatively, the sample containing the dopant devices can be processed by standard e-beam lithography, which involves etching vias through the Si overgrowth layer and depositing metal connections. Compared to the conventional process described in section S1.4, there are less lithographic steps involved and their accuracy is much less critical. Figure Figure Figures The STM images in Fig. A key step in dopant device fabrication is in-situ alignment to pre-fabricated structures, i.e. localization of the pre-implanted contacts with the STM. Figure A large overview scan is then performed (see Fig. The quantum correction to the Drude conductivity in the 1D regime is given by where e is electron charge, is the reduced Planck constant, L is the length of the wire, D is the diffusion constant, τ φ is the phase coherence time and τ B is the magnetic relaxation time that, for a given 1D geometry, can be calculated as where W is the wire width (in the direction perpendicular to the field and current) and B is the magnitude of the magnetic field perpendicular to the dopant device plane where α is a dimensionless correction factor that reflects the inaccuracies in the geometry. The 1D assumption in the derivation of equation 2 can be expressed by a condition that l φ W . If, on the other hand, l φ W we need to apply a 2D weak localization theory which leads to a slightly different expression for the correction of the conductance Equation 2 can be used to fit the conductance of the dopant nanowires as a function of the magnetic field. Knowing the geometry of the nanowires, the only free parameters are the phase coherence length l φ and the Drude conductivity σ 0 , which is the conductivity of the δ-layer without the weak localization correction, i.e. the limit of conductivity at high magnetic fields. We also fit the prefactor α but since we assume that it only reflects the inaccuracies in the wire geometry we restrict the fit to a common value for all the temperatures. Figures If we compare the phase coherence length l φ to the width of the nanowires W , the two values are essentially comparable for both nanowires which means that the situation can neither be considered 1D nor 2D. In this intermediate regime an analytical formula for the conductance correction is not easily obtainable. When we apply the 2D theory to the magnetoresistance curves, the quality of the fits is substantially worse but the phase coherence length we obtain is essentially the same. In Fig. 