Anomalous Nernst effect, a result of charge current driven by temperature gradient, provides a probe of the topological nature of materials due to its sensitivity to the Berry curvature near the Fermi level. Fe3GeTe2, one important member of the recently discovered two-dimensional van der Waals magnetic materials, offers a unique platform for anomalous Nernst effect because of its metallic and topological nature. Here, we report the observation of large anomalous Nernst effect in Fe3GeTe2. The anomalous Hall angle and anomalous Nernst angle are about 0.07 and 0.09 respectively, far larger than those in common ferromagnets. By utilizing the Mott relation, these large angles indicate a large Berry curvature near the Fermi level, consistent with the recent proposal for Fe3GeTe2 as a topological nodal line semimetal candidate. Our work provides evidence of Fe3GeTe2 as a topological ferromagnet, and demonstrates the feasibility of using twodimensional magnetic materials and their band topology for spin caloritronics applications. The recently discovered two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) magnets providing new constituent materials for spintronics and caloritronics, have attracted much attention. To date, most 2D vdW ferromagnets are semiconductors (e.g., Cr2Ge2Te6) and insulators (e.g., CrI3), with Fe3GeTe2 (FGT) being the only ferromagnetic (FM) metal. Electrical switching of FGT by spin orbit torque Furthermore, the topological nature of FGT gives rise to some intriguing phenomena, for example, the observation of large anomalous Hall effect (AHE) In this work, we report the observation of AHE and ANE in exfoliated FGT thin film devices. We have determined σ xx (defined as )T( cm -1 ) indicates the origin of the observed large AHE and ANE in FGT is primarily the intrinsic mechanism from the large Berry curvature, and not scattering, such as skew scattering and side-jump Our work provides evidence for FGT as a topological ferromagnetic metal, and demonstrates the feasibility of using 2D vdW magnetic materials and their band topology for spin caloritronic applications. The vdW material of Fe3GeTe2 consists of Fe3Ge slabs sandwiched by two layers of Te atoms and a van der Waals gap between the adjacent Te layers as shown in Fig. Single crystals of bulk FGT, grown by chemical vapor transport method, exhibit a lattice constant of c = 16.36 Å, measured by X-ray diffraction (for details, see Supporting Information). The magnetic properties of bulk FGT, characterized by a superconducting quantum interference device, show a saturation magnetization of about 310 emu cm -3 with a magnetic moment of 1.25 μB per Fe atom, and Curie temperature of about 200 K (see Supporting Information Fig. We first examine the magnetic properties of FGT through the anomalous Hall effect with magnetometry results in the Supporting Information. about 0.07 at low temperatures, similar to previous reports We next describe the anomalous Nernst effect results in thin FGT devices. As depicted in Fig. Similar to that of AHE, we observe a rectangular hysteretic ANE loop. When we apply 12 mA current to the left side heater to generate an opposite temperature gradient ∇T x of about -1.1 K μm -1 , we observe a similar but reversed rectangular hysteresis loop as shown in Fig. To assess and eliminate this possible contribution, we apply a large magnetic field Hx up to 6 kOe along the x direction and observed no appreciable signal (see Supporting Information Fig. To gain further insight and extract the Seebeck coefficients at zero field, provided by the robust PMA, we measure the ANE in the FGT devices at different temperatures T*, and also with different temperature gradients ∇T x , as summarized in Fig. α xy = -σ xy (( the intrinsic mechanism or side-jump, instead of skew scattering, dominates AHE and ANE where h is Planck constant and a z is the interlayer distance (a z = c/2 = 8.18 Å). This further corroborates the intrinsic Berry curvature as the primary source of the observed large AHE angle and ANE angle. This is consistent with the recent proposal of FGT as a topological nodal line semimetal with a large Berry curvature from the nodal line This may be the reasons for the exceptionally large AHE angle θ H and ANE angle θ N of 0.07 and 0.09, far larger than those in common ferromagnets. In summary, we have observed ANE in exfoliated 2D van der Waals ferromagnetic metallic Fe3GeTe2 thin film devices. We have observed exceptionally large anomalous Nernst effect angle θ N of 0.09, corroborated by the similarly large anomalous Hall effect angle θ H of 0.07, much larger than the values of ≤ 0.02 for common ferromagnetic metals. From the measured transport coefficients and the Mott relation, we find the large Berry curvature is responsible for the observed large AHE angle and ANE angle, which provides evidence for FGT as a topological ferromagnet. Our results demonstrate the feasibility of using 2D vdW magnetic materials and their band topology for spin caloritronics applications. calibration curves to measure the local temperatures. For example, when 10 mA current is applied to heater H2 (red curves in Fig. Because the anomalous Nernst signal V is proportional to ∇T × M, a voltage signal along yaxis Vy could be generated by ∇T x × M z or ∇T z × M x . To eliminate the possible contribution from the vertical temperature gradient ∇T z , we measure the transverse voltage Vy as a function of external applied magnetic field Hx while keeping the same heater current (14 mA) as used in the main text in Fig. ( and 3d. The longitudinal voltage Vx and the transverse voltage Vy are displayed in colors as a function of T* and ∇T x . Using the definitions of Sxx = -H of 0.07, both are much larger than those in common FM metals of ≤ 0.02. ∂ε ) ε F , where k B is the Boltzmann constant, ε is the energy, and ε F is the Fermi energy. By substituting the scaling relationship for the Hall resistivity ρ xy = λMρ xx n into the Mott relation and Eq. (