Effects of pressure on the electronic structure, electron-phonon interaction, and superconductivity of the high entropy alloy (TaNb)0.67(HfZrTi)0.33 are studied in the pressure range 0 -100 GPa. The electronic structure is calculated using the Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker method with the coherent potential approximation. Effects of pressure on the lattice dynamics are simulated using the Debye-Grüneisen model and the Grüneisen parameter at ambient conditions. In addition, the Debye temperature and Sommerfeld electronic heat capacity coefficient were experimentally determined. The electron-phonon coupling parameter λ is calculated using the McMillan-Hopfield parameters and computed within the rigid muffin tin approximation. We find, that the system undergoes the Lifshitz transition, as one of the bands crosses the Fermi level at elevated pressures. The electron-phonon coupling parameter λ decreases above 10 GPa. The calculated superconducting Tc increases up to 40 -50 GPa and, later, is stabilized at the larger value than for the ambient conditions, in agreement with the experimental findings. Our results show that the experimentally observed evolution of Tc with pressure in (TaNb)0.67(HfZrTi)0.33 can be well explained by the classical electron-phonon mechanism. High-pressure studies of superconducting materials have brought about the latest breakthrough in the field of superconductivity. The record-high T c of 203 K in H 3 S High entropy alloys When the external pressure is applied, T c of (TaNb) 0.67 (HfZrTi) 0.33 increases up to about 10 K at around 50-60 GPa and then it remains practically constant up to about 100 GPa. After that, it slightly decreases to 9 K at 190 GPa The Ta 0.335 Nb 0.335 Hf 0.11 Zr 0.11 Ti 0.11 sample was prepared by melting the required high-purity elements, i.e., tantalum foil (99.9%), niobium pieces (99.99%), hafnium pieces (99.99%), zirconium foil (99.8%) and titanium pieces (99.99%). The elemental metals were arc-melted to a single metallic button under an argon atmosphere on a water-chilled copper plate. A piece of zirconium was used as a getter at each melting steps. After the initial melt, the sample nugget was turned and remelted three times to ensure the optimal mixing of the constituents. Mass loss during the synthesis was smaller than 1% and the resulting material was hard and silver in color. The phase purity of the obtained material was checked by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Philips X'pert Pro MPD with Cu K α radiation. The sample exhibited ductility, and therefore could not be ground. Because of that, for qualitative and quantitative characterization the sample had to be converted into a plate form. In order to prepare the sample for the XRD analysis, the button was cut into smaller piece and then transformed into a plate using hydraulic press. The mechanical handling did not cause any sample contamination. The plate was put on the Al 2 O 3 (corundum) sample holder and mounted in a small furnace inside a diffractometer. Above 400 • C the sample oxidizes and, hence, the XRD analysis in higher temperatures was not continued. The lattice parameter for TNHZT at different temperatures was estimated from the LeBail fit using a HighScore program. Heat capacity measurements were carried out using a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) Evercool-II. The two-τ relaxation method was used to measure the specific heat without external magnetic field and under 8 T magnetic field, in the temperature range 1.9 -10 K. The sample was attached to the measuring stage by using Apiezon N grease to ensure good thermal contact. Electronic structure calculations were performed using the Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker method with the coherent potential approximation (KKR-CPA) Electron-phonon coupling and its evolution under external pressure is studied using the so-called Rigid Muffin Tin Approximation (RMTA). This method has been successfully applied to many superconducting materials, mostly containing transition metal elements where η i are the McMillan-Hopfield parameters where V (r) is the self-consistent potential at site i, R MT is the radius of the i-th MT sphere, R l (r) is a regular solution of the radial Schrödinger equation (normalized to unity inside the MT sphere), n l (E F ) is the l-th partial DOS per spin at the Fermi level E F , and N (E F ) is the total DOS per primitive cell and per spin. For a more detailed discussion of the approximations involved in this methodology, see e.g. Refs. In the case of a random alloy, where a single crystal site i is occupied by several different atoms that have different concentrations, modification of Eq.( , where M = i c i M i . The final formula for the electron-phonon coupling (EPC) parameter λ of HEA used in our work becomes: where McMillan-Hopfield parameters η i of each atom in the system are computed in the self-consistent KKR-CPA calculations and c i is the atomic concentration of the element. As mentioned above, this approach was recently applied to the first superconducting highentropy alloy Ta 34 Nb 33 Hf 8 Zr 14 Ti 11 As far as the crystal structure is concerned, high pressure synchrotron X-ray diffraction measurements were performed in the pressure range from 0 to 96 GPa and it was shown that (TaNb) 0.67 (HfZrTi) 0.33 maintains the bcc structure, since no structural distortion was observed 3. Pressure dependence of θD of tantalum from the direct phonon calculations, from the Grüneisen model for several values of n, and from the quasi-harmonic calculations of Liu et al. where V 0 is the equilibrium volume. Bulk modulus of B = 177.35 GPa and its derivative B = 2.87 were obtained and are used in the subsequent analysis. The Debye temperature of TNHZT θ 0 D was measured only at ambient conditions As the volume compression (in our case) reaches 30% (see, Fig. which also may be pressure-dependent. Equations ( we may write q(V ) as a power-law relation where ζ = V /V 0 , n is a material-dependent constant parameter, and q 0 = q(V 0 ) is the value at ambient conditions. Such approximation leads to the formula for γ G (V ) Once γ G (V ) is calculated the Debye temperature for a given volume (or equivalently pressure) is computed from: Input parameters, required to compute θ D (V ) are ambient-pressure Debye temperature θ 0 D and ambientpressure Grüneisen parameter γ 0 G , which have not been determined for our system yet. To obtain γ 0 G we have performed the volume thermal expansion coefficient α measurements, described in the next section. This allows to calculate the Grüneisen parameter at ambient conditions: where V 0 is the primitive cell volume, N A is the Avogadro number, and C V is the molar constant-volume heat capacity taken as the Dulong-Petit limit of 24.94 (J K -1 mol -1 ). The second order Grüneisen parameter is given by the following relation: Using Dugdale and MacDonald Finally, second order Grüneisen parameter may be calculated at ambient conditions as Bulk modulus values B and B were determined above from the P (V ) fit, thus the only parameter which remained to be determined is the power-law coefficient n from Eq.( Calculations of the phonon densities of states for Nb and Ta were performed using a Quantum ESPRESSO software Among many available formulas for the "theoretical" Debye temperature (see, Ref. To avoid any confusions we explain the difference between ω 2 (that enters Eq. ( Computed and experimental values of the bulk modulus B, its pressure derivative B , the Grüneisen parameter γ 0 G , and the second order Grüneisen parameter q 0 for Nb and Ta are gathered in Table To summarize the methodology section, electronphonon coupling constant λ is calculated using Eq. ( The (TaNb) 0.67 (HfZrTi) 0.33 as-cast sample was characterized using X-ray diffraction method (XRD). The measurement was first performed at room temperature and then at temperatures from 100 • C up to 400 • C with a step of 50 deg. The XRD pattern is shown in the Supplemental Material [34] and contains only sharp Al 2 O 3 (holder) reflections and reflections that were indexed with an I-centered cubic phase. A cubic lattice parameter for TNHZT was refined using the LeBail method and High-Score software. A relative change of a unit cell volume (∆V /V 0 ) vs. temperature is presented in Figure The temperature dependence of the electronic heat capacity, C el /T of (TaNb) 0.67 (HfZrTi) 0.33 is presented in Fig. Evolution of the Debye temperature with pressure, needed to calculate λ in our approach, was simulated according to the model described above. The ambientpressure Grüneisen parameter γ 0 G was calculated using Eq. 11. The lattice thermal expansion coefficient and unit cell volume have been measured experimentally and heat capacity was approximated by the Dulong-Petit law. The parameters B = 177 GPa and B = 2.87 were determined from the Birch-Murnaghan equation of state In addition, a shift of electronic states causes a gradual decrease of the third DOS maximum, lying in the lowest energy range. Atom with the largest contribution to the total DOS at E F is Ti (see also Table In the N (E F ) versus P relation (Fig. On the whole, upon external pressure both empty and occupied electronic bands move towards E F . Interesting evolution is found in the N -Γ direction, where the local minimum of one of the bands is near E F (peak in DOS is associated with this band). As shown in Fig. What is worth noting, two transitions in topology of electronic states under pressure were reported theoretically Values of the ambient-pressure McMillan-Hopfield parameters are gathered in Table Evolution of the McMillan-Hopfield parameters with pressure is shown in Fig. The pressure evolution of λ, obtained based on com-puted η i (P ) parameters (Fig. Taking the derivative of ln λ from Eq.( where The simplified pressure-volume equation of state V = V 0 exp(-P/ B) was used to convert the pressure derivative into the volume one. The value of such-defined B "bulk modulus" is of no importance here for the qualitative discussion. The McMillan-Hopfield parameters increse when the unit cell volume decreases, thus d ln η d ln V is negative Finally, the superconducting critical temperature may be calculated using McMillan formula The last parameter, which has to be determined is the Coulomb pseudopotential parameter, μ * . In zero pressure, the most-commonly used value of 0.13 would lead to an overestimated T c = 12.5 K. To get the experimental zero pressure T c = 7.7 K one has to use μ * = 0.215. Similar value was used for pure Nb to reproduce the experimental critical temperature based on the calculated Eliashberg function In general, under the assumption of relatively large μ * (0) = 0.215, our calculations quite well predict the variation of T c with pressure (but only when variable μ * (P ) is used). In spite of the decrease in the computed λ above 10 GPa, T c increases up to 40 -50 GPa and then remains almost constant up to 100 GPa, just like it is observed in the experiment. This counter-intuitive observation shows the delicate balance between T c , θ D , and λ, since an increase in θ D leads to a quadratic increase in the denominator of Eq.(3) (tendency to decrease λ) and linear increase of T c via the multiplicator in McMil-lan's Eq. In summary, we have studied pressure effects of the electronic structure, electron-phonon interaction, and superconductivity of the high entropy alloy (TaNb) 0.67 (HfZrTi) 0.33 in a pressure range from 0 to 100 GPa. With increasing pressure the total density of states at the Fermi level N (E F ) gradually decreases. Lifshitz transition is observed around 70 GPa when one of the bands starts crossing the Fermi level. Due to disorderinduced band smearing effects, however, the transition is not sharp, since these bands contribute to N (E F ) also at lower pressures (even below 50 GPa). As in the experimental studies, T c (P ) changes the slope above 50 GPa and this effect may be correlated with the calculated band structure evolution and the Lifshitz transition. The effects of pressure on the lattice dynamics were simulated using the Debye-Grüneisen model, where γ G parameter was additionally determined. The calculated McMillan-Hopfield parameters increase with pressure but due to concurrent effect of the lattice stiffening and increase of the Debye temperature, the electronphonon coupling parameter λ decreases above 10 GPa. In spite of this, the calculated superconducting T c increases up to 40 -50 GPa and later is stabilized at the larger value of λ than observed at the ambient conditions. This non-decreasing T c results from the increase of the Debye temperature and decrease of N (E F ), which is caused by the monotonic decrease of the Coulomb pseudopotential parameter μ * . Our results are in good agreement with the experimental trend and shows that up to a studied pressure of 100 GPa the evolution of T c with pressure in (TaNb) 0.67 (HfZrTi) 0.33 can be well explained by the classical electron-phonon mechanism. This implies that the electronic structure of the system is well described by the coherent potential approximation. An excellent additional test of our theoretical results would be a measurement of the electronic heat capacity under pressure, which would allow verification of the observed decrease in both N (E F ) and λ. The electron-phonon coupling constant λ is defined as: where α 2 F (ω) is the Eliashberg electron-phonon interaction function. Defining the McMillan-Hopfield parameter as and the "second moment" of Eliashberg function as: we arrive at the identity: Note, that ω 2 is the second moment of α 2 F (ω) ω function, not the usual average square of α 2 F (ω). The advantage of writing λ as in Eq. ( since α 2 term cancels out. Thus, in RMTA one may effectively decouple calculations of λ into purely electronic and phonon parts. Moreover, if F (ω) is difficult to compute directly, as in our case of the high entropy alloy, and one assumes, that it follows the Debye model F (ω) = 9ω For the Debye spectrum, Eq.( 