Interfacial deposition stability between Li metal and a solid electrolyte (SE) is important in preventing interfacial contact loss, mechanical fracture, and dendrite growth in Li-metal solid state batteries (SSB). In this work, we investigate the deposition and mechanical stability at the Li metal/SE interface and its consequences (such as SE fracture and contact loss). A wide range of contributing factors are investigated, such as charge and mass transfer kinetics, plasticity of Li metal and fracture of the SE, and the applied stack pressure. We quantify the effect of the ionic conductivity of the SE, the exchange current density of the interfacial charge-transfer reaction and SE surface roughness on the Li deposition stability at the Li metal/SE interface. We also propose a "mechanical stability window" for the applied stack pressure that can prevent both contact loss and SE fracture, which can be extended to other metal-electrode (such as Sodium) SSB systems. Li-metal all-solid-state batteries (SSBs) are promising candidates to replace conventional secondary batteries, providing improved safety with the use of nonflammable solid electrolytes (SE) In general, uneven distributions of current and stress at the Li metal/SE interface (due to geometric irregularity The objective of the current study is to provide basic models for the deposition and mechanical stability of the interface between Li metal and the SE, under boundary conditions (BCs) that are relevant for practical Li-metal SSBs. We first show that the interfacial stress caused by the stack pressure has a much smaller effect on the Li deposition stability compared to other factors, such as the charge-transfer of Li * /Li at the interface and the mass-transfer rate of Li * in the SE. Secondly, we investigate Li electrodeposition and plastic deformation for a wide range of BCs and material properties, including the shape of a surface irregularity, the charge-transfer kinetics at the Li metal/SE interface, the conductivity of bulk SE, the yield strength of Li metal, and the applied stack pressure. Finally, we examine the development of contact loss arising from a finite amount of Li deposition. The increase of surface overpotential as a consequence of contact loss is also discussed. In conclusion, we demonstrate that although ideal stable Li electrodeposition is impossible, the electrochemical and mechanical conditions can be optimized to reduce the electro-deposition instability and ensure mechanical stability of the Li metal/SE interface, thereby allowing control of the overpotential and suppression of dendrite formation. The model geometry used for all calculations is shown in Figure In the present work, the Li deposition stability and the mechanical stability are described by the electro-deposition stability factor θ and the contact loss factor γ respectively. The deposition stability factor is defined as θ = i n (peak)/i n (valley), where i n (peak) and i n (valley) are the current densities at the peak and valley of the Li protrusion, respectively, as defined in other work. Both the Li electrodeposition and interfacial contact loss are affected by the chargetransfer reactions at interface S (described by the Butler-Volmer relation), mass transfer in the SE (described by the Ohmic relation), and interfacial contact mechanics (described by elastoplastic continuum mechanics). Equations and assumptions associated with the related physical processes are reviewed and discussed in the Method section. As the presence of surface defects (such as cracks/voids) on the interface S is common on the SE surface are introduced to ensure that any perturbations of the current density induced by the defect vanish at the boundaries, as indicated by the vertical flow of current density (red arrows) when approaching the boundary x = ±0.5 μm. The current contour lines in Figure For typical solid electrolyte materials, the contact surface area can be as little as 10% of the total surface area in simple micro/nano polishing. The inset in Figure The interfacial area-specific resistance can be computed as ASR `Nabcdefb = η/i N , where η is the overpotential at interface S and i N is the normal current density at the same point. Notably, ASR `Nabcdefb is dependent of the interfacial contact loss and the exchange current density at the interface. In experiments, the interfacial resistance can be measured through electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), and the measured value is usually a combined effect of the interfacial contact loss and the interfacial charge transfer, which explains why the measured values can be very different even with the same material. For example, ASR values between 0.2 and 200 Ω • cm D have been measured for Li/LLZO/Li cells depending on the applied pressure. Additional factors that affect the deposition stability are the SE ionic conductivity σ F`j and the exchange current density i bkf , which controls the Li * mass-transfer rate at the interface, as shown in Equation The effect of ionic conductivity σ F`j and exchange current density i bkf on Li deposition is studied with the same model shown in Figure To maintain stable electrodeposition (top left area of Figure Conventionally, the formation of a SEI (Figure Unstable Li deposition may cause contact loss at interface S. Therefore, the application of a stack pressure P A is essential during cell cycling to maintain intimate contact. In principle, P A should be large enough to drive plastic/creep deformation of Li metal to smooth out the inhomogeneities caused by the uneven deposition. A wide range of yield strengths for Li, σ q , from 0.6 to 50 MPa has been reported in the literature. Figure From Figure In order to provide direct comparison with experimental studies Figure In general, results in Figure Whether contact loss occurs at an interface is determined by the competition between the irregular Li deposition and the ability to displace Li metal under plastic deformation driven by the stack pressure P A . In this section, both the mechanical and electro-deposition effects on interfacial contact loss are discussed. To quantify the contact loss, the degree of contact γ is defined as γ(t) = A : (t)/A : (0), where A : (t) is the remaining interfacial contact area after t seconds and A : (0) is the initial contact area. For the 2D model used in this work, the "contact area" is the contact length of interface S. A similar model as that in Figure Figure Figure Unstable Li deposition is believed to be one of the main sources for dendrite formation/propagation and interfacial contact loss. Both effects will amplify current inhomogeneity by either focusing current on a Li domain that is growing into the SE, or by redirecting current from the contact loss area to other areas where now the local current density needs to increase. As the internal stress of irregularly deposited Li accumulates (Figure To increase deposition stability, both the geometry and the electrochemical properties of Li metal and SE are important: a) "Shallow and wide" surface defects are preferred (Figure To make our discussion more general, a quantity l A = σ F`j • ‰Š `‹OE• Y is defined to reflect the combined effect of the bulk (ionic conductivity σ F`j ) and the surface (exchange current density i bkf ) of the SE on the Li deposition stability. Notably, the second term ‰Š `‹OE• Y equals the charge transfer area-specific resistance ASR , when the Butler-Volmer relation (Equation Conclusions drawn above are also applicable to other metal SSB system (such as Sodium and Magnesium) as long as the metal electrode/SE interface is chemically stable. For solid-state battery system with different combination of metal electrodes and SEs, the required mechanical stability window for stack pressure can be very different. From the available material properties of electrodes and SEs in typical SSB systems (as shown in Table Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Gerbrand Ceder (gceder@berkeley.edu). Linear elasticity is assumed for the elastic state of both Li metal and the SE: An elastic/perfect plastic model without hardening is assumed for the Li metal plastic flow, with the Von Mises criterion and associated flow rule (Details in section SI-1b): At boundary S: Interfacial contact equilibrium (More details in section SI-1c). At boundary S n : Neumann BC with constant compressive stress: σn = -P A n. At boundary S A : Fixed in both x and y direction. At S F and S ‰ : Fixed in x direction. Here, σ is the stress tensor; ε and ε are the total strain tensor and the plastic strain tensor, respectively; E and ν are the Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio of Li metal or the SE, respectively; σ q is the yield strength of Li metal; Φ(σ) ≡ 0 defines the surface of stress state at which yield occurs; n is the unit normal direction of the interface S oriented toward the exterior (for example, the normal of the Li metal, n F`, points downward and the normal of the SE, n vw , points upward in Figure Since the SE is a single-ion conductor, it cannot accumulate carriers, and the conduction is therefore purely ohmic (More details in section SI-2a): At interface S, the Butler-Volmer relation (5) Equation 4 implies that Li * ions are homogeneously distributed in both the bulk and on the surface of the SE without the presence of a "space charge layer". Equation 5 is the Butler-Volmer equation that incorporates the effect of interfacial stress, which was first studied by Monroe and Newman In general, there are two mechanisms by which stress modifies the Butler Volmer equation for non-stress conditions; 1) Most importantly, the hydrostatic pressure modifies the equilibrium potential due to a change in free energy of the metal electrode. This term is V F`∆ P F` and is included in our work through the modification of the overpotential η. 2) It is also possible that the exchange current density ("i bkf " in the Butler-Volmer relation) varies due to changes in the barrier for ion transfer from the electrolyte and metal electrode. Lacking a direct determination of this contribution it is often related to the changes in free energy of the end states in the electrode and electrolyte. A recent overview of the various assumptions by which this can be done is given by Ganser et al. 