Radiative coolers that can passively cool objects by radiating heat into the outer space have recently received much attention. However, the ultimate limits of their performance as well as their ideal spectral design are still unknown. We present the fundamental lower bound of the temperature of a radiatively cooled object on earth surfaces under general conditions, including non-radiative heat transfer, and the upper bound of the net radiative power density of a radiative cooler as a function of temperature. We derive the ideal spectral emissivities that can realize such bounds and, contrary to common belief, find that the ideal emission window is different from 8 to 13 μm and forms disjointed sets of wavelengths, whose width diminishes at lower temperatures. We show that ideal radiative coolers with perfect thermal insulation against conduction and convection have a steady-state temperature of 243.6 K in summer and 180.5 K in winter, much below previously measured values. We also provide the ideal emission window for a single-band emitter and show that this window should be much narrower than that of previous designs if the objective is to build a radiative freezer that can operate in summer. We provide a general guideline for designing spectral emissivity to achieve the maximum temperature drop or the maximum net radiative power density. The atmosphere acts as a selective window to electromagnetic waves, transmitting most of the visible sunlight and blocking harmful ultraviolet and X-rays Here, we present the ideal spectral emissivity under general conditions that realizes the ultimate lower bound of the temperature of a radiatively cooled object on earth. Contrary to common belief, we prove that the optimal window is different from 8 to 13 μm and depends strongly on the target temperature, which in turn is limited by the non-radiative heat transfer rate. Particularly, with no non-radiative heat transfer, the cooler should have a needle-like spectral emissivity if the objective is to have as low steady-state temperature as possible, and can induce 56.4 K and 92.5 K drops in summer and winter, respectively, if enough time is given to reach a steady state. More generally, we establish a universal guideline for designing spectral emissivity under ________________________ a) E-mail: qubit@kaist.ac.kr. given environmental conditions, including ambient temperature and the non-radiative heat transfer coefficient, and present the ultimate lower bound of the temperature as well as the ultimate upper bound of the net radiative power density under those conditions. Before we derive the ideal spectral emissivity, we provide our model and its assumptions on how a radiative cooler interacts with its surroundings. A radiative cooler that covers a target object is horizontally placed on the ground at sea level with no nearby obstacles so that the view angle of the sky is 2π steradian. The cooler and the object are in thermal equilibrium and thus have the same temperature (T). The cooler undergoes radiative heat exchange with the sun, the outer space, and the atmosphere. It also undergoes non-radiative, i.e., conductive and convective, heat exchange with the ambient air and the ground (Fig. The radiation through the atmosphere is subject to various conditions, such as season P sun (T amb , T, α) = ∫ dλ I sun (λ, Ω sun , T amb , α)ε c (λ, Ω sun , T), P atm (T amb , T, α) = ∫ dΩ cos θ ∫ dλ I ̃atm (λ, Ω, T amb , α)ε c (λ, Ω, T), P non-rad (T amb , T) = h c (T amb -T), is the spectral radiance of an ideal blackbody following Plank's law (h, c, kB, and λ are the Plank constant, the velocity of light in vacuum, the Boltzmann constant, and wavelength, respectively). εc(λ, Ω, T) represents the spectral and directional emissivity of the cooler. Isun(λ, Ωsun, Tamb, α) is the spectral solar irradiance at a mid-latitude, sea-level location in the northern hemisphere when the sunlight is incident from angle Ωsun. In Eqs. (2b-c), the absorptivity of the cooler is replaced by its emissivity using Kirchhoff's law. In Eq. (2d), the non-radiative absorption is expressed by an effective non-radiative heat transfer coefficient hc, which depends on environmental conditions, such as wind speeds, as well as on how well the cooler and the object are thermally insulated from the environment Now, let us derive the ideal spectral emissivity of a radiative cooler at a specific temperature for maximum net cooling power density assuming it is isotropic at all angles. We first rearrange the net cooling power density in Eq. ( where I BB (λ, T) = ∫ dΩ cos θ I ̃BB (λ, T) and I atm (λ, T amb , α) = ∫ dΩ cos θ I ̃atm (λ, Ω, T amb , α) are spectral irradiances and Prad(Tamb, T, α) = Pcooler(T) -Psun(Tamb, T, α) -Patm(Tamb, T, α) is the net radiative power density. We note that εc(λ, T) works as a scaling factor for the net radiative heat exchange at each wavelength. For maximal Pnet(Tamb, T, α) and Prad(Tamb, T, α) at a given temperature, εc(λ, T) can be suitably adjusted between 0 and 1 depending on the sign of the term Irad,BB = IBB(λ, T) -Isun(λ, Ωsun, Tamb, α) -Iatm(λ, Tamb, α). For wavelengths at which the sign is positive (i.e., net radiative emission occurring), εc(λ, T) = 1 should be chosen to maximize the radiation whereas, for other wavelengths, εc(λ, T) = 0 should be chosen to minimize absorption. This emissivity design rule is summarized as where is the sign function, whose value at x = 0 is undefined but does not affect the results in this situation. We emphasize that εideal is sensitively determined by the temperature of the cooler. This aspect was not fully investigated in previous studies, and two types of emissivity patterns were usually considered as optimal: a broadband emissivity pattern for above-ambient cooling and a rectangular (1 over 8-13 μm and 0 for other wavelengths) emissivity pattern for below-ambient cooling Another important fact revealed by Eq. ( The temperature of the cooler in a steady state can be identified by solving Eq. (3) for Pnet(Tamb, T, α) = 0. First, we investigate the most extreme case of h c = 0. Without non-radiative heat transfer, Pnet(Tamb, T, α) is always positive if T > Tideal,min. Thus, the ideal radiative cooler cools down until the temperature approaches Tideal,min. For example, at Daejeon city (36.35 ○ N in latitude), Tideal,min is 243.6 K and 180.5 K at noon in summer and winter, respectively, as shown in Figs. In reality, the presence of conduction or convection (hc ≠ 0) increases the steady-state temperature of an ideal cooler, Tideal, above Tideal,min. The steady-state temperature of any radiative cooler with temperature-independent spectral emissivity can be easily found graphically because Prad and Pnon-rad are monotonically increasing and decreasing functions of T, respectively, and they cross each other at the steady-state temperature. For example, Prad's for an 8-13 emitter (ε8-13, black dashed line) and a broadband emitter (εFull, black dotted line) are plotted in Fig. In general, the net radiative power density of any radiative cooler cannot exceed the values indicated by the black solid line in Fig. In other words, there is always a better spectral design than unit emissivity from 8 to 13 μm at any target temperature. For example, at 273.15 K, the net radiative power density of the 8-13 μm emitter is 7.31 W/m 2 , whereas that of the ideal cooler optimized for this temperature is more than two times larger at 16.84 W/m 2 . Note that these results are independent of hc. For the particular case of hc = 0.5 W/(m 2 K), the lower bound of the steady-state temperature, which is 271.10 K, is below the freezing temperature of water. The ideal cooler, which can reach this bound, has a highly selective spectral emissivity with many disjointed sets of wavelengths over which the emissivity is unity, as shown in Fig. At lower hc values, the difference becomes more dramatic. Tideal and εideal are plotted for a range of hc values in Figs. In practice, however, it might be challenging to realize such a highly selective spectrum. Thus, we also consider a simper, single-band emitter with unit emissivity over a single wavelength range from λshort to λlong and optimize λshort and λlong for best performance. For hc = 0.5 W/(m 2 K), the steady-state temperature is shown in Fig. Figure In conclusion, we presented a systematic method to calculate the ultimate lower bound of a radiatively cooled object's steadystate temperature as well as the ultimate upper bound of net radiative power density at a given cooler temperature under general environmental conditions with an arbitrary effective non-radiative heat transfer coefficient. We also derived the ideal spectral emissivities that can reach such bounds. Unlike the often-adopted contiguous emission window of 8 to 13 μm used in previous radiative coolers, the ideal radiative cooler exhibits unity emissivity over disjointed sets of wavelengths. We also investigated the ideal emission band for a single-band emitter and found that the optimal band narrows down considerably at lower temperatures. The proposed scheme may serve as a basic guideline for designing the emissive properties of extreme radiative coolers as well as for estimating the amount of thermal insulation required for them. 