For carbon-based materials, in contrast to metal surfaces, the relationship between strain and reactivity is not yet established, even though there are literature reports on strained graphene. Knowledge of such relationships would be extremely beneficial for understanding the reactivity of graphene-based surfaces and finding optimisation strategies which would make these materials more suitable for targeted applications. Here we investigate the effects of compressive and tensile strain (up to ±5%) on the structure, electronic properties and the reactivity of pure, N-doped and P-doped graphene, using DFT calculations. We demonstrate the possibility of tuning the topology of the graphene surface by strain, as well as by the choice of the dopant atom. The reactivity of (doped) strained graphene is probed using H and Na as simple adsorbates of great practical importance. Strain can both enhance and weaken H and Na adsorption on (doped) graphene. In case of Na adsorption, a linear relationship is observed between the Na adsorption energy on P-doped graphene and the phosphorus charge. A linear relationship between the Na adsorption energy on flat graphene surfaces and strain is found. Based on the adsorption energies and electrical conductivity, potentially good candidates for hydrogen storage and sodium-ion battery electrodes are discussed. Graphene, a monolayer of sp 2 hybridized carbon atoms arranged in a honeycomb lattice Tozzini and Pellegrini have theoretically demonstrated that the strength of H binding on graphene can be tuned by out-of-plane deformation, without introducing any surface functional groups Additionally, the presence of certain functional groups can induce local corrugation of the graphene basal plane. It has been suggested that the dominant source of the enhanced reactivity of oxidized graphene compared to pristine graphene is the corrugation of the basal plane induced by binding of Ocontaining groups and sp 2 → sp 3 rehybridization Here we investigate the influence of tensile and compressive strain on non-doped, as well as N-and P-doped graphene's structure, electronic structure and reactivity. We choose N and P as the representatives of n-type dopants in graphene which influence its structure in two ways: (i) the planar nature of graphene is not disturbed (N-doping), or (ii) significant plane deformation occurs (P-doping). To illustrate the reactivity of strained (doped) graphene surfaces we use H and Na as simple adsorbates, representatives of covalent and ionic bonding on graphene The results were obtained using the PWscf code of Quantum ESPRESSO distribution The deformation of the graphene layer was quantified in terms of the deformation energies (Edef), calculated as the difference in the total energies of the strained (compressed or stretched, n%) and the corresponding non-strained (0%) system: where X = C, N or P. The interaction of the chosen adsorbates (A = H or Na) with investigated surfaces was quantified in terms of their adsorption energies: where Esubs+A, Esubs and EA,isol stand for the ground state total energies of the substrate with A adsorbed, the total energy of the bare substrate, and the total energy of isolated A, respectively. By this definition, the molecular dissociation of H2 is not included in Eads(H). The contribution of dispersion to the overall interaction of Na with graphene is relatively great, while in the case of H it is rather small where ρsubs+Na, ρsubs,frozen and ρNa stand for the ground state charge densities of the substrate interacting with Na, the substrate when Na is removed (frozen geometry), and that of isolated Na atom, respectively. For conciseness, only the structures corresponding to 5% compression (-5%) and 5% stretch (+5%) will be presented in the figures. However, other investigated strain levels will also be discussed throughout the text. Surfaces of non-doped, N-doped and P-doped graphene compressed or stretched by 1, 3 and 5% (as is described in Computational Details) were investigated, while the corresponding non-strained surfaces (0% strain) were used as reference points. For more details on the non-strained surfaces see ref. Compressive strain generally resulted in two possible types of topology: "waves" and "hills" (examples can be found in Fig. Obviously, different topology of compressed graphene is obtained with different dopant atoms, i.e. the topology can be tuned by a specific combination of dopant atoms and strain. Positive strain leads to stretching of the surface. Since non-doped and N-doped graphene are flat even in the no-strain case, they remain flat upon stretching, while C-C and C-N bonds become somewhat elongated (Table to +5% case (Table Structures obtained with +1% and +3% strain are analogous to the 0% and 5% surfaces, with the P bump becoming less pronounced with growing tensile strain in P-doped graphene. Naturally, larger strain (absolute value) requires larger deformation energy (Fig. All of the investigated non-doped and N-doped surfaces were found to be non-magnetic. When it comes to P-doped graphene, we find that the total magnetization is dependent on the strain level inflicted upon the supercell (Table the electrical conductivity is preserved. However, there is a significant alteration of the density of states compared to those of the non-strained cases. It was previously shown that the corrugation of graphene basal plane can be significant for enhancing its reactivity Atomic hydrogen forms covalent bonds with non-doped, non-strained graphene (C54(0%)), with preferential C-top adsorption site (~1.13 Å directly above one C atom) and the adsorption energy of -0.81 (-0.87) eV (in agreement with previous literature reports On non-strained N-graphene H preferentially binds to the dopant's first neighbouring C-top site, with the adsorption energy of -1.76 (-1.83) eV, and the corresponding C-H bond length of 1.12 Å. It was previously shown that carbon atoms in the nitrogen first coordination sphere are the most reactive ones towards H and OH in N-doped graphene For non-doped and N-doped graphene, all the investigated strain levels promote H bonding. However, the compressive strain strengthens this interaction more than the equal degree of tensile strain (Fig. The enhancement of the reactivity of non-doped and N-doped graphene towards H with the corrugation of the plane is in agreement with our previous results which showed that the reactivity of the graphene basal plane increased with deformation, due to the formation of surface dangling bonds, which make C atoms in the deformed areas "bond-ready" Sodium is known to interact rather weakly with pristine graphene, hovering more than 2 Å above its basal plane, with the preferential hollow adsorption site (above the centre of C6 hexagon) Introducing strain can both strengthen and weaken the interaction of non-doped, N-doped and P-doped graphene with sodium, depending on the dopant and on the sign of the strain (compression or stretching), as it can be seen in Fig. The most stable structures of Na adsorption on -5% and +5% models are shown in Fig. No relationship analogous to the one in Fig. For all the cases, the Na s-states are located above the Fermi level and the total DOS (Fig. Sodium adsorption is of great practical importance when considering potential electrode materials for sodium-ion batteries. The cohesive energy of sodium (1.13 eV Another important aspect in this regard is the electrical conductivity of the material. As shown in one of the previous sections the bare C53X(n%) systems are conductive (Fig. Based on Na adsorption energies and electrical conductivity considerations, the P-doped graphene is expected to be a very good candidate as a sodium-ion battery electrode material: no Na precipitation is expected, and it is conductive both before and after Na adsorption. However, it should be kept in mind that P is very reactive as a dopant in graphene, and not only towards Na. It is known to attract oxygencontaining groups to attach to it The dispersion-corrected H adsorption energies (PBE+D2) were found to scale extremely well with the corresponding dispersion-non-corrected (PBE) H adsorption energies (Fig. When it comes to sodium, the dispersion-corrected adsorption energies (PBE+D2) are found to scale almost perfectly with the corresponding non-corrected (PBE) adsorption energies in case of no strain and positive strain (Fig. graphene surfaces Figure We have investigated the effects of compressive and tensile strain (up to 5%) on the structure, electronic structure and the reactivity of non-doped, N-doped and P-doped graphene, by means of DFT calculations. The possibility of tuning the topology of the graphene surface by strain, as well as by the choice of the dopant atom, has been demonstrated. The reactivity of such systems has been probed using H and Na as simple adsorbates of great practical importance. Strain does not affect the preferential H adsorption site on (doped) graphene. In the case of sodium, the most favorable adsorption site can be affected by plane corrugation -sodium prefers settling in the dents on the surface. While H binds covalently to the investigated surfaces, Na exhibits an ionic interaction, with significant charge transfer from Na to graphene. Strain can either enhance or weaken the H and Na adsorption on (doped) graphene. In the case of Na adsorption, a linear relationship is observed between the Na adsorption energy on P-doped graphene and phosphorus' charge in corresponding bare substrate. For Na adsorption on flat graphene-based surfaces, a linear relationship between Na adsorption energy and strain is found -Na binds more strongly to more stretched surfaces. Surfaces of strained (doped) graphene are found to be conductive both in bare state (no adsorbate) and with H or Na adsorbed. Based on the adsorption energies of Na and electrical conductivity, P-doped graphene is expected to be a good candidate as a sodium-ion battery electrode material, but it should be kept in mind that P is very reactive in graphene, not only towards Na. Non-doped graphene stretched by 5% is another potential candidate for the same purpose, with less "risk" of the active site for Na adsorption to be "poisoned" by another species. The results obtained using PBE without any dispersion correction and those obtained with Grimme's D2 dispersion correction scale linearly with each other in the case of H adsorption, while there are some deviations from linearity in the case of Na adsorption on largely corrugated surfaces.