In this study, we designed a metasurface based on Al/SiN/Al nano-sandwich optical absorbers. Parity-symmetric dark magnetic resonance modes, anti-symmetric bright magnetic resonance modes, and surface lattice modes are established simultaneously in such a meta-surface. By changing the structural parameters, the wavelength of the dark mode can be tuned to overlap with the lattice mode. Fano resonance is introduced by coupling between the dark and lattice modes. Fano resonance exhibited a narrow wavelength spectrum and directional radiation angle. Fanotype thermal emitters proposed in this work can possibly be used as coherent infrared light sources in the future. In recent years, research interest in thermal emissions in the infrared wavelength range has rapidly grown due to its important applications in thermophotovoltaic (TPV) devices 1 , radiative cooling 2,3 , incandescent sources 4 , near-field heat transfer 5 , and infrared spectroscopy 6 . Various structures and systems have been used to control thermal emissions, such as gratings 7 , nanoantennas 8 , photonic crystals 9 , surface plasmons 10,11 , metamaterials [12][13][14][15] , and metasurfaces (MTSs) 16 . Control of the properties of thermal emission, such as the emission bandwidth 14,17 , coherent properties 7 and dynamics switching In plasmonics, researchers can design and fabricate various metallic nanostructures with different shapes and sizes to produce different plasmonic resonance. In complex systems, the tuning of the interactions between different plasmonic resonators can provide a flexible method for producing many interesting novel resonance modes 21 . These modes have significantly different far-field radiation properties 22 . Some modes have strong far-field radiation, which are defined as bright modes. However, some modes have weak far-field radiation, which are defined as dark modes. When bright and dark modes are coupled with each other, the well-known Fano resonance mode can be produced Most types of plasmonic resonance are either electric resonance (ER) or magnetic resonance (MR). Typically, MR exhibits better optical absorption and local field enhancement than ER. Perfect absorber based on MR mode in metamaterials had been studied Among different MTS resonance unit designs, metal/insulation/metal (MIM) sandwich resonators have very strong local MR modes and are easily fabricated. MIM resonators have been used in magnetic field enhancement In recent years, symmetry analysis has played an increasingly important role in optical systems. Through designing optical modes with different symmetry, modes coupling can be manipulated By changing the width of the MIM, we tuned the resonance frequency of the MR. In this way, the MR frequencies can overlap with the SLR frequencies, which introduces strong coupling between the MR and SLR modes. When a bright MR mode was coupled with an SLR mode, we obtained an ordinary bright mode. When a dark MR mode was coupled with an SLR mode, we produced Fano resonance. Compared with uncoupled MR, this Fano resonance produced stronger optical absorption and a narrower bandwidth. Angle-resolved spectral analysis is powerful to study the behavior of optical modes The study of the modulated thermal emissions due to the coupling between SLR and MR modes with different parity-symmetries was performed using Al-SiN-Al magnetic MTSs. Firstly, we designed the structure and studied the eigenmodes with different parity-symmetries in the MIM MTS using the commercial finite element method software, COMSOL Multiphysics (COMSOL Colt.). Figure ╬╝m. An SLR mode was detected at 9.4 ╬╝m. However, at a normal incidence angle (Fig. As well known, the spectral behaviors of optical resonance modes are characterized by quality factor (Q-factor). It is defined as Q =╬╗/(2╬ö╬╗) To With width of grating increasing, the frequency location of second MR parity-symmetric dark mode (dashed white line) gradually approached that of the SLR folding cone. At the grating width d=3.45 ╬╝m, the wavelength of second MR parity-symmetric dark mode spectrally overlapped with that of the SLR folding cone, and one isolated bright thermal emission spot can be found at the normal incident angle near ╬╗=7.1 ╬╝m, as highlighted by the dashed white circle in Fig. (h). According to the above discussion, this isolated bright thermal emission light spot was induced by Fano resonance due to the strong coupling between the second MR parity-symmetric dark mode and the SLR mode. To investigate the coupling physical mechanism of the MR with different parity-symmetric properties with SLR, parity-based coupled mode theory is developed, and the above experimental results can be well explained. When harmonic light illuminates a dipole , the oscillation equation is given as follows: ’üŁ where 0 ’üĘ is the eigenfrequency of the resonator, g is the coupling factor of the resonator to the external field, which could be determined by the intrinsic properties of the resonator, such as the material, shape factor, and more importantly, the parity. Here, we take g as the mode parity factor, and, in this one-dimensional periodic system, it is defined as Where () px is the field spatial distribution function in the x-direction. For the parityantisymmetric bright mode, g, and for the parity-symmetric dark mode, g=0. We can mimic the coupling efficiency between the optical modes and light through g. In a system with two optical modes, the state evolution can be written as follows: 50 ’üŁ’üŁ are the charge displacements corresponding to different optical modes, g1, g2 are the parity factors that indicate the coupling between the optical modes and incident field, is the coupling factor between the two optical modes, By solving Eq. ( Finally, the energy dissipation in the system can be calculated as 50 We numerically calculated the absorption spectra using Eqs. ( To balance the energy, we set the value of g in the range’üø ’üØ 0, 0.5 . Meta-surfaces of nano-sandwich optical absorbers Al/SiN/Al were used to control the thermal emission in the infrared range. Analysis of the MR modes and their coupling effects with the SLR mode was performed using COMSOL Multiphysics. No coupling occurred between the first MR parity-anti-symmetric bright mode and the SLR mode, while Fano resonance was induced by the coupling between the second parity-symmetric dark mode and the SLR mode. A series of samples with varied grating widths were fabricated, and their thermal emissions were experimentally investigated through the angle-resolved thermal emission spectra of the samples. For the sample with ╬ø=7 ╬╝m and d=3.45 ╬╝m, one isolated point near the normal incidence angle was observed in the angle-resolved thermal emission spectrum. Numerical analysis based on coupled mode theory revealed that this intriguing phenomenon was caused by Fano resonance due to the strong coupling between the second MR parity-symmetric dark mode and the SLR mode when their wavelengths overlap. As denoted in Fig. We presented the optical properties of SiN film used in simulation, which comes from the infrared ellipsometry measurement. The schematic plot of thermal emission measurement used in this manuscript are given out in the supplementary information. In addition, the Q factor of Fano The angle resolved thermal emission spectra shown in the main text in Fig. Fig. The spectral behaviors of optical resonance modes are characterized by quality factor (Qfactor). It is defined as where ╬╗ is the central wavelength of optical resonances, ╬ö╬╗ as the half bandwidth. To obtain these parameters, the Lorentz and Fano fitting were performed for simulated magnetic resonance and Fano resonance in Fig. The Lorentz fitting for simulated magnetic resonance was performed based on formula as Where 0 ’üĘ was the central frequency, w was bandwidth, a and A were constant,’üĘ ranged in [6.6, 7.6] in the unit of microns. After iteration fitting, we obtained the results as denoted in Fig. 