The electronic and magnetic properties of clinopyroxene CaMnGe2O6 were studied using density function calculations within the GGA+U approximation. It is shown that anomalous ferromagnetic ordering of neighboring chains is due to a "common-enemy" mechanism. Two antiferromagnetic exchange couplings between nearest neighbours within the Mn-Mn chain and interchain coupling via two GeO4 tetrahedra suppress antiferromagnetic exchange via single GeO4 tetrahedron and stabilize ferromagnetic ordering of Mn chains. Pyroxenes are a large group of rock-forming minerals widespread in the Earth's crust and its upper mantle Discovery of magneto-electric effect in pyroxenes with general formula ATM(Si,Ge) 2 O 6 (where TM is a transition metal ion and A can be alkali or alkaline earth metals) resulted in intensive studies of their magnetic structure and its coupling with electronic properties and lattice distortions. Depending on particular choice of TM or A ions there were observed very different types of magnetic structures in pyroxenes including collinear antiferromagnets, commensurate and incommensurate spin spirals and even ferromagnets In pyroxenes transition metal ions are in the ligand octahedra, which form one dimensional (zigzag) chains sharing their edges, see Fig. In the present paper we perform DFT calculations to study electronic and magnetic properties of CaMnGe 2 O 6 , which magnetic structure was recently refined DFT calculations were performed in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) We start by analyzing electronic structure of CaMnGe 2 O 6 , as obtained in the GGA+U calculations for the experimental ground state magnetic structure (as it will be explained below the same magnetic structure, AFM1, corresponds to the total energy minimum in the GGA+U calculations). One can see from the density of states plot, presented in Fig. In order to find origin of ferromagnetic ordering of Mn chains we calculated exchange parameters J ij of the Heisenberg model, which was written in the following form: where i and j numerate lattice sites. The total energy method as realized in the JaSS code Four different magnetic configurations presented in Fig. It is interesting, that in spite of ferromagnetic order of neighboring chains all isotropic exchange parameters turned out to be antiferromagnetic. The dominating exchange parameter is intrachain exchange J=3.6 K, it is 3 times larger than J 1 =1.2 K and 10 times larger than J 2 =0.3 K. In general, both J and J 1 determine magnetic structure of the investigated pyroxene and suppress weak AFM J 2 exchange making spins in neighboring chains to order ferromagnetically (see Fig. Using the mean-field theory we estimated Curie-Weiss temperature, where z i is the number of exchange paths per Mn site. For exchange parameters obtained for U =4.5 eV expression (2) results in θ calc =62.8 K, while experimental value is θ exp = 35.1 K To summarize, electronic structure and magnetic properties of CaMnGe 2 O 6 were studied using the GGA+U calculations. The calculated values of exchange interaction parameters allow to explain the experimentally observed magnetic structure with antiferromagnetic interaction within the zigzag Mn chains and ferromagnetic ordering of these chains. The Monte Carlo simulation of magnetic susceptibility within 3D spin model with calculated exchange parameters agrees with experimental data much better than the one for isolated spin chains stressing importance of interchain coupling. The obtained values of exchange interactions also indicate that in CaMnGe 2 O 6 magnetic frustration is weak. Such a weak frustration could explain the commensurate collinear antiferromagnetic structures common for Ca 2+ -bearing pyroxenes.