Magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) have been extensively used in drug/gene delivery, hyperthermia therapy, magnetic particle imaging (MPI), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), magnetic bioassays, etc. With proper surface chemical modifications, physicochemically stable and non-toxic MNPs are emerging contrast agents and tracers for in vivo MRI and MPI applications. Herein, we report the high magnetic moment, irregularly shaped -Fe4N nanoparticles for enhanced hyperthermia therapy and T2 contrast agent for MRI application. The static and d namic magnetic properties of -Fe4N nanoparticles are characterized by vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) and magnetic particle spectroscopy (MPS) systems, respectively. Compared to the -Fe2O3 nanoparticles, -Fe4N show at least 3 times higher saturation magnetization (in emu/g), which, as a result, gives rise to the stronger dynamic magnetic responses as proved in the MPS meas rement res lts. In addition, -Fe4N nanoparticles are functionalized with oleic acid layer by a wet mechanical milling process, the morphologies of as-milled nanoparticles are characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), dynamic light scattering (DLS) and nanoparticle tracking analyzer (NTA). We report that with proper surface chemical modification and tuning on morphologies, -Fe4N nanoparticles could be used as tiny heating sources for hyperthermia and contrast agents for MRI applications with minimum dose. Nowadays, magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs), with proper surface chemical modifications, are emerging nanomaterials that have been exploited in the areas of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic particle imaging (MPI),1 10 drug/gene delivery,11 nanoparticles.37 ́-Fe4N, -FeN, -Fe-3N, etc.42 ́-Fe4N nanoparticles. Hydrogen gas is for reducing the starting materials, ́-Fe2O3 nanoparticles, in a tube furnace. Then the nitridation is proceeded in the same furnace under a mixture of ammonia and hydrogen gas to obtain ́-Fe4N nanoparticles, as shown in Figure ́-Fe4N nanoparticles. The morphologies of -Fe2O3 and ́-Fe4N nanoparticles are obtained using a transmission electron microscopy (TEM). From each nanoparticle sample, three different samples are prepared for the TEM characterization: the wet mechanical milled -Fe2O3 and ́-Fe4N nanoparticles in oleic acid (OA), named as -Fe2O3@BM and ́-Fe4N@BM; the supernatant of these nanoparticle suspensions after a ultra-centrifugation step (10,000 rpm for 20 min), named as -Fe2O3@Ultra and ́-Fe4N@Ultra; the supernatant from these nanoparticle suspension after keeping at room temperature for 24 h, named as -Fe2O3@S p and ́-Fe4N@Sup. The TEM images, illustration of each TEM sample preparation process, and schematic drawings of different shape nanoparticles are summarized in Figure TEM characteri ation on -Fe2O3 nanoparticle samples. Three different samples are characteri ed: -Fe2O3@Ultra, -Fe2O3@BM, and -Fe2O3@Sup. The corresponding TEM images are shown on the right panel. Most of the nanoparticles show irregular shapes with some spherical nanoparticles, as shown in (i), (ii), (iii), and (iv). Less aggregations of nanoparticles are observed from the s pernatant of the sample -Fe2O3@Ulta. (b) TEM characteri ation on ́-Fe4N nanoparticle samples. Three different samples are characterized: ́-Fe4N@Ultra, ́-Fe4N@BM, and ́-Fe4N@Sup. Well-dispersed nanoparticles are observed from the ́-Fe4N@Ultra sample. For the samples ́-Fe4N@BM and ́-Fe4N@Sup, most of the nanoparticles show irregular shapes and the size of the nanoparticles are larger than that of the starting material, -Fe2O3 nanoparticles, as shown in (v), (vi), (vii), and (viii). More aggregations are observed which is due to the sintering of nanoparticles during the reduction and nitridation processes as well as the non-superparamagnetic properties of these sintered bodies. and ́-Fe4N nanoparticles. Figure ́-Fe4N@BM nanoparticles in Isopar G fluid. The DLS results give a slight discrepancy with that of the TEM images. Although we justified the discrepancy by two explanations in the last section: first, as the samples were ball milled, they added an extra 2 nm oleic acid coating around the nanoparticles and made the hydrodynamic size distribution slightly larger than observed from the TEM images; second, the hydrodynamic peaks around 100 nm and 1000 nm from the -Fe4N@BM sample helped us infer that the particles might have sintered and aggregated. Thus, in order to further characterize the size of the fabricated -Fe4N nanoparticles, another competent optical characterization method, the Nanoparticle Tracking Analyzer (NTA) (details regarding the techniques and models have been mentioned in the Methods & Materials section), is used. An added advantage of characterizing the nanoparticles by the NTA over the DLS is that they also give an information about the concentration of the particles from the solution. Figure MNPs subjected to AC driving field causes detectable EMF in the pick-up coils and this EMF is a time-varying voltage signal. This analog voltage signal collected from pick-up coils is sampled at a sampling rate of 500 kHz signal are obser ed from both -Fe2O3@BM and -Fe4N@BM samples (highlighted in grey in Figure of induction, the time-varying magnetic flux induces EMF in the pick-up coils. During one relaxation process of magnetic moments of nanoparticles to align with the direction of external AC field, the stray field causes the EMF in the coils and there is a 90° phase shift between magnetic moment and detected voltage from pick-up coils. As shown in Figure between the voltage and field under the driving field frequencies of 350 Hz, 650 Hz, 950 Hz, 1250 Hz, 1850 Hz, and 2450 H , respecti el . The detected oltages from -Fe2O3@BM and -Fe4N@BM samples are quite synchronous, indicating the identical phase lags of both types of nanoparticles to the AC driving fields. The calculated phase lags of magnetic moments of MNPs to different driving field frequencies are summarized in Figure responses of -Fe2O3@BM and -Fe4N@BM samples are calculated using the real-time voltage signals from Figure In addition, as we gradually increase the frequency of driving field, the dynamic hysteresis loops transform from long ellipses to flat ovals for both samples, as shown in Figure For magnetic hyperthermia treatments, when MNPs are subjected to the AC field, the area of their magnetic hysteresis loop, A, corresponds to the dissipated energy.56 In this paper, we reported high magnetic moment, irregularly shaped -Fe4N nanoparticles with OA surfactant. The crystalline structure, static (DC) and dynamic (AC) magnetic properties are characterized by VSM and MPS s stems and compared to the -Fe2O3 nanoparticles. O r -Fe4N nanoparticles show superior magnetic properties with more than 3 times higher saturation magnetization when compared to -Fe2O3. The dynamic magnetic responses of both nanoparticles are compared and the d namic (AC) magneti ation c r es sho that o r -Fe4N nanoparticles, with large hysteresis loop, could be potentially applied as high-performance heating sources in hyperthermia treatment with minimum dose. In addition, due to the sintering in the nitradation process, the fabricated -Fe4N nanoparticles, with irregular shapes, hold great promise for enhance T2 relaxivity as contrast agents in MRI applications. Since nanoparticles with a larger hydrodynamic size distribution generate greater magnetic field gradient and this leads to a higher order of proton dephasing. The stability of OA coated -Fe2O3 and -Fe4N nanoparticles are investigated in Supplementary Materials S7. With smaller sizes and less aggregations, -Fe2O3 nanoparticles show better stability. In this work, OA is used as surfactant on -Fe4N nanoparticles, these lipophilic MNPs show very good dissolvability in polar liquids such as oil. In addition, it is reported that OA can form a dense protective monolayer that binds firmly to the MNP surfaces with enhanced colloidal stability.60 62 However, for biomedical applications, the lipophilic substances (i.e., OA) coated MNPs are not good candidates and thus the practical use of these MNPs are limited. In the future we can further functionalize OA-coated MNPs with trialkoxysilanes. Thus, the functionalized nanoparticles can be dispersed in various aqueous solutions such as human serum and plasma.63 Besides, the biocompatibility and colloidal stability of -Fe4N nanoparticles can be further enhanced by conjugating chemical compounds such as chitosan, polyethylene glycol (PEG), amino acids, citric acid, etc., so that the water solubility of MNPs can increase significantly .64 67 Chemicals. -Fe2O3 powder (purity 99.5%, size 20 nm) is purchase from MTI Corporation, Richmond, CA. Oleic acid is purchased from Fisher Scientific, Hampton, NH. Isopar G fluid is purchased from ExxoMobil, Irving, TX. Wet mechanical milling. 400 mg of -Fe2O3 and -Fe4N powders are prepared for wet mechanical milling process, respectively. In the case of wet milling, 400 mg powder is dispersed in 6 mL oleic acid (OA, CH3(CH2)7CH=CH(CH2)7COOH) under argon atmosphere in glove box. The milling conditions are: 14 mm ball diameter, vial rotation of 8000 rpm for 8 hours. X-ray diffraction (XRD) characterization. Samples for the XRD measurement are prepared in the glove box. Certain amo nt of -Fe2O3 and -Fe4N nanoparticles are put on a piece of glass and sealed by epoxy to avoid oxidation when the samples are taken out of the glove box for the XRD measurement. XRD pattern are measured using a Bruker D8 discover 2D diffractometer (40 kV and 35 mA). A cobalt radiation source (wavelength~1.79 Å) is used to get better signal. The XRD patterns are converted to copper radiation for a convenient comparison. Sample preparation and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) characterization. The as-milled -Fe2O3 and -Fe4N nanoparticles in OA (labeled as -Fe2O3@BM and -Fe4N@BM in this paper, with concentration of 67 mg/mL) are ultra-sonicated for 1 hour to make the nanoparticles evenly dispersed. The -Fe2O3@BM and -Fe4N@BM suspensions are diluted by 100 times in OA, then 10 L of each suspension (concentration of 0.67 mg/mL) is dropped onto TEM grids. The -Fe2O3@BM and -Fe4N@BM in OA are ultracentrifuged at 10,000 rpm, 9,300 g for 20 minutes, then 10 L supernatant (labeled as -Fe2O3@Ultra and -Fe4N@Ultra in this paper) is drew from each sample and dropped onto TEM grids. The -Fe2O3@BM and -Fe4N@BM in OA are sealed and placed at room temperature for 24 hours, the larger MNP clusters precipitate to the bottom of suspension and 10 L supernatant (labeled as -Fe2O3@Sup and -Fe4N@Sup in this paper) is drew from each sample and dropped onto TEM grids. All the 6 TEM grids are air dried before the TEM To establish a stronger corroboration with that of the TEM images and DLS results, the samples of the same order of dilution were characterized in nanoparticle tracking analyzer (NTA, Model: Nanosight LM-10). We would like to clarify here that the hydrodynamic size distribution obtained from DLS for both -Fe2O3 and -Fe4N are in correlation ith the TEM images. Ho e er, onl -Fe4N could be characterized by NTA. Although the reason behind h -Fe2O3 could not be characterized by NTA is not clear, our estimation is that as NTA uses a a elength of 403 nm, -Fe2O3 having an extremely high transparent refractive index (r.i. = 2.91) in Isorpar G fluid media of much lower refractive index must cause total internal reflection for most of the light. Nevertheless, NTA gi es s the concentration of the -Fe4N nanoparticles hich in t rn specifies the -Fe2O3 concentration as both the nanoparticle samples for hydrodynamic size characterization, were prepared in a similar manner. The sample volume prepared for both DLS as well as NTA particle analyzer is 1.5 mL. Vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) characterization. 25 L -Fe2O3 and -Fe4N nanoparticles in OA suspensions are dropped on a filter paper and air-dried, then fit into a 5 mm diameter 12 mm long gelatin capsule S3. Models of dynamic magnetic responses. In the presence of AC magnetic fields H t A • sin 2π • f • t , MNPs are magnetized and their magnetic moments tend to align with the fields. For a monodispersed, non-interacting MNP system, the static magnetic response obeys the Langevin model: where, The magnetic moment of each MNP is expressed as m M V M πD 3 The higher odd harmonics are expressed as: M t | 5 560 A 5 5 sin 2π • 5f • t u t S 0 V M t Combining equations ( The amplitude of u t is proportional to driving field frequency f and amplitude A, the magnetic moment m As shown in Figure In addition, as discussed in the paper, the harmonic amplitudes of both MNPs increase as the driving field frequency f increases (denoted as region I in Figure 