Photonic integrated circuit (PIC) phased arrays can be an enabling technology for a broad range of applications including free-space laser communications on compact moving platforms. However, scaling PIC phased arrays to a large number of array elements is limited by the large size and high power consumption of individual phase shifters used for beam steering. In this paper, we demonstrate silicon PIC phased array beam steering based on thermally tuned ultracompact microring resonator phase shifters with a radius of a few microns. These resonators integrated with micro-heaters are designed to be strongly coupled to an external waveguide, thereby providing a large and adjustable phase shift with a small residual amplitude modulation while consuming an average power of 0.4 mW. We also introduce characterization techniques for the calibration of resonator phase shifters in the phased array. With such compact phase shifters and our calibration techniques, we demonstrate beam steering with a 1x8 PIC phased array. The small size of these resonator phase shifters will enable lowpower and ultra-large scale PIC phased arrays for long distance laser communication systems. Next generation compact space and aerial moving platforms will highly rely on free-space laser communication systems deploying photonic integrated circuit (PIC) technology. A key enabling PIC component in this regard is an integrated optical phased array Despite many advances, one main limitation that prevents further scaling of PIC phased arrays is the size and power consumption of phase shifters. In particular, phase shifters which are typically waveguide-based and use the thermo-optic effect for phase shifting have a length scale of a millimeter, and a power consumption of several to tens of milliwatts Here, we propose and implement silicon PIC phased arrays that rely on ultra compact ring resonators as phase shifters. High quality factor (Q) silicon microring resonators with a radius within a few microns can provide compact phase shifters given that they can exhibit strong phase accumulation due to the large amount of round-trips experienced by light in the resonator near the resonant frequency. Resonator phase shifters have been demonstrated in silicon nitride integrated photonics An illustration of a unit cell element of our PIC phased array is depicted in Fig. where ω and ω 0 are the laser frequency and the resonator's resonant frequency, respectively, Q 0 is the intrinsic quality factor of the resonator, and Q c is the coupling quality factor between the resonator and the waveguide. The shape of this transmission curve consists of a Lorentzian with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) given by the loaded Q of the resonator To provide a substantial phase shift with small amplitude distortion, the PIC resonators must be strongly over-coupled, i.e. Q 0 Q c . This is verified in Fig. which clearly shows how phase varies with the resonant frequency that can be shifted by altering the resonator refractive index. Here, we use the thermo-optic effect in silicon to produce these variations by means of the resistive heater placed over the resonator. The nanoantenna emitter shown in Fig. We implement a 1x8 PIC phased array with the array unit cell outlined in Fig. For the experiment, a micro-probe laid on gold pads on the chip is used to apply voltage to the resistive heaters of the resonators. We then characterize the performance of the device with a flexible imaging apparatus, shown in Fig. The ring resonator phase shifters designed for the phased array supports two radial modes (see supplementary material Though the resonator phase shifters were designed to be identical, fabrication imperfections often lead to slight discrepancies in their transmissive properties. The most important variations are in the resonant frequency, since the accumulated phase shift is most sensitive near this frequency. To align the resonances of the phase shifters, we apply a fixed bias voltage to their corresponding heaters. Once these voltages are applied, we employ a genetic algorithm to find the voltage values that optimize the amount of light steered to a given position on the camera We employ two methods based on near-field and far-field imaging to characterize the spectrum of the resonator phase shifters. The near-field method is initially used to learn the location of the resonance wavelengths, the resonance transmission extinction, and to perform a coarse alignment of the resonances. Though our near-field method is primarily applicable to resonances with observable extinction in their spectrum, the alignment of these resonances automatically align the other resonances including the strongly overcoupled ones. The far-field method is then used for the fine alignment of the strongly overcoupled resonance modes which are the modes of interest, and by nature have weak resonance extinction. The near-field method involves performing a wavelength sweep in which near-field images of the phased array output are collected by an IR camera. By reading the camera pixel intensities corresponding to individual nanoantennas at a given wavelength, we find the spectrum of the resonator phase shifter corresponding to each nanoantenna (see supplementary material for more details To overcome the limitations of the near-field method for the characterization and calibration of strongly overcoupled resonances, we introduce a far-field method that consists of monitoring the far-field image of the phased array whilst tuning the resonances of the phase shifters. The far-field method is primarily useful for overcoupled resonance modes that provide a large phase shift, and therefore a noticeable beam displacement in the far field. For a given wavelength, we monitor the dissimilarity between far-field images obtained when non-zero and zero bias voltages are applied to a single resonator phase shifter in the array. To quantify this dissimilarity, we calculate the squared differential far-field intensity (SDFI) integrated over the image plane for these two voltages, i.e. (I 2 (V, λ) -I 1 (0, λ)) 2 dx dy, wherein I 2 and I 1 are the far-field image intensity patterns for applied bias voltages of V and 0, respectively. If the wavelength is close to resonance, larger phase shifts are expected to occur for a given applied voltage, thereby leading to far-field fringe displacements, hence a larger SDFI which allows to identify the resonance wavelength. When the array is periodic, one can obtain the following analytical expression for the SDFI spectrum corresponding to each resonator phase shifter in the array (see supplementary where N is the total number of radiating nanoantenna elements in the array, n is the index position of the considered antenna and its corresponding phase shifter, and ∆φ(λ) is the phase shift obtained from applying a non-zero bias voltage V to the n th resonator phase shifter, as expected from Eq. ( . Fits of the measured SDFI spectra to Eq. ( We proceed by applying the calibration method described in the previous section on the PIC phased array device shown in Fig. As illustrated in Fig. Though in this work we used microheaters for thermo-optic tuning of resonator phase shifters, a more efficient alternative approach could involve charge injection phase shifters integrated with microresonators that can consume a much lower power While in this work we demonstrated a one dimensional phased array, our concept can be extended to two dimensional arrays as well. A two dimensional (2D) phased array with an optimally randomized sparse placement of unit cells and appropriate phases can localize the beam in the far field with minimal side-lobes and enable a much larger steering range even if the array unit cell spacing is quite large with respect to the operation wavelength. Random sparse arrays of scatterers for field localization which date back to radar In this work, we have demonstrated PIC phased array beam steering using ultra compact and low power silicon resonator phase shifters. We demonstrated a 1x8 phased array with an array unit cell size as small as 15 x 20 μm 2 that includes a phase shifter with a power consumption as small as 0.4 mW for π phase shifts. The compactness of the resonator phase shifter and the nanoantenna allows for the design of a compact and low power unit cell for phased arrays and provides a viable path for efficient and scalable 2D beam steering. We introduced new methods for the calibration of the resonator phase shifters in the array based on near-field and far-field information. More specifically, we developed a farfield analytical model for the spectral characterization of the strongly overcoupled resonator phase shifters in the array and used the model for the resonator characterization and the array calibration. Though we used thermo-optic tuning for the resonator phase shifters, employing charge injection phase shifters within the resonators and 3D integration of the PIC devices and electronics can enable even lower power an larger scale 2D beam steering platforms. The microring resonator phase shifter used in this work has an external radius of 2.75 micron, a thickness of 220 nm, and a ring width of 1.15 micron. We employed the transverse electric (TE) resonance mode of the resonator for our design as it can be supported with a more compact resonator geometry. A finite element method is employed to find the resonance optical modes of the device. Figure The spectra of these resonators for different pulley coupling angles are provided in Fig. We employ a similar nanoantenna design used in In order to accelerate the process of finding our phase shifter resonances, which is required for our device's calibration, we employ an image-based resonance characterization method. The latter consists of taking a sequence of images of the phased array near-field while sweeping over the optical wavelength used in our experiment. The collected images are then averaged and pixels at which an average intensity exceeds a given threshold are identified. These pixels are then clustered in bins based on their spatial proximity such that each bin corresponds to the near-field emitted by one of the phased array nanoantennas. These bins are then used to extract the total intensity of the field emitted by each antenna for all images collected during the wavelength sweep. The resulting data is then employed to reconstruct the emission spectrum of the device's resonator phase shifters. Sample results attributed to the steps taken in this approach can be found in Fig. As mentioned in the main text, we can characterize the resonance of each array radiating element by performing a wavelength sweep of the array's far-field. The swept quantity consists of the mean square difference between images where a center, V 0 , and a shifted voltage, V 0 + δV, are applied onto the considered resonator, which can be mathematically expressed as where λ is the considered wavelength, I denotes a collected image, the i, j indices respectively indicate the image pixel coordinates, V consists of the applied voltage, and V 0 and V 0 + δV are the center and shifted voltages applied to the device, respectively. Hereafter along with in the main text, we refer to f (λ) as the squared differential far-field intensity (SDFI). For a periodic phased array, one can model f (λ) through the use of Fourier optics where U 0 is the Fourier transform of u 0 , k is the radiation wavevector, and A(x, z) is the array factor. When all elements are radiating in phase and are arranged periodically, this factor is given by: where N is the number of emitting elements and Λ is the periodicity of the array. Consider the case where the n th element of the array has a phase offsetted by ∆φ due to a voltage applied to the device's heater. The array factor then becomes 1e j(n-1)α 1e jα + e j (n-1)α+∆φ + e jnαe jNα 1e jα , where δ mn is the Kronecker delta function. We therefore expect the far-field intensity pattern formed by such a phased array to be given by hence, following a few algebraic maneuvers, the difference between the two considered intensity patterns should be given by To obtain the SDFI spectrum given in Eq. ( 