Topological nodal-line semimetals (TNLSMs) are materials whose conduction and valence bands cross each other, meeting a topologically-protected closed loop rather than discrete points in the Brillouin zone (BZ). The anticipated properties for TNLSMs include drumhead-like nearly In recent years, topological semimetals including Dirac, Weyl, and nodal-line semimetals have been theoretically predicted and experimentally verified, opening a new field in condensed-matter physics in which novel properties and new applications can arise from spin-polarized states with unique band dispersion In the search for nodal-line semimetals, several systems have been theoretically proposed since 2011 Among the topological materials, intense effort has been applied to realizing topological superconductors (TSCs) In this work, we present the results of high-pressure measurements on single-crystalline SrAs3. Upon applying pressure, the topologically-protected α pocket and trivial β pocket disappear around 1 GPa, and two higher frequencies denoted as ε and ξ emerge, indicating a Lifshitz transition. More interestingly, a superconducting transition has been observed from 20.6 GPa, with a dome-like pressure dependence. High-pressure X-ray diffraction (XRD) was conducted to investigate the high-pressure structure of SrAs3, and a structural transition was found around 20 GPa. DFT calculations on the highpressure structure of SrAs3 reveal a TCI state. TCI states have previously been experimentally verified only in narrow-gap IV-VI semiconductors with a rock-salt structure, for example SnTe SrAs3 crystallizes in a triclinic (space group P1 _ ) or monoclinic (space group C2/m) structure; the latter is proposed to possess topological-nodal-line states protected by time-reversal symmetry, spatialinversion symmetry, and mirror symmetry along the b axis As a TNLSM, SrAs3 possesses 2D drumhead-like nearly-flat surface states nested inside the closed nodal line, and it may provide an ideal playground for many interaction-induced nontrivial states, such as superconductivity. In the resistivity under higher pressures in Fig. To verify whether the pressure-induced superconductivity arises from a structural phase transition, we performed high-pressure synchrotron XRD measurements, shown in Fig. At ambient conditions, SrP3 and SrAs3 have the same crystal structure (C2/m), while SrBi3 forms in the cubic Cu3Au-type structure (space group: Pm-3m, No. 221) GPa indicates that the pressure-induced structural phase transition in SrAs3 is first order and that the two phases have only a minute difference in Gibbs free energy. Since the pressure-induced superconductivity appears long after the topologically-protected α pocket is eliminated, it is important to check whether the high-pressure band structure of SrAs3 is topologically nontrivial, which is a necessary condition for topological superconductivity. To obtain more electronic structure information on the high-pressure phase of SrAs3, we performed DFT calculations for pressurized SrAs3 at 34 GPa, as summarized in Fig. Owing to the cubic symmetry of this material, there are twelve band crossing points at symmetricallyequivalent points in the full BZ. Upon turning on SOC, a gap will be opened at these crossing points, resulting in a continuous SOC gap with a curved chemical potential between valence and conduction bands at each k point, as shown in Fig. To identify the topological nature of this material, the Fu-Kane parity criterion Searching for Majorana fermions has been fueled by the prospect of using their non-Abelian statistics for robust quantum computation, and they can be realized as a bound state at zero energy, i.e. Majorana bound states (MZM), in the vortex core of a topological superconductor The superconducting phase of SrAs3 is centrosymmetric (Pm-3m), so barring the exceedingly unlikely possibility of bulk spin-triplet superconductivity, the bulk route to Majorana quasiparticles is not available. However, we propose a TCI state hosting TSSs with helical spin texture. Superconductivity in these states or induced in these states by proximity effect from the bulk could potentially be topologically nontrivial. However, unlike in other TCIs such as SnTe or Pb1-xSnxM (M = Se, Te), trivial bulk bands in pressurized SrAs3 cross the Fermi level, and we are unable to distinguish which bands participate in the superconductivity. Further work will be required to elaborate the contributions from TSSs and bulk states to the superconductivity. In summary, at ambient pressure, SrAs3 is a TNLSM with 2D drumhead-like nearly-flat surface states, which may be strongly correlated and are often associated with the enhancement of superconductivity Higher-pressure experiments on a powder sample reveal a dome-like superconducting transition accompanying a structural phase transition into a phase which we predict to host a topologicalcrystalline-insulator state with TSSs and helical spin texture. Besides its intrinsic interest as a TNLSM, SrAs3 offers an alternative route to explore the topological-crystalline-insulator state beyond IV-VI semiconductors and, as a superconducting TCI, high-pressure SrAs3 could serve as a candidate topological superconductor. Doping studies or strain may still be able to induce superconductivity in the low-pressure phase, and should be pursued, and the evolution of the drumhead-like states with pressure remains to be clarified. Self-flux method. Sr (99.95 %, Alfa Aesar), and As (99.999 %, PrMat) were mixed in a molar ratio of 1:3 and placed into an alumina crucible. The crucible was sealed in a quartz ampoule under vacuum and subsequently heated to 750 °C in 10 h. After reaction at this temperature for 300 h, the ampoule was cooled to 400 °C in 50 h and cooled freely to room temperature. SrAs3 single crystals with black shiny metallic lustre were obtained. Bi-flux method. Sr (99.95%, Alfa Aesar), As (99.999%, PrMat) and Bi (99.9999%, Aladdin) blocks were mixed in a molar ratio of 1:3:26 and placed into an alumina crucible. The crucible was sealed in a quartz ampoule under vacuum and subsequently heated to 900 °C in 15 h. After reaction at this temperature for 20 h, the ampoule was cooled to 700 °C over 20 h, and then slowly cooled to 450°C at 1 °C/h. The excess Bi flux was then removed in a centrifuge, and SrAs3 single crystals with black shiny metallic lustre were obtained. 