In modelling of chemical, physical or biological systems it may occur that the coefficients, multiplying various terms in the equation of interest, differ greatly in magnitude, if a particular system of units is used. Such is, for instance, the case of the Population Balance Equations (PBE) proposed to model the Latex Particles Morphology formation. The obvious way out of this difficulty is the use of dimensionless scaled quantities, although often the scaling procedure is not unique. In this paper, we introduce a conceptually new general approach, called Optimal Scaling (OS). The method is tested on the known examples from classical and quantum mechanics, and applied to the Latex Particles Morphology model, where it allows us to reduce the variation of the relevant coefficients from 49 to just 4 orders of magnitudes. The PBE are then solved by a novel Generalised Method Of Characteristics, and the OS is shown to help reduce numerical error, and avoid unphysical behaviour of the solution. Although inspired by a particular application, the proposed scaling algorithm is expected find application in a wide range of chemical, physical and biological problems. Obtaining a unitless or dimensionless formulation of governing equations plays an important role in mathematical and numerical analysis of any practical problem. First of all, it enables to specify important scaling parameters, which fully determine the system's behaviour. Henceforth, solving one dimensionless problem is equivalent to solving a whole class of dimensional problems sharing the same scaling parameters. Moreover, dimensionless equations allow one to estimate the relative magnitude of various terms and, thus, eventually to simplify the problem using asymptotic methods For these reasons, nondimensionalization, or more ambiguously "scaling", reformulates dimensional models in terms of dimensionless quantities only. As stated above, one of the purposes is in decreasing the computationally intractable orders of magnitude of physical quantities. In addition, the scaling procedure allows for an estimation of characteristic properties of a given system, such as intrinsic frequency, typical length, or time duration. Once a system of equations in physical units is given, the following steps The characteristic constants are found by solving a system of N = min{N d , N x } equations with N x unknowns, with N d and N x being the total numbers of dimensionless coefficients and characteristic constants, respectively. Since the complexity of realistic models often leads to N d > N x , potential difficulties may affect the scaling procedure as explained in The novel technique may be beneficial for models with a number of dimensionless coefficients larger than the number of characteristic constants to estimate. This is exactly the case of the Population Balance Equations (PBE) model The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we present the novel scaling procedure, which we call Optimal Scaling. Meaning to reduce computational efforts and numerical errors, we also derive an analytical formula for determining the characteristic constants within the proposed technique. The analytical solution is general and holds for a wide range of equations. In addition, Section 2 analyses and tests the new methodology on three popular models presenting examples of classical and quantum dynamics. In particular, we consider the Projectile Problem Given f : R N x × (0, ∞) N p → R, let us consider the equation f x1 , . . . , xN x ; p1 , . . . , pN p = 0, (1) where x1 , . . . , xN x correspond to the unknown variables and the independent quantities, while p1 , . . . , pN p are the positive parameters assuming experimental values. All variables and parameters in (1) are expressed in their physical units. Our aim is to derive from the given equation the corresponding dimensionless model with computationally tractable orders of magnitude for parameters and involved variables. The following derivation can be generalised to the vector case, by considering f as a single component of the given vector operator. The dimensionless counterparts of the variables x1 , . . . , xN x are defined as: where θ ≡ θ 1 , . . . , θ N x ∈ (0, ∞) N x are strictly positive characteristic constants with the dimensions and orders of magnitude of the corresponding variables. The change of variables (2) allows rewriting (1) as a dimensionless equation where the dimensionless coefficients λ ≡ λ 1 , . . . , λ N d ∈ (0, ∞) N d are functions of the characteristic constants θ and the physical parameters p ≡ { p1 , . . . , pN p }, i.e. λ i = λ i (θ; p), ∀i = 1, . . . , N d . Given the physical parameters p, the characteristic constants θ should be proposed by the user in order to specify the coefficients λ, i.e. λ i = λ i (θ), ∀i = 1, . . . , N d . In other words, the characteristic constants θ correspond to the degrees of freedom in the scaling procedure. One of the most common approaches for the definition of the characteristic constants θ consists in imposing as many λ as possible equal to 1, starting from the coefficients of the highest orders polynomial or derivative terms in (3), as explained in the approach presented in For this reason, we suggest an alternative approach. More specifically, we propose to look for such constants θ (we call them optimal scaling factors θ opt ∈ (0, ∞) N x ), for which the deviation where the functional C(θ) : (0, ∞) N x → [0, ∞) measures the distance of the magnitude of coefficients λ from 10 0 . The cost function C(θ) in (4) can evaluate the constants θ through the Euclidean distance C eucl (θ) between the vector log 10 (λ i ) N d i=1 , holding the orders of magnitude of the coefficients λ, and the vector {Θ i } N d i=1 , holding the desired orders of magnitude Θ i = log 10 (10 0 ) = 0, ∀i = 1, . . . , N d : The choice of C(θ) in (4) is not unique, and definitions alternative to (5) can be explored. In particular, the functional C(θ) in (4) can be chosen as the maximum norm C max (θ): The functional (6) is less regular than (5). However, numerical routines, such as the Simulated Annealing Algorithm [KGV83, Č85, B 92, BRS93, YL91, ZSM + 93], can be successfully applied for finding the minimum of non-smooth cost functions. In this study, we have used the implementation proposed in [B 92] due to its computational efficiency (up to 10 Algorithm 1: The Optimal Scaling procedure to reduce the equation f ( x1 , . . . , xN x ; p1 , . . . , pN p ) = 0 to dimensionless and computationally tractable variables, when the positive parameters p1 , . . . , pN p assume known experimental values. The Optimal Scaling procedure results in dimensionless equations with computationally tractable orders of magnitude for the variables of interest. In addition, it is independent from any resolution methodology, since it can be applied before running the chosen technique. Preferably, the scaling procedure should not imply a significant computational effort. In what follows, we show that if the Euclidean norm is chosen in (4) as a cost function, then the minimisation problem can be solved analytically. We consider the minimisation problem (4) with the cost function C(θ) = C eucl (θ) (5). The Buckingham Π-theorem From (7), it follows Imposing ∂C eucl (θ)/∂θ j = 0, ∀ j = 1, . . . , N x , one obtains Discarding the units of measure, the change of variables θ j = 10 ρ j , ∀ j = 1, . . . , N x , allows rewriting (9) as a symmetric linear system, whose solution provides θ eucl = {10 ρ j } N x j=1 . Here θ eucl is the point of minimum of the cost function C eucl (θ). As has been noticed previously, C eucl is not a unique choice for the cost function. In the following sections, we shall demonstrate that the performance of the Optimal Scaling method does not depend on a choice of the cost function. Such an observation can be explained by the equivalence of norms on the finite dimensional space (0, ∞) N x The following subsections analyse and test the Optimal Scaling procedure on three case studies: the Projectile Problem In the projectile problem described in with g = 9.8 m/s 2 the gravitational acceleration, R = 6.3781 × 10 6 m the radius of the Earth and v 0 = 25 m/s the initial velocity. The dimensionless counterpart of ODE (11) is obtained by the change of variables where t c [s] and x c [m] belong to the set of the strictly positive characteristic constants θ defined in (2). The transformation (12) leads to with the dimensionless coefficients λ 1 (θ), λ 2 (θ), λ 3 (θ) > 0 defined as The scaling (12) results in N d = 3 dimensionless coefficients λ ≡ {λ 1 , λ 2 , λ 3 }, computed as functions of N x = 2 characteristic constants θ ≡ {t c , x c }. Several methods can be applied to assign suitable numerical values to coefficients λ and constants θ. In particular, Table As remarked above, there is no control on the magnitude of N d -N x = 1 coefficient λ, if N x = 2 coefficients λ are set to 1. In fact, Table Finally, we remark that the cost functions C eucl (θ) and C max (θ) provide similar solutions as seen from the numerical values of θ 1 = t c and θ 2 = x c reported in Table Table While Table The effect of the scaling procedures can be also analysed by inspecting the flow in the phase spaces of position and momentum of the ODEs (11) and (13). Given y 1 = x, y 2 = dx/dt, w 1 = ξ and w 2 = dξ/dτ, the flow is represented in Figure The vectors (15) are shown in Figure such that the intervals (16) are of the scale of the solutions of (11) and (13) (Figure (iii) Flow in phase space of (13) for (b) λ 2,3 = 1. (iv) Flow in phase space of (13) for (c) λ 1,3 = 1. (vi) Flow in phase space of (13) for (e) min θ C max (θ). The arrows show the vectors (15) in the intervals (16), with x max = 60 m and v max = 60 m/s. The blue lines provide the solutions of ( Aimed to demonstrate the versatility of Optimal Scaling procedure, we test the proposed methodology on the Schrödinger Equation (SE) for an hydrogen atom in a magnetic field Assume a constant magnetic field along a direction indicated by the dimensionless unit vector n ∈ R 3 , i.e B = B n, with B expressed in Tesla [T]. Despite its simplicity, this model is rich in effects, which include classical chaos The position r ∈ R The SE (17) can be written in terms of dimensionless variables by means of the transformation ] being the strictly positive characteristic constants θ defined in (2). By plugging ( with ρ ≡ ρ • ρ and the dimensionless coefficients λ(θ) > 0 defined as for θ ≡ {α 0 , β 0 , γ 0 }. Now, setting λ 1 = λ 4 = λ 5 = 1 leads to the often used atomic units and the scaling factors θ = θ atom : with α 0 ≈ 5.3×10 -11 m roughly the radius of a free hydrogen atom in its ground state, and β 0 ≈ 2.4×10 -17 s the corresponding time unit, given the parameters values from Table Our next goal is to illustrate the capability of Optimal Scaling (OS) to properly explore limiting behaviours of a given model. In particular, we consider the Landau-de Gennes model, which is commonly used to study properties of nematic liquid crystals The Landau-de Gennes model is expressed in terms of an integral functional of a field Q taking values into the space of symmetric, traceless 3x3 matrices. In its simplest form, the dimensional functional F can be written as with L, A, B, C the material dependent parameters and Ω ⊂ R 3 the domain containing the liquid crystal. Aiming to rewrite in unitless form the functional (23), one invokes the following change of variables: where x ∈ Ω is the (dimensional) coordinate variable, while x, Q and F are the scaled (unitless) counterparts of x, Q and F respectively. In (24), we define θ ≡ {x 0 , Q 0 , F 0 } ∈ (0, ∞) N x as the N x = 3 characteristic constants to be determined. By using (24) and A NI ≡ B 2 /(27C), one obtains the dimensionless formulation of (23): with Ω = Ω/x 0 , ∇ = x 0 ∇ and d V = dV/x 3 0 . The unitless parameter θ ≡ A/A NI does not depend on the scaling factors θ = {x 0 , Q 0 , F 0 }. It assumes the values θ = 0, 1, 9/8 for the parameters choices suggested in with θ = {x 0 , Q 0 , F 0 } and ξ NI ≡ √ L/A NI a typical length scale of the liquid crystal, called nematic correlation length. In so that N x = 3 out of N d = 4 dimensionless coefficients are equal to 1, i.e. λ 1,3,4 (θ) = 1. As stated above, the large-body limit is achieved when geometric length scales (such as the size of the domain Ω) become large compared to intrinsic length scales (for instance, the nematic length ξ NI ). Aiming to analyse the large-body limit, the value of R is chosen in As a consequence, the large-body limit leads to the following regime of the functional F parameters: In other words, such a limit assigns a small weight to the term corresponding to λ 2 . Now, let us verify if the Optimal Scaling procedure is able to recover the physical scaling ( We consider the cost function C eucl (θ) (5), with a choice of {Θ i } N d i=1 targeting to drive the orders of magnitude of coefficients {λ i } N d i=1 close to the regime (29). In particular, it is possible to select: with λ 1 , . . . , λ 4 (29). We remark that such a choice of Θ 1 , . . . , Θ 4 differs from what was proposed for the case studies in Section 2.2 and Section 2.3, where Θ i = 0, ∀i = 1, . . . , N d . Given (30), the analytical solution derived in Section 2.1 for the argument θ eucl = {x 0 , Q 0 , F 0 } of minimum of the norm C eucl (θ) provides: It is easy to check that the optimal scaling factors (31) coincide with the physical scaling ( Our next goal is to apply the Optimal Scaling procedure to the Population Balance Equations (PBE) model of the dynamic development of Latex Particles Morphology proposed in The morphology of latex particles can be understood as the pattern of phase-separated domains, describing a given particle. The considered pattern is composed by agglomerates of polymers belonging to two separated phases: the so-called non-equilibrium and equilibrium phases. With the aim to predict the evolution of the morphology of interest, it is possible to focus on the distributions m(ṽ, t) [L -1 ] and w(ṽ, t) [L -1 ] of the size ṽ [L] at time t [s] of non-equilibrium and equilibrium polymers clusters, respectively. The volume ṽ is measured in Litres [L] and the elapsed time t in seconds [s]. For any fixed time t, the expected number of non-equilibrium and equilibrium clusters with volume ṽ in the interval [α, β] is provided by β α m(ṽ, t) dṽ and β α w(ṽ, t) dṽ (32) respectively. The distributions m(ṽ, t) and w(ṽ, t) are not normalised to 1. Rather, their zero-order moment yields the expected total number of polymers clusters, for any given time t. As detailed in = -∂( g(ṽ,t) m(ṽ,t) ) ∂ṽ + ñ(ṽ, t)μ(ṽ, t) m(ṽ, t)m(ṽ, t) = -∂( g(ṽ,t) w(ṽ,t) ) ∂ṽ + μ(ṽ, t) m(ṽ, t)w(ṽ, t) The nucleation rate ñ(ṽ, t) [L -1 s -1 ] accounts for the expected number of non-equilibrium clusters formed per unit of time: where δ( x) [L -1 ] is the Dirac delta function. The growth rate g(ṽ, t) [L s -1 ] corresponds to the expected increase of volume per unit of time of a given cluster with size ṽ at time t: The migration rate μ(ṽ, t) [s -1 ] is the expected proportion of non-equilibrium clusters moving per unit of time to the equilibrium phase: The aggregation rate ã(ṽ, ũ, t) [s -1 ] corresponds to the expected frequency of coagulations between clusters with volumes ṽ and ũ at time t: As presented in Expected Odds Monomers-Polymers Ψ( t): The following definitions complete the presented model: Σm,w ( t) where m and w are the solutions of (33). Table 2.3 × 10 -7 mol Table The application of Optimal Scaling (Section 2) to the dimensional model (33) for Latex Particles Morphology requires the definition of dimensionless counterparts of (33)-(45). We define the scaled counterparts of the variables in the PBE system (33) as: where ] and w 0 [L -1 ] belong to the set of the strictly positive characteristic constants θ defined by the change of variables (2). The variables Ψ( t) (41) and Φ( t) (43) are dimensionless and computationally tractable since they are given by the ratios between quantities of the same dimensions and orders of magnitude. Then, we define Ψ(t) and Φ(t) as the dimensionless counterparts of Ψ( t) and Φ( t) respectively: The quantities Ṽmat pol2 ( t) (38), Ṽpol2 ( t) (42) and Ṽp ( t) (44) are scaled by the factors M 0 [L], P 0 [L] and Π 0 [L] respectively: The Dirac delta function δ(ṽv c ) [L -1 ] is scaled by the factor δ 0 [L -1 ]: with the dimensionless coefficient λ c computed as The definitions (45) of the variables Σm ( t) and Σw ( t) suggest the proper scaling factors: By integrating (33), multiplied by ṽ, with respect to ṽ over R + , it is possible to show that the quantities Ṽc m pol2 ( t) (39) and Ṽc w pol2 ( t) (40) correspond to the first-order moments of m(ṽ, t) and w(ṽ, t): Given (52), the dimensionless counterparts V c m,w pol2 (t) of the variables Ṽc m,w pol2 ( t) are computed as: In agreement with (52), the proposed scaling (46)-(53) ensures the dimensionless variables V c m pol2 (t) and V c w pol2 (t) to be the first-order moments of the dimensionless distributions m(v, t) and w(v, t). Given the characteristic constants θ ≡ {ν 0 , t 0 , m 0 , w 0 , M 0 , P 0 , Π 0 , δ 0 } and the corresponding scaled quantities, it is possible to rewrite the PBE system (33) and the rate functions (34)-(37) in terms of the defined dimensionless variables. The equations (54)-(66) summarise the arising dimensionless model, where the parameters are specified in Table n(v, t) ≡ λ n Φ(t) δ(vλ c ), with δ(x) the Dirac delta, (57) V p (t) ≡ (Ψ(t) + 1) (66) The examination of the model for dynamic development of Latex Particles Morphology, introduced in Section 3.1, reveals that the values of the physical parameters given in Table In Section 3.2 we derived the dimensionless counterpart of the considered model along with the resulting equations ( For an arbitrary choice of the cost function C(θ) in (4), numerical routines, such as the Simulated Annealing Algorithm [B 92], can be used to perform the optimisation. For example, for C(θ) = C max (θ) (6) we implemented Algorithm 1 in R and chose the function optim [R C19], with the method SANN, to Table perform Simulated Annealing. We label as θ max the numerical values of θ opt , obtained in this manner, and present them in Figure Aimed to compare the presented results of Optimal Scaling with other scaling methods, we use the traditional scaling procedure As mentioned before, the computational tractability of the arising coefficients λ(θ k ) and corresponding variables can be quantified by the ratio r(θ k ): To provide a complete description of the behaviour of the ratio r (67), we show in Figure In order to compare the coefficients λ resulting from various considered scaling approaches, we define as θ M and θ m those scaling factors θ k for which the ratio r(θ k ) (67) achieves its maximum and minimum value respectively: where the index k ∈ N enumerates all choices of N x = 8 out of N d = 19 coefficients λ, such that the linear system (A.2) is numerically solvable. Figure The factors θ M (red triangles) and the corresponding coefficients λ(θ M ) shown in Figure The provided results demonstrate that the traditional scaling approach described in Appendix A can compete in performance with the Optimal Scaling procedure only when it gives rise to a scheme which satisfies the following requirements: (i) the linear system (A.2) to be solvable and (ii) the ratio r (67) is minimal. Obviously, the significant efforts required for finding such a scheme are not comparable with the well-defined and straightforward solution offered by the Optimal Scaling algorithm. Solving the PBE model (54) derived in Section 3.2 and Section 3.3 is far from being a trivial task, because of its numerical and modelling complexities. The numerical difficulties include (i) potential (ii) Dimensionless Coefficients λ(θ * ). , obtained with various scaling methods for the model described in Section 3.1. (ii) Corresponding values of the dimensionless coefficients λ(θ * ), defined in Table Since the equations for m(v, t) and w(v, t) in (54) can be solved analogously, we limit our discussion to the solution of the following Population Balance Equations (PBE) system We propose to evaluate the solution m(v, t) of (69) along N curves, belonging to P ≡ (v, t) ∈ R 2 : v, t ≥ 0 , with the prescribed form v = φ k (t), ∀k = 1, . . . , N. Given m k (t) ≡ m(v, t)| v=φ k (t) , the chain rule provides the time derivative of m k (t). As a result, one obtains the ODE system arising from (69) by evaluating the solution m(v, t) on the curves v = φ k (t), ∀k = 1, . . . , N, ∀t ∈ R + : where ρ(v, t) ≡ ∂g(v, t)/∂v and The particular choice of the curves v = φ k (t), for k = 1, . . . , N, as the solutions of the Cauchy problems allows cancelling the partial derivatives with respect to v in (70). The curves v = φ k (t) in (73) correspond to the characteristics defined by MOC, showing that GMOC embeds MOC. Moreover, the Method of Lines (ML) The definition (73), i.e. MOC, avoids the numerical errors caused by the discretization of the partial derivatives with respect to v in (70). However, the characteristics grid (73) may lead to the inefficient integration of the PBE system (69), if other dynamical mechanisms make the solution m(v, t) behave differently from what is prescribed by the function g(v, t) Appendix C concludes the implementation of GMOC, explaining how to impose the initial and boundary conditions of (69) in the ODE (70). Appendix C also provides the numerical schemes for approximation of the partial derivatives with respect to v, the integral terms and the time evolution in (70). In Section 3.3 we considered various scaling procedures, including the newly derived Optimal Scaling, for nondimensionalization of the PBE model (33) and found that the range of magnitude of λ coefficients in resulting dimensionless equations (54) may vary from 10 4 to 10 50 depending on a choice of a scaling procedure. Our objective is to investigate how the variation of λ coefficients affects the computational performance and accuracy of the resolution method (GMOC in this case) applied to (54). As discussed in Section 3.2, the dimensionless counterpart (54) of ( (75) The effect of a choice of θ on the efficiency of the numerical treatment of the dimensionless equations (54) is evaluated by the following experiment. First, we set the integration domains for the dimensional model (33) as: ṽ ∈ [0, ṽmax ] and t ∈ [0, Tmax ], with ṽmax = 10 -16 L and Tmax = 450 s. (76) As motivated in Section 3.2, the dimensionless counterpart (54) of (33) should then be integrated within the properly scaled domains: where ṽmax and Tmax are chosen as in (76), while ν 0 and t 0 depend on a particular choice of θ ≡ {ν 0 , t 0 , m 0 , w 0 , M 0 , P 0 , Π 0 i.e. θ = θ eucl or θ = θ test . We choose GMOC (Section 4.1) as an integration technique and use the same numbers N and M of grids points (see Table Figure deal with the narrow density N(v; λ c , σ c ). On the contrary, the scaling θ = θ eucl allows for h ≈ 9.7×10 -3 < σ c ≈ 1.7 × 10 -2 , leading to the reduction of numerical oscillations in Figure where ṽmax , N and v c have been fixed. In conclusion, the scaling factors θ have a strong impact on performance and accuracy of the numerical treatment of the resulting equations, and the Optimal Scaling procedure, as the name suggests, provides an optimal choice of such factors. We propose a novel scaling procedure for the dimensionless reformulation of an arbitrary equation expressed in physical units. As any standard scaling method, the new approach potentially simplifies the analysis of the underlying equation, and reduces its numerical complexity. At the same time, by its very design, our method assures optimal and computationally tractable orders of magnitude for the terms involved in the resulting dimensionless equation. Defined in this way, the Optimal Scaling technique relies on the optimisation of the characteristic constants which determine the magnitudes of physical quantities, i.e. scaling factors. The method is independent of a particular resolution methodology, applied to a given equation, since it can be performed once, without interfering with the chosen solver. In this sense, the scaling procedure should never require a significant computational effort. Moreover, we suggest a specific choice of a cost function to be minimised which, without a performance loss, allows for an analytical computation of scaling factors. This analytical solution is general and holds for a wide range of equations. We validated the Optimal Scaling method by applying it to three popular problems -the simple Projectile Problem, the Schrödinger Equation for a hydrogen atom in a magnetic field and the Landau-de Gennes model for liquid crystals. One of the important properties of the efficiency of a scaling routine is its ability to produce scaled parameters of similar orders of magnitude in order to avoid severe round-off errors, and improve conditioning of the considered problem. We introduce a metric for quantification of the similarity among scaled (dimensionless) quantities, which is a ratio of maximal and minimal values of scaled parameters. If compared with other traditional scaling approaches In addition, the reported data demonstrate that Optimal Scaling ensures a strong reduction of the range of orders of magnitude assumed by physical quantities. In the example of Schrödinger Equation (SE), our methodology results in decreasing a ratio between maximal and minimal parameters values from 10 25 (dimensional) to 10 2 (dimensionless), whereas for the Projectile Problem these values are respectively 10 3 and 10 2 . Despite such a strong transformation, Optimal Scaling allows for an accurate estimation of characteristic features of a given system. As an example, we show that the factors, provided by Optimal Scaling, follow the same trend as the often used atomic units for SE. Also, we demonstrate that the Optimal Scaling procedure preserves the qualitative behaviour of the flow in the phase space of position and momentum of the Projectile Problem. Finally, we prove that Optimal Scaling correctly describes the large-body limit of Landau-de Gennes model for liquid crystals. The outlined features of Optimal Scaling make it an excellent candidate for application to the recently proposed PBE model for Latex Particles Morphology formation To solve the resulting dimensionless PBE model for Latex Particles Morphology formation, we introduce a novel flexible numerical approach called Generalised Method Of Characteristics (GMOC). GMOC integrates the equations of interest along properly defined characteristic curves and can be beneficial to the problems where the solutions have complex shapes, potentially leading to numerical instabilities. We apply GMOC with the constant characteristic curves to the dimensionless PBE equations, obtained using different scaling approaches, in order to evaluate the effect of those approaches on the overall computational performance of the solver. Our numerical experiments reveal that a choice of scaling factors has a significant effect on performance of a PBE solver. The integration carried out with the optimally scaled factors yields the errors up to three orders of magnitude smaller than the those obtained with alternative scaling techniques. Finally, the use of Optimal Scaling helps avoid unphysical numerical oscillations present in the numerical solutions obtained with the traditional scaling methods. In summary, a particular choice of scaling factors has a strong impact on performance of numerical solver, and the proposed Optimal Scaling procedure, as the name suggests, allows for the optimal choice of such factors. Our objective is to show that the solutions m(v, t) and w(v, t) of the dimensionless system (54), derived in Section 3.2, must be always non-negative. As before, it is enough to prove this statement for the solution m(v, t) only, as the identical arguments can be applied to w(v, t). In other words, we want to demonstrate that the solution m(v, t) of ( (B.1) Let us define t * > 0 as the minimal time at which there exists such a volume v = v * > 0 that m(v * , t * ) = 0. Assuming the continuous evolution of m(v, t) from a positive initial data of ( In what follows, we provide details of the implementation of the Generalised Method Of Characteristics or GMOC (Section 4.1) for solving the PBE (69). We explain how to impose the initial and boundary conditions of (69) in the ODE (70), as well as how to numerically treat the partial derivatives with respect to v, the integral terms and the time evolution in (70). Initial and Boundary Conditions. The initial condition of (69) imposes: The information carried by φ 0 (t) and m 0 (t) is used to approximate the partial derivatives and the integral terms, as explained below. As a result, the boundary condition of (69) is imposed in the ODE system (70). Partial Derivatives. Given {φ k (t), m k (t)} N k=0 for all t ∈ R + , finite difference schemes can approximate the partial derivatives ∂m(v, t)/∂v| v=φ k (t) , ∀k = 1, . . . , N. As stated in 3 Given f ( x; p) = 0, where x ≡ { x1 , . . . , xN x } correspond to unknown variables and independent quantities, expressed in physical units, and p ≡ { p1 , . . . , pN p } are known dimensional positive parameters, introduce the strictly positive constants θ ≡ {θ 1 , . . . , θ N x } with the same dimensions as x1 , . . . , xN x ; Define the dimensionless variablesx ≡ {x 1 = x1 /θ 1 , . . . , x N x = xN x /θ N x }; Rewrite f ( x; p) = 0 in the unitless form f (x; λ) = 0, with λ(θ) ≡ {λ i (θ; p)} N d i=1 ∈ (0, ∞) N d being the dimensionless coefficients of the equation f (x; λ) = 0; Define the functional C(θ) to measure the distance of the magnitude of λ(θ) from 10 0 ; Compute θ opt = argmin θ∈(0,∞) Nx C(θ), using the appropriate minimisation procedure; Return the dimensionless and computationally tractable equation f (x; λ(θ opt )) = 0