Infrared optical photonic crystals fabricated using direct laser writing, which is based on the two-photon polymerization of suitable monomers, have received substantial interest since the emergence of this process. Two-photon polymerization could be a disruptive technology for the fabrication of all-dielectric photonic crystals in the infrared spectral range, as it allows the synthesis of large scale arrays of uniform structures with arbitrary geometries and arrangements. However, all-dielectric photonic crystals that provide birefringent optical responses in the infrared spectral range have not yet been demonstrated using direct laser writing techniques. Here we explore the form birefringence observed in photonic crystals composed of arrays of subwavelength-sized slanted polymer microwires. The photonic crystals investigated here were fabricated in a single fabrication step using direct laser writing of an infrared transparent photoresist (IP-Dip). A strong contrast of the cross-polarized reflectance of photonic crystals as a function of the in-plane orientation is observed in the mid-infrared spectral range at λ ≈ 6.5 μm. This observation is indicative of an anisotropic optical behavior. Finite element based techniques corroborate the experimentally observed responses qualitatively. Photonic crystals have received increased attention in recent years for optical applications ranging from chiral optical filters to super resolution. We have demonstrated that direct laser writing allows the fabrication of structured surfaces to reduce Fresnel reflection loss at infrared wavelengths. The all-dielectric birefringent photonic crystals investigated here are composed of slanted microwires as shown in The photonic crystals are designed to operate in the infrared spectral range. Therefore, the dimensions of the slanted wires were chosen to maintain a subwavelength regime for infrared wavelengths, while being sufficiently large to allow accurate fabrication using the direct laser writing process. In order to conveniently test the polarization response of the photonic crystals in the infrared spectral range, four photonic crystals with different azimuthal orientations of the microwire slanting plane ranging from φ = 0 • to 135 • in steps of 45 • were arranged in a pixel-like pattern. The photonic crystals shown in Fig. An optical micrograph of the fabricated photonic crystals is shown in Fig. The cross-polarized reflectance of these photonic crystals was simulated using a commercial finite element modeling software package (COMSOL Multiphysics) in order to determine their expected infrared optical responses. The dielectric function of IP-Dip, which was previously determined in the infrared spectral range by spectroscopic ellipsometry, was used for these model calculations. Fig. for which the optical axis is oriented parallel or perpendicular to the input polarization (φ = 0 • and 90 • ), the crosspolarized reflectance is vanishing. This optical response is indicative of a significant polarization mode conversion due to the form-induced birefringence of the investigated photonic crystals in the infrared spectral range. The crosspolarized reflectance of the photonic crystals was measured at λ ≈ 6.5 μm using a Bruker Hyperion 3000 infrared microscope in combination with a Bruker Vertex 70 FTIR spectrometer. The beam path for this microscope when measuring in reflectance is outlined in Fig. Fig. All-dielectric photonic crystals comprised of slanted microwires were successfully fabricated using direct laser writing from an infrared transparent photoresist. Experimentally obtained cross-polarized reflectance images exhibit a strong contrast between photonic crystals as a function of the azimuthal orientation. Photonic crystals obliquely oriented with respect to the direction of the input polarization show a strong reflectance. The cross-polarized reflectance of the crystals oriented perpendicular or parallel to the input polarization is vanishing. The experimental observations are found to be in qualitative agreement with finite element based model calculations of the cross-polarized normal incidence reflectance. The optical response is indicative of a birefringent behavior which is expected for the photonic crystals composed of slanted microwires. The difference between the cross-polarized reflectance of photonic crystals with oblique azimuthal orientation is tentatively interpreted as an indication of a biaxial response. This would be consistent with experimental findings reported in the literature for slanted columnar thin films investigated in the visible spectral range. We have also noticed boundary effects, which could hinder the application of these materials for pixel-based polarization filters for wavefront-splitting infrared polarimeters, for instance. The following article has been accepted to the Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B. After it is published, it will be found at https://avs.scitation.org/journal/jvb.