Hidden defects affecting the interface in a composite slab are evaluated from thermal data collected on the upper side of the specimen. First we restrict the problem to the upper component of the object. Then we investigate heat transfer through the inaccessible interface by means of Thin Plate Approximation. Finally, Fast Fourier Transform is used to filter data. In this way we obtain a reliable reconstruction of simulated flaws in thermal contact conductance corresponding to appreciable defects of the interface. Consider a composite body made up of two slabs of different materials in close thermal contact. Since the contact surfaces are rough on a microscopic level, thermal contact is always imperfect (see for example Consider the composite domain Ω A = Ω + ∪ A ∪ Ω -where Ω + = {(x, y, z) s.t. x, y ∈ (-L, L) a + > z > g + (x, y)} Ω -= {(x, y, z) s.t. x, y ∈ (-L, L) -a -< z < -g -(x, y)} with g + and g -continuous, possibly non differentiable, functions ranging in (0, 1) with << min{a -, a + }. We stress that Ω + and Ω -are made of different materials each characterized by density ρ ± , specific heat c ± and thermal conductivity κ ± . The third, irregular, thin slab is and ρ a , c a and κ a are its physical parameters. Let γ = a L a dimensionless parameter which represents the geometrical "thinness" of the slab Ω + . The domain A has variable thickness (g + (x, y) -g -(x, y)) and it is assumed to be filled up with air, whose conductivity κ a = 0.002587 Wm -1 K -1 is much lower than κ ± . It means that A opposes to heat transfer from Ω + to Ω -and the corresponding Thermal Conductance is 3 Modeling the solid interface A by means of Robin boundary conditions on the two sides of a plane. Imperfect contact. The temperature of Ω A depends on the physical characteristics of A. We account for the different conductivities κ -, κ a , κ + in Ω A by imposing continuity of temperature and heat flux for z = g + (x, y) and z = -g -(x, y) as transmission conditions for the heat conduction equation in Ω A . The functions g + and g -are very irregular at a microscopic scale but, if their values are normally distributed in a small neighborhood of the mean values g - and g + , the set A can be successfully approximated by the parallelepiped Ā = {(x, y, z) s.t. x, y ∈ (-L, L), -g -< z < g + }. The task of solving the heat equation in Ω A becomes much simpler if we consider Ā instead of A. The interface behaves like a controlled heat exchanger between Ω + and Ω -of conductance H = κa (g + -g -) . A further simplification consists in squeezing Ā to the plane z = 0 and assigning the Robin boundary conditions (imperfect contact while the heat equation is considered in the two domains The presence of an anomaly in the interface, corresponds to a change in the heat transfer from Ω + to Ω -. Hence, in analogy with (3), we have where These boundary conditions describe a non constant imperfect contact (see Remark We are assuming that variations of H in time take place in a much longer interval than (0, t max ). For this reason, H does not depend on t. Let u + be the solution of Boundary data are i.e. a source of power Φ is ON for t S seconds (t S < t max while the index S is for "source"). Let u -be the solution of in (-L, L)×(-L, L)×(-a, 0)×(0, t max ] with initial condition u -(x, y, z, 0) = 0. Boundary data are u holds and can be written in terms of boundary data on the two sides of the interface z = 0. More precisely We stress that solutions u + and u -depend on the dimensionless parameter γ = a L introduced in section 2. It is well known that, when κ + = κ -, the midpoint of the thermal jump due to imperfect contact is the value of the background temperature . It means that transmission conditions can be changed in ordinary boundary conditions on the two sides of the interface (see for example for all H, x, y and t. When H = 0 (insulating interface) and H = ∞ (perfect contact) we have R = 0. R > 0 elsewhere. There is numerical evidence that R is negligible when parameters are in the range we are dealing with. Figure where G 0 (x, y, 0, t; 0, 0, a, 0) is the Green function of a Continuous Plane Source and the constant S is Figure Assumed the smallness of R (confirmed by numerical computations and by the analytical estimate (13), interface boundary conditions can be written approximately as The IBVP (6)(7)(8)(9)(15) is now the direct model underlying the inverse problem of evaluating H. Observe that the problem has been restricted to the upper slab Ω + . The dimensionless parameter γ = a L gives a measure of how much Ω + is "geometrically thin". As observed in the introduction, Ω + is considered "thermally thin" when aH κ < .1. We introduce the set of dimensionless variables ζ = 1-z γL , ξ = x L , η = y L and τ = t α+ L 2 (we recall that the numbers α ± = κ± ρ±c± are the diffusivities of upper and lower slabs respectively) and define so that, the heat equation for ζ > 0 (former upper slab) becomes for (ξ, η, ζ) ∈ (0, 1) × 0, 1) × (0, 1) and τ ∈ (0, t max α+ L 2 ). Observe that in (17) we use a notation that points out the explicit dependence of v +,γ on γ. Variables ξ, η, ζ and τ are slightly different from usual ones (see for example Thanks to the substitution of ( Consider the formal expansions It is remarkable that, though h is independent on τ (at least in the time scale at hand), its partial sums in the expansion above are dependent on τ by construction. We observe that We claim that the limit in (25) exists as we can see by generalizing the one dimensional case with φ(x, y) = φ 0 and constant h. In this special case, it is for t ∈ (0, t S ). As for the other coefficients, we have that v N (ξ, η, ζ, τ ) = lim γ→0 ∂γ N . In particular: It is remarkable that in the one dimensional case it is ∂u + ∂γ = Φ0 κ ((1 -ζ)γL + O(γ)e -βt (see Plugging the expansion of v +,γ in (18), ( with v 0ζ = v 1ζ = 0 i.e. ∂(v0+γv1) ∂ζ = 0. As suggested by ( (the symbol ≈ means that u + (x, y, a, t) is taken in practice on the top side of a thin plate of thiockness a > 0) and The order zero approximation of h can be obtained from second order relations. More precisely, Choosing a time value t which corresponds to a good approximation of the "ideal" value of H (i.e. its value in absence of conduction flaws) and coming back to variables (x, y, z, t), we have where T = u(x, y, a, t) is the temperature of the accessible side z = a at time t. Recall that, in experimental real life situations, our knowledge of T come from a sequence of measurements taken by means of an infrared camera. In numerical simulations T is computed solving the direct model with a finite elements code. Remark. When the unknown parameter H is a function of two variables, the computation of higher order term in expansion (24) is very hard. A strong smoothing procedure would be required in order to perform reliable computation of fourth or sixth order partial derivative of data T . At present we have not yet solved this problem. Simulation of experimental data collection requires the numerical solution of the direct problem described in section 4. Numerical values of parameters (in MKS units) are: Upper slab Lower slab • κ -= 14 • ρ -= 8000 Geometrical parameters: • d 0 = 10 -5 m (average contact thickness) • a = 10 -2 m (thickness of a single slab) The upper surface is uniformly illuminated with a source (spotlight) having a power density constant in time. The contact resistance between the slabs is due to a variable thickness d(x, y). Given the thermal conductivity k a of the material between the two sheets (air) the unknown heat exchange coefficient is given by For the simulations we assume: where: Figure Figures 1. From the spectrum F i = F {u i } = F F T (u i ), the power spectrum 2. The spectrum is shifted to the center of the data, and scaled to have a maximum value 0: SP i = log(P i ) -max (log(P i )). 3. Looking at the graph of the scaled power spectrum (see, for example, figure 4. The filtered temperature map at time t i is obtained by an inverse Fourier transform: The effective heat exchange coefficient computed on the Fourier-filtered map gives the result shown in figure In order to obtain a smooth temperature map from the noisy data, a lowpass filter (LPF) is applied in the frequency domain. The LPF consists in applying a mask to the spectrum based on a suitable threshold θ. Denoting by U = F {u} the Fourier transform of the temperature u, and by the normalized power spectrum, the mask M is defined by: A "denoised" map u D is obtained by inverse-transforming the product U • M : u D = F -1 (U • M ).The choice of the threshold is not a straightforward task: a small threshold leaves data unmodified, while a too large one smooths data too much. We adopt the following procedure, which allows an automatic computation of the threshold. If we choose a random value of the threshold, between min(S U ) and 0, an high-pass filter (HPF) is realized by the mask M c complementary to M . We shall call "noise" temperature that obtained by: Choosing θ = 0 the HPF gives a perfect replica of the map u, while the LPF gives a null power spectrum. Conversely, the LPF gives a perfect (unsmoothed) replica of the temperature data if θ = min(S U ) while the HPF gives a null spectrum in such conditions. A small value of θ > min(S U ) produces masks M and M c such to give an almost random temperature. Therefore, intuitively we should increase the value of θ, starting from the lower value of the power spectrum, until the noise temperature u N vaguely starts to look like the original map u. In those conditions, the map u D is over-smoothed. The previous reasoning can be translated into formulae, by considering what "to look like" means in this context. If we compute the correlation among the noise (n) temperature map u N and the original map (signal, s) u, c n,s corr(u N , u), for values of θ ∈ (min(S U ), 0), the plot of c n,s versus θ is like that shown in figure Looking at figure 8 it is clear that such a minimum is not the absolute minimum of the correlation. Clearly, a zero noise temperature is the absolutely less correlated to any non-zero map! Figure Gaussian blurring is intrinsic in heat diffusion processes, so we can expect that different contact resistance profiles conduct to similar H shapes. That's indeed the case. Figure Figures As figures 13 and 14 show, the rectangular and gaussian profiles bring to nearly identical H shapes, as a consequence of temperature blurring, as fig- 