Strong electron correlations have long been recognized as driving the emergence of novel phases of matter. A well recognized example is high-temperature superconductivity which cannot be understood in terms of the standard weak-coupling theory. The exotic properties that accompany the formation of the two-channel Kondo (2CK) effect including the emergence of an unconventional metallic state in the low-energy limit also originate from strong electron interactions. Despite its paradigmatic role for the formation of non-standard metal behavior, the stringent conditions required for its emergence have made the observation of the nonmagnetic, orbital 2CK effect in real quantum materials difficult, if not impossible. We report the observation of orbital one-and two-channel Kondo physics in the symmetryenforced Dirac nodal line (DNL) metals IrO 2 and RuO 2 nanowires and show that the symmetries that enforce the existence of DNLs also promote the formation of nonmagnetic Kondo correlations. Rutile oxide nanostructures thus form a versatile quantum matter platform to engineer and explore intrinsic, interacting topological states of matter. Unconventional metallic states and the breakdown of the Landau Fermi liquid paradigm is a central topic in contemporary condensed matter science. A connection with high-temperature superconductivity is experimentally well established but the conditions under which these enigmatic metals form has remained perplexing In this work we establish that oxygen vacancies (V O 's) in the Dirac nodal line (DNL) materials IrO 2 and RuO 2 drive an orbital Kondo effect. V O 's are prevalent in transition metal oxides, including, e.g., TiO 2 and SrTiO 3 , and their properties and ramifications have become central research topics as they can lead to an intricate entanglement of spin, orbital, and charge degrees of freedom The rutile structure type possesses mirror reflection, inversion, and a fourfold rotation (C 4 ) symmetry which enforce the presence of DNLs in the band structure of rutile oxides T -dependence of the resistivity ρ(T ) below a low-T energy scale Supplementary Note 3). That is, we are concerned with weakly-disordered, diffusive metals which are three-dimensional (3D) with respect to the Boltzmann transport, whereas strong correlation effect causes a resistivity anomaly at low T . Table Oxygen vacancies in transition metal rutiles M O 2 . In Fig. angle between adjacent octahedra leads to a fourfold screw axis symmetry. This non-symmorphic symmetry not only protects DNLs in IrO 2 against SOC-induced splitting Moreover, the fourfold screw axis symmetry ensures that the C 4 rotation axes centered at the sites M 1 and M 2 near V O1 are not parallel (ẑ ∦ ẑ, see Fig. Experimental signatures of orbital 2CK effect in IrO 2 NWs. Now we turn to our experimental results which, to the best of our knowledge, demonstrate the most convincing realization of the long searched orbital 2CK effect in a solid. Figure the symmetry of the effective potential implies the almost perfect degeneracy of the orbitals d xz and d yz as defined in Fig. This explains the deviations from the √ T behavior observed below ∼ 0.5 K in Fig. Experimental signatures of orbital 1CK effect in RuO 2 NWs. RuO 2 is also a DNL metal with the same non-symmorphic symmetry group as IrO 2 but weaker SOC. In contrast to IrO 2 , it lacks time-reversal symmetry will drive an orbital 1CK effect. This is indeed borne out by our transport data on RuO 2 NWs. Figure As a further demonstration of the B-field independence, we present in Fig. Despite the ubiquitous appearance of magnetic Kondo scattering in real quantum materials We have shown that the low-T resistivity anomaly in the transition metal rutile IrO 2 is caused by V O 's, demonstrating key signatures of an orbital 2CK effect and ruling out alternative explanations due to, e.g., the EEI effect. The most convincing argument in favor of 2CK physics would be the demonstration of direct tunability of 2CK physics to 1CK physics upon breaking the channel degeneracy. This is difficult, as the channel degeneracy is protected by time-reversal symmetry. A perhaps less direct, yet complementary, demonstration of this tunability is provided by our results for RuO 2 NWs which develop an orbital 1CK effect. In RuO 2 , the antiferromagnetic order breaks the channel degeneracy. Our analysis also indicates that the underlying symmetries which support the existence of DNLs in the Brillouin zones of both transition metal rutiles also aid the formation of orbital 2CK and 1CK physics. Materials condensing in the rutile structure type and its derivatives form an abundant and important class that has helped shaping our understanding of correlated matter. The metal-insulator transition in VO 2 , e.g., has been known for 60 years The demonstration that the non-symmorphic rutile space group supports a V O -driven orbital Kondo effect in M O 2 holds promise for the realization of novel states of matter. The potential richness of orbital Kondo physics, e.g., on superconducting pairing, was recently pointed out in Ref. 37 but may be even richer when considering the possibility of its interplay with topological band structures. Specifically, we envision the creation of a 2CK non-symmorphic superlattice of V O 's in IrO 2 where the 2CK Majorana modes entangle with the band structure-enforced Dirac excitations forming a strongly correlated topological non-Fermi liquid state. Understanding its properties will foster deeper insights into the interplay of topology with strong correlations beyond the usual mean field treatment. The theoretical approach to this non-symmorphic superlattice is reminiscent of the topologically garnished strong-coupling fixed-point pioneered in the context of Weyl-Kondo semimetals RuO 2 NWs were grown by the thermal evaporation method based on the vapor-liquid-solid mechanism, with Au nanoparticles as catalyst. A quartz tube was inserted in a furnace. A source material of stoichiometric RuO 2 powder (Aldrich, 99.9%) was placed in the center of the quartz tube and heated to 920-960 • C. During the NW growth, an O 2 gas was introduced into the quartz tube and the chamber was maintained at a constant pressure of ≈ 2 torr. Silicon wafer substrates were loaded at the downstream end of the quartz tube, where the temperature was kept at 450-670 • C (Ref. 55). The morphology and lattice structure of the NWs were studied using XRD and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM). The XRD patterns demonstrated a rutile structure Electrical measurements. Submicron Cr/Au (10/100 nm) electrodes for 4-probe ρ(T ) measurements were fabricated by the standard electron-beam lithography technique. The electrode fabrication was done after the thermal treatment (annealing and/or oxygenation) of each NW was completed. To avoid electron overheating, the condition for equilibrium, eV s k B T , was assured in all resistance measurements NWs B-E), the measurements were performed on an Oxford Heliox 3 He cryostat with a base temperature of 250 mK. The magnetic fields were supplied by superconducting magnets and applied perpendicular to the NW axis in all cases. S. Y. , S. K. and J. J. L. analyzed and explained the data, and wrote the manuscript. The authors declare no competing interests. Correspondence Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Stefan Kirchner (email: stefan.kirchner@correlated-matter.com) or Juhn-Jong Lin (email: jjlin@mail.nctu.edu.tw). Data availability All data collected or analysed during this study is available in the main text or the supplementary information material. Code availability Details on the numerics is available upon request from the authors. ρ(300 K), residual resistivity ρ B0 , and Kondo resistivity in the unitary limit ρ K0 are in μΩ cm, the electron mean free path (10 K) is in nm, the electron diffusion constant D(10 K) is in cm 2 s -1 , the Kondo temperature T K is in K, and the number density of oxygen vacancies n V O is in m -3 . n O denotes the oxygen atom number density in the rutile structure. In all 4-probe configuration for transport measurements, the length between the two voltage probes is ∼ 1 μm. The (10 K) and mensionality of the metal where T 0 is a reference temperature, e is the electronic charge, 2π is the Planck constant, F is the screening factor which parameterizes the degree of screening of the EEI effect, and D is the diffusion constant. Empirically, it has been established that, typically, F 0.1 in weakly disordered metals and alloys T transport anomaly found in IrO 2 NWs. Indeed, the explanation of a √ T resistivity anomaly at low T in terms of a nonmagnetic 2CK effect driven by a dynamical Jahn-Teller effect T nm (where T is in K), justifying that the NW is 3D with regard to the EEI effect. The anomalous resistivities we observe in Figs. Ruling out surface defect scattering scenario. In this work, the low-T resistivity anomaly measured in a given NW is a bulk property of the NW. It originates from the coupling of conduction electrons with those V O 's distributing across the radius of the NW. If the dynamic defect scattering were dominantly taking place near the surface of a NW, one would expect quasi-two-dimensional (quasi-2D), instead of 3D EEI effect to play a role. The resistance increase due to the quasi-2D EEI effect is given by 5, 10 where R is the sheet resistance. For concreteness, assume the thickness of an active surface defect layer, if any exists, to be of the order of the electron mean free path ∼ 3 nm ( L T ). For a residual resistivity ρ B0 ∼ 100 μΩ cm, R = ρ B0 / ∼ 300 Ω. Then, taking F = 0-0.1, Supplementary Eq. ( Other scenarios compatible with power-law in temperature behavior. A characteristic feature of Kondo physics in metals is the increasing scattering rate as T is lowered in contrast to, e.g., phonon scattering. Processes like dynamical Coulomb blockade and Luttinger liquid behavior are also associated with power-law behavior in T . These can be safely ruled out as underlying cause in our IrO 2 and RuO 2 NWs as their diameters are much larger than the electron mean free paths in these systems which renders electron transport 3D. Moreover, dynamical Coulomb blockade requires contacts with small tunneling conductances to observe the resulting power-law behavior in T and bias voltage across the junction. The resulting power-law exponent is given by the resistance in units of the quantum of resistance h/(2e 2 ) (Ref. Here we provide detailed information for the lattice parameters around the oxygen vacancy V O1 depicted in Fig. We refer to the corresponding basis functions as |Γ 2dim 1 and |Γ 2dim 2 which can be taken as the components of a pseudospin variable. For the 5d electrons of IrO 2 (and 4d electrons of RuO 2 ), the C 4ν at M 2 ensures the degeneracy of d xz and d yz , where the symmetry axis is parallel to the ẑ axis. In the rutile structure, the oxygen ions above and below the square centered around M 2, i.e., along the ẑ-axis, are minimally (less than half of their ionic radius) set off from the C 4 rotation axis. A V O thus enhances the symmetry around the M 2 site, see Fig. where |Γ m i denotes the i th basis function of the m th irreducible representation. The pseudospin associated with the two-dimensional representation is locally conserved. In IrO 2 , the valence of Ir is +IV so that the Ir ion at position M 2 results in a [Xe]5d 6 electron configuration. Arguments reminiscent of those used by Cox in the context of UBe 13 yield an effective Kondo model where the role of the nonmagnetic Γ 3 is replaced by the two-dimensional irreducible representation of C 4ν (Ref. where τ d and τ c are vectors of Pauli matrices for d and conduction electrons in orbital space, and J K is a pseudospin exchange coupling constant. The conduction electron spin projection in Supplementary Eq. ( The approximate nature of the almost perfect C 4ν symmetry implies that a low-energy scale exists below which the orbital degeneracy is lifted. We identify this scale with the deviations from the 2CK T behavior observed in IrO 2 NWs around T ∼ 0.5 K, see Fig. an issue for RuO 2 NWs due to the more localized nature of the 4d vs. the 5d orbitals, in line with the experimental observation. In our arguments we focused on the defect electron localizing at site M 2. If the second defect electron localizes at site M 1, one may expect two-impurity Kondo physics to occur. Due to non-symmorphic rutile structure, however, the ẑ axis with respect to which we defined d xz and d yz are not parallel. This fact, together with the local nature of the expansion Supplementary Eq. (3), favors local orbital Kondo screening over an orbital dimer. Dynamical large-N calculations. The T dependence of the transport lifetime τ in our IrO 2 NWs due to orbital 2CK scatterers can be obtained, e.g., via a dynamical large-N approach. We assume that the concentration of V O 's (n V O ) is small enough so that inter-vacancy effects can be ignored. The lifetime τ is related to T -matrix T (ω, T ) via τ (k) -1 = 2 c 2CK Im k|T (ω, T )|k , where c 2CK is the concentration of spherically symmetric dynamic scattering centers, which we identify with n V O , and |k is a plane wave state. T (ω, T ) can be obtained from a dynamical large-N method which is known to give reliable results for multichannel Kondo, including orbital 2CK problems where n f (n B ) is the fermionic (bosonic) distribution function, and A f (A B ) is the spectral function associated with the fermionic pseudoparticle representation (bosonic decoupling field) with A < 0 as shown in Fig. The extraction of the n V O values in our NWs is described below. As discussed, each V O contributes one defect electron to the M 2 (or M 1) ion, causing the orbital Kondo effect. Because IrO 2 NWs manifest the 2CK effect, the ρ ∝ √ T characteristic at low T can be compared with the dynamical large-N calculations (Sec. Supplementary Note 5), which predicts the 2CK resistivity to be ρ 2CK (T ) = m n e e 2 n V O 2Λ a ImT (ω = 0, T ) , where m ∼ 1.6 m 0 is the effective electron mass (m 0 is the free electron mass) As the low-T resistivities of RuO 2 NWs conform to the 1CK scaling form, the ρ K0 value in every NW can be inferred. In this unitary limit, the Kondo resistivity is given by 32 where m ∼ 1.4 m 0 (Ref. ing variation in ρ(E F ) is bigger in RuO 2 than in IrO 2 . The observed bigger variations of T K for different RuO 2 NWs compared to those for IrO 2 NWs are consistent with this picture. V