In this paper we develop a semi-analytical perturbation-theory approach to the calculation of the energy levels (binding energies) and wave functions of excitons in phosphorene. Our method gives both the exciton wave function in real and reciprocal spaces with the same ease. This latter aspect is important for the calculation of the nonlinear optical properties of phosphorene. We find that our results are in agreement with calculations based both on the Bethe-Salpeter equation and on Monte Carlo simulations, which are computationally much more demanding. Our approach thus introduces a simple, viable, and accurate method to address the problem of excitons in anisotropic two-dimensional materials. Although black phosphorus was first obtained in 1914, over a century ago, few research was developed around this material throughout most part of the twentieth century. In 100 years only around one hundred papers have been written Black phosphorus is the most stable of the phosphorus allotropes, and presents a unique structure when reduced to few layers. Along with graphite, it is one of the few-layer materials composed by a single type of atom, in this case, phosphorus Contrary to what occurs in TMD's, phosphorene presents a direct band gap in both monolayer and bulk forms. The values of the quasi-particle gap range from 0.3 eV (in bulk) to 2.0 eV (in monolayer) Like many others 2D materials (graphene being a notable exception), excitons dominate phosphorene's optical properties. Experimental works have reported highly anisotropic and tightly bound excitons, with binding energies up to 900 meV This paper is organized as follows: In the next section we present the model Hamiltonian, and transform it in order to separate our problem in two parts: an unperturbed Hamiltonian, which has cylindrical symmetry, and a perturbation one, which includes the lattice anisotropy information. Next, we introduce a simple semi-analytical method that allows us to solve the cylindrical symmetric part of our problem. In Sec. III we present the necessary formalism to compute the effect of perturbations breaking the cylindrical symmetry. Afterwards, in Sec. IV, we compute the exciton binding energies and wave functions for three different scenarios: phosphorene encapsulated in hBN, phosphorene on a substrate of silicon oxide (SiO 2 ), and phosphorene in freestanding form. Finally we compare our results to values obtained in other works, finding a good agreement. We start this section introducing the effective Hamiltonian that will be used throughout the text to describe the exciton dynamics in black phosphorus; it reads This is a center of mass Hamiltonian, composed of a kinetic (first and second) and potential (last) terms. Since black phosphorus is a highly anisotropic material there are two different reduced masses in the x and y directions, thus leading to two different contributions to the kinetic terms, one for each direction in momentum space. The reduced masses are defined as with m x/y and M x/y being the effective masses of electrons and holes, respectively, in the x/y direction. The potential term V (r) corresponds to the Rytova-Keldysh potential Performing this change of variables, the Hamiltonian (1) acquires the form where the kinetic term has now the usual form, albeit with a different mass, β = (μ y -μ x )/(μ y + μ x ), and θ is the in-plane polar angle. The parameter β characterizes the degree of anisotropy. The larger it is the more anisotropic the system is. The new variable R is defined as We see that this variable change produces the desired effect, that is, the anisotropy is now present in the potential, and the kinetic term takes the usual form of an isotropic center of mass system, with reduced mass equal to 2μm 0 . From now on we will work in this new coordinate system, and only return to the original x and y coordinates when plots are presented and concrete values for averages of distances are computed. To avoid misunderstandings we will warn the reader when confusion may arise. The main advantage of working with the Hamiltonian in this form is two fold: (i) the unperturbed Hamiltonian has cylindrical symmetry and (ii) we can now expand the potential energy term in powers of β, allowing us to separate Eq. ( We can now divide our problem into two different stages: (a) solving the unperturbed problem, whose Hamiltonian consists of the first two terms in Eq. ( In order to solve the unperturbed problem we will introduce a semi-analytical method that has already shown excellent results in a previous work where e imθ r |m| follows from the eigenfunctions of the z-component of the angular momentum and from the radial behavior of the wave function near the origin, for m = 0, ±1, ±2, ..., the magnetic quantum number; the exponential term (Slater basis) e -ζj r describes the decay of the radial part of the wave function far from the origin, with a decay rate determined by the parameter ζ j ; the coefficients c ν j weight the different terms in the sum and A ν is a normalization constant given by with , and where Γ(x) is the Gamma function. The index ν encodes both the principal (n) and the angular (m) quantum numbers. An additional advantage of this method is that the matrix elements of both the kinetic operator and the electron-electron interaction do not mix different m values and, therefore, the eigenvalue problem is block diagonal in the angular momentum space. In this work, and contrary to Ref. Using the proposed wave function and computing the matrix elements of the kinetic and potential operators (see Appendix), the generalized eigenvalue problem, whose numerical solution gives the coefficients c ν j and the unperturbed binding energies where is the superposition kernel. Both kernels have analytical expressions that are given in the Appendix. The superposition kernel differs from a Kronecker-δ since the Slater basis is not orthogonal. Equation ( where the grid Ω is composed of equally spaced values in the interval [Ω min , Ω max ] and A is real number typically chosen between 2 and 5. The interval is divided in N steps. With the unperturbed problem dealt with, we will use this section to present the necessary formalism to compute the corrections introduced by the perturbation that is, the remaining terms of the potential expansion given in Eq. ( Starting with the non-degenerate states (m = 0), the first-order energy correction is elementary and is given by the matrix element (all the matrix elements in this work are known analytically) where the superscript (0) indicates that these are unperturbed wave functions, that is, they are the solution of first two terms of Eq. ( For the degenerate states, the first-order correction is obtained from the solution of the secular equation det H (1) (1) For clarity sake let us work out a specific case that will be used later in the text. Consider the degenerate states (n = 2, m = ±1). The energy corrections will be given simply by where the first term will only produce a finite contribution for the perturbation term proportional to β, and the second term for the term proportional to β 2 . The new eigenstates will be superpositions of the original unperturbed states, that is This superposition of states is to be expected, since m is no longer a suitable quantum number, due to the loss of rotational symmetry in the original problem. To further improve the energy eigenvalues, we compute the second-order correction for the non-degenerate states, only considering the term of H (1) linear in β, since we only want corrections up to β 2 . This correction reads Although the sum should cover all the μ states different from ν, we consider only the dominant term in the sum, that is, that for which the ratio | ν|H (1) |μ | 2 /(E μ ) has the largest absolute value. Therefore, the exact value for the ground state energy will be slightly more negative than what we actually compute. It is important to note that, once again, the angular dependence of the wave functions plays a crucial role in evaluating the matrix elements, since there will be coupling only between μ and ν states whose angular functions combine to give e ±2imθ . Since cosine is an even function, and only the real part of the exponential will couple with cos(2θ), the sign difference in the complex exponential will not change the matrix element value. Having determined the binding energies corrections, we proceed to compute the first-order correction to the wave functions, using the relation where, and once again, we only consider the dominant term in the sum. In this section we apply the formalism introduced previously to three different cases: phosphorene encapsulated in hBN; phosphorene on a substrate of SiO 2 ; and freestanding phosphorene. Due to the similarities between the analysis for these three physical systems, we will give special attention to the case of phosphorene encapsulated in hBN (due to its experimental relevance), and comment on the differences to the other two scenarios. Let us start applying the semi analytical method introduced in Sec. II to black phosphorus encapsulated in hBN. For this experimental scenario we have κ = 4.5, and r 0 = 25 Å Ref. on SiO2 -428 -121 -160 -66 -78 Freestanding -799 -340 -424 -232 -262 Table As discussed previously, we observe that states with m = 0 are degenerate. We also note that, as expected, the binding energies are inferior for the cases with more dielectric screening, that is, higher values of κ (κ = 1 for freestanding and κ = 2.4 for phosphorene on SiO2). Let us stress that the energies given in this table refer to the solution of the Hamiltonian given by the first two terms of Eq. ( For the cases of black phosphorus on a SiO 2 substrate, and for freestanding black phosphorus, we observed larger binding energies (in absolute value) than when we encapsulate the material in hBN. This is a sensible result, since in these two other cases the effect of dielectric screening is reduced and, as a consequence, the excitons are more tightly bound. Freestanding phosphorene presents the largest exciton binding energies of the lot. After computing the unperturbed eigenenergies we proceeded to compute the energy corrections as described in Section III. Calculating the first order corrections to the degenerate and non-degenerate states using equations ( The values we obtained for the corrected ground state binding energy and their comparison to other results from the literature are summarized in Table In Figure Ref. Ref. Ref. Ref. [13] --380 - Ref. Ref. Ref. [17]* ---900±120 Ref. [32] ---740 Ref. [18] ---840 Ref. [33] ---780 Ref. [34] ---860 Ref. Table extremely similar to these ones, the only difference being the the smaller area across which the probability density extends, since the higher binding energy in these other two scenarios leads to more localized wave functions. Plotting these functions we have returned to the original x and y coordinates through the relation given in Eq. ( Finally we compute the mean value of x 2 and y 2 in the corrected exciton ground state. Although this may be a straightforward process, one aspect should be noted: when evaluating the matrix elements one should only consider the contributions up to β 2 , since otherwise one would be inconsistent with the potential expansion made , and 2s exciton states of phosphorene encapsulated in hBN. These three states correspond to the three more tightly bound excitons. These plots emphasizes the effect of the phosphorene anisotropic crystallographic structure on its excitons. When dealing with isotropic systems, such as the 2D hydrogen atom, the 1s orbital presents a circular shape. This is not the case in phosphorene, where we see that for the 1s state, what was once a circle, is now a disk stretched along the x direction. The same reasoning applies to the other two plots. in the beginning of the text. The values we found for L x = x 2 gs and L y = y 2 gs for the three considered cases are presented in Table The perturbed binding energies of the three mostly bounded excitons are given in Table In this work we have studied excitons in phosphorene in three different scenarios: encapsulated in hBN, on a substrate of SiO 2 , and freestanding. Our approach to this problem hinges on a change of variable proposed by Rodin et al. in Ref. In possession of an analytical formula for the excitonic wave function, we computed the exciton binding energies in three different scenarios, having obtained -234, -428 and -799 meV for the ground state binding energy of phosphorene encapsulated in hBN, phosphorene on a SiO 2 substrate, and freestanding phosphorene, respectively. These values are in agreement with (within the same range) the values presented in other works using different numerical approaches. In all the considered cases the three more tightly bound excitons corresponded to 1s, 2p y , and 2s states. We then plotted the probability density for different exciton states and, although not shown, we could have done the same in the reciprocal space, since the semi-analytical nature of our approach allows to pass between the real and reciprocal spaces with ease. We have also computed the characteristic length scales for the exciton ground state, having obtained L x = 1.1 nm and L y = 0.53 nm for freestanding phosphorene, and higher values for the other two studied cases. The difference between L x and L y reflects the crystal anisotropy that characterizes this 2D material. Finally we note that the method can be generalized to include the effect of electric (Stark effect 