Atomically thin transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have distinct optoelectronic properties including enhanced luminescence and high on-off current ratios, which can be further modulated by making more complex TMD heterostructures. However, resolution limits of conventional optical methods do not allow for direct nanoscale optical-structural correlation measurements in these materials, particularly of buried interfaces in TMD heterostructures. Here we use, for the first time, electron beam induced cathodoluminescence in a scanning transmission electron microscope (CL-STEM) to measure optical properties of monolayer TMDs (WS2, MoS2 and WSSe alloy) encapsulated between layers of hBN. We observe dark areas resulting from localized (~ 100 nm) imperfect interfaces and monolayer folding, which shows that the intimate contact between layers in this application-relevant heterostructure is required for proper inter layer coupling. We also realize a suitable imaging method that minimizes electron-beam induced changes and provides measurement of intrinsic properties. To overcome the limitation of small electron interaction volume in TMD monolayer (and hence low photon yield), we find that encapsulation of TMD monolayers with hBN and subsequent annealing is important. CL-STEM offers to be a powerful method to directly measure structure-optical correspondence in lateral or vertical heterostructures and alloys. KEYWORDS: cathodoluminescence, two dimensional materials, transition metal dichalcogenides, interfaces, heterostructures. TEXT: Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) in the monolayer limit show unique optical properties including enhanced photoluminescence (PL) and spin-valley coupling Multi-phase materials have been synthesized as well as mechanically stacked, with the interface quality and dielectric environment emerging as important characteristics to control layer coupling and opto-electronic properties Encapsulation between layers of a dielectric has shown to be important in measuring and controlling intrinsic opto-electronic properties of TMDs and other two-dimensional materials Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) has been used extensively to investigate structure of multi-phase TMDs occurring naturally or grown by synthetic processes However, all of these measurements have relied on SEM, which offers limited spatial resolution compared to scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) due to beam broadening and larger probe sizes, and limited compositional contrast due to reliance on secondary electrons (see electronic supplementary material (ESM) and refs In this work, we demonstrate quantitative CL-STEM on mechanically exfoliated monolayers of TMDs enabled by encapsulation of a single TMD layer in hBN, which we apply to study effects of interface quality on opto-electronic properties. The hBN encapsulation enhances CL yield by increasing electron beam interaction volume, and reduces electron beam induced damage We first focus on tungsten disulfide (WS2) because of its high excitonic quantum efficiency at room temperature To demonstrate feasibility of CL-STEM studies on single layer TMDs, we first started with exfoliated single layers of WS2. Details of the experimental procedure are provided in the ESM; in short, the active material, monolayer WS2, was first exfoliated from bulk crystals using the wellestablished scotch-tape method White light bright field image of the heterostructure transferred to a TEM grid (Figure To achieve direct structure-property correlation with high spatial resolution, we next simultaneously collected STEM and CL images (Figure Briefly, a focused electron beam (~ 1 nm) was incident on the heterostructure, generating electron hole pairs that, due to type 1 band-gap alignment, are funneled from hBN layers into the active TMD material (inset of Figure A representative CL spectrum is shown in the inset of Figure We note that hBN layers not in direct contact with the monolayer WS2 also display signal in the monochromatic CL image. To distinguish between these hBN and encapsulated monolayer WS2 areas, monochromatic maps corresponding to the WS2 exciton resonance at 616 nm as well as a non-resonant wavelength at 550 nm were taken sequentially (Figures On the other hand, emission at 616 nm has contributions from the same physical phenomena (which contribute to emission at 550 nm), and additionally from the comparatively narrow WS2 exciton emission. Thus, a visual comparison of monochromatic images at 550 and 616 nm illustrates positions at which the sandwiched WS2 monolayer luminesces. To further visually isolate the WS2 monolayer region and emphasize features due only to WS2, in Figure We next comment on the spatial resolution of CL-STEM in assessing the interlayer coupling. The high spatial resolution of the measurement is exemplified by a CL image (Figure We find that CL-STEM offers higher spatial resolution, and direct structure-optical correspondence. We note that understanding of the CL resolution also enabled us to distinguish between (multi)layer folding and termination edges, from which we show that folding has longerrange effects on the interlayer coupling (see ESM, Figure The self-limiting electron beam induced damage is suggested to be a result of direct knock-on at a small area, whereas the luminescence is expected to result from a larger area due to lateral diffusion of carriers in surrounding hBN layers. Although damage can occur in surrounding hBN layers In conclusion, we have utilized CL-STEM to measure nanoscale heterogeneities in monolayer TMDs (WS2, MoS2, WSSe) encapsulated in dielectric layers (hBN). We directly measured the effect of an imperfect interface -resulting from contaminants and layer folding -on the luminescence, resulting in the first direct nanoscale optical-structural characterization of the interface. As these nanoscale inhomogeneities are a general feature of single phase and multiphase heterostructures, it is important to understand their role for enabling higher quality optoelectronic devices. Further, we observed that even excitation by high energy electrons (80 kV) in a TEM primarily results in ground state exciton CL, allowing direct comparison with PL measurements, but with higher spatial resolution. We quantified the effect of electron beam irradiation on the CL magnitude, and demonstrated a suitable imaging condition with reduced damage to the sample. These first CL-STEM measurements on monolayer TMDs should pave the way forward for further direct nanoscale structure-optical measurements in application relevant multi-phase materials. By enhancing signal to noise by using thicker hBN and improved detectors, direct defect mapping may be possible in future measurements. sample, with the contrast directly proportional to mass (or thickness). The incident electron beam current is ~ 1 nA, and the convergence angle is ~ 3 mrad. The WS2 layer is sandwiched between two thick layers (> 20 nm) of hBN. Electron-hole pairs are generated in hBN and monolayer WS2, with the number of generated electron-hole pairs approximately proportional to the layer thickness. hBN has a bandgap of ~ 6 eV and WS2 has a bandgap of ~ 2.3 eV, and together they form type 1 band alignment. Hence, most of electron-beam generated electrons and holes diffuse into the WS2 layer before recombining (see Figure To prepare the hBN-encapsulated WS2 heterostructure, we utilize a modified dry transfer method (Figure Plasma treatment improves adhesion of PPC onto PDMS and reduces de-wetting. The PPC-PDMS mask is heat-treated at 160° C for ~ 10 min to remove the solvent. This mask is mounted upside down on a transfer arm, and used to perform the transfer using a modified process from Ref Briefly we describe the procedure below, 1. The PPC-PDMS mask contacts the top hBN (kept on a SiO2/Si substrate) at ~ 50° C, then temperature is increased to ~ 70° C (held for ~ 1 min), and then decreased to 50° C (held for ~ 1 min). By moving the mask away from the substrate, hBN is picked up. 2. The top hBN is dropped onto monolayer WS2 by contacting the hBN-PPC-PDMS mask to the WS2 at ~ 75° C, and then moving slowly away from the substrate. After the top hBN drops on WS2, we heat treat the substrate at 75° C for ~ 5 min to improve adhesion between WS2 and top hBN. Monolayer WS2 is identified by optical contrast, and confirmed by PL measurements. The PL measurements are performed by using a green laser (532 nm) focused with a 20 or a 60 microscope objective, ~ 20 μm spot size, and power ~ 4 mW. The PL signal is sent to the spectrometer via a long-pass filter (to filter excitation laser). After carefully eliminating contributions from scattered laser and room light, we use the spectrometer in non-dispersive mode to measure a luminescence image (as seen in Figure To show the background (from hBN, as explained in main text) and excitonic contributions (WS2 A-exciton) to CL spectrum, we show spectrum from position B (indicated in Figure As mentioned in the main text, the damage from the electron beam is minimal when monochromatic images are taken. Here we show sequential monochromatic images (256×256 pixels, 0.7 ms per pixel), which show almost no change in the CL signal. As we have mentioned in the manuscript, without the hBN encapsulation, negligible CL is measured for any sample. Further, the lack of luminescence in the area of imperfect interfaces illustrates the effect of improper hBN encapsulation. As an example experiment, we show CL in a bare (not encapsulated) monolayer WS2. In the CL image, the monolayer area is barely distinguishable from the TEM grid and background noise. The mechanism of the enhancement is detailed in the manuscript and is due to higher number of beam-induced carriers in thicker encapsulated samples that subsequently recombine in a TMD monolayer. Another important aspect of sample preparation is annealing of the heterostructure. Our process involves first annealing the heterostructure sample, and then transfer to TEM grid. This order preserves the integrity of the carbon on the TEM grid. However, as proof of concept, we show CL-SEM before annealing on a heterostructure sample. For comparison, another sample after annealing is also shown. These samples are representative of the effects of annealing on a large (>10) number of samples. Due to higher electron energy in (S)TEM compared to SEM, interaction volume is reduced, as illustrated by Monte-Carlo simulations (Figure 