The one-dimensional cobaltate Ca3Co2O6 is an intriguing material having an unconventional magnetic structure, displaying quantum tunneling phenomena in its magnetization. Using a newly developed experimental method, s-core-level non-resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (s-NIXS), we were able to image the atomic Co 3d orbital that is responsible for the Ising magnetism in this system. We show that we can directly observe that it is the complex d2 orbital occupied by the sixth electron at the high-spin Co 3+ trig (d 6 ) sites that generates this behavior. This is extremely rare in the research field of transition metal compounds, and is only made possible by the delicately balanced prismatic trigonal coordination. The ability to directly relate the orbital occupation with the local crystal structure is essential to model the magnetic properties of this system. Since its crystal structure was fully determined in 1996 1 , Ca 3 Co 2 O 6 has garnered a large degree of attention due to its special atomic arrangements and peculiar magnetic properties. The discovery of stair-step jumps in the magnetization at regular intervals with an increasing applied field strength However, the origin or character of the presumed Ising magnetism is the subject of much discussion. To resolve this, one actually has to also simultaneously address the issue of the charge states of each of the two Co sites, as well as their spin-states Herein, we make use of 3s core level non-resonant inelastic scattering (NIXS) to determine the orbital occupation of the cobalt 3d ions. As has recently been shown, the angular dependence of the NIXS integrated intensity of the 3s → 3d transition can directly map out the shape of the local orbital hole density of an ion in its ground state, without the need to do any calculational modelling of the spectral line shapes Our experimental setup is illustrated in Ref. 24 and a general description of the inelastic x-ray scattering method is given in Ref. 25 with momentum transfer q = k i -k f and energy transfer hω = hω i -hω f , where k i,f and hω i,f denote the momentum and energy of the incoming and scattered photons, respectively (see Methods). We recorded the scattered beam as a function of the sample angle φ, here defined as the angle between the fixed momentum transfer vector q and the c-axis of the crystal. A collection of NIXS spectra measured at various sample angles is displayed in Fig. The spectra in Fig. to demonstrate that we can discern three peaks, one at 100.7 eV, one at 104.2 eV, and one in-between at 102.1 eV. Once given our final results, one will see that there is good a posteriori justification for the presence of these three peaks, and the electron configurations in Fig. To quantitatively analyze the spectra of Fig. To properly appreciate the intensity variations in the spectra one must map them to a polar plot. This is shown in Fig. To interpret the four-lobe shape of the 104.2 eV polar plot (Fig. What follows, is that due to (1), the experimental cut is a sum of a slice through the large e g lobes of one site, plus the large e g lobes of the other site. These two octahedral sites, along with the plane of the cut taken in the experiment are illustrated by the two lower 3D blueyellow shapes in Fig. The near perfect agreement between the experimental data points and the calculated curve establishes that the ansatz is correct, i.e. that the Co oct ions are 3+ and LS, which suggests that the magnetism must originate from the trigonal site. We now focus our attention on the remaining intensity not yet accounted for, that is, the 100.7 eV and 102.1 eV peaks of Fig. To understand the meaning of this shape, consider first a high-spin (HS) 3d 5 ion. Its hole density will be spherical since it is a half-filled shell system, where each of the five d-orbitals contains one electron. To represent this situation in the [001] to [110] plane of our experiment, we have added a pink circle to Figure Only now are we in a position to recognize that this is a cut through the [001] to [110] plane of the donut-like d 2 orbital, where the d m notation refers to the complex spherical harmonics Y m 2 . The expected shape of the cross-sectional cut through the d 2 orbital is shown as a grey solid line, which agrees very well with our experimental data points. To assist in visualizing the experimental cut through the total electron/hole density, we have plotted the 3D theoretical shapes (green-red shapes) of the corresponding cuts taken in the experiment (Fig. To corroborate this description, and to verify that it is indeed the d 2 orbital that is occupied by the sixth electron, we have also obtained experimental spectra in the [100] to [010] plane (perpendicular to the Co-Co chains). The Co trig site electron density cut in the XY-plane. The experimental/theoretical electron density (red/grey) was obtained by subtracting the experimentally/theoretically determined hole density (green/black) from a reference d 5 circular (spherical in 3D) hole density (pink), which is of the same radius as in Fig. Shown in Fig. We would like to note that by using the HS 3d 5 sphere as reference, one may infer that we have effectively assumed that the 3d 6 configuration of the Co trig is in the HS state. However, such an assumption is justifiable since the total effective magnetic moment (μ 2 ef f = 37 μ 2 B /f.u. Our finding that the d 2 orbital is occupied by the minority electron of the HS Co trig naturally explains the Ising character of the material, since this d 2 orbital carries a large orbital moment of 2 μ B , and consequently generates a huge magneto-crystalline anisotropy, thereby determining the easy magnetization axis, and freezing it in the z-direction, i.e. along the Co-Co chain. Evidently, it is the d 2 orbital that is stabilized as the lowest energy orbital by the crystal field that arises due to the trigonal prismatic coordination. A closer look reveals that this is in fact not trivial. Past crystal field analyses based on band structure calculations show that the d 0 , d 2 , and d -2 orbitals are close in energy, but are well separated from the d 1 , and d -1 orbitals, as shown in Fig. We are now able to retrospectively justify the identification and use of the three peaks in our experimental spectra required for producing the polar plots. First, we conclusively showed that the Co oct sites are in a 3+ LS state, where the six-fold degenerate t 2g shell is completely filled, and the four-fold degenerate e g shell is completely empty (Fig. Utilizing the substantial intensity of the dipole forbidden transitions available with s-NIXS, we are able to, in a straightforward fashion, observe the electron orbitals that are active in Ca 3 Co 2 O 6 . Knowledge of these orbitals is necessary for theoretical models to more reliably calculate the various inter-site exchange interactions, and in turn to quantitatively model the magnetic structure, including the intriguing magnetization tunneling phenomena. This should also help in explaining the large and positive Seebeck coefficient reported for Ca 3 Co 2 O 6 single crystals The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon request. other hand, what does vary is the experimental intensity of the Compton scattering, as this is dependent on the paths the x-rays take when entering and when scattered out of the sample. That is, the incidence angle of the x-rays relative to the sample surface varies as the sample is rotated, and therefore also the interaction depth of the x-rays and the sample. However, because the theoretical Compton scattering intensity is only proportional to the total electron density in the sample-and not the scattering geometry relative to the sample surface-we should expect that this remains constant through the experiment. Therefore, the spectra in Fig. 