The proper design principles are essential for the efficient development of superionic conductors. However, the existing design principles are mainly proposed from the perspective of crystal structures. In this work, the face-centered cubic (fcc) anion frameworks were creatively constructed to study the effects of anion charge and lattice volume on the stability of lithium ion occupation and lithium ion migration. Both the large negative anion charges and large lattice volumes would increase the relative stabilities of lithium-anion tetrahedron, and make Li ions prefer to occupy the tetrahedral sites. For a tetrahedral Li ion migration to its adjacent tetrahedral site through an octahedral transition state, the smaller the negative anion charge is, the lower the lithium ion migration barrier will be. While for an octahedral Li ion migration to its adjacent octahedral site through a tetrahedral transition state, the larger negative anion charge is, the lower the lithium ion migration barrier will be. New design principles for developing superionic conductors with the fcc anion framework were proposed. Low Li ion migration barriers would be achieved by adjusting the non-lithium elements within the same crystal structure framework to obtain the desired electronegativity difference between the anion element and non-lithium cation element. Safety is the most important concern when using the commercial lithium ion batteries (LIBs) in the application scenarios of the large-scale energy storage, such as electric vehicles. Replacing the currently employed flammable liquid electrolytes in LIBs with the solid-state electrolyte (SSE) materials and collocating with the Li metal anodes to construct the all-solid-state lithium ion batteries (ASSLIBs) not only could solve the battery safety issues, but also remarkably enhance the energy density of battery systems To efficiently develop more advanced superionic conductors for ASSLIBs, the better understanding of fast ion migration mechanism in the state-of-the-art superionic conductors and the development of proper design principles are quite essential. Ceder et. al. have proposed an important design principle for superionic conductors that the body-centred cubic (bcc) anion framework with face-sharing lithiumanion tetrahedra allows the low activation energy of Li ion migration However, the existing design principles of the face-sharing lithium-anion tetrahedron and frustrated energy landscape are mainly proposed from the perspective of crystal structure without the considerations of other factors, e.g. binding strength between the migrating Li ion and its adjacent anions, and the polarizability of anion Tet-Oct-Tet pathway This work is based on the density functional theory (DFT) calculations performed by using the Vienna ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) software. The interaction between ion cores and valence electrons described by the projector augmented wave (PAW) method The topologies of the close-packed anions of the common lithium ionic conductor materials can be approximately classified into the fcc, body-centered cubic (bcc) and hexagonal close-packed (hcp) frameworks or Oct-Tet-Oct hoppings. Considering the fcc and hcp anion frameworks are much more common than bcc anion arrangement (Figure First, we have calculated the anion Bader charges and lattice volumes of some stable lithium oxides and sulfides from the MP database, to determine the reasonable value ranges of anion charge and lattice volume, as listed in Table The energy barrier and jump distance for Li ion migration are determined by the total energy landscape of Li. The total energy landscape of Li ion in an ionic solid depends on the electrostatic interaction between Li ion and other ions, which can be further divided into a short-range Li-anion attractive interaction and a longer-range Li-cation repulsive interaction Combining the anion framework model (heat maps in Figure Li-cation interactions and distorted anion frameworks of some real lithium compounds resulting in different total energy landscapes than those set by our orderly anion framework model. It's worth noting that most of these NEB calculated E m are path and migration mechanism dependent, which are not considered in our anion framework model. In addition, even for LiCoO 2 , LiMn 2 O 4 and LiTiS 2 with only a specific Li ion migration path, we find that different researchers get quite different NEB results (Table Additionally, it can be seen from Figure with the AFLOW database without extra DFT calculations. The Similar effect can be also found in Li 10 MP 2 S 12 (M = Ge and Sn) materials with tetrahedral Li occupations. The higher electronegativity of Ge vs. Sn (2.0 vs 1.7 In a ternary, quaternary and even more polynary alkali metal compounds, the anion charges are usually affected by the electronegativity of the non-alkali metal elements, as confirmed by some previous work Li octahedral occupations In summary, the fcc anion framework model show that anion charge and lattice volume significantly affect lithium ion occupation and ion migration, which is confirmed by many reported materials. Both the larger negative anion charges and large lattice volumes would enhance the relative stabilities of the tetrahedral Li occupation. For tetrahedral Li ion migration along the Tet-Oct-Tet pathways through an Oct transition state, the smaller negative anion charge is, the lower the lithium ion migration barrier is. While for octahedral Li ion migration along the Oct-Tet-Oct pathways through a Tet transition state, the larger negative anion charge is, the lower the lithium ion migration barrier is. Our anion framework model can be used for screening lithium superionic conductors with the fcc anion frameworks. Most importantly, new design principles for developing advanced superionic conductors with the fcc anion frameworks were proposed. Adjusting the non-mobile cation element within the same crystal structure framework to obtain the desired electronegativity differences between the anion element and non-mobile cation element, eventually achieving low E m for ion migration. or T:4 is also labeled as "other" type. The analyses of lithium coordination environment were performed by the ChemEnv code Table Compounds E m (Model predicted) E m (NEB calculations) E m (AIMD simulations) Comments LiCoO 2 0.82 0.67 addition, the larger negative O anion charges would lower the relative energies of LiO 4 , and hence reduce the corresponding E m for Li ion migration in these O anion frameworks with smaller O lattice volumes (