Femtosecond laser pulses can induce ultrafast demagnetization as well as generate bursts of hot electron spin currents. In trilayer spin valves consisting of two metallic ferromagnetic layers separated by a nonmagnetic one, hot electron spin currents excited by an ultrashort laser pulse propagate from the first ferromagnetic layer through the spacer reaching the second magnetic layer. When the magnetizations of the two magnetic layers are noncollinear, this spin current exerts a torque on magnetic moments in the second ferromagnet. Since this torque is acting only within the subps timescale, it excites coherent high-frequency magnons as recently demonstrated in experiments. Here, we calculate the temporal shape of the hot electron spin currents using the superdiffusive transport model and simulate the response of the magnetic system to the resulting ultrashort spintransfer torque pulse by means of atomistic spin-dynamics simulations. Our results confirm that the acting spin-current pulse is short enough to excite magnons with frequencies beyond 1 THz, a frequency range out of reach for current induced spin-transfer torques. We demonstrate the formation of thickness dependent standing spin waves during the first picoseconds after laser excitation. In addition, we vary the penetration depth of the spin-transfer torque to reveal its influence on the excited magnons. Our simulations clearly show a suppression effect of magnons with short wavelengths already for penetration depths in the range of 1 nm confirming experimental findings reporting penetration depths below 2 nm. The first experimental observation of ultrafast demagnetization due to femtosecond laser excitation in nickel were reported more than twenty years ago Spin and energy resolved transport of laser-excited hot electrons can be described by the model of superdiffusive transport introduced by Battiato et al. Here, we present a theoretical study combining the superdiffusive spin-transport and atomistic spin-dynamics simulations This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we introduce the methods we have used. We outline both the basic approach to spin-torque calculation as well as atomistic spin-dynamics simulations. In Section III we present a description and discussion of our results. Finally, we conclude in Sec. IV. In our calculations, we assume a spin-valve type magnetic trilayer of a structure FM1(d 1 )|NM(d)|FM2(d 2 ), where FM1 and FM2 are metallic ferromagnetic layers and NM is a metallic nonmagnetic spacer. The setup is illustrated in Figure The main input parameters of the model are energy and spin dependent electron velocities and life times, which are obtained from ab initio calculations on each energy level. Moreover, the same amount of electrons is populated in both spin channels. The initial time dependence of the hot electron distribution is given by the temporal shape of the laser pulse. We consider a Gaussian-shaped laser pulse, which dictates the time-dependent number of electrons on each energy level, , in spin channel, σ ∈ {↑, ↓}, being evolved as where Nσ ( , z) is the average number of excited electrons at energy level with spin σ at position z. Moreover, t 0 stands for the time-zero position of the pulse peak while ∆ is the pulse width. Here we have assumed ∆ = 40 fs. In order to assume a finite penetration width of the laser, , we assume that the average number of excited electrons exponentially decreases with the distance from the left interface of FM1 layer located at z = 0 where N0 = N (0, ) is the same for all energy levels, = i . In our calculations we have used N0 = 0.1 electrons per level, corresponding to a laser fluence F = 27.5 mJ • cm -2 for Fe. The laser penetration depth is assumed to be = 15 nm in all layers. Moreover, the model assumes both gradual relaxation of high energy electrons toward lower energy levels as well as generation of higher order electrons due to elastic scattering of itinerant electrons on atoms. Importantly, we consider the FM2 magnetization being perpendicular to the one of FM1. Furthermore, we suppose that the spin current generated and polarized by FM1 layer is entirely absorbed by the FM2 layer and thus completely transformed into spin-transfer torque. This gives rise to a damping-like spin-torque term exerted on magnetic moments. For more details on the spin-torque calculation methodology, see Ref. For our spin-dynamics simulations we consider a thin iron layer with a bcc lattice. To describe the resulting dynamics we solve the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation numerically for the (normalized) magnetic moments m i of each atom in the iron layer at lattice position i. The equation consists of a precessional term of the normalized magnetic moment m i = M i /μ s around its effective field H i and a phenomenlogical relaxation term with damping constant α The exchange interaction between the magnetic moments at lattice nodes i and j in iron can alternate in sign depending on the distance of the two magnetic moment to each other leading to frustration effects. The values of the exchange interactions and details of their calculation can be find in Appendix A. The exchange interaction in metals like iron is long range. In our numerical simulations, we include exchange interactions up to the 6th neighboring shell, which corresponds to the distance of 2a, where a is the lattice constant. Note, that exchange interactions at higher neighbors might be still relevant and affect the dispersion relation and the effective spin wave stiffness. However, this will only cause a minor shift of the frequencies of the standing waves, but it will not further have an effect on the results. Due to the small thickness of the second ferromagnet, the demagnetization field due to the dipolar interaction of the magnetic moments causes a shape anisotropy which aligns the magnetic moment perpendicular to the z-direction and therefore, perpendicular to the first magnetic layer. We consider a uniaxial anisotropy with a hard axis in z direction and an anisotropy constant of k z = -0.267 meV. Furthermore, we consider a magnetic anisotropy aligning the magnetic moments in x direction with an anisotropy constant of k x = 0.00697 meV. Both values are taken from experiments by Razdolski et al. The magnetic system is excited by femtosecond STT, which has been determined as described in the previous section. In the following, we use the same STT in all performed simulations, but we couple the STT in two different ways to the magnetic system. In our first calculations, we consider that the spin current j s per atom is completely absorbed by the first magnetic plane, where z = 0 corresponds to the interface with the normal metal. In further calculations, we assume spincurrent absorption within a characteristic penetration depth λ STT We perform atomistic spin-dynamics simulations by numerically integration of the LLG equation using the Heun method To start with, we consider a femtosecond STT which is absorbed completely at the interface of the second ferromagnetic layer and we use a thickness of d 2 = 25 a = 7.2 nm of the second ferromagnet. Using the atomistic spin-dynamics simulations we study the resulting magnetization dynamics during the first 100 ps. The ultrafast STT excites magnetization dynamics leading to the creation of high-frequency magnons which propagate through the second magnetic layer and can be reflected multiple times before decaying. In Figure We find furthermore that standing waves are formed due to the small thickness of the ferromagnet. Only magnons with wavelengths fitting into the system dimensions remain after a few picoseconds (see below). For a further analysis, we study the time-evolution of the averaged magnetization of the last layer, m(z = d 2 ) and perform a Fourier transformation in the time domain to determine the appearing frequencies. The magnetization components as a function of time are shown in the upper panel of Figure In the lower panel of Figure Standing spin waves are formed if the thickness of the system is a multiple of the wavelength and the wavevector q z is given by: where d 2 is the thickness of the second ferromagnet as introduced before and n = 0, 1, 2, . . . denote the mode. To obtain the corresponding frequencies, we determine the dispersion relation of the magnons analytically. For that purpose we consider the linearized LLG equation without damping and solve it analytically as described in Ref. where J eff (q) denotes the total contribution of exchange interaction and is given by where J k is the exchange interaction with the k-th neighbor, N k is the number of k-th neighbors and θ k are the distance vectors between the magnetic moment and the considered neighbor. We consider only spin-wave propagation in z-direction with q = q z ẑ and simplify the expression by approximating cos x ≈ 1 -(1/2) x 2 -(1/24) x 4 . We can then obtain a simplified expression for the exchange interaction with Making this approximation, we obtain for the effective exchange constants J eff,1 = 5.60 meV and J eff,2 = 1.42 meV. Note that especially the value J eff,1 is much smaller than the nearest neighbor exchange interaction. In Figure of J fit-q 2 eff,1 = 7.90 meV. The fitting curve can describe overall the numerical results, but clear deviations occur. The obtained fitting parameter strongly deviates from the analytical model, demonstrating the importance of the higher order corrections. A fit including the q 4 -term shows small deviations at higher frequencies above 5 THz. In order to describe the dispersion relation with a high precision, we also fit the dispersion relation and obtain small corrections for J eff,1 and J eff,2 . The fitted values are J fit eff,1 = 5.72 meV and J fit eff,2 = 1.14 meV. With this analytical model, we predict the spin-wave peak positions using the conditions for standing waves given by equation To provide a more realistic description of the spin dynamics, we now consider a finite penetration depth of the transverse spin. Large penetration depths suppress high frequency magnons and therefore, recent experiments investigated the maximum frequencies that can be excited to determine the upper bound of the penetration depth. Here, we will explore the modifications of the frequencydependent amplitudes of the excited magnons due to a finite penetration depth. We perform simulations assuming an STT that enters the film with a characteristic penetration depth as described by equation The resulting spin-wave amplitudes as a function of the frequency for different penetration depths are shown in Figure As next step, we investigate the temporal evolution of the excited magnon spectra. Instead of calculating a Fourier transformation in the time-domain, we perform a Fourier transformation now in the space domain and obtain the amplitudes as a function of the wavevector of the modes. The results are shown in Figure As last step, we want to compare our observation to the lifetimes of the frequencies due to Gilbert damping. To describe the frequency dependent lifetimes due to Gilbert damping in the magnetic layer, we consider again the linearized LLG equations, but now we include also the damping contributions. We solve the coupled set of equation considering plane waves as solution of the system. The imaginary part of the eigenvalue corresponds to the frequency of the system and the real value is linked to the frequency-dependent lifetime of the spin waves. Note that the damping term also modifies the frequency of the magnons, which however only becomes relevant for larger damping values. The corrected frequency ω is then given by: hω = (hω) 2 The lifetime τ of the spin waves due to Gilbert damping describes an exponential decay of the modes after excitation and is strongly frequency dependent. We obtain for the wavevector dependent lifetime: The resulting lifetime as function of the frequency is shown in Figure spin waves with higher frequencies have a much lower lifetime than the ones with lower frequencies, our numerical results indicate an even faster decay of these highfrequency modes. This indicates that nonlinear processes occur and magnon-magnon interaction leads to a stronger decay of the modes with higher frequencies. To summarize, we have studied theoretically the laserinduced excitation of THz magnons in Fe|Cu|Fe trilayer structures with two ferromagnetic materials having perpendicular magnetization orientations. We use a theoretical model to describe superdiffusive hot electron transport leading to ultrafast spin-current transfer. This spin-current bursts excite THz magnons in the adjacent second ferromagnet via an ultrafast spin-transfer torque. We combine our model with atomistic spindynamics simulations including exchange interactions beyond nearest neighbor interactions to describe the magnetization dynamics in the second ferromagnet on the atomic scale. In this way, we demonstrate the excitation of THz magnons and the formation of standing spin waves within the first picoseconds, as well as the larger lifetimes of the lowest frequency modes in good agreement with experimental observations. We analyze how the magnonic distribution depends on the penetration depth of the spin-transfer torque and we find a complete suppression of magnons with wavelength λ ≤ 2λ STT . The decrease of magnon mode population with frequency (studied within the first 100 ps) is apparently significantly faster for longer penetration depths. We confirm that STT penetration depth has to be smaller than 1 nm in order to achieve a significant occupation of the 4th magnon mode, as observed experimentally Our results demonstrate that laser-induced hot electron spin currents offer a new pathway to excite highfrequency magnons in the THz regime, which allows for new design concepts for ultrafast spintronics and highfrequency magnonics applications. The developed theory can be used to tailor the trilayer composition so that the desired magnonic contribution is enhanced.