The structural and nanochemical properties of thin AlOx layers are decisive for the performance of advanced electronic devices. For example, they are frequently used as tunnel barriers in Josephson junction-based superconducting devices. However, systematic studies of the influence of oxidation parameters on structural and nanochemical properties are rare up to now, as most studies focus on the electrical properties of AlOx layers. This study aims to close this gap by applying transmission electron microscopy in combination with electron energy loss spectroscopy to analyze the structural and nanochemical properties of differently fabricated AlOx layers and correlate them with fabrication parameters. With respect to the application of AlOx as tunnel barrier in superconducting Josephson junctions, Al/AlOx/Al-layer systems were deposited on Si substrates. We will show that the oxygen content and structure of amorphous AlOx layers is strongly dependent on the fabrication process and oxidation parameters. Dynamic and static oxidation of Al yields oxygen-deficient amorphous AlOx layers, where the oxygen content ranges from x = 0.5 to x = 1.3 depending on oxygen pressure and substrate temperature. Thicker layers of stoichiometric crystalline -Al2O3 layers were grown by electron-beam evaporation of Al2O3 and reactive sputter deposition. Aluminum oxide (AlOx) layers are important components of several state-of-the-art electronic devices and decisive for their electronic properties. Thin AlOx-tunnel barriers with a thickness of ~2 nm are widely used in Al/AlOx/Al-based Josephson junctions (JJs) for superconducting electronic devices like superconducting quantum bits, single-electron transistors, single-photon detectors, radiation detectors and superconducting quantum interference devices in magnetometers Amorphous AlOx layers are fabricated by static or dynamic oxidation of electron-beam evaporated Al layers in deposition systems with a base pressure in the high-vacuum (HV) regime. Static oxidation is performed with a fixed O2-partial pressure whereas a constant O2 flow is used under dynamic oxidation conditions. The oxidation process is a self-limiting process with fast oxidation during the initial stage, followed by saturation of oxide-layer growth and decreasing oxidation rate towards zero which can be described by the Cabrera-Mott model Numerous studies were performed to correlate oxidation conditions and critical current in JJs. Specifically, the influence of temperature To obtain information on the properties of the amorphous AlOx layers on the nanoscale, this work is concerned with the correlation of the AlOx-oxidation conditions with the structural and nanochemical AlOx properties investigated by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) combined with electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS).We have investigated in particular the oxygen concentration and potential conditions that can lead to crystalline Al2O3. The latter goal is motivated by the observation that quantum bits containing an epitaxially grown crystalline Al2O3 tunnel barrier show a reduced density of two-level systems Our previous work on the optimization of Al/AlOx/Al-layer systems for JJs has demonstrated that AlOx-tunnel barriers with highly homogeneous thickness can be obtained on an epitaxial Al(111) lower electrode layer grown on Si(111) substrates The majority of the investigated Al/AlOx/Al-layer systems were fabricated in a single-chamber MEB 550S (PLASSYS Bestek, Marolles-en-Hurepoix, FR) electron-beam physical vapor deposition system with a base pressure of 10 -7 mbar in the HV regime. It is equipped with a sample-plate heater for heating the substrate up to 700 °C, an UV lamp for oxidation enhancement and a Kaufman source to generate an Ar/O-plasma for removing carbonaceous contamination from the substrate or plasma-enhanced oxidation. The fabrication process is in detail described in the Supplementary Information and in Briefly, the 100 nm thick lower Al layer was deposited on cleaned Si(001) and Table AlOx layers with a thickness below 2 nm However, thicker AlOx layers are required for quantitative chemical analysis due to limitations of the used transmission electron microscope with an electron-beam diameter of 1.8 nm (cf. Supplementary Information). For this reason, the samples listed in Table An additional sample, denoted as EBPlas-250|0.3|JJ, was fabricated with identical oxidation parameters as EBPlas-250|0.3 (250 °C and 0.3 mbar) but with only a single oxidation step to obtain a ~2 nm thin AlOx-tunnel barrier to analyze differences between ~20 nm thick AlOx layers and thin AlOx-tunnel barriers. For comparison, two samples were deposited in other systems. The sample EBLes was fabricated in a different electron-beam physical vapor deposition system (PVD 75, Kurt J. with simulated diffraction patterns using the JEMS software EELS was performed in the scanning (S)TEM mode using a self-written acquisition script including binned-gain averaging EELS measurements were also performed with a probe-corrected FEI Titan 80-300 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) equipped with a Gatan imaging filter Tridiem 866ERS (Gatan Inc., Pleasanton, USA) at the Ernst Ruska Center for Microscopy and Spectroscopy with Electrons (Forschungszentrum Jülich, Jülich, GER) using the StripeSTEM technique EELS acquisition conditions and the subsequent analysis process are in detail described in ref. The morphology of the AlOx layers is predominantly determined by the morphology of the lower Al layer. Our previous work has demonstrated that thickness variations of AlOx-tunnel barriers are directly correlated with thickness variations of the lower Al layer, which can be minimized by epitaxial growth of Al(111) on Si(111). Under optimized conditions Figure Crystalline Al inclusions are only observed in multiple oxidized AlOx layers, where an iterative Al-deposition/oxidation process (cf. Section II) was used. For each iteration, an Al layer with an intended thickness of 1 nm was deposited with a nominal deposition rate of 0.1 nm/s. This results in a very short deposition time and the total amount of deposited Al can vary due to fluctuation of the deposition rate or delays during the closure of the mechanical shutter. We assume that the Al does not grow as a homogeneous 1 nm thick layer, but rather forms islands with different height, which locally may prevent complete oxidation of the islands. Al-grain sizes to the comparatively high base pressure of the deposition system (~10 -6 mbar), because residual gases like oxygen can have strong impact on the Al-grain size and Al-growth process The AlOx layer of ReSput (cf. Figure Remarkably, the AlOx layer is subdivided into an amorphous lower sublayer with an average thickness of 8.6 ± 2.1 nm, which exhibits a slightly brighter contrast in Figure A transition from the amorphous to the crystalline phase was only observed in sample ReSput fabricated by reactive sputter deposition, although such a transition was previously reported to occur during static oxidation in an ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) system The present study is motivated by the goal to achieve more detailed information on the correlation between deposition conditions, chemical composition and structural characteristics of differently fabricated AlOx layers, which can be obtained from EELS and energy-loss nearedge structure (ELNES) analyses of the Al-L2,3 and O-K ionization edges acquired in a transmission electron microscope (for experimental details see Supplementary Information). Table In addition to the analysis of ELNES fingerprints, the EELS spectra can be used to determine the chemical composition by the evaluation of the integrated intensities of the Al-L2,3 and O-K edges (cf. Supplementary Information). Figure Both effects can be used to maximize the O content which reaches x = 1.30 for EBPlas-250|9.5. EBLes and the crystalline sublayer of ReSput contain an oxygen content of x = 1.5 as expected for the stoichiometric -Al2O3 phase. An oxygen content of x = 1.18 was found for the amorphous sublayer of ReSput, which does not contain crystalline Al inclusions. Grain boundaries between two neighboring crystalline -Al2O3 grains in ReSput show an oxygen excess with x = 1.8. This high oxygen content is consistent with the existence of molecular O2 at the GBs as demonstrated by the ELNES of the O-K ionization edge (cf. Figure The most striking observation revealed by ELNES in differently fabricated AlOx layers is the gradual transition from an amorphous state to a state that shows crystalline features at high oxidation temperature and oxidation pressure, although HRTEM images still suggest purely amorphous AlOx (cf. Figure We suggest that the amorphous/crystalline transition can be triggered by a slightly higher oxygen content or/and improved vacuum conditions. AlOx-tunnel barriers in JJs require maximum thicknesses  2 nm, which can be fabricated by a single dynamic or static oxidation process. Due to experimental limitations, thicker AlOx layers were used for composition analysis applying an iterative Al-deposition/oxidation process, which may has modified the AlOx properties leading to differences between thin and thicker AlOx layers. To assure that the results concerning structural and nanochemical properties of thick AlOx layers are also valid for tunnel barriers, possible differences and their influence on AlOx properties will be discussed in this Section. The most obvious difference is the existence of nanocrystalline Al inclusions, which are only present in the thick AlOx layers and may have influenced the measured oxygen content. It was shown in Section III.A that the fraction of Al inclusions decreases strongly with increasing oxygen pressure. It is rather high for dynamically oxidized samples (EBPlas, EBPlas-UV), where EELS spectra clearly show the ELNES fingerprint of pure Al. Thus, the measured oxygen content most likely differs from tunnel barriers, which are expected to contain a higher oxygen concentration. For static oxidation at high oxygen pressure (EBPlas-70|9.5 and EBPlas-250|9.5) the amount of Al inclusions is reduced to less than 3 %. Possible effects by Al inclusions should be marginal and below the error for the determination of the chemical composition, which is estimated to be between 5 and 10 %. The content of Al inclusions for samples fabricated by static oxidation at low pressure (EBPlas-70|0.3 and EBPlas-250|0.3) is around 8 % and the real oxygen content could be slightly higher than the measured values (cf. Figure To further analyze possible effects of Al inclusions on composition analyses of thin and thick AlOx layers, EELS spectra of an AlOx-tunnel barrier were acquired with a probe-corrected transmission electron microscope at the Ernst Ruska Center for Microscopy and Spectroscopy with Electrons (Forschungszentrum Jülich, Jülich, GER). The small probe size of this instrument (~0.8 nm) allows acquiring spectra which are not affected by the signal from the lower and upper Al layers and allows to determine the oxygen content of the AlOx-tunnel barrier layer. Sample EBPlas-250|0.3|JJ (cf. Figure Although the nominal oxidation parameters for both samples were identical (250 °C and 0.3 mbar), slight deviations occurred due to experimental limitations (cf. Supplementary Information). The thin AlOx layer was actually oxidized within the temperature interval between 260 and 290 °C compared to an oxidation temperature interval between 220 and 280 °C for EBPlas-250|0.3. The oxygen content in the center of the tunnel barrier (x = 1.250.10) and the thick layer (x = 1.220.13) agree well within the error limit. A major difference between thin and thick AlOx layers is the ratio between 'interface' and 'bulk' regions. Hence, all EELS spectra were acquired in 'bulk' regions in the center of the AlOx layer, where the influence of the Al/AlOx interface is the lowest. HRTEM images of EBPlas-250|0.3|JJ (cf. Figure The With respect to reducing noise in JJs, further optimization of the static oxidation process is desirable to induce an amorphous-to-crystalline transition in HV systems, which are typically used for JJ fabrication. Such a transition was already demonstrated by Reichel et al. Electron-beam evaporation from a pure Al target was used for Al deposition in the Plassys at a chamber pressure of 8 -12 Independent of oxidation conditions, the oxidation process is self-limiting and yields AlOx layers with a thickness below 2 nm, which is an ideal tunnel-barrier thickness for JJs. However, thicker AlOx layers are needed for quantitative chemical analysis due to limitations of the used transmission electron microscope (cf. Supplementary Information section B). For this reason, the samples listed in Table During the oxidation process, considerable temperature variations occurred compared to the pre-set oxidation temperatures given in Table An additional sample, denoted as EBPlas-250|0.3|JJ (nominal conditions: 250 °C and 0.3 mbar, cf. Table I main paper), was fabricated with the same nominal oxidation conditions as EBPlas-250|0.3, but with only a single oxidation step to obtain a ~2 nm thin AlOx-tunnel barrier for comparison between ~20 nm thick AlOx layers and AlOx-tunnel barriers. In the last step, a 100 nm thick upper Al layer was deposited using the same deposition parameters as for the lower Al layer. (HR)TEM images with simulated diffraction patterns using the JEMS software For our experimental setup, which is optimized in respect of a high S/N-ratio for EELS measurements, the diameter of the electron probe (diameter which contains over 90% of the electrons in the beam) in our TEM is ~1.8 nm, which is about the same size than the AlOxtunnel barrier thickness. Thus, due to unpreventable small sample and beam drifts during the measurement, the electron beam will not only be focused on the AlOx layer but also interact with the lower and upper Al layer, and EELS spectra will contain signals of both pure Al and AlOx. This effect can be enhanced by an Al/AlOx interface that is not perfectly parallel to the electron-beam direction, either by misalignment of the sample (more than 0.5° tilt between the electron beam and the Al/AlOx interface) or by thickness variations of the Al and AlOx layers. To avoid contributions from the Al layers, EELS spectra were acquired in thicker AlOx layers, which were fabricated by iterative oxidation and Al deposition. Furthermore, beam-induced damage like carbon contamination, oxygen loss, recrystallization or hole drilling by extended illumination of the same spot with the focused electron beam can be minimized in the thicker AlOx layers by acquiring spectra in a window of about 3x5 nm2 in the center of the AlOx layer. With the beam continuously scanning over such a region, this leads to a significantly enhanced signal-to-noise ratio in electron energy loss spectra. Table