Low dimensional systems with a vanishing band-gap and a large electron-hole interaction have been proposed to be unstable towards exciton formation. As the exciton binding energy increases in low dimension, conventional wisdom suggests that excitonic insulators should be more stable in 2D than in 3D. Here we study the effects of the electron-hole interaction and anharmonicity in single-layer TiSe2. We find that, contrary to the bulk case and to the generally accepted picture, the electron-hole exchange interaction is much smaller in 2D than in 3D and it has negligible effects on phonon spectra. By calculating anharmonic phonon spectra within the stochastic self-consistent harmonic approximation, we obtain TCDW≈ 440K for an isolated and undoped single-layer and TCDW≈ 364K for an electron-doping n = 4.6 × 10 13 cm -2 , close to the experimental result of 200 -280K on supported samples. Our work demonstrates that anharmonicity and doping melt the charge density wave in single-layer TiSe2. The occurrence of charge ordering in bulk TiSe 2 (see Fig. From the theoretical point of view, it has been shown that harmonic calculations in bulk TiSe 2 including the electron-phonon interaction within density-functional perturbation theory (DFPT) Recently, single-layer TiSe 2 was synthesized either by exfoliation or molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). It displays a 2 × 2 CDW with a T CDW that is enhanced with re-spect to the bulk case (T bulk CDW ≈ 200K) and is strongly substrate dependent In this work we study the anharmonic phonon spectra of an isolated single-layer TiSe 2 within the stochastic self-consistent harmonic approximation (SSCHA) ARPES measurements show that the high-T phase of single-layer TiSe 2 is a weakly n-doped semiconductor The PBE and HSE06 harmonic phonon dispersion are very similar, despite a different electronic structure, as shown in Fig. This puzzling difference between bulk and single layer can be understood by noting that in the former the strong electron-hole interaction is between the 4p xy occupied states at zone center and some of the empty Ti 3d states at the L point. In the bulk, for a distortion having periodicity q = ΓM (i.e., all the TiSe 2 layers distort in phase), and coupling the Brillouin zone regions around the A point with those around the L point, the energy gain by the distortion is reversed with respect to the case of a distortion having modulation q = ΓL, namely the PBE energy gain is much larger than the HSE06 one Even if the two functionals give practically identical energy versus displacement profiles, this is not enough to conclude that the exchange interaction is irrelevant for the soft mode at the anharmonic level. For this purpose, we calculate the phonon dispersion including nonperturbative anharmonic effects within the SSCHA using both HSE06 and PBE as force engines. Namely, we evaluate the temperature dependent dynamical matrix where M is the matrix of the ionic masses M a with M ab = δ ab M a within the SSCHA. The free energy curvature with respect to the vector of the centroid positions R reads ΦΛ(0) Φ + ΦΛ(0)ΘΛ(0) where Φ represents the SSCHA force constant, ΦΛ(0) Φ is the so-called "static bubble term", and ΦΛ(0)ΘΛ(0) Φ contains the higher order terms. Here Φ refers to the n-th order anharmonic force constants averaged over the density matrix of the SSCHA hamiltonian (see Ref. The anharmonic phonon spectrum obtained by evaluating Eq. ( suspended and undoped monolayer TiSe 2 . Our calculated T CDW from first-principles SSCHA is 1.6-2.0 times higher than the measured one (depending on the substrate In conclusion, we study anharmonic effects in a freestanding TiSe 2 monolayer within the stochastic selfconsistent harmonic approximation. We have shown that the electron-hole exchange plays only a marginal role on the vibrational properties of its high-T phase, at odds with its bulk counterpart where the exchange interaction is crucial. We showed that the weakening of the electron-hole interaction in single layer is related to the different periodicity of the modulation with respect to the bulk and the fact that it couples different states in the electronic structure. Our results upturns the conventional wisdom that the electron-hole interaction should be stronger in low dimension due to an increase in binding energy By studying the temperature dependence of the A 1u soft mode at the M point, we find the T CDW of an isolated and undoped single-layer to be ≈ 440K, while T CDW ≈ 364K for an electron-doping n = 4.6 × 10 13 cm -2 , close to the experimental value for supported sample. Thus, T CDW is strongly doping dependent when including anharmonicity, an effect completely absent at the harmonic level as harmonic spectra are weakly doping dependent. Our work establishes phonon-phonon scattering and the density of carriers in the conduction band as the two mechanisms determining the melting of CDW in a single-layer TiSe 2 .