Overlimiting current (OLC) through electrolytes interfaced with perm-selective membranes has been extensively researched in recent years for understanding the fundamental mechanisms of transport and developing efficient applications from electrochemistry to sample analysis and separation. Predominant mechanisms responsible for OLC include surface conduction, convection by electro-osmotic flow, and electro-osmotic instability depending on input parameters such as surface charge and geometric constrictions. This work studies how a network of microchannels in a non-uniform array, which mimicks a natural pore configuration, can contribute to OLC. To this end, micro/nanofluidic devices are fabricated with arrays of parallel microchannels with non-uniform size distributions. All cases maintain the same surface and bulk conduction to allow probing the sensitivity only by the non-uniformity of the channels. Both experimental and theoretical current-voltage relations demonstrate that OLCs increase with increasing non-uniformity. Furthermore, the visualization of internal recirculating flows indicates that the non-uniform arrays induce flow loops across the network enhancing advective transport. These evidences confirm a new driving mechanism of OLC, inspired by natural micro/nanoporous materials with random geometric structure. Therefore, this result can advance not only the fundamental understanding of nanoelectrokinetics but also the design rule of engineering applications of electrochemical membrane. Electrokinetics is the study of fluid and particle motions that was first reported in 1809 showing fluid migrates through the narrow spaces between naturally packed soil under the application of electric field Especially, the perm-selectivity of nanostructures, associated with electrical double layer overlap, has accelerated the fundamental study of nanoscale electrokinetics Here we investigate the effects using a micro/nanofluidic platform shown in Figure Natural porous structures can be characterized by several properties including roughness, connection between pores and size distribution, etc. Among these, we here focus on geometric non-uniformity in order to mimic the natural pore configurations. Polydimethyl-siloxane (PDMS) is used as a building block of the device. The main and buffer channel are connected by a cation selective membrane, Nafion. See supporting information for detailed experimental procedure. They have the dimension of 1 mm (width)  6 mm (length)  7.5 m (depth) and 66 of micro-fins (each fin has the dimension of 7.5 m (width)  2.5 mm (length)  7.5 m (depth)) are installed only inside the main channel. The fins are unevenly arranged to form nonuniform arrays, having different gaps (hw and hn) and the wide and narrow channels are consecutively placed across the 1 mm-width main channel. The side channels in the vicinity of the membrane are used for experimental convenience The first basic results are the voltage-current relation in a device filled with 1 mM KCl. The external voltage increases from 0 V to 8 V at 0.2 V/sec. As shown in Figure Compared to the uniform case (7.5 m, 7.5 m), OLCs significantly increase in non-uniform cases. Such elevations are strongly attributed to the recirculating flow. To explain this measurement quantitatively, we consider the unit array of the non-uniform pair shown in Figure where ε is the dielectric constant of the electrolyte solution,  is zeta potential, E is the electric field, hi is width of the microchannel, d is depth of the microchannel, and μ is the viscosity of the fluid. Also, there would be pressure build up (P) at the end of microchannel so that pressure-driven flow was induced to the opposite direction to the electroosmotic flow with the flow rate where f(hi) can be obtained by solving the steady Stokes equations in rectangular coordinate based on high-precision numerical solutions. The numerical values of the friction factors are given in the supporting information. Specifically, the pressure gradient will adjust itself such that the recirculating flow due to pressure and electroosmosis combined in both channels becomes zero, given the dead-end condition at the membrane interface. As a result, a net recirculating flow is formed in a loop, whose flow rate is given Using this theoretically obtained Qrec, a numerical analysis for OLC is conducted and the details are given in the supporting information. Experimental OLC is extracted from the slope of OLC regime in I-V plot of Figure Note that experimental OLC is immeasurable when (hw, hn) = (>11.5 m, <3.5 m) due to the tracer/wall interaction of visualization experiments and the fabrication limit of soft-lithography (too high aspect ratio). In addition, parabolic type flows are induced not only in single pair of channel array but also in the entire device which consisted of 33 pairs. The most-astonishing fact from the observation is that OLC with dimension enhances 340 % (from 0.58 nS at (hw, hn) = (7.5 m, 7.5 m) to 1.99 nS at (hw, hn) = (10.5 m, 4.5 m)) only by slight adjusting gaps between the micro-fins. To provide unarguable evidences of the recirculating flow, the propagation of depletion zone and the motion of tracer particles are visualized as shown in time-sequential images of Figure Based on the I-V measurements (Figure One example of modifying non-uniformity is implemented by fabricating repeated wide or narrow channels indicated as w and n shown in Figure presenting work complements more general theoretical model of geometric non-uniformity that include effects such as complex connections, finite EDL thickness effects, and diffusionosmosis