We study the magnon transport in the nonlocal configuration composed of two Pt strips on top of yttrium iron garnet, with and without the presence of RF microwave generated by an on-chip antenna. We find that the spin-Hall induced thermal magnon heating/cooling, the Oersted field as well as the Joule heating generated by the a.c. current in the Pt injector can significantly influence the spin-pumping signal measured by the Pt detector in the presence of RF microwave, forcing the spin-pumping voltage to show up in the first and second harmonic signals in the nonlocal magnon transport measurement. These results indicate that nonlocal magnon transport configuration can serve as a structure to electrically detect and manipulate the spin-pumping signal. Furthermore, certain caution is needed when studying the interplay between incoherent magnon and coherent magnon spin transport in the nonlocal transport configuration, since the change in microwave-induced spin-pumping voltage can overwhelm the incoherent magnon transport signals. Recently, the incoherent magnon spin current generated electrically or thermally in magnetic insulators Besides incoherent magnons, the coherent magnons have been well-studied in the past. The coherent magnons can be generated by RF microwave at the ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) state The following article has been accepted by Applied Physics Letters. After it is published, it will be found at Link. configuration in the presence of RF microwave To begin with, we have grown 60nm YIG films on top of the gadolinium gallium garnet (GGG) (110) substrate by magnetron sputtering As shown in Fig. To probe the RF microwave influence on the non-local measurement, we fabricated an on-chip antenna beside the two Pt bars in order to apply RF microwave, as schematically shown in Fig. . In this setup, a constant 4GHz 25dBm microwave generated by a microwave synthesizer is sent into the antenna, and the nonlocal magnon transport measurement is simultaneously carried out using a lock-in amplifier. As shown in Fig. In this second experiment, we apply amplitude modulated (50% modulation) microwave onto the antenna, and at the same time measure the voltage at the Pt detector bar with a lock-in amplifier at the same modulation frequency The following article has been accepted by Applied Physics Letters. After it is published, it will be found at Link. pumping experiment configuration The following article has been accepted by Applied Physics Letters. After it is published, it will be found at Link. Idc=+5mA curve. This difference is most possibly due to the SHE in the Pt injector: when Idc=-5mA, the SHE in the Pt injector can result in spin accumulation pointing along x-direction at the Pt/YIG interface, as shown in Fig. The SHE induced heating/cooling leads to the difference in linewidth broadening in the Idc=±5mA spin-pumping curves. Interestingly, the linewidth broadening difference is more obvious at the resonance high-field edge than the resonance low-field edge in Fig. Significantly, we observe reversed linewidth broadening difference for the Idc=±5mA spinpumping curves in the negative resonance field regime, as plotted in Fig. The following article has been accepted by Applied Physics Letters. After it is published, it will be found at Link. See the supplementary material for several supplemental experiments that were conducted. Supplementary material section 1 presents estimation of the heating effect in the system and its The following article has been accepted by Applied Physics Letters. After it is published, it will be found at Link. The following article has been accepted by Applied Physics Letters. After it is published, it will be found at Link. The following article has been accepted by Applied Physics Letters. After it is published, it will be found at Link. The following article has been accepted by Applied Physics Letters. After it is published, it will be found at Link. We have carried out the spin-pumping experiment twice on the Pt detector when I 5mA is applied on the Pt injector, and the data subtraction is presented in the following figure, Fig. We use different d.c. current in Fig. For the 2 nd harmonic nonlocal voltage dip V at the positive resonance magnetic field position, as shown in Fig. The following article has been accepted by Physics Letters. After it is published, it will be found at Link. 