Independent current extraction in multi-junction solar cells has gained attention in recent years because it can deliver higher annual energy yield and can work for more semiconductor material combinations than the more established series-connected multi-junction technology. The heterojunction bipolar transistor solar cell concept (HBTSC) was recently proposed as a simple, compact and cost-effective multi-terminal device structure that allows independent current extraction. It consists of only three main layers: emitter, base and collector. In this work we use a drift-diffusion model to analyze important aspects in the design of an HBTSC structure based on typical III-V semiconductor materials. We find that carrier injection from the emitter into the collector (transistor effect) degrades the opencircuit voltage of the top sub-cell, but this risk can be eliminated by optimizing the base design. We find requirements for the base layer which are, in principle, achievable in the context of current III-V semiconductor technology. ULTI-junction solar cells combine several sub-cells made of different semiconductor materials, each one absorbing a portion of the solar spectrum. This absorption selectivity leads to a high photovoltaic efficiency because the sub-cells converting high energy photons can deliver their photocurrent at correspondingly high voltages. This is the main reason why, multi-junction solar cells and, in particular, those made of epitaxial III-V materials, hold the absolute efficiency records to-date among all existing photovoltaic technologies In order to facilitate the integration of multi-junction devices into modules, most of them have been designed to operate under the condition of current-matching, that is, the device has only two terminals and the sub-cells are forced to produce the same photocurrent because they are interconnected in series. Although this configuration has been very successful, the current-matching constraint introduces some problems. First, M anuscript received June , 2019. This work has been partially funded by the European Union's Horizon2020 Research and Innovation Programme under Grant Agreement 787289 and by the Spanish Ministry of Economy under the project INVENTA-PV (TEC2015-64189-C3-1-R). E.A. acknowledges a Ramón y Cajal Fellowship (RYC-2015-18539) funded by the Spanish Science, Innovation and Universities Ministry. Funding from Universidad Politécnica de current-matched structures are very sensitive to the choice of band-gap energies. Efficiency limit calculations show that adopting an independent current extraction design increases enormously the range of band-gap energies that are suitable for each different sub-cell in a multi-junction stack Those limitations in current-matched multi-junction cells have motivated a growing interest in device architectures with three or more terminals To exploit the potential of the HBTSC simple structure and make the step from theory to practical implementation it is necessary to find cost-effective and efficient device designs. In the band diagram of Fig. In order to illustrate the role of the base layer on the performance of the HBTSC we use a drift-diffusion model. For simplification, we do not introduce illumination and study only the dark characteristics (with the exception of Fig. As long as the device is in the dark, the equations of the driftdiffusion model are the same as for an ideal bipolar transistor (BJT). It is known that the BJT performance profits from strong carrier injection from emitter to collector because this leads to a high transistor gain. For that reason, the design always considers a very small base thickness (WB) and the equations are simplified. However, we can anticipate that the typical short-base approximation should not be used here because the detailed balance model of the HBTSC shows that carrier injection has to be avoided to reach the efficiency limit of a double-junction solar cell For the base, we consider three possible materials. We have labelled them base material 1 to 3 (BM1 to BM3), as summarized in Table Fig. The J0 top value results from the sum of an emitter contribution (holes injected from the base, Eq. ( Let us now discuss the dark current density in the bottom junction (J0 bot ). Fig. Finally, we present in Fig. Fig. In Fig. Using a simple drift-diffusion model with parameters representative of III-V materials, we have shown that the penalty that can be expected from the compact structure of the HBTSC is a voltage loss (dark current increase) in the top cell if the design is not optimized. This voltage loss is related to the injection of carriers from the emitter into the base. If the carriers reach the collector (long minority carrier diffusion length in the base), the performance of the bottom junction can be marginally improved. However, the overall balance between degradation of the top cell and improvement of the bottom cell is always negative for the ideal devices studied here when carrier injection is possible. Therefore, maximum efficiency can only be achieved when that affect is eliminated. Further indications are given about the suitable base parameter space to design an efficient III-V semiconductor HBTSC. In general, it is found that increasing the band-gap energy, the doping concentration and/or the minority carrier diffusion length in the base reduces carrier injection and improves the overall performance. Some combinations of those parameters are feasible from the point of view of III-V material technology. In particular, it is found that, if the material in the base has a sufficiently high band-gap energy (above 2.1 eV), carrier injection is eliminated independently of all other base parameters, and specifically, independently of having a thin base layer. In fact, our calculations show that with that bandgap energy carrier injection is negligible even for a base as thin as 50 nm. This implies that the HBTSC concept is compatible with compact, thin-film and cost-effective technologies. We summarize in Table J C = J Cn + J Cp = -J 0 bot 