In this report, a novel methodology based on the static coherent states approach is introduced with the capability of calculating various strong-field laser-induced nonlinearities in full dimensional single-electron molecular systems; an emphasis is made on the high-order harmonic generation. To evaluate the functionality of this approach, we present a case study of the Hydrogen molecular ion H + 2 interacting with a few-cycle linearly polarized optical laser with trapezoidal waveform. We detected that the accuracy of the obtained harmonics is considerably enhanced by averaging the expectation value of the acceleration of the single electron over a set of identical random simulations. Subsequently, the presented approach demands a significantly lower number of basis sets than the regular exact three dimensional unitary split-operator solvers of time dependent Schrödinger equation that necessitate an extremely large number of data points in the coordinate space, and so the computational cost. Additionally, applying static coherent states method, we have investigated isolated attosecond pulse generation using the polarization gating technique, which combines two delayed counter rotating circular laser pulses, and opens up a gate at the central portion of the superposed pulse. The significant advancement of attosecond science has opened up a new field of physics where enables us to control and steer electrons using laser fields; thereby, looking into strong-field ionization and coherence dynamics of atomic, molecular and solid-state systems in their natural time scales The underlying physics of the non-perturbative HHG process which is a highly nonlinear response of matter to the ultrashort intense laser fields can be qualitatively predicted by invoking the well-known semiclassical threestep model It is predicted theoretically and exhibited practically that the produced HHG spectrum which falls rapidly in the first few harmonics after a broad plateau ends up with a sharp cut-off. This cut-off corresponds to the maximum kinetic energy that electron can gain upon recombination: K max ∝ 3.17U p where U p = eE 2 0 /4mω 2 0 is * mreidi@pks.mpg.de the ponderomotive potential, ω 0 is the angular frequency of the laser field and E 0 is the electric field amplitude. There are a number of approaches containing physical approximations established to compute nonlinear phenomena under intense ultrashort fields such as HHG spectra in atomic and molecular systems Several numerical techniques have been developed for solving the TDSE, which are either based on the discretization on a grid or expansions into basis functions. The most recognized approaches are: discrete-variable representation (DVR) Here, we introduce our development of static coherent state method (SCS) Further, SCS primarily exhibits its potential in near to mid-infrared studies: The numerical complexity for solving the TDSE grows significantly with laser wavelength, and scales nearly to λ 6 Here comes the structure of this article: we initially formulate how to compute HHG on the basis of the SCS method. We examine our approach by applying SCS for HHG spectra of the Hydrogen molecular ion H + 2 induced by a linearly polarized laser field and comparing it with 3D Cartesian and cylindrical unitary splitoperator (USO) solution of TDSE Throughout this paper, atomic units (a.u.), e = = m e = 1 are used unless stated otherwise. Implementing the static coherent states method (SCS) is propagated in imaginary time (ITP) until the expectation value of the field-free Hamiltonian H converges to the lowest accessible value which is the ground state energy of the system for a fixed inter-nuclear distance where Ω -1 is the inverse of the overlap matrix Ω kl = Z k |Z l with elements Having gained the ground state of the system in a fixed initial inter-nuclear distance R 12 at the end of imaginary time propagation part (ITP), we study the behaviour of the system in the presence of an external laser field propagating TDSE in real time (RTP). To prevent nonphysical effects due to the reflection of the wave packet from the boundary, we multiply C coefficients corresponding to each coherent state by a mask function with the form where Q j gives the boundary point in the j th direction, b j is the length of absorbing region (it can be different for each direction) and q ij is the position of the i th coherent state in the j th direction. Considering no dynamics for the nuclei, the general Hamiltonian of the system would be In Eqs. ( where j is the dimension number. For the matrix elements of electron-nuclear Coulombic potentials in Eq. ( where i is the index number of the nuclei and Here, we compute the HHG spectrum D(ω) as the squared magnitude of the Fourier transforms (FT) of the expectation value of the electron dipole acceleration a e where T is the total pulse duration and is the Hanning function which filters nonphysical features (non decaying components) from the HHG spectrum as the Fourier transform is applied over a finite time. The expectation value of the dipole acceleration of the single electron in H + 2 system can be computed using the Newtonian equation of motion where F 1e and F 2e are the expectation value of the nucleus-electron attractive forces, F le is the force exerted on the electron by the external laser field and m e is the mass of electron. For the expectation value of the nucleus-electron attractive forces one can verify that where is the matrix elements of the attractive Coulombic force on the base of a static grid of coherent states and r ei = r e -R i . To compute F ie kl , applying the identity operator of coordinate states of electrons leads to one gets Using the fact that coherent states are Gaussian wave packets in the coordinate representation and by applying the Gaussian product rule where Taking into account the over-completeness property of coherent states from Eq. ( Now substituting this Laplace transform 1 into Eq. ( where One can also show that Substituting Eq. ( and considering it is straightforward to verify that where B 1 is the first order Boys function For the electric force exerted on each nucleus by the external laser field (E) we also simply get We now turn to employ our proposed SCS approach and investigate HHG in H + 2 for different laser induced scenarios. We initially study HHG from a linearly polarized optical field, and afterward using polarization gating technique explore the single isolated attosecond pulse generation in H + 2 . It is worth mentioning that since H + 2 is an oriented heteronuclear molecule, the spatial symmetry is broken in the system and both odd and even harmonics are allowed. In these applications of the SCS method, we utilize two complementary CS grid boxes with N i CS in the internal box and N e CS in the external box which form a complex static CS grid with a total number of N t = N i + N e coherent states At first, the behavior of H + 2 system is studied at R 12 = 2 a.u. and R 12 = 3 a.u. in the presence of a trapezoidal 2 induced by a linearly polarized laser field in the z direction. Hence, the external coherent states are distributed more widely along the z direction compared to x and y. A total number of 8000 CS implemented in each simulation, containing 3000 CS distributed around the two nuclei and 5000 CS elsewhere to capture phenomena occurring beyond the effective Coulombic range. 800 nm 5-cycles (which rises in the first cycle and falls in the last one) linear laser field with intensity of I = 10 14 W/cm 2 to examine the effectiveness and performance of SCS in such kind of simulations. The external laser field is linearly polarized along the z axis with the following shape where E 0 is the amplitude of the laser field, ω is the carrier frequency and A env (t) is the trapezoidal envelope function. For simulating HHG in H + 2 at R 12 = 2 a.u. and R 12 = 3 a.u. introduced to the mentioned laser field, a complex static grid with a total number of 8000 CS is constructed distributing 3000 randomly generated CS by the Gaussian distribution function in the internal box around the two nuclei and distributing 5000 randomly generated CS more homogeneously in the external box by using the Sobol sequence The HHG spectrum of H + 2 calculated based on the SCS at R12 = 2.0 a.u. (left panel) and R12 = 3.0 a.u. (right panel), induced by a 5-cycles trapezoidal 800 nm laser field with the intensity of I = 10 14 W/cm 2 in comparison with the 3D Cartesian USO solution of TDSE under the same conditions (i.e., laser parameters and grid boundaries). For both internuclear distances R12, three distinct cases with averaging factor Na= 1, 10 and 100 are considered. We improve the observed deviation between our results and the Cartesian USO solver in the above cut-off region, as we increase the number of averaged random simulations Na. sentation of one of such random 3D coherent state grids is depicted in FIG. In Fig. For the next step, to evaluate SCS approach in simulation of more complex laser-induced scenarios, the single isolated attosecond pulse (SAP) generation is investigated in H + 2 using polarization gating technique in which E 0 , t d , τ p , ω and φ are the field amplitude, time delay between two pulses, the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the the Gaussian shaped pulse, the carrier frequency and the carrier-envelope phase, respectively. Having computed x-or y-component of dipole acceleration a x(y) via Eq. ( where The time-frequency profiles of the high harmonics w(ω, t) are also obtained via a Morlet wavelet transform of the time-dependent dipole acceleration where we set the Gaussian width σ = 2π in this work. In order to study how SAP is generated in H + 2 at R 12 = 3 a.u. using SCS, the system is simulated in the presence of a 800 nm 10-cycle laser field which has a polarization gating in the middle of the pulse. Such laser field is formed by combining two 8-cycle left and righthand circularly polarized Gaussian pulses with both time delay t d and FWHM of the Gaussian envelope τ p equal to 2 cycles (i.e., 5.33702 fs or 220.64 a.u.) and the intensity of I = 3 × 10 14 W/cm 2 for φ = 0 and φ = π/2 similar to To investigate SAP in H + 2 introduced to such laser field, a complex static grid with a total number of 12000 CS is constructed distributing 3000 randomly generated CS by the Gaussian distribution function in the internal box around the two nuclei and distributing 9000 randomly generated CS more homogeneously in the external box by using the Sobol sequence. The nuclei are considered to be located in the x direction. The external coherent states are randomly distributed in the phase space between (-80, 80) a.u. in x direction, (-55, 55) a.u. in y direction, In Fig. As it is apparent, at the central part of both fields (Fig. In summary, a static coherent states (SCS) method is developed for full-dimensional quantum simulation of high-order harmonic generation process in single-electron systems such as Hydrogen molecular ion H + 2 . Such an approach using coherent state as the basis sets of the electronic system, for the first time, successfully calculates the high-order harmonic generation (HHG) spectrum of a full-dimensional realistic system. A key significance of SCS approach is that the choice of basis sets possess randomness attributes. As a result, the correctness of our simulation can be increased by averaging over calculations from the ensemble of random CS grids. As the first case study, we have examined the correctness and optimality of our full dimensional simulation of HHG for H + 2 in the presence of a linearly polarized laser field, comparing them with 3D unitary split-operator (USO) solvers. Compared to the USO solutions, SCS exhibits a higher cost effectiveness for calculating the HHG spectrum. In the second scenario, as a complementary examination of the SCS approach, the generation of single attosecond pulse (SAP) is performed using the polarization gating technique. Such a polarization gate is constructed by mixing two delayed Gaussian pulses with opposite circularity propagating in the z direction, in which the gate is opened up at the central portion of the generated pulse. At the polarization gate, we show that the field polarization dominantly turns into linear in the x direction. Consequently, isolated attosecond pulses generated in the x direction are considerably more intense than those generated in the y direction. Presented approach in this work demands a considerably lower number of coherent states in the phase space compared to the USO solvers which requires exceedingly large number of grid points in the coordinate space. Such a characteristics shows its potent in computing higher dimensional systems such as H 2 , where obtaining the exact solutions is limited by the available methods. The detailed analysis associated with such systems is currently under development. 