We report comprehensive study of physical properties of the binary superconductor compound SnAs. The electronic band structure of SnAs was investigated using both angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) in a wide binding energy range and density functional theory (DFT) within generalized gradient approximation (GGA). The DFT/GGA calculations were done including spin-orbit coupling for both bulk and (111) slab crystal structures. Comparison of the DFT/GGA band dispersions with ARPES data shows that (111) slab much better describes ARPES data than just bulk bands. Superconducting properties of SnAs were studied experimentally by specific heat, magnetic susceptibility, magnetotransport measurements and Andreev reflection spectroscopy. Temperature dependences of the superconducting gap and of the specific heat were found to be well consistent with those expected for the single band BCS superconductors with an isotropic s-wave order parameter. Despite spin-orbit coupling is present in SnAs, our data shows no signatures of a potential unconventional superconductivity, and the characteristic BCS ratio 2∆/Tc = 3.48 -3.73 is very close to the BCS value in the weak coupling limit. Binary compounds of the SnX-family (X=Te, Se, As, S, Sb, P) attract much attention due to their unique properties Another interesting result was found in investigations under high-pressure. In Ref. On the theoretical side, in Ref. The band dispersion of SnAs resembles that for SnTe, the known crystalline topological insulator. Moreover, due to the similarity of SnAs to SnTe, it was suggested, that the mixed compound Sn(As,Te) may manifest topological superconductivity, if it is superconducting. Pre-liminary experimental studies of electronic band structure of SnAs by ARPES technique Despite the existence of previous investigations, there is still lack of knowledge of the origin of superconductivity in SnAs, and the question about the impact of SOC is still opened. In the current paper we report detailed experimental study of the normal and superconducting properties of SnAs. For the normal state we studied by ARPES technique electronic band structure in a wide binding energy interval. The measured superconducting properties include specific heat and magnetic susceptibility in various magnetic felds, and the superconducting gap by Andreev reflection spectroscopy. Also, we report refined calculations of the SnAs band structure within DFT/GGA for bulk and (111) slab crystal structures, with and without SOC, and compare them with the ARPES spectra. The SnAs samples were synthesized from pure elements: Sn and As with purity of 99.99% and 99.9999%, respectively. The sealed quartz ampoule with elements taken in a stoichiometric ratio of 1:1 was slowly heated to 600 • C, held for 48 hours to form the phase, then heated to 800 • C and held for 24 hours to homogenize the melt. The crystals were then grown by a modified Bridgman method at a melt cooling rate of 1 The obtained SnAs crystals were cleaved into the small pieces of about 3 mm size, which had a pyramidal shape with triangular base (Fig. Elemental composition of the sample was measured by EDS (Energy-Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy) technique using SEM; the spectrum contains only lines related to the Sn-and As-atoms. Quantitative analysis shows Sn and As content of 48.9% and 51.1%, respectively, that corresponds to the ratio of 0.978 : 1.022. ARPES measurements were performed using a semispherical VG Scienta R4000 energy analyzer with energy resolution of 17 meV and angular resolution of 0.5 • . The ultraviolet helium lamp VUV 5k was used as a light source with photon energy 21.2 eV. The measurements were carried out at room temperature. Pressure in the chamber didn't exceed 1 -2 × 10 -10 mbar. The samples were cleaved along the (111) plane (see the LEED pattern on Fig. Resistivity, magnetic and thermal properties of SnAs sample were measured using PPMS-9 (Quantum Design). Specific heat measurements of SnAs crystals were carried out by thermal relaxation technique with 3 He calorimeter, in the range of temperatures 0.4 -6 K and magnetic fields 0 -500 Oe. Low-frequency magnetic susceptibility measurements of SnAs crystals were taken in the range of temperatures 2 -6 K and magnetic fields 0 -200 Oe. It is worth of noting, that magnetic susceptibility at "H=0" is actually measured at a finite low value (2-5 Oe) of the AC-magnetic field while the external DC-magnetic field is set to zero. Magnetization loop was measured using Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (VSM) at temperature of 2 K. For thermal and magnetic measurements we used a sample with mass of 6.66 mg. In order to implement the Andreev reflection (AR) spectroscopy, the SnS contacts were prepared in situ using the break-junction technique It is a common knowledge, that the dI/dV characteristics of high transparency superconductor -normal metal -superconductor (SnS) microcontacts exhibit a so called subharmonic gap structure The dI/dV measurements were made in the temperature range from 1.5 to 4 K. The measurements were taken by four probe technique. In order to bias the sample we used a voltage controlled current source fed with a sum of the DC bias and AC modulation voltages. The running current and voltage were measured independently using a precise digitizer; dI, and dV were obtained using two lock-in amplifiers SR-830. DFT/GGA calculations Theoretical band structure for SnAs was calculated within density functional theory (DFT) with the fullpotential linear augmented plane-wave framework as implemented in WIEN2k The DFT/GGA results for SnAs are presented on Fig. SOC impact on the DOS is most pronounced for As-4p states in the interval between -0.5 eV and -2 eV as follows from the dotted line on panels c) and g). Also, SOC slightly affects the Sn-5p states. The same effect is visible for dispersions along X-Γ-L directions on panels d) and h) of Fig. From Fig. , where N A is the Avogadro constant, k B -Boltzmann constant and N (E F ) -the DFT/GGA value of total DOS at the Fermi level. Then γn γ calc = m * me with γ n =2.67 mJ/(mol×K 2 )electronic specific heat in the normal state (see below) gives m * me =1.41. This ratio agrees well with Ref. V m * me me = 0.6 Å-1 , where V is elementary cubic cell volume. Also it may be found as k F = (3π 2 n) 1/3 , where n = N/V with N -number of valence electrons in the unit cell. From partial DOS one can see that there are 2.1 of As-4p electrons, 0.1 Sn-5s electrons and 0.72 Sn-5p electrons; hence, in total N per formula unit is 2.92. There are 4 formula units per cubic cell with V =187.5 Å3 . It gives k F =1.23 Å-1 . Such discrepancy between k F values comes from multi-band anisotropic nature of SnAs spectra while all definitions above are for the isotropic single band Fermi liquid. There is also theoretical conjecture for concentration in Ref. Previously these values were estimated in the Ref. Lower panels e) to h) in Fig. Earlier ARPES results obtained by our group were reported in Ref. Bulk calculations for k z other than 0 (the k z direction coincides with the [111] direction) show, that by varying k z it is not possible to improve agreement between the calculated and experimental spectra, similar to a number of studies In Fig. Inclusion of SOC splitting slightly improves the situation. The wings around 0.9 and 1.3 eV agrees a bit better with experiment but ARPES does not show clear separation of those bands. One should note also that bulk DFT/GGA bands along K -Γ -K direction do not reproduce ARPES bands near Fermi level shown by red dashed curves on ARPES spectra. In case of (111) slab calculations, as panels (c,d,f,g) of Fig. For more detailed information about superconducting properties of SnAs we performed resistivity, specific heat and magnetic susceptibility measurements. Temperature dependence of resistivity is shown in Fig. Temperature dependence of the magnetic AC susceptibility χ of SnAs crystal is presented in Fig. Specific heat tends to zero at T -→ 0 in zero field and does not demonstrate any anomalies in the low-temperature region. This tendency is an additional evidence of bulk nature of superconductivity in the studied samples. The polynomial extrapolation to zero temperature C(T )/T = βT 2 + γ r (β=0,317±0,019 mJ/(mol×K 4 )) gives residual electronic specific heat γ r = 0.015 mJ/(mol×K 2 ). Magnetic field suppresses the superconducting transition and shifts it gradually to lower temperatures. At fields above 300 Oe, the superconductivity is fully suppressed, as follows from the equality of the specific heat at H = 300 Oe and higher fields, for example, 500 Oe. Thus, the electronic component of the specific heat can be defined as C e = C(H) -C(H 0 ) + γ n T for H < H 0 , (where H 0 = 300 Oe exceeds the critical magnetic field), taking into account the entropy conservation. The electronic specific heat in the normal state γ n at temperatures above T c was found to be γ n = 2.67 mJ/(mol×K 2 ). The residual term γ r is much less than the electronic specific heat in the normal state γ n . The ratio γ r /γ n ≈ 0.5% quantifies the relative amount of unpaired carriers; it confirms the bulk character of the superconducting state, and evidences for a high crystal purity. Temperature dependence of the electronic contribution to specific heat C e (T )/T in various fields is shown in Fig. Inset of Fig. 8π , where w is the density of energy, ∆F is the difference between free energies in superconducting and normal states, N is the molar quantity, and V is the sample volume. Numerical integration give us ∆F = Tc 0 ∆SdT = -9.00 mJ/mol, where ∆S is the difference between the entropy in superconducting state at zero field and in normal state. Taking into account N=m/μ=3.44•10 -5 mol (here μ is the formula mass of SnAs, m= 6.66 g is the sample mass) V =m/ρ= 0.971•10 -3 cm 3 (ρ=6.86 g/cm 3 is the mass density) we have for critical magnetic field H c =283 Oe. To analyze thermal properties of superconducting condensate, it is convenient to consider the normalized electronic specific heat C en = C e T γ n . For the superconducting condensate it may be calculated within the framework of the BCS theory using the so-called alpha model is the superconducting gap at zero temperature), and m(φ) = 1 + μ cos(2φ) -angular dependence of the gap. Normalized electronic specific heat of the superconducting condensate C e T γ n versus (T /T c ) and its best fit with the s-and d-wave α-model In this case from the fitting procedure, the contribution of one of the gaps φ 1 becomes equal to zero, whereas angular modulation for the second one vanishes (μ -→ 1). Evidently, the best description of the experimental data is obtained using the single-band BCS model with an isotropic gap and α = 2∆(0) k B T c = 3.73. Despite SnAs as shown above has essentially multi band electronic system application of single band BCS model can be justified in case matrix of coupling constant consists of approximately equal values for all Fermi surface sheets Similar behavior may be also observed for other firstorder phase transitions: e.g., for melting transition, where the specific heat of a crystal changes to the specific heat of a liquid right at the melting point, however, the temperature does not change during melting despite the heat enters the system; as a result, the specific heat exhibits a sharp peak. In our case, similarly, the transition from superconducting to normal state occurs with the absorption of latent heat. The finite width of the peak is due to the intermediate state (shape effect). Thus, the specific heat in magnetic fields demonstrates features intrinsic to the first-order phase transition and indicates SnAs to be the type-I superconductor. Figure The data obtained enables one to estimate superconducting parameters of the SnAs compound. Electronic part of specific heat in normal state together with k F and m * found from DFT/GGA results described above give possibility to estimate London penetration depth λ L , coherence length ξ, and Ginzburg-Landau parameter κ. For calculations we take DFT/GGA based Fermi momenta k F from 0.6 to 1.23 Å-1 , while m * =1.41m e is rather safely obtained from DFT/GGA and specific heat. Then London penetration depth may be estimated using formula λ L (0) = (3π 2 m * /[μ 0 k 3 F e 2 ]) 1/2 . It gives λ L (0) in the range from 25.7 to 75.4 nm. Corespondingly, coherence length ξ(0) = 0.18 2 k F /(k B T c m * ) equals to 171.0 -350.5 nm In order to have a deeper insight into the superconducting properties of SnAs and, particularly, temperature dependence of the superconducting energy gap ∆, we measured Andreev reflection spectra. The superconductor -normal metal -superconductor (SnS) Andreev reflection spectroscopy is a powerful tool to determine the energy gap value and its temperature evolution. Unlike several other intimate techniques, such as scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS), and point-contact Andreev reflections (PCAR), this technique does not require any data fitting By mechanical tuning the sample bending and thus, the break junctions area one can realize Andreev contacts with different 2a/l ratio and also stacks of sequentially connected S-n-S-n...-S contacts Energy gap temperature dependence deduced from the measured Andreev spectra. ∆ = 0.54 ± 0.04 meV is found from extrapolation of ∆(T ) to T = 0, obtained with the BCS fitting dependence. Evolution of the gap value with temperature ∆(T ) is plotted in Fig. Values Values from Ref. Table 