The φ 0 Josephson junctions formed by ordinary superconductors and a magnetic non-centrosymmetric interlayer are studied. We derive an analytical solution for the magnetization dynamics induced by an arbitrary current pulse and formulate the criteria for magnetization reversal. Using the obtained results, the form and duration of the current pulse are optimized. The agreement between analytical and numerical investigations is reached in the case of a large product of the ratio Josephson to magnetic energy, strength of spin-orbit interaction and a minimal value of the current pulse. The obtained results allow one to predict magnetization reversal at the chosen system parameters. The ability to manipulate magnetic properties by the Josephson current and its opposite, i.e., to influence the Josephson current by magnetic moment, has attracted much recent attention. The application of DC voltage to the φ 0 junction produce current oscillations and consequently magnetic precession. As shown in Ref. An investigation of the heterostructures that combine superconducting and ferromagnetic elements gives insight into the problem of the mutual influence of superconductivity and ferromagnetism, allows a realization of exotic superconducting states such as the Larkin-Ovchinnikov-Fulde-Ferrell state and triplet ordering, and promises applications that utilize the spin degree of freedom Recently, an anomalous phase shift was experimentally observed in different systems, particularly, in the φ 0 junction based on a nanowire quantum dot One of the milestones for superconducting electronics which stands out by ultra-low energy dissipation is the creation of cryogenic memory In this work we derive an analytical solution for the magnetization dynamics induced by an arbitrary current pulse and formulate the criteria for magnetization reversal in the φ 0 Josephson junctions formed by ordinary superconductors and a magnetic, non-centrosymmetric interlayer. Using the obtained analytical results, we optimize the form and duration of the current pulse. The agreement between analytical and numerical investigations is reached in the case of a large product of the ratio of the Josephson energy to the magnetic energy, strength of spin-orbit interaction and a minimum value of the flowing current. The obtained results explains the periodicity in the appearance of the magnetization reversal intervals observed in Ref. 46 and allow one to predict magnetization reversal at the chosen system parameters. The plan of the rest of this work is as follows. In Sec. II we introduce the model and methods, particularly, the derivation of effective field and current pulse. This is followed by Sec. III, where the relation between expressions for the temporal dependence of the current's pulse and the superconducting current is obtained for different ratio of Josephson to characteristic frequency of junction. In Sec. IV we present solution of Landau-Lifshiz-Gilbert equation for the case, when product of the ration of Josephson to magnetic energy and spin-orbit coupling is much more that one. Section V is devoted to small damping regime. We discuss the periodicity in the appearance of the magnetization reversal intervals in the diagrams "Gilbert damping -ration of Josephson to magnetic energy". The periodicity for the diagram "spinorbit coupling -ration of Josephson to magnetic energy" is discussed in Sec.VI. Finally, in Sec.VII we summarize our main results and conclude. Physics of SFS Josephson structures is determined by system of equations which consist of Landau-Lifshits-Gilbert (LLG), resistively shunted junction (RSJ) model, and Josephson relation between phase difference and voltage. The dynamics of the magnetic moment in φ 0 JJ is described by the LLG equation 47 where M is the magnetization vector, γ m is the gyromagnetic relation, H ef f is the effective magnetic field, α is Gilbert damping parameter, M 0 = |M|. In order to find the expression for the effective magnetic field we have used the model developed in Ref. 24, where it is assumed that the gradient of the spin-orbit potential is along the easy axis of magnetization taken to be along ẑ. In this case the total energy of the system can be written as where φ is the phase difference between the superconductors across the junction, I is the external current, , and ), the parameter υ so /υ F characterizes a relative strength of spin-orbit interaction, K is the anisotropic constant, and V is the volume of the ferromagnetic (F ) layer. Consequently the effective field is determined by where r = lυ so /υ F , and G = E J /(KV). Using ( where m x,y,z = M x,y,z /M 0 satisfy the constraint i=x,y,z m 2 i (t) = 1. In this system of equations time is normalized to the inverse ferromagnetic resonance frequency ω F = γK/M 0 : (t → tω F ). In order to describe the full dynamics of SFS structure the LLG equations should be supplemented by the equation for phase difference φ, i.e. equation of RSJ model. According to the extended RSJ model or in the normalized variables it takes a form where the bias current I is normalized to the critical one I c and Φ = φ -rm y . We note that in order to use the same time scale in the LLG and RSJ equations we have normalized time to the ω -1 F . In this case a new parameter determined by the w = ω F /ω c is occurred, were ω c = 2eIc R is a characteristic frequency of the Josephson junction. As we will see, the behaviour of the system depend on the value of this parameter and it characterizes its different regimes. The current pulse is I = I p and its has rectangular form where A s and δt are the pulse amplitude and width, respectively. We note that if any other form is not specified below, the rectangular form is considered. The initial conditions for the LLG equation are the m x (t = 0) = 0, m y (t = 0) = 0, m z (t = 0) = 1 and for RSJ-model equation φ(t = 0) = 0. Via the numerical solution In this paper we also compare the analytical and numerical results concerning the periodicity of magnetization reversal in α -G and r -G planes. In order to demonstrate the realization of the magnetization reversal intervals, we solve numerically system of differential equation (4) for the fixed values of G and α (or G and r). Then we have checked the value of m z at the end of each time domain, and if the reversal is realized, the values of G and α (or r) are recorded to the files. Repeating this procedure for the different values of our parameters we build the figures which demonstrates the magnetization reversal appearance in α -G and r -G planes. As we mentioned above, the physics of switching in the φ 0 is determined by LLG equation ( To investigate the magnetization dynamics, one should start with the solving equation ( with the initial condition Φ(t = t 0 ) = 0. For A s < 1 it gives tan Φ(t)/2 = A s tanh t-t0 τ0 tanh t-t0 τ0 Here , which determines time scale for approaching a constant value of Φ. So, the formula (9) allows to calculate the sin Φ during the pulse t 0 ≤ t ≤ t 0 + δt. In the second region t ≥ t 0 + δt, when the pulse has been switched off (I p (t) = 0), we have 2 exp -t-t0-δt w (10) which exponentially drops to zero with a time scale τ 1 ∼ w. Here tan Φ(t0+δt) 2 is determined by the equation ( ≪ δt and τ 1 ∼ w ≪ δt are fulfilled, i.e., when the pumping time τ 0 and the time τ 1 of dropping to zero, are small in comparison with the pulse duration: τ 0 ≪ δt and τ 1 ≪ δt. These conditions mean that sin Φ approaches A s = sin Φ ⋆ and drops to 0 for short periods of time τ 0 , τ 1 , correspondingly, in comparison with the pulse duration δt, thus sin Φ shows nearly a rectangular form which coincides with the pulse I p (t). This case is demonstrated in Fig. In the opposite case of w τ 0 , τ 1 the profile of sin Φ becomes more complicated. First, the pumping process of sin Φ to A s becomes broader. Second, a significant tail emerges where I p (t) = 0, but sin Φ = 0, which influences the magnetization dynamics. This situation is shown in Fig. So, one can notice that parameter w measures time of Φ reaction to the external current. It could be concluded that for small w in comparison with the characteristic time scale of I p (t) and for arbitrary current pulse I p (t), which values are not very close to 1 (to I c ), time derivative w Φ in (6) can be neglected and then, the relation sin Φ = I p (t) works well. A question appears: does magnetization reversal is determined by the value of m z at the end of the current's pulse? The answer is positive for small w only, i.e., when ω F ≪ ω c . In this case, when the pulse is switched off, the y component of effective field in LLG equation can be neglected, because I p ≈ sin Φ. Then, the dynamics of m z is determined by parameters of LLG equation: if m z < 0, we observe the magnetization reversal, and it does not happen in the opposite case (m z < 0). At large value of w the magnetization reversal is determined by its tail after switching pulse off. This feature is demonstrated in Fig. In the case of w = 0.1, (Fig. Our theory is based on a few key observations. The first one is that for small w and current pulse I p (t), which value A s is not close to 1 (to I c ), as it was discussed in the previous section, we can neglect the term w • dΦ/dt in equation ( The second observation is that the condition w ≪ 1 can be rewritten as It means that w ≪ 1 does not imply the case of small G ≪ 1, therefore we can use LLG equation in the Gr ≫ 1 limit as it was done in Ref. 24. It was also estimated there, that it is plausible for G to vary in a wide range, starting from G ≪ 1 till G ∼ 100 ≫ 1. The third observation is that the Gilbert damping can be relatively small α ≪ 1 According to the previous remarks, using (11), we can write LLG equation during the pulse as The limit of the strong coupling Gr ≫ 1 (but r ≪ 1) can be treated analytically As we see from (9), after the pulse has been switched off, the sin Φ has a fast drop to 0 due to condition w ≪ 1. In this time region the dynamics of the magnetization is determined only by the interplay of the magnetic anisotropy and the Gilbert damping, which makes the magnetization to line up along the easy axis It should be noted, that the magnetization reversal is not affected by the form of the current pulse, but by its integral over the pulse duration only. This is demonstrated in Fig. It was demonstrated in Ref. According to (14), the magnetization reversal in the r -G plane under pulse I p (t) = A s [θ(t -t 0 ) -θ(t -t 0 -δt)] occurs in the hyperbolic areas at for n = 0, ±1, ..., whereas the most efficient reversal appears when the condition cos (GrA s δt) = -1 is fulfilled, i.e. GrA s δt = π + 2πn. Equation ( In order to test this effect of the small damping regime determined by ( As we see, in the small damping regime the magnetization reversal does not depend on α. The areas, where it occurs, are periodic in parameter G , which is determined by (17). As we see, the realization of the magnetization reversal intervals in α -G plane obtained by numerical simulations at small damping, is in agreement with the analytical results. Results of numerical calculations of the magnetization reversal intervals in α-G plane at large Gilbert damping produced with the same parameters are demonstrated in Fig. For simplicity we again consider rectangular pulse at low damping regime and small w. Equation (17) gives the hyperbolic curves for different n. From physical point of view they are the curves of a constant amplitude for the driving force in the LLG equation (1). In this situation the magnetic moment becomes aligned in the m z = -1 direction exactly after the pulse has been switched off, and the relevant time scale is determined only by the pulse duration, not by the Gilbert damping. It helps us to optimize the pulse duration in order to make the fastest reversal. We see from (18) that the shortest time is realized for n = 0 This situation is demonstrated in Fig. FIG. We see the perfect agreement between numerical and analytical calculations which stress the validity of our theory at chosen system's parameters. It should be noticed, that the periodicity of the magnetization reversal in the r -G plane was first observed in Ref. 46 numerically only for a non-gauge-invariant scheme. Compare both results we may conclude that, actually, the term φ0 in (6), which makes the equations gauge-invariant, only slightly shifts these areas of magnetization reversal. But, from the other point of view, the gauge invariant form of equations gives a possibility for analytical consideration of equation (6). Finally, we discuss the magnetization reversal at the parameters corresponded to the different points in the stripes, indicated in Fig. First we compare the magnetization dynamics for three points in the lowest stripe shown in Fig. It should be noted, that observed periodicity of the magnetization reversal in SFS φ 0 junction is similar to the well-known effect followed from the Bloch equations in quantum optics and nuclear magnetic resonance 