Superconducting (SC) fluctuations in cuprate superconductors have been extensively studied to gain a deep insight into preformed Cooper pairs above the SC transition temperature Tc. While the various measurements, such as the terahertz (THz) optical conductivity, Nernst effect, angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) measurements have provided the signature of the SC fluctuations, the onset temperature of the SC fluctuations depends on the measurement scheme. Here, we shed light on the Higgs mode to investigate the SC fluctuations, as it is the direct fingerprint of SC order parameter and can help elucidate the development of SC phase coherence. We perform THz pump-optical probe spectroscopy for underdoped and overdoped Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x (Bi2212) thin films. The oscillatory behavior in the pump-probe signal (THz Kerr signal) observed in the SC phase has been identified as the Higgs mode in single crystals in our previous work [K. Katsumi et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 117001 (2018)], but two onset temperatures are identified above Tc. Combined with the results of the single crystals in a wide range of doping, we find that the first onset T1 ons is 10-30 K above Tc. T1 ons coincides with that of the superfluid density Ns extracted from the THz optical conductivity. Hence, T1 ons is interpreted as the onset of macroscopic SC phase stiffness. On the other hand, the second onset T2 ons is identified at substantially higher than Tc, whose origin is discussed in terms of preformed Cooper pairs. Among the various physical properties in cuprate superconductors, superconducting (SC) fluctuations have attracted intensive interests over decades To gain deeper insights into the onset of SC fluctuations, we focus on the collective amplitude mode of the SC order parameter, namely the Higgs mode, which directly manifests the development of the SC order parameter More recently, the Higgs mode has been observed in the d-wave cuprate superconductor Bi2212 by THz pump-optical probe (TPOP) spectroscopy in reflection geometry. Phenomenologically, the measurement scheme resorts to the THz pulse-induced Kerr effect, where the intense THz pulse modifies the optical response of the near-infrared probe pulse. The oscillatory behavior of the optical reflectivity, which follows the squared THz-pump electric field (E field) was identified as a fingerprint of Higgs mode In this paper, we investigate the SC fluctuations in underdoped (UD) and overdoped (OD) Bi2212 thin films by TPOP measurements. The instantaneous oscillatory component, or THz Kerr signal, observed in the pump-probe signal has been identified as the Higgs-mode response in our previous study with singlecrystalline Bi2212 samples We performed TPOP measurements on underdoped (UD76, Tc = 76 K and thickness of 60 nm) and overdoped (OD67, Tc = 67 K and thickness of 160 nm) Bi2212 thin films grown by the sputtering method on MgO substrates. The SC transition temperature Tc was determined by the magnetic susceptibility measurement using a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) as shown in Appendix A. In Fig. Since the oscillatory component of the reflectivity change follows the square of the THz peak E field [Fig. where ε1 is the real part of the dielectric constant and Ei denotes the i-th component of the THz-pump or optical-probe E field. Assuming the tetragonal symmetry for Bi2212, the nonlinear susceptibility can be decomposed into the irreducible representations of the D4h point group as ( Here we defined 3) . In our previous work, mean-field calculations showed that the Higgs-mode response should appear only in the isotropic A1g channel Therefore, we attribute the observed THz Kerr signal below Tc to the Higgs mode, and we focus on the A1g components of ∆R/R in the following discussion. In addition to the TPOP measurement, THz time-domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS) in transmission geometry was performed on the same UD76 and OD67 thin films to evaluate the superfluid density, which corresponds to the phase stiffness of the SC order parameter. The A1g component of the THz pulse-induced transient reflectivity change ∆R/R for θPump = 45 • at various temperatures is displayed in Fig. At 30 K, below Tc, ∆R/R for both films show oscillatory behaviors which follow the squared THz-pump E field EPump(t) 2 . In addition to the THz Kerr component, ∆R/R has a decaying component that survives for as long as 10 ps. For the UD76 thin films at 120 K, above Tc, the signal consists of a weaker THz Kerr component and a decaying signal that switches its sign after 2 ps. At 268 K the decaying signal remains positive for all delays. For the OD67 thin films at 150 K, above Tc, the signal consists of a weaker THz Kerr component and a decaying signal. The overall behaviors are similar to the results obtained in the single crystals To quantitatively discuss the temperature dependence of the amplitude of the THz Kerr signal, we should take into account the temperature dependence of the squared THz-pump E field inside the thin film in the analysis of third-order nonlinear susceptibility χ (3) relevant to the THz Kerr signal. Here, we evaluated the squared THz-pump E field inside the thin film (BFFT) for each temperature by using the optical constants measured by THz transmission spectroscopy. The detailed calculations of BFFT and χ (3) are explained in Appendix B. The obtained temperature dependence of BFFT are shown in Figs. In order to define an onset temperature of the THz Kerr signal (T1 ons ) precisely, we take the second derivative of χ (3) with respect to temperature as shown in Figs. In order to compare the onset temperature of the THz Kerr signal T1 ons and that of the SC phase stiffness, we evaluate the superfluid density by THz-TDS in transmission geometry. Here, the first term is the Drude component and the second term is the SC component, where ωp is the plasma frequency, τ is the scattering time and Ns is the superfluid density. The previous THz optical conductivity measurements and theories showed that the inhomogeneity transfers the spectral weight from the Delta function to the Drude component In both Bi2212 thin films, T1 ons coincides with TNs within our experimental error bars, which further supports the interpretation that T1 ons is attributed to the onset of the Higgs mode and therefore that of the macroscopic SC phase coherence. Now we examine T1 ons of the Bi2212 single-crystalline samples in a wide range of doping from our previous TPOP results Such a behavior has been reported in other cuprate superconductors including LSCO and YBCO, where the onset temperature of the long-range SC phase coherence is shown to exist at most 20 K above Tc in a wide range of doping when probed by the microwave and THz spectroscopy Next, we consider the origin of the second onset temperature of the THz Kerr signal, T2 ons . The values of T2 ons for all the measured samples including the single crystals are represented in the phase diagram of Fig. Furthermore, recent nonlinear conductivity, paraconductivity and torque magnetometry measurements have provided evidence that the macroscopic SC phase coherence vanishes rapidly above Tc in an exponential fashion. In these studies the SC phase locking mechanism among the locally formed SC patches is explained by a phenomenological percolation model We have investigated the Higgs-mode response through the observation of the THz Kerr effect in UD and OD Bi2212 thin films using the TPOP spectroscopy. Two onset temperatures are identified in the THz Kerr signal. Combined with the result of single-crystalline samples, the first one (T1 ons ) is identified at 10 K-30 K above Tc, while the second one (T2 ons ) is located substantially higher than Tc. T1 ons coincides with that of the superfluid density evaluated from the THz optical conductivity measurement, indicating that T1 ons is attributed to the onset temperature of the long-range SC phase coherence which is dynamically fluctuating and snapshotted by the THz probe. On the other hand, the coincidence between T2 ons and the gap opening temperature reported from Nernst signal. In all of the single crystals, T1 ons is located 10-30 K above Tc as summarized in the phase diagram (Fig. 