Motivated by recent experiments on magnetically frustrated heavy fermion metals, we theoretically study the phase diagram of the Kondo lattice model with a nonmagnetic valence bond solid ground state on a ladder. A similar physical setting may be naturally occurring in YbAl3C3, CeAgBi2, and TmB4 compounds. In the insulating limit, the application of a magnetic field drives a quantum phase transition to an easy-plane antiferromagnet, which is described by a Bose-Einstein condensation of magnons. Using a combination of field theoretical techniques and density matrix renormalization group calculations we demonstrate that in one dimension this transition is stable in the presence of a metallic Fermi sea and its universality class in the local magnetic response is unaffected by the itinerant gapless fermions. Moreover, we find that fluctuations about the valence bond solid ground state can mediate an attractive interaction that drives unconventional superconducting correlations. We discuss the extensions of our findings to higher dimensions and argue that, depending on the filling of conduction electrons, the magnon Bose-Einstein condensation transition can remain stable in a metal also in dimensions two and three. Correlated metals with closely competing quantum ground states provide an important platform for studying a range of fascinating phenomena such as strange metallicity From a theoretical perspective, it is necessary to establish what properties of frustrated magnetism, including quantum critical phenomena, are stable in the presence of a metallic band. This question is delicate, as both the magnetic fluctuations and the electronic excitations are gapless at the critical point. In this work, we consider one of the best understood transitions in insulating quantum magnets, the so-called magnon Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) Currently, it is unknown if the magnon BEC transition can take place in a metal. To address this question, we study a lattice model Our main results are summarized in fig. Each site hosts a localized spin and a conduction electron site coupled to their nearest neighbors. Shaded ovals represent the localized spin singlets in the VBS phase. (b) The band structure of conduction electrons for t ⊥ < 2t . Depending on the filling, one or two bands can cross the Fermi level. (c) Schematic phase diagram of the model. The VBS-AFM transition occurs at h c and is of the BEC universality class. In the AFM phase partial gaps open near h g and h g determined by the filling at nonzero J K (shaded green areas). For two bands crossing the Fermi level superconductivity (SC) emerges for sufficiently large J K . The model: We consider the Kondo-Heisenberg model on the two-leg ladder (see fig. where S r,α denotes a vector of spin-1/2 operators at site r, chain α = 1, 2. For J ⊥ = 0 The conduction electron Hamiltonian reads where the dispersion is given by E ± (k) = -2t cos k ∓ t ⊥ -μ, for a chemical potential μ, the lattice constant is set to unity, and ψ k,± = (ψ k,1 ±ψ k,2 )/ √ 2 are two-component spinors in the bonding/antibonding basis. The resulting band structure is presented in fig. Finally, the conduction electrons interact with the localized spins via an antiferromagnetic Kondo coupling H K = J K r,α S r,α • s r,α where s r,α = ψ † r,α (σ/2)ψ r,α and J K > 0. To make headway analytically, we project the S r,α operators in H K onto the low-energy sector of Eq. 1 and obtain in the hard-core boson representation One sees that the spin-flip term acts only between the two fermion bands. As is shown below, this has important consequences, namely stabilizing the BEC transition against Kondo screening. Numerical methods: For the numerical solution of the model, we use the DMRG algorithm as implemented in the ITensor package Magnon BEC transition: We first consider the oneband case for fields below the BEC transition h < h c . As the second band is gapped, one can integrate the fermions out (See section 2 of SI Appendix). Ignoring the hard-core constraint, we find the leading terms (in J K ) to renormalize the bosonic spectrum. In particular, the critical field is reduced , (3) where the expression is for the case of the bottom band being partially filled and J 2 K /t ⊥ J is assumed (see SI Appendix for details). The top line of (3) derives from the transverse part of the Kondo coupling ((2), bottom line), whereas the bottom line arises from the longitudinal part ((2), top line). Up to second order in J K we find that the total magnetization M z = M z f + M z c ≡ r,α S z r,α + s z r,α vanishes for fields h < h c (J K ). However, M z f and M z c themselves do not vanish. In particular, this results in a Zeeman splitting for the conduction electrons. The nonzero values of M z f and M z c appear in second order in J K and do not exhibit any singularities (see SI Appendix for details). This effect remains qualitatively similar in the two-band case. To determine the critical properties at the transition h c (J K ) we use the fermionic representation of H f . In this representation the BEC transition corresponds to a Lifshitz transition, where the chemical potential touches the bottom of the spinon band. At the critical point, we take the low-energy continuum limit (with x denoting position) to find that the lowest-order interaction term in the gradient expansion (f † f ) 2 has to vanish due to the Pauli principle, whereas all of the higher-order terms [such as (f † ∂ x f ) 2 ] are irrelevant at the QCP due to the additional derivatives where f (x, τ ) is the spinon field in the continuum, τ is imaginary time, and There are several predictions that directly follow from the above discussion that we now confirm with DMRG. First, we examine whether the magnon BEC transition survives at finite Kondo coupling. To that end, we set J k = 0.4 and compute the transverse spin susceptibility at the ordering wavevector χ(π) ≡ r e iπ(r-L/2) (S + r,1 - ) , see fig. To precisely locate the critical field h c and determine the critical exponents associated with the transition, we study the finite-size scaling of the spin gap ∆ s close to criticality. The observable ∆ s L z has a vanishing scaling dimension, and consistent with the magnon BEC we assume a dynamical exponent z = 2. Near criticality this implies that ∆ s L z ∼ R[(h -h c )L 1/ν ] for an arbitary scaling function R and that ∆ s L z is L independent at h = h c , i.e. ∆ s L z versus h curves for an increasing set of systems-sizes precisely cross at a single point identified with the critical field h c . This relation is tested in fig. K , in good qualitative agreement with the free-boson result of eq. (3). To estimate the correlation length exponent ν, we study the finite-size scaling of R-curves at criticality (see section 6 of SI Appendix for details). We find ν = 0.49 We now argue that the BEC transition also remains stable in the two-band case. While the boson self-energy in this regime could have divergences at q = ±(k + F ± k - F ), generally, these momenta are not equal to the ordering wavevector Q = π. Assuming J K J , the bosons in the vicinity of q = π are then expected to be described by the same theory Eq. 4 in the vicinity of h c (J K ) as in the one band case. Hence, the universality class of the transition is unchanged, and corrections to Eq. 3 are subleading at weak coupling. Superconductivity in the 2-band case: We now consider the properties of conduction electrons for the two-band case (fig. Ignoring for the moment the aforementioned Zeeman splitting, integrating out the gapped hard-core bosons leads to two interaction terms where the index +(-) refers to individual bands (see fig. Semiclassically, the terms in Eq. 5 create a pinning potential for the fields making their excitations gapped. To assess their possible impact in the quantum regime, we performed one-loop renormalization group (RG) analysis. The corresponding equations have been derived in Ref. Let us now discuss the interplay of the above effects and the Zeeman splitting E Z due to a finite J K . The Zeeman splitting E Z can thwart superconductivity It follows that for infinitesimal J K , E Z dominates while at larger J K , ∆ SC takes over, which represents a "Doniach-like" competition between Zeeman splitting and superconductivity. This is similar to the competition between the Kondo coupling and the RKKY interaction. We note that the superconducting pairing due to VBS fluctuations differs from the conventional scenario of a spin density wave QCP The expectations above are confirmed by the DMRG results in fig. ), and SC (defined above), O ± SC , order parameters, through their respective correlation functions χ + D/S (r) = (O + SC/SDW ) † (L/2)O + SC/SDW (r) . At J k = 0.2, we find that both order parameters fall off like a power-law, akin to the decoupled free-electron limit. By contrast, in the spin gapped phase, J k = 2.4, the SDW FIG. Interactions in the AFM phase: For h > h c (J K ) there is a finite density of spinons in the fermionic representation of the Hamiltonian eq. ( where we use φ(x) for the spinon fields. First, a velocity renormalization appears due to dx∂ x φ∂ x φ σ . H I , on the other hand, describes the interaction between fermionic spinons and the Fermi sea where k f F is the Fermi wavector of the spinons. As φ, φ ρ,σ are slowly varying functions of x the integral averages to zero except for two special cases If that is so, however, this term is relevant throughout the AFM phase similar to the opening of the spin-density wave gap in itinerant magnets. The presence of dxM z f ∂ x φ σ term leads additionally to a Zeeman splitting for the conduction electrons. For h > h c , M z f is nonzero even in the absence of Kondo coupling and thus this term is linear in J K and is parametrically larger then both the AFM gap and the perturbatively induced Zeeman splitting ∼ J 2 K discussed for h < h c . Thus, Zeeman splitting ∼ J K is the dominant effect of the Kondo coupling and we need to reconsider the effect of the interaction Eq. 6 starting with the Zeeman-split Fermi points. The condition for Eq. 6 not to be averaged to zero is then . In each case, one of the three gapless modes is gapped out. At finite J K one expects each of these special values broaden into an interval, as is shown by the shaded green regions in Fig. Extensions to 2D and 3D: We now show that the magnon BEC transition is also stable at finite J K in the one-band case for 2D and 3D extensions of the model considered here. The two-dimensional extension of the model in fig. where for q y close to π, f (k, q) ∼ f (k, π)(q y -π) (see SI Appendix for details). Assuming that the BEC occurs for bosons with q = Q 0 [e.g. Q 0 = (π, π, π) in 3D], only fermions around the Fermi surface points connected by Q 0 ('hot spots') are coupled to the critical mode. To assess the influence of the interactions, we calculate their scaling dimension for two cases with the Fermi velocities at the 'hot spots' being antiparallel or not. We define the scaling dimension of energy and the momentum parallel to the Fermi velocities to be 1: [ε] = [k ] = 1, while the remaining momenta have scaling dimension 2 to keep z = 2 intact . This provides a strong indication that the BEC transition should retain its universality class in the oneband case. The above result implies, that the quantum critical behavior is governed by the same theory as in the undoped case, i.e. that of a dilute z = 2 Bose gas. Interestingly, this prediction may be verified in YbAl 3 C 3 , where a VBS ground state of the Yb moments Discussion and conclusions: In this work we have studied quantum critical properties and phases of a one-dimensional frustrated Kondo lattice with a nonmagnetic valence bond solid state in magnetic field. We have shown that the field-induced magnon BEC transition that occurs in the insulating limit is stable in the presence of a metallic conduction band and retains its universality class, with the critical value of the field being lowered. We have demonstrated that VBS fluctuations lead to unconventional superconductivity in the case of two partially filled bands. Finally, we have shown that the stability of the magnon BEC transition extends to higher-dimensional versions of the model. Our results allows us to draw conclusions regarding field-induced transitions in heavy-fermion materials with spins residing on frustrated lattices. In particular, our results have lead us to a clear interpretation of the observed criticality in YbAl 3 C 3 and anchor future studies of the phase diagrams and quantum criticality of frustrated Kondo lattices. It will be also interesting to extend our theory to VBS states that may break a crystalline symmetry as well as field-tuned VBS to AFM transitions that occur at fractional magnetization plateaus In the Supplementary Material we present the details of analytic calculations as well as additional numerical details supporting the results presented in the main text. For the case of a single band crossing the Fermi energy we show how the expressions in the main text are derived; in the AFM phase we present the bosonized Hamiltonian for the localized spins and discuss the details of the calculation when the spinon-electron interaction is relevant; for the case when two bands cross the Fermi energy the details of the renormalization group (RG) calculations are given. Finally, we discuss the effects of a commensurate filling of the conduction bands, which was not discussed in the main text. The Kondo-Heisenberg ladder model that we have focused our study on is given by where ψ r,α = (ψ r,α,↑ , ψ r,α,↓ ), μ = 0 corresponds to half-filling, and we focus on J ⊥ J . We first discuss the mapping of the Heisenberg ladder model H f to an XXZ spin chain and hardcore bosons or Jordan-Wigner fermions for clarity to the reader, as these results are well known Let us for the moment ignore J and analyze the resulting states. The ground state (at h = 0) consists of singlets ) on every rung of the ladder with energy -3J ⊥ /4. The excited states are the three triplet states on each rung. For h = 0 the three triplet states are degenerate with the energy J ⊥ /4. Whereas, for h = 0 the triplet states split and the energies are given by J ⊥ /4 ± h and J ⊥ /4 for S z = ±1 and 0, respectively. Under an applied magnetic field, the energy of the lowest triplet state will eventually cross that of the singlet state and a transition occurs. We can map the two lowest lying states onto a spin-1/2 chain identifying the singlet rung state 2) with spin down | ↓ and first excited triplet state | ↑ i,1 ↑ i,2 with spin up | ↑ . We can now also reintroduce J to the model and calculate the matrix elements of the J part of Hamiltonian. For this we consider the state of two adjacent rungs: 2 are the higher energy triplet states. If we limit ourselves to the two lowest lying states of each rung we obtain an effective spin-1/2 XXZ Hamiltonian The Hamiltonian Eq. (S2) has a fully polarized (gapped) ground state for | h| > 3J /2 and a gapless phase that can be readily studied by bosonization otherwise. Thus the hapless phase is limited to fields In this work we will concentrate mostly on the first critical field h c . Alternatively to the above, the spins can be represented in terms of hard-core bosons using the correspondence , leading to the Hamiltonian: From this representation it can be seen that the transition is of BEC type, with bosons with momentum π/a condensing at the critical field. On the other hand, the spin chain Hamiltonian can be written as well using fermionic (spinon) operators with the help of Jordan-Wigner transformation: where the string operator is chosen to make the bosonized expressions for spin operators (see below) more convenient. In the literature, an additional transformation f i → (-1) i f i is usually applied. This results in the following hamiltonian: We move on to the Kondo coupling, that can be rewritten as (to simplify the notation let us consider a single rung of the ladder): Here we consider the limit of small Kondo coupling. In that case, since states |0 and | -1 are always gapped with the energy being of the order J ⊥ , one can see that the contributions from coupling to this states will be at least of the order J 2 K /J ⊥ (using e.g. second-order perturbation theory) and we can neglect them. The remaining matrix elements can be written using the Si or a i operators resulting in: where introducing ψ ± i ≡ (c 1i ± c 2i )/ √ 2 one gets: The Hamiltonian of the conduction electrons can be rewritten as: where ξ k = -2t cos k -μ, where we have set the lattice constant to unity for brevity. In the regime h < h c (J K ) the boson density is assumed to be zero. As the Hamiltonian is quadratic in fermionic fields we proceed by integrating them out and then expanding in powers of the bosonic fields. Here we ignore the hard-core constraint and work with usual Bose fields; formally one may replace the constraint by an on-site repulsion that is much larger then the bandwidth. Since we are interested in qualitative effects due to the Kondo coupling, we may examine the terms in the action generated by the Kondo coupling in the free boson limit and then study the effect of these new terms if a hard-core constraint is implemented. The partition function reads where A c denotes the expectation value of an arbitrary operator A and is given by Moreover, as the bosons are dilute it makes sense to decompose the induced term in powers of a/a † fields. There are two types of couplings that correspond to the first and second term in Eq. (S7) represented as vertices in Fig. First of all it is easy to see that it's negative such that the critical field for the BEC is lower in the presence of a small J K . Note that if the g-factor of itinerant electrons had not been neglected there would have been an additional contribution ∼ -J K g c hv F a † a/2π due to the S z i • s z i part of the Kondo coupling (referred to as the ZZ part hereafter) further decreasing h c (J K ). Now let us discuss the value of the present contribution. For the case Fig. 1 -2 t t ⊥ sin q 2 sin (x + q/2) The results are presented in Fig. ). However, the difference between the value at maximum and at q = π (where the original spinon dispersion has minimum) is of order 1. As we assume J K J , t ⊥ it follows that the renormalized spinon dispersion still has a minimum at q = π. FIG. On the other hand, for t ⊥ ≤ 2t , μ < -t ⊥ + 2t (Fig. If we now consider the next order diagrams, a peculiar result is that the Peierls singularity is seen in the first diagram of Fig. However, the same diagram results in a non-zero self energy for the bosonic propagator depicted in Fig S4 . The expression corresponding to the diagram is: where 2 in front is due to summation over spin indices, q 0 is the incoming momentum and we set the incoming frequency to be zero, as h c is set by D -1 (iω = 0, q 0 ) = 0, D being the bosonic propagator. For the one -band case when the "+" band is partially occupied while the "-" band is empty, the latter's contribution vanishes (e.g. the integral over ε is zero as the poles are in the same half-plane), while the former is: One can see that even if ε q+q0 = 0 the denominator is nonzero for all the integration region; thus we can take q 0 = π, ε q+q0 = J (-cos q + 1); One can rewrite the integral as: For 1/8 filling k F = π/4, for J = 0.3, t = 1, one gets δh c ≈ -0.0129J 2 K , while the contribution of the first diagram (S10) is ≈ -0.009J 2 K . The total result is then δh c ≈ -0.022J 2 K . FIG. We attribute the quantitative discrepancy between these results and the numerical ones to the effect of the hardcore constraint. In particular, while the contribution (S13), if derived with conventional perturbation theory, would contain no contributions from virtual two-boson states (because it stems from the ZZ part of the Kondo coupling, Eq. where the factor of 2 is due to the bosonic creation operator matrix element. Overall, this leads to δh f ree c = -2J 2 K 16t ⊥ . In the hard-core limit, on the other hand, the transition (1)→( We can also look at the effective low-energy properties of the fermions due to integrating the bosons out. Using perturbation theory one gets the following interaction term: Using the fermionic expressions for spins one however has: ) and Wick's theorem was used; averaging in the Green's functions is carried over the vacuum state. Hence, the fermions are not affected in this case for fields below the critical one. Let us now consider the XX and YY couplings. As they include the gapped fermions it is a good idea to get rid of them first. We have the action: where (G 0 ) ii is the Fourier transform of If we omit the frequency dependence of G 0 (iε, k) and take the extreme case t ⊥ t the last two terms take the form which is the ZZ coupling already considered (the first term is absorbed in the conduction electrons' chemical potential). Furthermore, this coupling is smaller then the original ZZ one by the parameter J K /t ⊥ and thus can be neglected in the low-energy theory. However, there still may be effects that arise from the high frequencies and where the frequency dependence of G 0 can not be omitted. We turn now to consideration of such effects by considering lowest order diagrams. G ↓,0 (i(ε-ω),k-q) D 0 (iω,q) ∑ ↑ (iε,k): FIG. S5: Self-energy diagrams for fermions (band index suppressed); interaction vertices defined in Fig. Let us first study the lowest-order diagrams contributing to the fermionic self-energy (see Fig. where ε q = J ⊥ + J cos q -h is the bosonic dispersion relation from Eq. (S4). The explicit expressions for the self-energies are: Or, in real frequencies after a Wick rotation: Most importantly, the self energies for spin up and down electrons are not equal to each other leading to a Zeeman effect. Namely, close to the Fermi level we can take ε ≈ 0 to get: where the iδ can be dropped since the denominators are never zero in the gapped phase. Note that this difference can be backtracked to the frequency dependence of the bosonic propagator. Additionally, unless k F = π/2 (i.e. one of the bands is half filled), this quantity is not singular at the BEC transition. This result suggests that the energy of spin up electrons is smaller then that of spin down ones, which results (at a fixed chemical potential) in a depopulation of the spin down subband with respect to spin down one. This also suggests that a) a splitting of the Fermi points for up/down electrons even if g c = 0; b) finite magnetization of the conduction electrons. We can also check the latter statement directly. Let us now calculate the magnetization of conduction electrons and localized spins perturbatively (i.e. the correction to Green's functions is taken in the lowest order in the interaction): Evaluating the integral over ω in the first term (using ε q > 0, i.e. bosons are gapped) we get: Analogously performing the integrals for the second term we get: Altogether, one gets: the last line obtained with k → k + q, q → -q using ε -q = ε q . Interestingly, the total magnetization actually turns out to be directed opposite to magnetic field, despite Zeeman splitting lowering the energy of the spins along the field. This can be backtracked to the presence of a pole in the fermionic self energy, which contributes to the magnetization as is shown above. For the localized spins total magnetization is equal to the number of bosons (note the additional minus sign due to the fermionic bubble in the diagram): resulting in It is evident from Eqs. (S17), (S18) that the total magnetization M cond + M loc vanishes; i.e. despite the presence of Zeeman splitting the system is not magnetized. Note that the effect of the ZZ term in the Kondo Hamiltonian is of higher order in J K , as the magnetization for both the conduction electrons and the localized spins is perturbatively small. Once again, at the BEC transition only q = π becomes gapless, so unless the fermions are at half-filling, the contribution to magnetization described above will evolve smoothly through h c . Finally, let us remark that the effects and expressions above are valid also for the case where both bands cross the Fermi level. Gap in the bosonic spectrum still guarantees that the corrections obtained are indeed small and no divergencies occur. In this case the hard-core bosons/spinons stemming from the spin ladder are not gapped and we can not ignore the interactions between them or simply integrate them out. We can, however, linearize near the Fermi points of the Jordan-Wigner (spinon) representation of the spin and then use bosonization to include the interactions nonperturbatively. One can also use directly the spin-boson mapping (note that these bosons describe the low-energy degrees of freedom of spinons and are different from the hard-core bosons introduced previously): where k f F is the filling of the Jordan-Wigner fermion band that depends on h = h-J ⊥ -J /2 and α is the lattice cutoff of the order of the lattice constant. For h = 0 (halfway through the gapless phase) one should have Sz = f † i f i -1/2 = 0 and thus the band is at half filling k f F = π. The fermionic hopping term transforms into the bare term where v F = J sin(k f F a). The interaction term, which is due to ZZ coupling is then: The last term loses its relevance in a magnetic field away from half filling. Moreover, one can estimate its scaling dimension for h = 0: as e ia[φ(x)] e -ia[φ(0)] ∼ r -a 2 K/2 for large r, [cos(4φ(x))] = L -4K which means that it is irrelevant for K > 1/2. Indeed the exact solution has K = 3/4 where φ → φ-π(M z f -1/2)x in a finite h. Note that here the magnetization M z f is not induced by the Kondo coupling as was discussed above for h < h c . Consequently, in the leading order we will neglect the perturbative corrections to M z f here. (M z f -1/2) is given by Kh/u, note however that K and u are themselves function of h. We now bosonize the itinerant fermions using the expressions for the fermionic operators: Now let us consider the Kondo term. We start with the ZZ part: The first term is relevant and induces a magnetization in the itinerant subsystem leading to splitting of the two cases above into four In the bosonic language this effect is absorbed into x. On the other hand, the second term is marginal. As for the third term, let us first consider it on its own (without the effect of Zeeman splitting). This term is then nonvanishing only for k f F = k F ; π -k F . In that case it can, however, be relevant: It is relevant if K < 1 which is true throughout the superfluid phase. Consequently, this coupling is relevant. Rewriting the term for k f F = k F one has: One can see that it acts to gap out two of the modes at filling the itinerant fermions are commensurate with the excitations of localized spins. Note however that the Zeeman splitting itself is of order J K . If we ignore it and go to the k f F = k F = π/2 case there will be four terms probably gapping out all the modes in the system (see also analysis of this special case in ). Taking into account the presence of both the Zeeman splitting and the cosine-interaction terms one sees that only one cosine term can be non-oscillating for a particular h, i.e. the following four cases 4v F , as is marked by the green regions in Fig. can still open a gap similar to the doping-induced Mott transition Away from the special fillings described above the Sz Sz correlations at 2k F are short-ranged and one can use perturbation theory (note that the power-law correlations at zero momentum transfer lead to the gradient terms and are presented above). In second order one obtains the following term: where S z (x, τ ) = Sz (x, τ ) -Sz (x, τ ) and S z (x, τ )S z (x , τ ) has short-range correlations (however, unlike the h < h c case they are not zero here). Note that for finite q one has d Sz (x, τ ) Sz (x , τ ) as Sz (x) = const and thus the average terms do not contribute. For weak coupling this term is marginal. Assuming the interaction to be also instantaneous (which is a reasonable assumption if the spin correlations are gapped at q), one can rewrite it using the conventional notations > 1, which leads to the conclusion that the interaction is marginally irrelevant. Note that for the case of half-filled band an umklapp term is allowed in the low-energy theory. As K ρ < 1 it follows that it is (marginally) relevant and leads to a Mott transition. In principle, for any commensurate filling an umklapp term will emerge in a certain order of perturbation theory. However, the requirement for Mott transition is K ρ < 1/n 2 , n being the order of commensurability. Thus, in the weak coupling limit the Mott transition is expected for the half filled band only. The interband part of the Kondo Hamiltonian (XX and YY coupling), taken at low energies, results in the same ZZ coupling after the second band is integrated out, as is shown above, and does not lead to any new effects. The self-energy effects (S16) (where the large frequencies have to be taken into account) that lead to a Zeeman splitting remain present, however, their effect is perturbatively smaller in the most of the AFM phase than the one caused by the ZZ interaction with the spinons, the latter being linear in J K . The perturbative approach employed in the previous section does not work here, as the lowest-order diagram contains a logarithmically diverging fermionic bubble. On the other hand, the bosons are gapped in this regime and we can integrate them out to obtain an effective interaction for fermions. The low-energy theory for the conduction electrons (Fig. FIG. First of all, the S z σ z term in the Kondo Hamiltonian could generate an interaction for the fermions in second order in J K . However, as was shown in the one-band case, the lowest-order contribution vanishes. To integrate out the bosons with the remaining S + σ -part of H K we simply perform an algebraic transformation in the action: q,ω a q,ω + a † q,ω j q,ω + a q,ω j † q,ω = (-iω + ε q )ã † q,ω ãq,ω -(-iω + ε q ) -1 j † q,ω j q,ω ; ãq,ω = a q,ω + (iω -ε q ) -1 j q,ω ; The interactions lead to two important effects : a) appearance of self-energies that ultimately results in a Zeeman effect for the conduction electrons; b) corrections to the interactions contain low-energy singularities and may result in gap opening, if some of them flow to strong coupling in the RG sense. a) has been considered in and the expressions derived there (e.g. for the Zeeman splitting Eq. (S16)) remain valid also in the two band case. Here we ignore the self-energy effects discussed in and concentrate on the low-energy interaction between the fermions of the two bands. As the bosonic spectrum ε q is gapped, to extract the low-energy lagrangian we can take ω = 0 and q such that all the fermionic fields are close to the Fermi momentum in the inverse propagator (-iω + ε q ) -1 (the neglected terms will have higher powers of q or ω making them less relevant). As there is no ω dependence we can write an explicit interaction Hamiltonian. The possible q values are ±(k The resulting Hamiltonian is (using the usual 1D notations for right-and left-movers): where k, k , q means the sum being taken only over small momenta. Rewriting these in real space one gets: ρ -r +,↑ (x)ρ r -,↓ (x) + ρ -r +,↓ (x)ρ r -,↑ (x) + ψ r, † +,↑ (x)ψ -r, † +,↓ (x)ψ -r -,↓ (x)ψ r -,↑ (x) + h.c.  . The expression above can be bosonized yielding: The first two terms contribute to the renormalization of the Fermi velocities as well as Luttinger parameter K, which are marginal in the RG sense while the last two are genuine interaction terms. Their scaling dimension is: . It is evident that in the absence of other interactions these terms are also marginal. Thus to move forward we should consider the RG flow with the initial conditions specified by (S22). The 2-loop RG equations for an interacting 2-band model have been derived for the general case in , where A and B are + and -in our case. However, other 9 couplings get generated in the RG. An example of an RG flow is in Fig. ⊥( The flow is shown up to 0.96 of the value of RG scale where couplings diverge. Some of the couplings are equal and the corresponding curves overlap -see text for the description of the flow. Qualitatively similar results are obtained for other combinations of parameter values. It turns out that 10 of 12 couplings grow and eventually diverge at a critical scale. Two of these (g BBBB ) correspond to the cosine term in usual 1D fermion chains with spin. They lead to the pinning of the phase φ σ . Consequently, the spin correlations induced by the conduction electrons are short-ranged in this phase. However, to study the qualitative character of the resulting phase in detail we need to bosonize the interaction terms that diverge. It goes as follows: , where α is the lattice cutoff scale. First we omit the Klein factors and write the bosonized expression corresponding to each of the interactions (we us the notations of AAAA : r,σ AABB : r,σ,a=+,- AABB : r,σ,a=+,- ABBA : r,σ,a=+,- where : ... : is for normal ordering; each term is marked by the g-notation from Let us now consider the effects of the presence of Klein factors U a r,σ in the operators ψ a r,σ . The U operators can be chosen unitary such that for those with the same indices they satisfy U a † r,σ U a r,σ = U a r,σ U a † r,σ = 1 Let us first consider the issue of simultaneous diagonalization. Actually, for many of the couplings above the products of Klein factors reduce to ±1 due to U † U = 1 (the ones that have -1 due to the interchange of fermionic operators are highlighted above). The ones remaining are: g AABB . Every pair of them has only two operators with the same indices, implying that these terms commute with each other Let us now consider the signs. More precisely, we need to define the observables in agreement with the sign conventions for the interactions. We choose the Klein factor products in the interactions to be all equal to 1. Consequently, the CDW/SDW/SC operators in a single leg are defined as for the single fermionic chain in Regarding the possible phases there are two possible tuning parameters: ratios the absolute value of the bare couplings should not matter as long as they are small). The system always flows to strong coupling and eventually diverges at some critical scale l 0 . The signs of the couplings are set well before the coupling become of order 1 and do not change up to l c . The signs are: g ⊥( +--+ turn out to be smaller in absolute value then the others. Using the bosonized expressions above one finds that g ⊥( ++++/----< 0 pins the φ ± σ fields and then the g ⊥( showing the d-wave character of the state. It is straightforward to check that these results are in line with a naive mean-field decoupling of the interaction terms, signifying that we have chosen consistent signs due to the Klein factors. To be even more precise, let us consider the CDW-SC competition controlled by the Luttinger parameter K ρ . Numerical solutions of RG equation that the g ⊥( Let us now discuss the interplay of the above effects and the Zeeman splitting arising from self-energy in Eq. (S16). Zeeman splitting actually hinders superconductivity (see also below); in the RG sense, it provides a lower cutoff for the flow. At that cutoff, if the dimensionless couplings responsible for the superconductivity are still small, the Zeeman effect needs to be taken into account first -it results in the absence of superconductivity in the low-energy theory (see below). However, if the coupling become of order 1 at the cutoff scale this suggests that superconducting corrrelations overcome the Zeeman splitting and dominate the low-energy physics. The couplings are marginal such that g(l) ∼ g 0 l where the RG scale l is equal to log(v F /α)/E Z at the cutoff, resulting in the condition v F /αe -1/g0 > E Z for a Zeeman energy E Z . Same condition can be obtained by comparing an estimate for the superconducting gap with the Zeeman energy akin to the Clogston-Chandrasekar limit Apart from the special cases k + F , k - F = π, 0, π ± 2πm, ±2πm there is no interaction between the low-energy fermions and spinons due to the XX and YY parts of the Kondo coupling. As the spin correlations at q = ±(k + F ± k - F ) are gapped one could expect similar physics as for h < h c albeit with a Zeeman splitting of J K M z f /2. Like in the single band case, the Zeeman splitting has to be included before other interaction effects, its scaling dimension being larger. The Zeeman splitting reduces the number of low-energy couplings for the model respecting momentum conservation, as now k AAAA/BBBB , g ⊥ ABAB , g AABB involve at least one fermionic operator not at the Fermi energy. The latter two are actually induced by the Kondo coupling and correspond to the cosine terms in bosonized form. Thus the only low-energy interaction remaining is g ABBA that renormalizes the velocities but can not open a gap. One can also analyze the special points The first case is identical to the one for the single chain, i.e. there appears an interaction term (ZZ) that is relevant. For the case k the interaction term appears (using (S19)): The expression above is needed only to evaluate the scaling dimension which is 2 σ )/4 < 0 for 3/4 < K < 1, i.e. is irrelevant. Interestingly, the long-range spin correlations seem to suppress the instability of the fermion LL. Note that in this special case the spin correlations at k - F -k + F are gapped and can be still integrated out (vice versa for k ++--> 0) leading to a phase with one charge and one spin mode (although with a mixed character in band space) being gapped (g ++--gaps out the modes, while the other couplings only renormalize the LL parameters). The following particular cases are special: • 1 band at the Fermi level k F = π/2 (or other commensurate filling): For h > h c there is a short-ranged ZZ coupling at 2k F generated by the localized spins away from k f F = π/2 ↔ h = 0. One can consider now also the umklapp terms: with the scaling dimension 2 -2K ρ . As K ρ < 1 (see discussion below Eq. (S21)) this term is relevant and leads to a Mott transition. The phase φ ρ is then pinned at π/ √ 2 and the CDW as well as SC correlations are short-ranged while all the spin correlations are power-law and isotropic Other commensurate fillings could be analyzed similarly, but one needs to go to higher orders in perturbation theory in J K and thus we do not consider them. Moreover, Mott transition for non-half-filled cases are not expected to occur at arbitrary weak coupling as K ρ < 1/n 2 , where n is the order of commensurability, is required • 2 bands at the Fermi level with k For h < h c we should additionally consider the umklapp interactions. This is however rather complicated, as this adds several new coupling constants to the RG and the equations in In this case the nature of the 'BEC' transition is not as clear, as the gap is indeed crucial for itinerant fermion correlations at q = π. For h > h c one can note that in the bosonized expressions for S ± (x) there is a part oscillating with q = π throughout the superfluid phase. This results in an additional coupling: +c.c. The scaling dimension of this term is 2 -1 4K -(K ρ + K -1 ρ )/4 -(K σ + K -1 σ )/4 > 0 for 3/4 < K < 1 and small J K . Thus this term is relevant. Performing the summations we get: Since the expression contains non-commmuting fields it cannot be interpreted in semiclassical terms. One sees that it can potentially localize four out of five gapless modes in the system. • k + F = 0: In this case the second band is exactly at a Van Hove singularity. Consequently, one could think that the results of the treatment for k + F = 0 still apply, but with a certain enhancement of the interaction effects due to the singularity in the density of states. We will show now that the conclusion of the stability of the Magnon BEC transition (at least in the 1-band case) carries over to higher dimensionalities. Let us consider the relevance of the Kondo coupling for the case of a 2 or 3 dimensional system built of ladders (a 2D example id in Fig. ( Sz (q) + 1/2)(s z 1 (q) + s z 2 (q)) - S-(q)(s + 1 (q) -s + 2 (q)) + S+ (q)(s - 1 (q) -s - 2 (q)) s α a (q) = ψ † a (k + q)σ α ψ a (k), where introducing ψ ± one gets: ( Sz (q) + 1/2) 1 + e i(φ ky +qy -φ ky ) 2 [s z + (q) + s z -(q)]+ + 1 -e i(φ ky +qy -φ ky ) 2 [ψ † + (k + q)σ z ψ -(k) + ψ † -(k + q)σ z ψ + (k)] 1 -e i(φ ky +qy -φ ky ) 2 [s + + (q) + s + -(q)]+ + 1 + e i(φ ky +qy -φ ky ) 2 [ψ † + (k + q)σ + ψ -(k) + ψ † -(k + q)σ + ψ + (k)] + h.c. From the definition (S25) it follows that for q y ≈ π e i(φ ky +qy ) ≈ e i(φ ky ) + O(q y -π); i.e. for q y → π one finds that 1-e i(φ ky +qy -φ ky ) vanishes linearly as q y -π, while 1+e i(φ ky +qy -φ ky ) → 1. We can study now the scaling dimensions of the Kondo coupling at a magnon BEC critical point where ( Sz (q) + 1/2) → dl2πa † (l + q)a(l), S-(q) → a(q). We assume that the BEC transition is caused by the condensation of bosons at the AFM wavevector Q 0 = (π, π) in 2D or Q 0 = (π, π, π) in 3D. We first remark that with bare dynamical exponent z = 2 the ordinary bosonic quartic term is marginal in d = 2 and irrelevant for d > 2 (scaling dimension d + z -4) thus we can ignore corrections to the bosonic scaling in Eq. (S26). We now proceed to the analysis of the Kondo coupling. As z = 1 for the fermions, assigning scaling dimensions is not straightforward; we will thus consider several concrete cases. As the bosons condense at a finite wavevector Q 0 for a generic Fermi surface only points connected by Q 0 ('hot spots') take part in the low-energy physics at the QCP. Near a hot spot, the low-energy lagrangian of the fermions is dεd d kψ † (-iε + v F k 1 + hinder the extrapolation to the thermodynamic limit. To alleviate this issue, we consider a modified data set computed by a moving average over adjacent system sizes, marked by a blue curves in fig. 