The Dirac semimetal PdTe2 was recently reported to be a type-I superconductor with Tc = 1.64 K and a critical field μ0Hc = 13.6 mT. Since type-I superconductivity is unexpected for binary compounds, we have conducted muon spin rotation experiments to probe the superconducting phase on the microscopic scale via its intermediate state. For crystals with a finite demagnetization factor, N , the intermediate state forms in applied fields (1 -N )Hc < Ha < Hc. We have carried out transverse field muon spin rotation measurements on a thin disk-like crystal with the field perpendicular to (N ⊥ = 0.86) and in the plane (N = 0.08) of the disk. By analysing the μSR signal we find that the volume fraction of the normal domains grows quasi-linearly with applied field at the expense of the Meissner domain fraction. This then provides solid evidence for the intermediate state and type-I superconductivity in the bulk of PdTe2. The large family of layered transition metal dichalcogenides is extensively studied because of their fascinating electronic properties. One of the modern-day research interests is a non-trivial nature of the electronic band structure, which may result in topology driven quantum states. Density functional calculations show, for instance, that selected transition metal dichalcogenides host generic three-dimensional type-II Dirac fermion states In a recent paper Leng et al. Nonetheless, several curious features have come to the fore in the superconducting state of PdTe 2 . First of all, ac-susceptibility measurements in a small driving field have revealed large screening signals in applied dc-fields H a > H c (Ref. 10) (here H a is directed along the aaxis). This has been attributed to superconductivity of the surface sheath The resulting complex phase diagram in the H -T plane shows some similarities with the diagrams reported for the superconductors LaRhSi 3 These conflicting results warrant the investigation of the superconducting phase of PdTe 2 on the microscopic scale. For this the μSR technique is extremely well suited, because it is a local probe which permits to determine whether regions with distinct magnetic properties are present in the crystal Although a powerful technique, μSR on type-I superconductors has not been explored in much detail. Studies of the intermediate state in elemental superconductors are scarce and concise Here we report transverse field muon spin rotation measurements in the superconducting phase of PdTe 2 . Experiments were performed on a thin disk-like crystal in two configurations: (i ) with the field perpendicular to the plane of the disk (N ⊥ = 0.86) and (ii ) with the field in the plane of the disk (N = 0.08). By analysing the asymmetry of the μSR signal we find that the normal phase volume fraction grows quasi-linearly with applied field at the expense of the Meissner phase fraction. This provides solid evidence for the intermediate state and type-I superconductivity in the bulk of our PdTe 2 crystal. The PdTe 2 crystal used for the μSR experiment was taken from a single-crystalline boule prepared by the modified Bridgman technique The crystal was attached with its flat surface utilizing vacuum grease (Apiezon N) to a thin copper foil that is supported by a fork-shaped copper holder. A thin layer of Kapton foil was wrapped around the sample and holder to mechanically fix the crystal. The holder was attached to the cold finger of a helium-3 refrigerator (HELIOX, Oxford Instruments) and μSR spectra were taken in the temperature range T = 0.25-5 K. The crystal is oriented with its large surface perpendicular to the muon beam and the area for the implanted muons is ∼55 mm 2 . Muon spin rotation (μSR) experiments were carried out with the Multi Purpose Surface Muon Instrument DOLLY installed at the πE1 beamline at the SμS facility of the Paul Scherrer Institute. The technique employs the decay probability of spin-polarized muons that are implanted in the crystal. In the case of PdTe 2 (density 8.3 g/cm 3 ) the muons typically penetrate over a distance of 133±26 μm, and thus probe the bulk of the crystal. In the presence of a local or applied field at the muon stopping site the muon spin will precess around the field direction with an angular frequency ω μ = γ μ B loc , where γ μ is the muon gyromagnetic ratio (γ μ /2π = 135.5 MHz/T). The subsequent asymmetric decay process is monitored by counting the emitted positrons by scintillation detectors that are placed at opposite directions in the muon-spin precession plane Transverse field (TF) experiments were performed with the magnetic field applied parallel and perpendicular to the crystal plane. In the first configuration the muon spin is along the beam direction, the field in the horizontal plane at right angles to the beam (and in the plane of the disk, N = N ), and the decay positrons are detected in the backward and forward counters. In the second case the beam-line is operated in the muon spinrotated mode, the applied field is along the beam direction (perpendicular to the plane of the disk, N = N ⊥ ), and the decay positrons are collected in the left and right counters. In the spin-rotated mode the muon spin is directed ∼ 45 • out of the horizontal plane. This results is a reduced asymmetry function (A ≈ 0.18) with respect to the full asymmetry (A ≈ 0.23) in the non-spin-rotated mode. The μSR time spectra were analysed with the software packages WIMDA 41 and MUSRFIT In order to investigate the presence of the intermediate state we have scanned the superconducting phase diagram as depicted in Fig. In Fig. The μSR response A(t) = AP (t), where P (t) is the muon depolarization function, in panel (a) of Fig. Here A 0 is the initial asymmetry and σ KG the depolarization rate. The fit is shown in panel (a) by the solid blue line. The fit parameters are A 0 = 17.6 and σ KG = 0.05 μs -1 . The small depolarization rate is attributed to a Gaussian distribution of static nuclear moments. In the normal phase, panel (c), the μSR response is best fitted with the function (solid black line): where σ N is a Gaussian damping rate, B a the applied field and φ N a phase factor. The fit parameters are A 0 = 17.4 and σ N = 0.04 μs -1 . The small damping rate is attributed to the field distribution of nuclear moments as well, which is considered to be static in the μSR time window. In an applied field in the superconducting phase, panel (b), best fits are obtained with a three component function (in the following we use B a and B c for the applied and critical field rather than H a and H c ) The third term, which we give the label 'background' for the moment, is small and accounts for muons that precess in the applied field at the angular frequency ω = γ μ B a , and σ bg and φ bg are the related damping and phase factor, respectively. f S = A S /A 0 , f N = A N /A 0 and f bg = A bg /A 0 are the volume fractions related to the superconducting domains, normal domains, and the background term, respectively. A 0 = A S + A N + A bg is the full experimental asymmetry, and was kept constant in the fitting procedure. The fit parameters at 9 mT (panel (b)) are: f S = 0.34 (solid blue line), f N = 0.56 and σ N = 0.25 μs -1 (solid green line), and f bg = 0.10 and σ bg = 0.50 μs -1 (solid pink line). Here we have fixed σ KG = 0.05 μs -1 . We remark that the Gaussian damping in the normal domains, σ N = 0.25 μs -1 , is larger than the value extracted from the normal state fit, see panel (c). This is not unexpected given the complicated domain patterns that can arise in the intermediate state In order to follow the evolution of the intermediate state with increasing magnetic field it is illustrative to inspect the Fast Fourier Transforms (FFT) of the μSR time spectra. The FFT amplitudes are shown in a threedimensional (3D) plot in Fig. In order to produce a quantitative analysis of the growth of the intermediate phase we have fitted the μSR spectra in applied fields to Eq. 3, as illustrated in Fig. Overall, our results comply with the simple model, but for small fields the quasi-linear behavior does not extend all the way to H a = (1 -N )H c . This points to a complex flux penetration process in weak fields. To conclude this section we remark that the value of H c at T = 0.26 K obtained by μSR for H a c, is close to the value for H a a (Ref. 10). A second set of spectra was taken after field cooling in 5 mT to a base temperature of 0.26 K, followed by stepwise heating the crystal to above T c , as indicated in Fig. In Fig. The most important conclusion that can be drawn from our μSR experiments is that the bulk of our PdTe 2 crystal exhibits type-I superconductivity. Solid evidence for this is provided by the detection of the intermediate phase. Here we use the muon as a local probe of the bulk on the microscopic level. It is of interest to provide a lower bound of the crystal volume that is occupied by type-I superconductivity. It cannot simply be taken equal to the ZFC Meissner volume, f S = 1, deduced from Fig. From the data in Fig. Next we address the background term, that results in the remaining volume fraction (5-10%) due to the third component in Eq. 3, i.e. muons that precess at the frequency of the applied field. Since the muons and decay positrons events are collected in the so-called VETO mode, the contribution from positrons arising from muons that do not stop in the sample will be small. Besides, the damping rate (e.g. σ bg = 0.50 μs -1 for the spectrum in Fig. Another aspect is that the superconducting and normal domains in the intermediate state are separated by domain walls. The width of the domain wall On the other hand, the possibility that a minute fraction of the crystal exhibits type-II superconductivity cannot be completely dismissed. In a type-II superconductor the local field in the vortex phase is close to the applied field and thus its field distribution could contribute to f bg . Local type-II behavior could possibly originate from a pronounced deviation of the 1:2 stoichiometry. We recall, however, that the EDX spectra show a uniform 1:2 composition within the experimental resolution of 0.5%. A mixed type-I and type-II behavior has been evoked to explain the STM/STS and PCS spectra, measured at the surface of PdTe 2 We have investigated the superconducting phase of PdTe 2 (T c = 1.6 K) by transverse field muon spin rotation experiments. μSR spectra were taken on a thin disk-like crystal in two configurations: with the field perpendicular to the plane of the disk (N ⊥ = 0.86) and with the field in the plane of the disk (N = 0.08). The H -T phase diagram was scanned as a function of temperature and applied field. The μSR spectra have been analysed with a three component muon depolarization function, accounting for the superconducting domains, the normal domains and a background term. In the superconducting phase normal domains are found in which the local field is always equal to B c and larger than the applied field. This is the hall mark of the intermediate phase in a type-I superconductor. The background term is predominantly attributed to muons stopping in the superconducting-normal domain walls. In conclusion, our μSR study provides solid evidence for type-I behavior in the bulk of the PdTe 2 crystal. 