Superconductors usually display either type-I or type-II superconductivity and the coexistence of these two types in the same material, for example at different temperatures is rare in nature. We the employed muon spin rotation (μSR) technique to unveil the superconducting phase diagram of the dodecaboride ZrB12 and obtained clear evidence of both type-I and type-II characteristics. Most importantly, we found a region showing unusual behavior where the usually mutually exclusive μSR signatures of type-I and type-II superconductivity coexist. We reproduced that behavior in theoretical modeling that required taking into account multiple bands and multiple coherence lengths, which suggests that material has one coherence length larger and another smaller than the magnetic field penetration length (the type-1.5 regime). At stronger fields, a footprint of the type-II mixed state showing square flux-line lattice was also obtained using neutron diffraction. Despite a century of research, the classification of superconducting states according to types of fermionc pairing and resulting properties is an actively developing field. According to Ginzburg and Landau paradigm, superconductors are classified as type-I and type-II based on the distribution of the magnetic field in materials. This is defined by Ginzburg-Landau parameter, κ = λ ξ , where λ is the magnetic penetration depth and ξ is the coherence length Superconductivity in ZrB 12 was first observed as early as in 1960's by Matthias et al. In this section we present the magnetic field distribution of ZrB 12 obtained by μSR and point out the emergence of the different superconducting phases on varying the applied magnetic field and temperature. In addition, we show the direct signature of the well ordered vortex lattice appearing in the mixed state using neutron diffraction studies. This highlights the advantage of using neutrons and muons in combination to reveal different superconducting phases in materials. Figures Small-angle neutron scattering (SANS) measurements allow us to confirm and characterise the flux-line lattice (FLL) in the mixed state of ZrB 12 . A representative diffraction image of ZrB 12 is presented in Fig. TF-μSR data collected at various fields and temperature are summarized in a H-T phase diagram in Fig. The most important result of this study is the observation of the mixed-intermediate state showing coexistence of type-I-like and type-II-like responses. Note that the "coexistent type-I and type-II response" is not a consequence of spatial inhomogeneity of κ. Namely, in order to produce such a response, the homogeneity should be of very large length scale, with macroscopic type-I domain. But then, at different temperatures such inhomogeneity would result in multiple peaks above the applied magnetic field in the type-I regime, which was not observed here. That points to intrinsic origin of the effect. In order to analyze the origin of this μSR response, we performed numerical modeling of both single-and multiband models. The relatively weak interband coupling, suggested by temperature dependence of magnetic field penetration length, suggests that one needs to account for superconducting degrees of freedom in both bands and use the two-band Ginzburg-Landau model where H is applied magnetic field, A is magnetic vector potential, ψ 1,2 represent the superconducting components associated with two bands, and the interband Josephson coupling η should be small, consistently with Ref. We have performed μSR and neutron diffraction measurements to study the rich superconducting phase diagram of ZrB 12 . The most striking effect found in ZrB 12 , is a simultaneous demonstration of both type-I and type-II characteristics in the μSR response in the same compound in a certain temperature range. It was possible to reproduce such a signal in a phenomenological model that takes into account multiple bands. At a large length scale, the state will have great similarities with the Landau state of type-I superconductors with Meissner domains immersed into proliferated tightly bound vortex domains. It would be interesting to extend our studies using low-energy-muon beams The μSR experiments were performed at the ISIS Pulsed Neutron and Muon Source 54 , STFC Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Didcot, United Kingdom. The small angle neutron diffraction experiments were performed at the Institut Laue Langevin, Grenoble, France. This work was supported by the Engineering and Phys-ical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) at Warwick through Grant No. EP/I007210/1 and the Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC) of the UK. P.K.B. would like to thank the Midlands Physics Alliance Graduate School (MPAGS) for financial support. We also wish to acknowledge useful comments from Vladimir Kogan of Ames Laboratory. S.M. acknowledges financial support from the European Unions Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Skodowska-Curie Grant Agreement (GA) No. 665593 