Concentrating solar power, particularly parabolic trough system with solar concentrations less than 50, requires spectrally selective solar absorbers that are thermally stable at high temperatures of 400C above to achieve high efficiency. In this work, the solar-thermal performance of a selective multilayer metafilm absorber is characterized along with a black absorber for comparison by a lab-scale experimental setup that measures the steady-state absorber temperature under multiple solar concentrations. Heat transfer analysis is employed to elucidate different heat transfer modes and validate the solar-thermal experiment. Due to the superior spectral selectivity and excellent thermal stability, the metafilm absorber deposited on the costeffective stainless steel foil could achieve the solar-thermal efficiency 57% at a steady-state temperature of 371C under 10 suns during the lab-scale experiment with losses, while a highest efficiency of 83% was projected under the same conditions for practical solar thermal applications. The results here will facilitate the research and development of novel solar materials for highefficiency solar thermal energy conversion. Renewable energy technologies, such as solar energy, are becoming increasingly important and widespread in today's world as more governments and private companies adopt these technologies as an alternative to fossil fuels. Solar energy can be converted to power efficiently through two main methods: by using solar photovoltaic cells to convert the solar energy to electricity, or by using solar thermal absorbers to convert the solar energy to high-temperature heat to generate power with heat engines One of the most common coatings in high-temperature CSP systems is Pyromark 2500 The basic working principle of solar thermal collectors is illustrated in Figure In this work, the solar-to-heat performance of previously-deveopled selective metafilm absorbers, deposited on both a polished silicon wafer and a cost-effective and flexible stainlesssteel foil, was characterized experimentally via a lab-scale setup that measures the steady-state absorber temperature under multiple solar concentrations. A black absorber as a reference sample was also measured for comparison. The optical and radiative properties of the absorbers were measured after multiple thermal cycling tests at high temperatures up to 700C in vacuum. A heat transfer model was used to quantify the solar-thermal efficiency at the measured steady-state temperature of the absorbers by considering the conductive heat loss as useful heat gain, for which experimental and theoretical values are both presented. A simple cost analysis was also performed to compare the material cost of the metafilm absorber with some commercial solar coatings. for spectral hemispherical and diffuse reflectance). The selective metafilm absorber consisting of a Fabry-Perot cavity (W-SiO2-W) with two anti-reflective coatings on top (Si3N4 and SiO2) was fabricated on a silicon wafer following the processes reported in an earlier work Thermal cycling tests at 600C and 700C were conducted for the metafilm-on-Si absorber, which went through 3 heating/cooling cycles with each consisting of 5 hours of heating in vacuum and 5 hours of cooling to room temperature (see details in Experimental Procedures and Figure where Rcond(Ts) is the conduction resistance that is dependent on the absorber temperature Ts. Here, the black absorber was first measured as a reference to find the correlation between Rcond(Ts) and Ts, and then the conduction heat gain by the metafilm absorber can be calculated from the correlation based on the measured steady-state temperature at a given solar concentration. All the parameters, such as the areas and emittance values at different temperatures, used in the solarthermal analysis of the metafilm-on-Si absorber were tabulated in Table The theoretical solar-thermal conversion efficiency theo can be calculated based on the theoretical heat gain from the energy balance in the heat transfer model as while the solar-thermal efficiency from the experiment can be found based on the conducted heat via the RTD wires as Note that in the experiment, there is no direct way of measuring heat conduction or conduction resistance from the RTD wires. Therefore, the black absorber is used as a calibration to find Rcond(Ts) by letting theo = ηexp at the same steady-state temperature Ts under a given solar concentration. As shown in Figure Further, the linear fit is used to calculate Rcond for the metafilm absorber at its measured steadystate temperatures, from which the experimental solar-thermal efficiency ηexp for the metafilm absorber was obtained under different solar concentrations from Eq. ( As presented in Figure To better understand the solar-thermal performance during the experiment, Figure where Qref and Qrad,t are the only heat loss modes. The pie charts in Figure Figure Figure suns, the metafilm-on-SS absorber reached an experimental solar-thermal efficiency of 73% at 500C, which was the temperature limit of the RTD sensor used. The large discrepancy from the theory (27% higher than the prediction) is believed to be due to the melting of the RTD packaging materials whose latent heat increases the solar-thermal efficiency during the experiment. The higher solar-thermal performance of the metafilm-on-SS absorber compared to the metafilm-on-Si absorber from the lab-scale experiments can be understood from the theoretical energy analysis presented as pie charts in Figure Finally, a cost analysis was conducted to compare the metafilm to other concentrating solar coating materials. The developed metafilms were fabricated at university facilities rather than commercial-scale setups. Therefore, a reasonable comparison of equipment costs as well as labor costs with commercial solar coatings cannot be made. Instead, a material cost analysis of the metafilm was performed (see details in the Supplemental Information), which turned out to be $2.23 per square meter. This is significantly lower than the materials cost of some commercial solar absorber coatings such as Pyromark, Co3O4, and LSM which cost $5.41, $50, and $100 per square meter, respectively The solar-thermal energy conversion performance of selective metafilm absorbers with excellent spectral selectivity and high-temperature thermal stability was successfully characterized with a lab-scale experimental setup under multiple solar concentrations up to 20 suns at temperatures up to 500C. The solar-thermal efficiency of a flexible cost-effective metafilm-onstainless-steel-foil absorber was experimentally characterized to be 57% at 371C under 10 suns from a lab-scale setup. The efficiency was projected to reach 83% in practical solar thermal applications by eliminating side and bottom radiation losses. Higher solar concentrations and high temperatures could possibly be reached with a more powerful solar simulator and more durable temperature sensors. The developed experimental setup and approach, along with the theoretical analysis, enables lab-scale performance characterization of novel solar-thermal materials under multiple solar concentrations before large-scale manufacturing and field tests. This would facilitate the research and development of high-efficiency solar-thermal energy harvesting and conversion, in particular CSP, with reduced costs.