For passive satellite imagers, current retrievals of cloud optical thickness and effective particle size fail for convective clouds with 3D morphology. Indeed, being based on 1D radiative transfer (RT) theory, they work well only for horizontally homogeneous clouds. A promising approach for treating clouds as fully 3D objects is cloud tomography, and this has been demonstrated for airborne observations. For cloud tomography from space, however, more efficient forward 3D RT solvers are required. Here, we present a path forward, acknowledging that optically thick clouds have "veiled cores." Photons scattered into and out of this deep region do not contribute significant information to the observed imagery about the inner structure of the cloud. We investigate the location of the veiled core for the MISR and MODIS imagers. While MISR provides multiangle imagery in the visible and near-IR, MODIS includes channels in the short-wave IR, albeit at a single view angle. This combination will enable future 3D retrievals to disentangle the cloud's effective particle size and optical thickness. We find that, in practice, the veiled core is located at an optical distance of ≈ 5, starting from the cloud boundary along the line-of-sight. For MODIS' absorbing wavelengths the veiled core covers a larger volume, starting at smaller optical distances. This result makes it possible to reduce the number of unknowns for the cloud tomographic reconstruction, and opens up new ways to increase the efficiency of the 3D RT solver at the heart of the reconstruction algorithm. Convective clouds have an important impact on the Earth's weather and climate. By reflecting solar radiation and trapping thermal radiation, they play a key role in the Earth's radiation budget. In addition, deep convective clouds are one of the key drivers of the hydrological cycle by redistributing water throughout the depth of the troposphere Quantification and monitoring of cloud properties with global coverage is operationally performed by spaceborne passive and active remote sensing. While active remote sensing (e.g., mm-wave radar) provides information about vertical cloud structure, the advantage of passive remote sensing (e.g., multi-spectral imaging) is the significantly larger spatial coverage. Traditional passive retrieval methods for cloud optical properties such as cloud droplet effective radius and optical thickness often make use of a dual-wavelength approach using passive reflectance measurements in the visible and near-infrared (VNIR) and short-wave infrared (SWIR) as first developed by In order to provide 3D cloud macro-and microphysical properties with global coverage, this computed tomography (CT) method has to be advanced so that it is applicable to satellite observations. To explore this, we use Terra's Multi-angle Imaging SpectroRadiometer (MISR, In the present study, we examine the hypothesis that optically thick clouds contain a "veiled" core. Inside this core, details of the liquid water distribution do not significantly contribute to satellite observations. These details are thus "veiled" by multiple scattering throughout the cloud volume. The 3D reconstruction algorithm makes use of the information about the cloud optical properties carried by the detected photons. This intricate spatial information originates primarily from the outer shell of the cloud, whereas the amount of information conveyed about the inner core of the cloud decreases significantly with depth due to multiple scattering. Being able to separate the cloud's "veiled" core from its shell will facilitate new, more efficient ways of solving the 3D RT inside potentially very large opaque clouds. In this paper we investigate if a veiled core exists and where it is located inside optically thick clouds from a space-borne perspective using synthetic MISR and MODIS observations. MISR provides the key multi-angle information in the VNIR. SWIR observations are also required for the new approach of 3D cloud tomography from space to disentangle cloud optical thickness and droplet effective radius The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the stochastic model we used to represent verticallydeveloped convective clouds in which we seek the veiled core under a range of opacity and illumination conditions; full details are provided in Appendix B. We also describe the adopted numerical 3D RT modeling framework. In Section 3, we describe our observational definition of the veiled core, and present our findings for the adopted class of cloud models taking MISR's VNIR perspective; further results are presented in Appendix A for oblique illumination. In Section 4, we switch from MISR's to MODIS' perspective on the veiled core, with an emphasis on the impact of droplet absorption, hence sensitivity to particle size, in SWIR channels. We summarize our findings in Section 5 and describe future research in support of cloud CT. In a companion paper To investigate the veiled core inside optically thick convective clouds from a satellite perspective, RT simulations are performed using synthetic clouds. In this study, we use the 3D Monte Carlo RT solver MYSTIC Simulations are performed for MISR's red band at 670 nm for each of the nine viewing angles and a spatial resolution of 275 m. The nine MISR cameras are labeled An, Af/Aa, Bf/Ba, Cf/Ca, and Df/Da RT simulations for MODIS are performed for the channels 1, 5, 6, and 7, assuming central wavelengths of 645, 1240, 1640, and 2130 nm The sensitivity studies presented in the following use idealized 2-dimensional (2D) convective clouds as shown in Fig. Figures For simplicity, the surface albedo is set to zero (pure absorption) and the solar zenith angle (SZA) is set to 0 • (overhead sun). For all simulations a constant effective droplet radius of r eff = 10 μm is chosen, with optical properties computed according to Mie theory Using this gridded cloud/surface scene, the simulated radiances as observed at the nine MISR cameras are computed at the top of the MYSTIC grid, and subsequently projected to the ground in order to simulate correctly actual MISR observations. The radiances of the highresolution cloud field are then averaged over 64 pixels to obtain MISR's resolution of 275 m. The results of three representative cameras (Bf, An, Ba) are displayed in Fig. For the following sensitivity studies, we assume that, for an average signal, differences in the simulated MISR radiances of 5% are too close to the instrument's noise, and thus considered negligible. In other words, we assume a sensitivity threshold for MISR of 5%, which corresponds to the root-mean-square (RMS) error on the difference between two independent MISR radiances at the 1.2σ level. To resolve these differences in the RT simulations, we determined that a numerical precision of ≤ 1% is required. This is achieved by performing simulations with MYSTIC using 2 × 10 5 photons per cloudy pixel, or 1.28 × 10 7 photons per MISR pixel (64 aggregated cloud pixels). We hypothesize that changes in the liquid water content (LWC) inside the veiled core lead to negligible differences in the observed MISR as well as MODIS radiances in the above sense of being 5%. To investigate the location of the veiled core inside these synthetic clouds, the LWC distribution in their inner core is manipulated and the observed radiances are compared to the reference cloud, as explained in the following. Sensitivity studies are performed with a reference cloud field and three different scenarios of modifying the 2D LWC grid: in the first scenario, the LWC in the inner core of the reference Koch cloud is replaced by its mean value. In the other two scenarios, the liquid water distribution in the cloud's inner core is replaced by new realizations of the turbulence field. To investigate the location of the veiled core inside these synthetic clouds, the simulated radiances of the reference case are compared with the radiances of both cloud variations. While MISR's red band is controlled entirely by scattering, absorption plays an important role for the MODIS' SWIR channels and its effect is investigated in 4. First, we present sensitivity studies for locating the veiled core using MISR observations. The optical thickness of the reference Koch cloud in Fig. Figure and shown in Fig. In this sensitivity study, most camera pixels detect a significant difference between the manipulated and the reference cloud up to 26%. These relative differences are slightly larger for the forward pointing cameras which observe predominantly the optically thinner part of the cloud field. The optically thinner part of the cloud allows for larger photon mean free path lengths, i.e., larger penetration depths. This causes the modified inner region of the cloud to contribute more strongly to the observed radiances compared to the optically thicker cloud area, which is mainly visible for the forward facing cameras. The nadir together with the Aa and Af views exhibit the overall smallest relative differences with a magnitude up to about 6%. Most of the significant relative differences (i.e., > 5%) have a positive sign, which implies that the radiances of the manipulated cloud field (I new ) are larger than the reference cloud. Comparing Fig. Figure The location and size of the veiled core in the previous experiments was decided by no other considerations than maximizing its size (half of the cloud size) and assuming a simple geometric shape at the same time (as required by the specific fBm generation technique we adopted in Appendix B). To provide a universal method of determining the size and location of the veiled core in arbitrary 3D clouds, a general metric is required, independent of the cloud's geometric shape. We use the optical distance along the line of sight of each MISR camera, as shown in Fig. We expect that the relative differences in the observed MISR radiances decrease as the optical distance between cloud surface and manipulated core increases. In other words, the deeper inside the cloud the manipulation occurs, the more it is veiled by additional multiple scattering. Figure For MISR, we assumed a sensitivity threshold of about ±5%, which is indicated by the white area in Fig. For larger effective radii, clouds with a fixed LWC have a smaller cloud optical thickness (cf. Eq. B1). Also, following Mie theory The RT simulations in the previous section were performed for MISR's red band at 670 nm. Light interaction with water droplets at this wavelength is dominated by scattering and absorption is negligible. Figure To investigate the effect of additional absorption on the veiled core of convective clouds, RT simulations were performed for MODIS channels 1, 5, 6, and 7, assuming central wavelengths of 645, 1240, 1640, and 2130 nm, which are indicated in Fig. The relative differences of the radiances ∆I/I are well below 5% for all MODIS pixels. For increasing wavelengths from channel 1 to 7 the differences decrease, as expected, due to increasing absorption by the cloud droplets. Observing the cloud scene at an absorbing wavelength leads to shorter photon paths inside the cloud, which in turn causes the veiled core to extend towards a smaller optical distance. In this study, we investigated the "veiled core" inside optically thick convective clouds, as observed with MISR and MODIS on Terra. We addressed two questions: first, is there a veiled core in opaque convective clouds and, second, where is it? To answer these questions, we simulated multi-angle observations of MISR using simplified 2D cloud models with a Koch fractal outer shape and highresolution internal turbulence. The results presented in this study indicate that a veiled core exists at an optical distance of ≈5 or more inside the cloud. Changes in the liquid water distribution inside this core result in less than 5% variability of the the multi-angle radiances observed by MISR, as long as mean, variance, and correlations of the liquid water field are preserved. For MISR and MODIS, with an estimated measurement uncertainty of about 3%, a variability of 5% or less can still be considered within Relative differences in [%] of observed MODIS radiances for wavelength channels 1, 5, 6, and 7 (assuming central wavelengths of 645, 1240, 1640, and 2130 nm) associated respectively to the extinction field modifications in (a) and (c). For MODIS' (whisk-broom) camera, the mean VZA of 9 • was assumed, averaged over the whole MISR swath inside of MODIS' much larger one. Furthermore, the MYSTIC results were averaged and interpolated to a spatial resolution of 250 m for channel 1 and 500 m for the remaining channels. the noise, and is thus negligible in the sense that it should not be viewed as signal in cloud tomography. The computational methodology used in this paper is complemented in a companion paper by The results from this 2D study can be directly transferred to 3D clouds. In general, making use of this veiled core opens up new ways to increase the efficiency of rendering synthetic observations of optically thick cloud volumes using RT models. The RT solver can be optimized to treat the outer shell of the cloud (where details matter) with higher accuracy than the veiled core, where the details of the liquid water distribution are negligible within the instrument's measurement uncertainty. Applying photon diffusion approximation inside the veiled core is a promising way to significantly increase the speed and efficiency for RT simulations of optically thick clouds. Replacing the detailed RT solver by a fast and efficient way to stream radiation through the veiled core, a significant amount of computational time and computer memory resources can be saved. Since the size of the veiled core increases with a larger cloud volume and higher optical thickness, the increase in computational effort will be balanced. For application specifically to the 3D cloud tomography inversion problem, making use of the veiled core is a promising way to increase the efficiency of the forward RT solver. During the reconstruction of the cloud volume the forward solver has to be called at each iteration. Thus, to speed up the reconstruction algorithm it is most important to increase the efficiency of the expensive RT solver. Moreover, treating the veiled core as a connected object, mainly determined by its bulk optical properties significantly reduces the number of unknowns in the inverse problem. Instead of solving the minimization for each pixel separately, only the bulk statistical properties of the core volume have to be estimated. The statistical properties comprise mean, variance and correlation of the extinction volume, which can be parameterized for the RT solver. Apart from 3D cloud tomography, other applications that involve RT modeling of optically thick cloud volumes can benefit from acknowledging the existence of a veiled core. For example, the efficiency of RT modeling for the analysis of ground-based cloud images (e.g., at DOE/ARM sites) as demonstrated by MISR's Perspective on the Veiled Core: Sensitivity to SZA Figure Figure Herein, we explain the model used to generate the idealized two-dimensional (2D) convective clouds used in this study. The 2D synthetic clouds vary only in the xand zdirections, and their geometric shape is derived from a Koch triangle (von Koch 1904), which has an infinitely long perimeter with fractal dimension log 4/ log 3 ≈ 1.26 The Koch fractal, which lives on a triangular grid, is mapped here to a rectangular grid for our present purposes, that is, to serve as input for the MYSTIC 3D RT solver. The synthetic cloud is defined as an arbitrary (liquid water, extinction, or droplet density) field discretized on a grid of 1025 × 1024 (width × height) cells. As a physically relevant variation on the basic fractal model, a density decay factor of 0.9 is applied at each scale reduction. Specifically, 2D density decreases multiplicatively by a factor of 0.9 for each fractal iteration, i.e., as smaller and smaller triangles are added to the structure of the fractal boundary of the Koch set. That way, the cloud model does not have a "hard" boundary, even if it is fractal in nature. Rather, it blends gradually into its clear-air environment, as is expected and observed in real-world clouds. In addition, this outer fractal cloud structure with an ad hoc scale-by-scale decay is modulated internally with a judiciously chosen vertical gradient function, as follows. "Rising parcel" theory in cloud physics predicts strong vertical stratification of clouds following an adiabatic gradient in their convective cores, which is amply confirmed by observations. Specifically, this gradient follows a linear trend in LWC over the vertical extent of the cloud, reaching its maximum typically in the upper third of the cloud from cloud top (e.g., where density of liquid water ρ w = 10 3 kg/m 3 . Diffusional droplet growth predicts a slow 1/3 power law increase in r eff with height above cloud base, assuming a constant droplet number concentration For simplicity, we follow For γ = 2/3, this zero-level offset is therefore at 1/7 th of the maximum value, which we can take as unity without loss of generality. For added realism, we set the maximum to be reached at z max located at 1/10 th of the cloud's thickness L z from its top, and reverse the linear trend back to the zero-level offset reached at cloud top (z = L z ). In summary, the vertical gradient modulation function is therefore letting z be the difference in altitude with cloud base (at z = 0). The resulting extinction field, which is scaled to To simulate the convective cloud's internal structure, the extinction field in Fig. The fBm is modeled using the diamond-square algorithm, a method originally used for generating terrain height maps for computer graphics, first introduced by Fournier et al. One drawback of this method is that it produces slight vertical and horizontal "creases" since the most significant perturbations take place in a rectangular grid. More sophisticated (Fourier-space) methods have been developed to compute 2D fBm fields (e.g., Finally, the central optical thickness is computed by integrating the cloud extinction along the vertical axis at x = 0: where ∆z = L z /1024 is the vertical grid-scale, after the whole extinction grid σ e (i, j) is scaled to yield a desired value of τ center .