In the present work, the morphology and the electrical and thermal conduction properties of cocontinuous poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF), maleated polypropylene (PPgMA) and multiwall carbon nanotubes (CNT) nanostructured blends are investigated. CNT preferentially locates in the PPgMA phase and clearly causes a refinement in the co-continuous structure. Electrical conductivity experiments show that nanocomposites are well above the percolation threshold and evidence for one order of magnitude enhancement in conductivity for the co-continuous nanocomposites compared to the monophasic nanocomposites with the same CNT volume fraction. On the other hand, thermal diffusivity enhancement for the co-continuous blends is found lower than that for the monophasic nanocomposites at the same CNT volume fraction. An explanation is proposed in terms of large interfacial area, causing phonon scattering at the interface between immiscible PVDF and PPgMA domains. Results described in this paper open the way to the preparation of high electrical and low thermal conductivity materials with possible application as thermoelectrics. Thermal management of polymeric materials is of high interest in energy related domains for thermal energy dissipation, including electronics, low temperature heat exchange and recovery, thermal storage, flexible heat spreader, encapsulation layers, etc. 2.1.Materials PVDF (Solef® S1010) with MFI = 2 g/10min (230 °C, 2.16 kg), was purchased from Solvay (Belgium). PPgMA (Polibond® 3200) with maleic anhydride content = 1.0 wt. % and MFI = 115 g/10 min (190 °C, 2.16 kg), was purchased from Crompton (USA). CNT (NC-7000) with a carbon purity of 90% and an average diameter of 9.5 nm were purchased from Nanocyl (Belgium). All the materials were used as received. Nanocomposites were prepared by using a twin-screw micro-compounder (Xplore by DSM, Netherlands) with 15 cm 3 mixing chamber, a recirculating channel and two co-rotating conical screw. PVDF and PPgMA were first fed into the compounder and blended at 210°C for 3 minutes, then MWCNT were added mixing for further 5 minutes. The screw speed was set at 100 rpm and nitrogen flow was used to prevent thermal oxidation during melt-mixing. Compounds were prepared varying the CNT fraction at 3.4 vol.%; 5.1 vol.%; 6.8 vol.% and 10.4 vol.% . The as prepared nanocomposites were later molded at 220 °C and 1 min and 100 bar, by means of a laboratory press (Gibitre instruments, Italy). The morphology of the nanocomposites was observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), with a LEO 1450 VP instrument (France) coupled with a back scattered electron detector and an EDS elemental analysis INCA Energy 7353 (Oxford Instruments, UK) probe. Samples for SEM observation where cut at cryo temperature (-30°C) with a microtome to obtain planar and smooth surfaces. The as prepared samples were then gold coated to ensure electrical conduction from sample surface. Transmission electron microscopy was carried out on a Jeol 2010 Field Emission TEM at 100 kV. Observations were performed on 60 nm thick slices ultracryocut parallel to the extrusion direction at -60 °C. Thermal diffusivity was measured by LFA 427 (Laser-Flash-Apparatus, Netzsch, Germany) on samples with 12.5 mm and 1 mm in diameter and height, respectively. Measurements were repeated three times on three different specimens for each nanocomposite to evaluate the standard deviation. Volume resistivity measurements were carried out on thermal diffusivity specimens by a home-made apparatus composed by a regulated power supply (GPS-3303 by GW Instek, Taiwan), two multimeters equipped with a digital filter to reduce the measurement noise (8845A by Fluke, USA) and two homemade electrodes. One multimeter was used for the regulation of the electric current while the other for voltage measurements. The electrodes were a cylinder (18.5 mm diameter, 55 mm height) and a square plate (100 mm side, 3mm thickness), both made of brass. Every electrode has a hole for the connection and a wire furnished with a 4 mm banana plug. The measurement system works with the multimeter method. The power supply was time to time regulated in current or in voltage to have accurate measurement by both the multimeters limiting, however, the power dissipated on the specimen. Before measurement, specimens were silver coated on both sides to improve the electrical conduction between them and the electrodes. Test were carried out on disks with 12.5 mm diameter and 1 mm thickness. The formation of co-continuous structures in immiscible polymer blends requires the exploitation of defined volume ratio between the polymers constituting the phases The segregation of electrically conductive nanoparticles into one phase of co-continuous polymer blends, is expected to result in the formation of the so-called double percolating network ©2018. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ In the present paper, PVDF/PPgMA/CNT nanocomposites, with PVDF/PPgMA ratio of 70/30 by weight, were prepared through melt mixing in a micro compounder. Morphological studies on the as prepared nanocomposites demonstrate that the all the materials exhibit co-continuous morphology, with CNT mainly locates in the PPgMA phase and progressive refinement of the co-continuous structure with the increase of CNT content. The electrical conductivity experiments reveal that all the nanocomposites are well above the percolation threshold. Furthermore, the confinement of CNT in the PPgMA phase, due to the formation of the so-called double percolating network, positively affect the electrical conductivity, being the electrical conductivity of the co-continuous nanocomposite higher (about one order of magnitude) than that of single matrix nanocomposite containing the same CNT volume fraction. On the other hand, thermal diffusivity enhancement for the co-continuous blends was found lower than for the monophasic nanocomposites at the same CNT volume fraction. This observation was interpreted in terms of concurrent effects between the positive effect of enhancement by CNT confinement in continuous phase and the negative effect of large interfacial area by CNT refinement on co-continuous structure. The phonon scattering at the interface between immiscible PVDF and PPgMA domains opposes to the enhancement in thermal conductivity related to the presence of nanotubes. The results described in this paper provide more insight in the understanding of electrical and thermal conductivity in polymer blends and may open possible application in thermoelectric materials, where the coupling of high electrical conductivity and low thermal conductivity is required. ©2018. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/