The control of nanostructuration of graphene and graphene related materials (GRM) into selfassembled structures is strictly related to the nanoflakes chemical functionalization, which may be obtained via covalent grafting of non-covalent interactions, mostly exploiting π-stacking. As the noncovalent functionalization does not affect the sp 2 carbon structure, this is often exploited to preserve the thermal and electrical properties of the GRM and it is a well-known route to tailor the interaction between GRM and organic media. In this work, non-covalent functionalization of graphite nanoplatelets (GnP) was carried out with ad-hoc synthesized pyrene-terminated oligomers of polylactic acid (PLA), aiming at the modification of GnP nanopapers thermal properties. PLA was selected based on the possibility to self-assemble in crystalline domains via stereocomplexation of complementary poly(L-lactide) (PLLA) and poly(D-lactide) (PDLA) enantiomers. Pyrene-initiated PLLA and PDLA were indeed demonstrated to anchor to the GnP surface. Calorimetric and X-ray diffraction investigations highlighted the enantiomeric PLAs adsorbed on the surface of the nanoplatelets self-organize to produce highly crystalline stereocomplex domains. Most importantly, PLLA/PDLA stereocomplexation delivered a significantly higher efficiency in nanopapers heat transfer, in particular through the thickness of the nanopaper. This is explained by a thermal bridging effect of crystalline domains between overlapped GnP, promoting heat transfer across the nanoparticles contacts. This work demonstrates the possibility to enhance the physical properties of contacts within a percolating network of GRM via the self-assembly of macromolecules and opens a new way for the engineering of GRM-based nanostructures. Graphene and graphene-related materials (GRM) are one of the most intensively explored nanoparticles family in materials science owing to their superior properties. Compatibilization between GRM nanoplatelets and organic polymers have been widely studied to promote dispersion in the preparation of nanocomposites as well as to tailor their physical properties. Several polymers have been shown to effectively nucleate on GRM For instance, polylactic acid (PLA) has two optically active enantiomers because of the chiral nature of the monomer: poly(L-lactide) (PLLA) and poly(D-lactide) (PDLA). PLLA and PDLA are able to co-crystallize into racemic stereocomplexes (SC), which have been studied mostly for their higher thermal stability and superior physical properties than the homocrystals of the homopolymers. L-lactide and D-lactide (purity ≥ 98 %) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Before polymerization, both monomers, L-lactide and D-lactide, were purified by three successive re-crystallizations from 100% (w/v) solution in anhydrous toluene and dried under vacuum at room temperature. 1-Pyrenemethanol (Pyr-OH) (purity 98 %) and stannous octanoate, tin(II) 2-ethylhexanoate (Sn(Oct)2, purity ~ 95%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received. All solvents, toluene (anhydrous, purity 99.8 %), chloroform (purity ≥ 99.5 %), methanol (purity ≥ 99.8 %), N-Ndimethylformamide (DMF) (anhydrous, purity 99.8 %) and dimethyl ether (DME) (purity ≥ 99.0 %) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used without further purifications. Graphite nanoplatelets (GnP) were synthesized by Avanzare (Navarrete, La Rioja, Spain) according to a previously reported procedure. Pyrene-end functionalized poly(L-lactic acid) (Pyr-L) and pyrene-end functionalized poly(D-lactic acid) (Pyr-D) were synthesized by the ring-opening polymerization (ROP) of monomers, L-lactide and D-lactide, initiated with Pyr-OH and catalyzed by Sn(Oct)2 in bulk at 140°C, as previously reported. The solid residue was filtered and dried in vacuum at 40 °C. Then, Pyr-L was dissolved in DMF (15 mg mL -1 ) at 65 °C for 15 min. The solvent was allowed to evaporate at 25°C for 48 hours and the residual solvent was removed by drying at 60 °C for 3 hours. Equivalent amounts of Pyr-L and Pyr-D were separately dissolved in DMF (15 mg mL -1 ) at 65 °C. The solutions were then mixed and stirred at 65 °C for 15 min. The mixed solution was casted on a Petri dish. The solvent was allowed to evaporate at 25°C for 48 hours and the residual solvent was removed by drying at 60 °C for 3 hours. The above-described blends were denoted as Pyr-L/Pyr-D SC. It is worth mentioning that both parallel and antiparallel stereocomplex structures may be obtained from the blend of Pyr-L and Pyr-D, as previously reported for similar pyrene-terminated PLA oligomers. Finally, the functionalized GnP were washed with methanol (50 mL) and diethyl ether (50 mL) and dried at 60 °C for 24 hours. Functionalized GnP Pyr-L/Pyr-D SC were prepared following two different methods. In the first method (Figure GnP nanopapers were prepared by suspension of GnP in DMF at a concentration of 0.2 mg mL -1 and the solutions were sonicated as described previously for the preparation of functionalized GnP. Then, GnP nanopapers were prepared by vacuum filtration, dried and mechanically pressed, following the procedure previously reported. All 1 H Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectra were recorded on a NMR Varian Mercury Plus 300 MHz. Samples were dissolved in deuterated chloroform (CDCl3) with TMS as internal reference (chemical shifts δ in ppm). Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements were performed on a DSC Q20 (TA Instruments , USA). Approximately 5 mg of sample were placed in the aluminum pans. The samples were heated from 25 °C to 250 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C min -1 and kept for 1 min to erase the thermal history. Afterwards, the specimens were cooled down to 25 °C, and finally reheated to 250 °C at 10 °C min -1 to evaluate the crystallization and melting behaviour of the samples. For functionalized GnP, the reference aluminum pan was filled with pristine GnP to facilitate the observation of the thermal transitions arising from the Pyr-L and Pyr-L/Pyr-D SC. Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements for the stereoisomers, the SC crystallites and functionalized GnP were carried out using an X-ray diffractometer (PANalytical X'Pert Pro MPD, Philips PW3040/60) with a Cu Kα radiation source with a wavelength of 1.542 Å. The measurements were operated at 40 kV and 40 mA with scan angles from 5° to 25° at a scan step of 0.026°. XRD measurements on nanopapers were carried out also with a 2D detector, exploiting a a Gemini R Ultra diffractometer. All data were collected using Cu Kα radiation. Data collection and reduction was carried out with CrysAlisPro software, version 1.171.35.11. (Agilent Technologies UK Ltd. Oxford, UK). 2D images were collected with a time from 10 to 30 seconds depending on the 2. The 2D data were then reduced to intensity vs. 2 profiles by the same software, to investigate preferential orientations in the nanopapers and well as to obtain averaged XRD profiles over the whole possible orientations. Thermal gravimetrical analysis (TGA) were performed using a TGA Discovery (TA Instruments, USA) under nitrogen atmosphere from 50 °C to 800 °C at 10 °C min -1 . The thermal degradation temperatures were defined as the temperatures corresponding to the maximum DTG peaks, obtained from the first derivative curve of the TGA thermogram. background of the spectra. The morphology of the graphene papers was characterized by a high resolution Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM, ZEISS MERLIN 4248). The density (ρ) of the nanopapers was calculated according to the formula ρ = m/V, where m is the mass of the nanopaper, weighed at room temperature using the TGA microbalance (Sensitivity: < 0.1 μg) and V is calculated from a well-defined disk film using the average thicknesses measured by FESEM. The in-plane thermal diffusivity (α∥) and cross-plane diffusivity (α⊥) were measured using the xenon light flash technique (LFT) (Netzsch LFA 467 Hyperflash). The samples were cut in disks of 23 mm and the measurement of the α∥ was carried out in a special in-plane sample holder while the α⊥ was measured in the standard cross-plane configuration. Each sample was measured five times at 25 °C. The Pyr-L and Pyr-D synthesized by the ring-opening polymerization of L-lactide and D-lactide using Pyr-OH as initiator have been first characterized for their molar masses. The number average molecular weight (MnNMR) of Pyr-L and Pyr-D was estimated based on the 1 H-NMR spectra (Figure Crystallization of as-synthesized Pyr-L or Pyr-L/Pyr-D SC was obtained after dissolving the product in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and left to crystallize. DMF was chosen in this study, allowing for the formation of stereocomplex crystallites and providing sufficient affinity for the subsequent dispersion of graphene nanoplatelets, as the surface tension of DMF (37.1 mJ m -2 ) is similar to that of graphene. The structures of the Pyr-L and Pyr-L/Pyr-D SC after crystallization from DMF were corroborated by FTIR spectroscopy (Figure Additionally, the crystalline complex ε-form, induced by the formation of complexes in specific solvents with five-membered ring structure such as DMF, The formation of the stereocomplex in the presence of GnP was investigated using two different approaches: i) sonicating the nanoplatelets in a solution containing both Pyr-L and Pyr-D (Figure and ii) sonicating separately the GnP with each of the stereoisomers, Pyr-L or Pyr-D, before mixing them to form the stereocomplex (Figure The modification of GnP was investigated by XPS (Figure The functionalization of GnP by the stereoisomers and the formation of the stereocomplex on the basal plane of GnP was also corroborated by thermal analysis (Figure GnP is observed between 200 -400°C, corresponding to the decomposition of the polymer chains. In this temperature range, GNP Pyr-L showed a small weight loss ~ 3 wt.% (after subtraction of the weight loss corresponding to the pristine GnP), which corresponds to an adsorption concentration of 0.0535 mmol g -1 or adsorption density of approx. 1400 chains μm -2 . The adsorption of the stereoisomers in the surface of GnP can be explained by i) the π-π interactions between pyrene moieties and GnP and ii) the intermolecular CH-π interactions between the -CH groups of PLLA and GnP, ©2019. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ Functionalized GnPs were used to prepare nanopapers, to assess the effect of the modification with Pyr-D/Pyr-L on the thermal transfer properties. In particular, the nanopapers have been prepared following the method described for GnP Pyr-L/Pyr-D SC_A, that has been previously confirmed that this strategy forms better SC crystallites. Furthermore, two nanopapers with increasing concentration of the stereoisomers were prepared to investigate the effect of the SC content on the properties of the nanopapers. Nanopapers density was significantly decreased by the presence of Pyr-L/Pyr-D SC, in the range of 0.3÷0.4 g cm -3 , compared to 1.0 g cm -3 for the pristine GNP nanopaper (Table . The increase in cross-plane diffusivity may partially be related to a loss in nanoflakes orientation. As the fractions of flakes lying on direction tilted with respect to the nanopaper plane are expected to contribute more to the heat transfer across the nanopaper, owing to the well-known anisotropy of graphitic materials. However, in this case, the above commented differences in preferential orientation are not sufficient to explain the change in cross-plane diffusivity. Indeed, the lower degree of orientation was observed for GnP Pyr-L/Pyr-D SC_A, compared to pristine GnP, does not correspond to a better cross plane diffusivity. Furthermore, the significant differences between diffusivities for GnP Pyr-L/Pyr-D SC_Aʹ and GnP Pyr-L/Pyr-D SC_Aʹʹ are not reflected in terms of preferential orientations, proven to be comparable. Therefore, the enhanced efficiency on cross-plane heat transfer appears to be related to the organization of the SC phase, acting as thermal bridge between GnP flakes. In fact, crystallinity and orientation of the macromolecules are well-known to dramatically affect the thermal conductivity of the polymeric materials The adsorption concentration and density of the stereoisomers and the SCs were determined from the TGA data of the fuctionalized GnP. The adsorption concentration (mmol g -1 ) was calculated from the mmol of polymer chains adsorbed per gram of framework graphene carbon according to the literature: where Mp is the total mass of adsorbed polymer, MG is the total mass of GnP and Mwp is the molecular weight of the polymer in g mol -1 . The adsorption density, defined by the number of polymers per area of GnP surface, N/A, was calculated as: where M/A is the mass per unit area of graphene estimated as 7.48 x 10 -7 kg m -2 (assuming an average area of GnP of 100 μm 2 and a density of 2200 kg m -3 ) and Mwp is converted to kg molecule -1 . Thermogravimetry was used to assess the content of organic fraction, namely the Pyr-l/Pyr-D SC in the nanopapers prepared form different enantiomers concentrations. Results are reported in Figure 