Metallization of 1T -TaS2 is generally initiated at the domain boundary of charge density wave (CDW), at the expense of its long-range order. However, we demonstrate in this study that the metallization of 1T -TaS2 can be also realized without breaking the long-range CDW order upon surface alkali doping. By using scanning tunneling microscopy, we find the long-range CDW order is always persisting, and the metallization is instead associated with additional in-gap excitations. Interestingly, the in-gap excitation is near the top of the lower Hubbard band, in contrast to a conventional electron-doped Mott insulator where it is beneath the upper Hubbard band. In combination with the numerical calculations, we suggest that the appearance of the in-gap excitations near the lower Hubbard band is mainly due to the effectively reduced on-site Coulomb energy by the adsorbed alkali ions. 1T -TaS 2 has been extensively studied for decades, as a unique transition metal dichalcogenide compound hosting the ground state of a Mott insulator In general, the band filling n, the on-site Coulomb energy U and the one-electron bandwidth W together drive the Mott insulator transition in a coordinated manner The metallization of 1T -TaS 2 is believed to be accompanied with the breaking of the long-range CDW order, i.e., the metallic phase starts to initiate at the domain boundaries of the CDW state In this work, we explore the Mott insulator-metal transition of 1T -TaS 2 upon surface doping by alkali K atoms. The K atoms deposited onto the surface will transfer electrons to the host lattice to increase the band filling The 1T -TaS 2 single crystal was grown by chemical vapor transport method. STM and STS measurements were carried out in a low-temperature scanning tunneling microscope (Unisoku Co.) at ∼4.2 K in ultrahigh vacuum (UHV), with the base pressure of 1 × 10 -10 mbar. The clean surface of 1T -TaS 2 was achieved by cleaving the sample in-situ in UHV. The sample was kept at ∼4.2 K and then quickly transferred to the evaporation chamber prior to K deposition. The K source (SAES, Alkali metal dispenser) was heated to ∼650 • C, and the atomic flux of K is estimated to be ∼0.005 monolayer (ML)/s. After the deposition, the sample was transferred to the STM stage for scan without annealing. Due to the strong enough bonding to the 1T -TaS 2 surface, the K atoms are static during normal scan. STM topographic images were collected under the constant current mode. STS dI/dV spectra were taken with a lock-in amplifier and a typical ac modulation of 10 mV and 879 Hz. The bulk 1T -TaS 2 crystal has a layered structure The dI/dV spectrum, which is proportional to the electron local density of states (LDOS), is taken on the 1T -TaS 2 surface and plotted in Fig. The evolution of dI/dV spectra upon K doping to the 1T -TaS 2 surface is plotted in Fig. We further explore the effects of the alkali doping on the long-range CDW order. Figure where t ij is the effective hopping between the nearestneighbor David stars and U i the effective on-site Coulomb repulsion. In theoretical calculations, we set t ij to be uniform t ij = t, and U i = 10t for David stars without K + deposition and U i = 2t for David stars with K + deposition. We calculate the LDOS by using the cluster perturbation theory arXiv:1910.14607v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 31 Oct 2019