The incorporation of materials with controllable electromagnetic constitutive parameters allows the conceptualization and realization of controllable metasurfaces. With the aim of formulating and investigating a tricontrollable metasurface for efficiently absorbing terahertz radiation, we adopted a pixel-based approach in which the meta-atoms are biperiodic assemblies of discrete pixels. We patched some pixels with indium antimonide (InSb) and some with graphene, leaving the others unpatched. The bottom of each metaatom was taken to comprise a metal-backed substrate of silicon nitride. The InSb-patched pixels facilitate the thermal and magnetic control modalities, whereas the graphene-patched pixels facilitate the electrical control modality. With proper configuration of patched and unpatched pixels and with proper selection of the patching material for each patched pixel, the absorptance spectrums of the pixelated metasurface were found to contain peak-shaped features with maximum absorptance exceeding 0.95, full-width-at-halfmaximum bandwidth of less than 0.7 THz, and the maximum-absorptance frequency lying between 2 THz and 4 THz. The location of the maximum-absorptance frequency can be thermally, magnetically, and electrically controllable. The lack of rotational invariance of the optimal meta-atom adds mechanical rotation as the fourth control modality. A metasurface is conceptualized as a planar periodic array of identical, electrically thin meta-atoms whose lateral extent is a small fraction of the free-space wavelength λ o Absorption of terahertz radiation by metasurfaces is an area of ongoing research The application of a quasistatic electric field E dc (in V nm -1 ) along a fixed direction provides a convenient control modality. For more reliable operation, an additional control modality would be desirable. At first glance, the absolute temperature T (in K) appears promising as the second control modality because the temperature-dependent Fermi-Dirac distribution • the Kubo formula for σ gr [Eq. • the Hanson formula for μ ch [Eq. (53), Ref. However, the overall temperature-dependence is so weak for T ∈ [273, 323] K as to be inconsequential. This means that a different material, with strongly temperature-dependent dielectric properties, must be incorporated along with graphene in the meta-atoms. Indium antimonide (InSb) is a promising material for this purpose. An isotropic n-type semiconductor, InSb has free carriers with low effective mass so that its conductivity can be thermally controlled Parenthetically, multicontrollability abounds in nature. At different stages in our lives, we use different sets of muscles to move from one location to another. A message can be transmitted by one person to another by writing as well as by speaking; likewise, a message can be received by a person visually as well as aurally. In critical facilities-such as nuclear power plants, space stations, and missile guidance and command centers-multiple control modalities are used to reliably effect specific actions. As terahertz systems are being increasingly used for diverse applications, multicontrollability will be appreciated and even required in diverse scenarios. In this paper, we propose and simulate a tricontrollable metasurface for efficiently absorbing terahertz radiation. Each meta-atom of this metasurface is made up of pixels The plan of this paper is as follows. Section 2 provides descriptions of the T -and B 0 -dependences of the relative permittivity of InSb, the E dc -dependence of the surface conductivity of graphene, the proposed metasurface, and the boundary-value problem solved to determine the absorptance of the metasurface when illuminated by a plane wave. Section 3 provides a discussion of numerical results obtained by us. The paper concludes with some remarks in Sec. An exp(-iωt) dependence on time t is implicit, with i = √ -1, ω = 2πf as the angular frequency, and f as the linear frequency. The free-space wavenumber is denoted by 2 Materials and Methods The metasurface is infinitely extended along the x and y axes, with the z axis normal to it. The metasurface is biperiodic in the xy plane, with each each meta-atom taken to be a square of side a ≤ λ c /4 in that plane, with λ c being the lowest operational value of λ o . The bottom of each meta-atom is a metal-backed dielectric substrate, as shown in Fig. On top of the substrate in each meta-atom, an inner square of side a -d, d a, is partitioned into square pixels of side b, with each pixel separated from its nearest neighbor on every side by a strip of thickness d. The dimensions b and d must be selected so that the ratio N r = a/(b + d) is an integer. The number of pixels in the meta-atom is thus N max = N 2 r . The pixels are aligned along the x and y axes. Some pixels are patched with InSb, some patched with graphene, and the remaining ones are unpatched. When a quasistatic magnetic field B 0 x is applied, the relative permittivity dyadic ε InSb of InSb in the terahertz spectral regime can be stated in matrix form as where and Here, ε .68 is the high-frequency part, m InSb = 0.015m e , m e = 9.109 × 10 -31 kg is the mass of an electron, q e = -1.602 × 10 -19 C is the charge of an electron, γ InSb = π × 10 11 rad s -1 is the damping constant, is the temperature-dependent intrinsic carrier density (in m -3 ), E g = 0.26 eV is the bandgap energy, and k B = 8.617 × 10 -5 eV K -1 is the Boltzmann constant Components of ε InSb are shown as functions of B 0 ∈ [-1, 1] T and T ∈ [270, 320] K in Fig. As a 0.335-nm-thick layer, graphene is modeled as an infinitesimally thin sheet with surface conductivity [Eq. (1.34),Ref. where the momentum relaxation time τ gr is assumed to be independent of the energy E, is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function Under the influence of E dc ẑ, which is directed normally to graphene, the chemical potential μ ch is a solution of the equation [21, Eq. ( where υ F is the Fermi speed of graphene and ε dc is the dc relative permittivity of the substrate. The integral on the right side of Eq. ( We fixed υ F = 10 6 m s -1 Figures The illumination of the pixelated metasurface by a normally incident, linearly polarized, plane wave was investigated. The incident electric field phasor is then given by and the incident magnetic field phasor by where η o = μ o /ε o is the intrinsic impedance of free space and φ ∈ [0 • , 90 • ] is the polarization angle. The plane wave is transverse-electric In order to determine the reflected and transmitted electric and magnetic fields, a 3D full-wave simulation in the 2-4-THz spectral regime was carried out using the commercially available CST Microwave Studio TM 2019 software. Because of periodicity along the x and y axes, the 2D Floquet model was used for the simulation. Adaptive refinement of a mesh of tetrahedrons was done, with the number of tetrahedrons being 47844 for the meta-atom depicted in Fig. Transmission was found to be infinitesimal, as expected. The reflected electromagnetic field contained both co-polarized and cross-polarized components, in general. A post-processing module was used to compute the absorptance A, as explained elsewhere Numerous different meta-atoms can be configured when N r > 2 and the placement and the numbers of InSb-patched, graphene-patched, and unpatched pixels are varied. The temperature dependence of σ gr is extremely weak for T ∈ [270, 320] K, graphene is unaffected by the application of quasistatic magnetic field oriented tangentially to it, whereas ε InSb is unaffected by |E dc | ≤ 0.08 V nm -1 . However, σ gr depends so strongly on E dc that even a few graphene-patched pixels can overwhelm the magnetothermal control provided by the InSb-patched pixels. We fixed a = 9.6 μm , b = 3 μm , d = 0.2 μm , and L sub = 9.6 μm , based on experience The thermal control modality is demonstrated in Fig. Each of the six absorptance spectrums contains a very broad peak-shaped feature with a maximum absorptance that lies between 0.10 and 0.12. The maximum-absorptance frequency does change from 2.86 THz to 2.92 THz at the rate of 1.2 GHz K -1 as the temperature increases from 270 K to 320 K, but the controllability provided by temperature alone is modest at best. The absorptance peaks narrow considerably and the maximum absorptances increase in Fig. As T increases from 270 K to 320 K in Fig. The magnetic control modality due to InSb-patched pixels is revealed by a comparison of Figs. The electrical control modality is demonstrated in Fig. As is clear from Figs. Having confirmed the bicontrollability of InSb-patched pixels in Secs. 3.3.1 and 3.3.2 and the unicontrollability of graphene-patched pixels in Secs. 3.3.3, we now move on to the metasurface depicted in Fig. The absorptance A was calculated for a normally incident plane wave with E inc x. Figures However, the electrical control modality provided by the sole graphene-patched pixel is strong in Figs. The introduction of |B 0 | > 0 of a sufficiently large magnitude creates a second peak-shaped feature in the absorptance spectrum, as is evident in Figs. However, if |B 0 | is fixed between 0 and 1 T, a quasistatic electric field can be used to blueshift the maximum-absorptance frequency at the rate of about 19.1 THz V -1 nm. Thus, the 1st peak-shaped feature is controlled primarily by a quasistatic electric field that acts through the graphene-patched pixel. 2nd peak-shaped feature The second peak-shaped feature is absent for B 0 = 0 and it is also strongly dependent on temperature. Thus, it surely arises from the bicontrollability of the six InSb-patched pixels. The magnetic control modality becomes obvious on comparing Figs. An example presented through Fig. If T is reduced to 280 K from the quiescent point, the maximum-absorptance frequency of the lowfrequency feature redshifts to 2.65 THz and the FWHM bandwidth alters to 0.25 THz in Fig. For the high-frequency feature, the maximum-absorptance frequency is 3.38 THz at T = 280 K and 3.41 THz at T = 300 K. The FWHM bandwidth remains about 0.35 THz and the maximum absorptance does not decrease below 0.985, despite the temperature change. Thus, the maximum-absorptance frequency of the high-frequency feature in Fig. We conclude that temperature can be used for: (i) coarse control of the low-frequency peak-shaped fea-ture and (ii) ultrafine control of the high-frequency peak-shaped feature. This control modality comes from the six InSb-patched pixels in the meta-atoms of the chosen metasurface. If |B 0 | is reduced to 0.8 T from the quiescent point, the maximum-absorptance frequency of the lowfrequency feature redshifts to 2.74 THz and the FWHM bandwidth changes to 0.26 THz in Fig. For the high-frequency feature, the maximum-absorptance frequency is 3.38 THz at |B 0 | = 0.8 T and 3.40 THz at |B 0 | = 1 T in Fig. Accordingly, a quasistatic magnetic field oriented tangentially to the chosen metasurface can be used for: (i) coarse control of the low-frequency peak-shaped feature and (ii) ultrafine control of the high-frequency peak-shaped feature. This control modality comes from the six InSb-patched pixels in the meta-atoms. Thus, if the magnet providing magnetic control becomes unavailable, the thermal control modality can be used. Conversely, if the heater/cooler unit providing thermal control becomes unavailable, the magnetic control modality can be used. If both modalities are available, both can be operationally hybridized to reduce the energy expended to run the control modalities. If |E dc | is reduced to 0.06 V nm -1 from the quiescent point, the maximum-absorptance frequency of the low-frequency feature blueshifts slightly to 2.872 THz and the FWHM bandwidth changes to 0.69 THz in Fig. For the high-frequency feature, the maximum-absorptance frequency is 3.27 THz at |E dc | = 0.06 V nm -1 and 3.49 THz at |E dc | = 0.08 V nm -1 . The FWHM bandwidth is 0.69 THz at |E dc | = 0.06 V nm -1 and 0.32 THz at |E dc | = 0.08 V nm -1 . The maximum absorptance remains in excess of 0.98, even though the magnitude of the quasistatic electric field is increased by 0.02 V nm -1 . Thus, the maximum-absorptance frequency of the high-frequency feature in Fig. Accordingly, a quasistatic electric field oriented normally to the chosen metasurface can be used for: (i) ultrafine control of the low-frequency peak-shaped feature and (ii) coarse control of the high-frequency peak-shaped feature. This control modality comes from the sole graphene-patched pixel in the meta-atoms. In Example No. 1 (Sec. 3.3.4.3), either one or two modalities provide coarse control, whereas the remaining modalities provide fine control, of a maximum-absorptance frequency. Through the absorptance spectrums in Figs. The quiescent conditions for the operation of the metasurface depicted via Fig. When |B 0 | is changed from 0.7 T to 0.9 T but both T = 310 K and |E dc | = 0.07 V nm -1 are held fixed, Fig. Finally, when |E dc | is changed from 0.06 V nm -1 to 0.08 V nm -1 but both T = 310 K and |B 0 | = 0.8 T are held fixed, Fig. Thus, either of the three control modalities can be employed to tune the maximum-absorptance frequency with comparable degree of control. There is a fourth control modality available too! Suppose that the polarization angle φ is changed from 0 • . The absorptance spectrum will change. As an example, the absorptance spectrums drawn for Example No. 2 in Sec. 3.4.4 were recalculated for φ = 90 • . With the quiescent conditions T = 310 K, |B 0 | = 0.8 T, and |E dc | = 0.07 V nm -1 being the same as with φ = 0 • (Fig. The piexelated-metasurface approach 