The Planckian relaxation rate /tP = 2πkBT sets a characteristic timescale for both the equilibration of quantum critical systems and maximal quantum chaos. In this note, we show that at the critical coupling between a superconducting dot and the complex Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev model, known to be maximally chaotic, the pairing gap ∆ behaves as η /tP at low temperatures, where η is an order one constant. The lower critical temperature emerges with a further increase of the coupling strength so that the finite ∆ domain is settled between the two critical temperatures. The Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer mechanism of conventional superconductivity 1 requires two species of fermions coupled by an attractive two-body interaction. The success in applying the SYK model to qualitative studies of strange metals and the minimalistic structure of the model itself fostered the effort to find a mechanism by which the superconducting state is formed out of an incoherent SYK metal. where η is a number close to one. This theoretical finding that we refer to as a Planckian superconductor draws parallels to the phenomenon of reentrant superconductivity The couplings t σ ij and J ij;kl are assumed to be independent Gaussian random variables with finite variances , and zero means. The interaction terms in the Hamiltonian (2) are decoupled within the Hubbard-Stratonovich transformations, where ω n = πT (2n + 1) are Matsubara frequencies and p = M/N controls the ratio between the "sites" In the normal phase (∆ = 0) the equations (6-8) can be written as (10,11) in the infrared ω n J. In this regime, the Green's function of the ψ fermions G + (iω n ) scales as √ ω n for ω n /J p -1/3 (t/J) 4/3 . In the equal sites case 2M = N , which corresponds to p = 1/2, the bare SYK Green's function survives for (t/J) The Green's function that satisfies the equations (10,12) is , that are achievable in the weak tunneling limit t J. Note that the frequency window strictly depends on the coupling t. For We plot ν = ∂ ln Gc/∂ ln ωn as a function of p at given frequencies and finite coupling t = 0.475J. At low frequencies, ν close to -1/2 is robust against p increase for p < 1/2. The frequency rise moves ν towards -1 (free fermion limit), while ν crosses over to 1 for large p. The temperature is T = 10 -4 J. p 1/2, the Green's function of the c fermions in the low-frequency limit is G c (iω n ) ∝ -iω n , The gap equation ( such as to abolish superconductivity at zero temperature. The constraint (13) follows from the gap equation ( The results for the critical temperature are presented in Figure This observation seems to be reminiscent of quite a peculiar feature of an Andreev billiard: To estimate the gap behavior at the critical coupling we consider the equations (6-8) at finite ∆, whereas the self-energy equation ( As we look for a low-temperature correction to zero ∆ at the critical coupling, we expand the gap equation (9) in powers of ∆ up to the second order, The SYK Green's function diverges at low frequencies as 1/ √ ω n and decays as 1/ω n in the ultraviolet. Hence the principal contribution to the sum (15) from the high frequencies is given by the bare ω n in the denominator. On the other hand, a divergent Green's function is crucial at low frequencies. Assuming G c decays fast enough in comparison to ω n , we replace G c with the infrared SYK Green's function (15). The low-temperature version of relation ( where we expand up to T 2 keeping in mind that ∆ ∝ T at the critical coupling. 56 Finally, one notices two terms in the top row of the equation ( Although this estimate gives η ≈ 1.22 that exceeds the found numerical value η ≈ 0.96 for the pairing gap ∆ ≈ η /t P , the derived low-temperature gap behavior ( Conclusion.-In this manuscript, we considered the superconducting proximity effect for the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev model. We have shown, that the superconducting dot coupled to the complex SYK model possesses reentrant superconductivity. At the critical coupling, which gives rise to the occurrence of a lower critical temperature, the pairing gap disappears at T = 0 and grows linearly with an increase in temperature. The linear-T growth of the gap is given by /t P , where t P = / (2πk B T ) is the Planckian relaxation time. The same timescale serves as an ultimate bound on manybody quantum chaos, 8 saturated in strongly coupled systems without quasiparticle excitations. Thereby a natural question arises whether the pairing gap is an appropriate physical observable for the Lyapunov spectrum Above we introduce Ḡ as an auxiliary function that requires Ḡ0 = G 1 and λ 0 = λ -1 > 0. Computationally, the algorithm (B4-B6) is of the same complexity as (B1) and (B3), while the adaptive step allows for a significant speedup. We treat the pairing gap ∆, the temperature T , and the coupling strength t that enter the equations (A10-A12) as an external set of parameters. Once the Green's functions are found within the procedure (B4-B6), we choose the data that satisfies the self-consistency relation (A13) to produce the finite-temperature phase diagrams. Matsubara frequencies ω n = πT (2n + 1) define a natural discrete grid. We set the ultraviolet cut-off N such that n ∈ [-N, -N + 1, . . . , N -1, N ], where the reliable N is of the order 10 4 -10 5 with the accuracy criteria (B2) ε = 10 -4 . The numerical analysis becomes more demanding as one enters the low-temperature regime in the vicinity of the critical coupling. We reach the lowest temperature of T ∼ 10 -3 using N = 1.5×10 6 , with a main computational bottleneck coming from the computer memory. Also, the computation of the lowest critical temperatures requires an increase of the accuracy for the self-consistency condition (A13) and ε (B2) to 10 -5 -10 -6 . One of the objectives of this manuscript is to study the pairing gap at the critical coupling and low temperatures. In this regime, the gap grows linearly in temperature as shown in Figure raises the question of whether those two seemingly independent quantities might be related. This hypothesis has been intensively investigated in the context of the AdS/CFT correspondence, in large-N vector models and spin systems (see [65] and the references therein). In systems with a small parameter (large-N quantum field theories or weakly coupled field theories) where a regime of exponential growth is present in the OTOC, however, they are set by the same physics even though they are quantitatively different [66,67]. 