In this paper, we report enhanced breakdown characteristics of Pt/BaTiO3/Al0.58Ga0.42N lateral heterojunction diodes compared to Pt/Al0.58Ga0.42N Schottky diodes. BaTiO3, an extreme dielectric constant material, has been used, in this study, as dielectric material under the anode to significantly reduce the peak electric field at the anode edge of the heterojunction diode such that the observed average breakdown field was higher than 8 MV/cmachieved for devices with anode to cathode spacing <0.2 μm. Control Schottky anode devices (Pt/Al0.58Ga0.42N) fabricated on the same sample displayed an average breakdown field ~4 MV/cm for devices with similar dimensions. While both breakdown fields are significantly higher than those exhibited by incumbent technologies such as GaN-based devices, BaTiO3 can enable more effective utilization of the higher breakdown fields available in ultra-wide bandgap materials by proper electric field management. This demonstration thus lays the groundwork needed to realize ultra-scaled lateral devices with significantly improved breakdown characteristics. Significant research interest has been generated by the AlxGa1-xN material system due to its attractive material properties such as extremely high critical breakdown field, predicted to be above 9 MV/cm for x ≥ 0.5, good lowfield transport properties, and high electron saturation velocity comparable to GaN. More recently a solution to this problem has been proposed to be the use of extremely high permittivity oxides inserted between the metal and semiconductor layers and in the gate-drain region. 9,10 Extreme permittivity dielectrics enable improved breakdown due to two reasons. Firstly, a high dielectric constant passivation layer Fig. Barium Titanate, BaTiO3, a perovskite oxide displaying high dielectric constant, is a suitable candidate for such applications. In this report, we demonstrate a >8 MV/cm average breakdown field for BaTiO3/Al0.58Ga0.42N (predicted critical breakdown field of Al0.58Ga0.42N ~9.7 MV/cm) heterojunction diodes which represents an important step towards achieving true material breakdown field in lateral devices. In comparison, control Schottky diodes displayed a breakdown field ~4 MV/cm, significantly lower than material breakdown field limit and representative of typical observations for Schottky devices. Low-pressure (LP) MOCVD was used to grow the active layers for the reported device structures on 3 μm thick high quality AlN-(0001) sapphire templates. These template layers were also deposited by LPMOCVD at growth temperatures close to 1250 C. Their RMS surface roughness was measured by atomic-force microscope (AFM) to be 1.44 nm, as shown in Figure BaTiO3 was deposited via RF sputtering at 630 oC in an oxygen ambient. The dielectric constant of the BaTiO3 films were estimated to be around 60. For the fabrication of the control samples, BaTiO3 was etched away using SF6 plasma ICP-RIE etching under the anode regions and the access regions while BaTiO3 was etched away only from the access regions for the heterojunction diodes. Finally, anodes were formed by the deposition of Pt/Au [60/100 nm] metal stack via e-beam evaporation for both the Schottky and the heterojunction diodes. The schematic of the fabricated heterojunction diode is shown in Figure The extracted doping density is found to be 4×10 18 cm -3 , as expected, near the top of the structure, and the lower density at larger depletion depths may be due to errors introduced by capacitor loss. cathode spacing of 700 nm. The turn-on voltage of the Schottky diode and the heterojunction diode are 0.9 V and 1.5 V, respectively. Both these devices display significantly lower turn-on voltage compared to what is typically observed for AlGaN PN/PIN diodes. The differential on-resistance (RON), calculated from the forward IV characteristics was 31 mΩ.cm 2 for Schottky diode, and 56 mΩ.cm 2 for the heterojunction diode. The increase in RON the heterojunction device is likely due to the presence of BaTiO3 layer which is nominally undoped. Breakdown characteristics were evaluated for several randomly selected Schottky and heterojunction diodes. Figure The improvement in the breakdown field is attributed to a reduced peak field and the suppression of gate leakage current due to the BaTiO3 layer. With a pinch-off voltage of -12 V, the vertical field and the horizontal field of the Schottky diode was estimated to be 3.15 MV/cm, assuming a total depleted sheet charge density of 1.55×10 13 cm - 2 , and 1.58 MV/cm respectively, which gives a total field of 3.52 MV/cm. Similarly, the vertical field and the horizontal field of the heterojunction diode was estimated to 3.15 MV/cm and 7.94 MV/cm respectively, leading to an effective electric field of 8.5 MV/cm. Multiple randomly chosen devices were measured for both the Schottky diodes and the heterojunction diodes and the results are show in Figure In conclusion, we have demonstrated Pt/BaTiO3/Al0.58Ga0.42N lateral heterojunction diodes with enhanced breakdown characteristics. By using BaTiO3 as a gate and access-region dielectric, the peak field at the anode edge was significantly reduced and an average breakdown field exceeding 8 MV/cm was achieved for devices with anode to cathode spacing of 0.18 μm. In contrast, Pt/Al0.58Ga0.42N control Schottky diodes displayed an average breakdown field below 4 MV/cm for devices with similar dimensions. The use of a high-k dielectric can more effectively utilize the high breakdown fields in ultra-wide bandgap materials, by proper electric field management. This demonstration thus provides a framework to realize ultra-scaled lateral devices with improved breakdown characteristics.