Hollow-core fibers have demonstrated record performance in applications such as high-power pulse delivery, quantum computing, and sensing. However, their routine use is yet to become reality. A major obstacle is the ability to maintain the polarization state of light over a broad range of wavelengths, while also ensuring low attenuation and single-mode guidance. Here we simulated, fabricated and characterized a single-mode polarization-maintaining anti-resonant hollow-core fiber. The birefringence was achieved by introducing resonators of different thicknesses, thereby creating reduced symmetry in the structure. The measured group birefringence of 4.4x10 -5 at 1550 nm is in good agreement with the calculated group birefringence from the simulations. This corresponds to a phase birefringence of 2.5x10 -5 at 1550 nm. The measured loss of the fiber was 0.46 dB/m at 1550 nm. With its simple structure, low loss, and broadband operation this polarization-maintaining anti-resonant hollow-core fiber is a serious contender for applications in gas-based nonlinear optics and communications. Air-guidance in hollow-core fibers holds the key to many exciting possibilities, e.g. the lowest loss signal transmission, Recent resurgent interest in hollow-core fibers has resulted in the development of anti-resonant hollow-core fibers Standard, anti-resonant hollow-core fibers consist of a ring of capillary resonators around a hollow core, with all resonators of the same diameter (d1) and thickness (t1) (Design A). In our birefringent hollow-core fiber, the modal birefringence is achieved by changing the thickness, t2 of two resonators (Design B). Figure Table Table There is a clear difference in the calculated phase birefringence in each transmission band with B P ~10 -5 at 1550 nm -significantly higher than the birefringence in the transmission band centered at 800 nm. In addition, there is a small difference in the calculated confinement loss for each polarization which is more noticeable towards the longer wavelength range. The cutback method was used to determine the transmission bands and the attenuation of the fabricated fiber of Design B. White light from a Xe light source was coupled into the core of 50 m of the fiber and the transmission was recorded using an OSA. The fiber was cut back to 10 m and the transmission was recorded again. Due to the very large anticipated beat length, it is not trivial to measure the phase birefringence of our hollow-core fiber. Instead, we measured the group birefringence B G = B P -λ dB dλ ⁄ of our fibre using the group beatlength technique with λ o the central wavelength The calculated phase birefringence of our polarization-maintaining anti-resonant hollow-core fiber is two orders of magnitude lower compared to that of highly birefringent HC-PBGFs To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of a birefringent anti-resonant hollow-core fiber. By using resonators of two different thicknesses we achieved a phase birefringence of ~10 -5 at 1550 nm. Each set of resonators have their first guidance band at around 800 nm and at around 2400 nm, respectively. We believe that the measured polarization-maintaining properties of this fiber at 1550 nm arise from the enhanced interaction of the guided light with the surrounding structure. At 1550 nm, the fiber operates at the lower edge of the transmission band centered at 2400 nm for the thicker resonators, and approaches the resonance at ~1200 nm. Light guided at 1550 nm is also at the upper edge of the transmission band centered at 800 nm for the thinner resonators, where losses due to the small core size dominate 