We study theoretically spin excitations in the newly discovered nickelate superconductors based on a three-band model and the random phase approximation. The spin excitations are found to be incommensurate in a low energy region. The spin resonance phenomenon is revealed as the excitation energy increases. The maximum intensity may be at the incommensurate momentum or the commensurate momentum, depending on the out-of-plane momentum. The spin excitations become incommensurate again at higher energies. The similarities and differences of the spin excitations between nickelate and cuprate superconductors are addressed. Our predicted results can be tested by inelastic neutron scattering experiments later. The high-T c cuprate superconductivity was discovered over thirty years ago, while a full understanding of its microscopic mechanism has so far been challenging Very recently, superconductivity with T c ranging from 9K to 15K was discovered in the Sr doped infinite-layer nickelate material Nd 1-x Sr x NiO 2 Although the mechanism of high-T c superconductivity is still puzzling now, it is generally believed that spin excitations should be important. Previously, the spin excitations in cuprate superconductors are intensively studied, both experimentally Several models for the band structure have been proposed recently to describe the nickelates, including the single-band model The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the model and present the relevant formalism. In Sec. III, we report numerical calculations and discuss the obtained results. Finally, we give a brief summary in Sec. IV. We start from the Hamiltonian including the hopping term, the superconducting pairing term, and the interaction term, expressed as, The hopping term H t is obtained from a three-band tight-binding fit from the first-principal band structure of the Nd 0.8 Sr 0.2 NiO 2 compound Here c † iμσ (c iμσ ) are creation (annihilation) operators at the i-th site in the orbital μ and with spin projection σ. The indices μ and ν run through 1 to 3 corresponding to the Ni-3d x 2 -y 2 orbital, the Nd-5d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital, and the Nd-5d xy orbital, respectively. H p is the superconducting pairing term, expressed as, Following Ref. where the U αα and U αα ′ (α = α ′ ) represent the intraorbital and inter-orbital interactions, respectively. J H and J ′ are the Hund's coupling constant and the pairing hopping constant of the two Nd-5d orbitals. Defining a six order column vector with ) T , the above bare Hamiltonian without the interaction term can be expressed as the 6 × 6 matrix term in the momentum space. The bare spin susceptibility including both the normal and the anomalous terms is then expressed as where U ij (k) and E i (k) are eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian which can be obtained through diagonalizing the Hamiltonian matrix. The cases with α = α ′ and α = α ′ are corresponding to the intraorbital excitations and inter-orbital excitations, respectively. Generally both the inter-orbital scattering and the intra-orbital scattering may contribute to the spin susceptibility. While from the present band structure, the three orbitals are weakly coupled and the spin susceptibilities from the inter-orbital scattering are nearly vanishing. As a result, only intra-orbital spin excitations (related to intra-orbital interaction terms in Eq.( The real parts of the bare normal state spin susceptibility as a function of the momentum q with ω = 0. (b) The imaginary parts of the renormalized normal state spin susceptibility as a function of the momentum q with ω = 0.1. The renormalized spin susceptibility can be obtained through the RPA Here U = U 11 is the on-site Hubbard-like interaction in the Ni-3d x 2 -y 2 band. In the following presented results, we use the nearestneighbor hopping constant of the Ni-3d band as the energy unit. Other in-plane hopping constants are taken from Ref. We now study the spin excitations in the normal state by setting the gap magnitude ∆ 0 = 0 in Eq. ( We turn to study the spin excitations in the superconducting state. At first, we would like to discuss the possible superconducting pairing symmetry. The nickelate compound crystallizes in a tetragonal structure. As indicated in Ref. The energy dependence of the spin excitations may be studied by later INS experiments. The existence of the spin resonance at the in-plane momentum (π, π) may be tested and taken as one important signature for the dwave superconductivity. The spin resonance is robust for different q z . The position changes slightly as q z changes. The intensity plots of the imaginary part of the spin susceptibility as a function of the in-plane momentum with different energies and q z are presented in Fig. When the out-of-plane momentum q z increases to π, as is seen in Figs. To study the energy dependence of the spin excitations more clearly, the intensity plots of the imaginary part of the spin susceptibility as functions of the momentum and energy are presented in Fig. The large Fermi surface is close to the magnetic Brillouin zone, generating significant spin excitations around the momentum (π, π), as indicated by the solid vectors Q 1 in Fig. For the case of low energy spin susceptibility in the superconducting state, only excitations near nodes can occur. Thus qualitatively speaking, the low energy spin excitations are qualitatively similar for different q z . A more insightful explanation for the low energy incommensurate spin excitations can be obtained through the constant energy contours. According to Ref. As the energy increases further, the RPA renormalization has a rather weak effect. Then the spin excitations are still determined by the bare spin susceptibility, similar to the case of low energy excitations. While at the high energy, the antinodal to antinodal excitations play an important role. The normal state Fermi surface splits at the antinodal direction for different k z . Thus the spin excitations for q z = 0 and q z = 0 are different. For the case of q z = 0, only the scattering between the same Fermi surface occurs. For the case of q z = 0, the spin excitations are determined by scattering between the Fermi surface with different k z . Then the weak disorder is induced. It is noted that the spin excitations along different directions are almost the same as those shown in Fig. Let us summarize the similarities and differences of the spin excitations in the d-wave superconducting state between the cuprates and nickelates. Firstly, although the band structure of nickelates is three dimensional, the properties of the spin excitations are qualitatively similar for different q z . The maximum spin excitations are always around the momentum (π, π), which is indeed similar to those of cuprates. Secondly, in both compounds, a spin resonance phenomena can be observed, namely, the spin excitation is enhanced greatly in the superconducting state at the energy about 2∆ 0 . The third similarity is that the spin excitations are incommensurate at low and high energies. Especially, the low energy spin excitations are nearly identical to those of cuprates. On the other hand, there still exist some differences for the spin excitations of these two families. In nickelates, the spin resonance is damped greatly. Therefore for some q z , the maximum excitation does no occur at the momentum (π, π). Moreover, the incommensurate spin excitations depend on the out-of-plane momentum q z . The maximum points may form a circle at the momentum space for certain q z . These similarities and differences may be detected by later INS experiments. At last, we would also like to discuss the difference of spin excitations between nickelates and iron-based superconductors. In iron-based superconductors, as discussed in Ref. In summary, starting from a three-band model and dwave superconductivity, we have examined the spin excitations in the nickelate superconductors based on the random phase approximation. A spin resonance phenomenon, namely, the spin excitation is enhanced in the superconducting state at the energy about twice of the gap magnitude, was revealed. Below and above the resonant energy, the spin excitations are incommensurate. The similarities and differences for the spin excitations in the nickelates and cuprates have been discussed. All of the numerical results are explained well based on the geometry of Fermi surface.