Ion transport in perm-selective media has been extensively investigated in recent years owing to its applications in advancements of fundamental understanding of nanoscale electrokinetics as well as innovative engineering applications. A key phenomenon in this context is ion concentration polarization (ICP) that occurs near perm-selective nanoporous membranes or nanochannels under dc bias. In classical settings, involving voltage-driven transport of ions through perm-selective membranes, concentration polarization is well understood as formation of steep concentration drop to reach near zero concentration (depletion layer) at the anodic side of cation-selective membranes. In contrast to this classical description, we demonstrate here that when ICP is driven in a microchannel and coupled with electroosmotic flows a long-tailed fluorescent layer in front of diffusion layer is formed, which can be characterized as an additional plateau in the concentration profile. Using a micro/nanofluidic platform, in situ visualizations, and local concentration measurements by microelectrode arrays we quantify that this plateau layer has a concentration of 60 % of bulk electrolyte concentration, regardless of the bulk concentration itself. Using a mathematical analysis of conservation laws for flow, charge, and salt, we demonstrate that this plateau region is related to the formation of a flow stagnation point due to the competition between electro-osmotic and induced pressure driven flows. Consistent with the experiments, this analysis predicts the plateau concentration to be 60% of the bulk electrolyte. Thus, this plateau concentration region completes the picture of ICP in microchannels which has drawn significant attention from the fields of electrokinetics and micro/nanofluidics. Ion concentration polarization (ICP) is a fundamental electrokinetic phenomenon that occurs near perm-selective nanoporous membranes or nanochannels One of the key characteristics of ICP is that charged particles are being repelled from the ion depletion zone which acted as a virtual barrier due to the balance of hydrodynamic drag force and electrophoretic force on the charged molecules Step-wise concentration profile in the ICP layer was verified with an in-depth experimental investigation of multiple vortical instabilities inside the ICP layer However, repeated experiments have shown anomalous phenomena of unexpected long-tailed fluorescent signal followed by sharp preconcentrated plug, which has remained unexplained. This work presents an in-depth investigation of the spatiotemporal concentration profiles outside of depletion zones in ICP, which is intermediate region between bulk and ion depletion layer. Unlike the diffusion-convection layer which has sudden drop in concentration followed by near zero concentration (Figure In addition, the time when c 13 (red circle) reached plateau concentration (~ 6 mM) was close to the time when c 35 (yellow circle) started to decrease (t = ~ 2 min). Likewise, the time when c 35 (yellow circle) reached plateau concentration (~ 6 mM) was close to the time when c 57 (green circle) started to decrease (t = ~ 3 min). From these observations, one can infer that the boundary between zones at bulk concentration (c 0 ) and plateau concentration (~ 0.6 c 0 ) was passing through the specific electrodes at those times. Conventional fluorescence dye such as Rhodamine 6G and Alexa 488 had been widely used to visualize ICP near the permselective nanochannel or nanoporous membrane To explain the formation of this concentration plateau, we next present a simple mathematical analysis. The domain was decomposed by zone (1): bulk region, zone (2): the secondary plateau and zone (3): the ion depletion zone as shown in Figure this analysis is yet unknown. We start by analyzing the velocity profiles. In this setup, the long microchannel has two sections of equal size, to the left and right of the nanofluidic element. The electric field is active only in the left half of the channel, but this field is responsible for driving the flow through the entire channel. Given that most of the left half is occupied by zone (1) which also contributes to half of hydraulic resistance of the system, we conclude that the net averaged velocity in the entire channel is / 2 u U ’ĆĮ where U=-’üź’ü║|E|/’üŁ is the electroosmotic velocity induced in zone ( This flow field at the centerline, y = 0.5, results in a velocity u c (3/4) -1/(2’üĪ). In zone (1) the velocity profile is positively valued (’üĪ = 1), but in zone (2) for ’üĪ < (2/3), we have a backward flow at the centerline. This implies that there is a stagnation point at the centerline between zones (1) and ( This stagnation point was also confirmed by an accumulation of micro-beads in supporting video 1 and video 2. The streamline that passes through the stagnation point (see the thick line in Figure , which is very close to the 60 % value measured experimentally as is in fact within the experimental accuracy. As the analytical investigation indicated, the formation of the secondary plateau of 0.6 c 0 was free from initial bulk concentration (c 0 ). See supporting note 5 for detailed analytical derivation. In the experiments we investigated bulk concentrations ranging from 0.1 mM to 100 mM. As shown in Figure ICP process has been extensively studied in recent years since it plays a core role in innovative engineering applications such as biomolecular preconcentrator and small-scale electro desalination device. Consequently, understanding of fundamental characteristics of ICP has evolved as well, especially when it comes to quantitative description of the concentration profiles. In this work, the spatiotemporal concentration profile of diffusion-convection layer of ICP had been rigorously investigated using patterned microelectrode array in micro/nanofluidic platform. This was the first experimental verification that secondary concentration plateau region of 60 % of c 0 is formed in front of diffusion layer in common setups utilizing ICP, unlike most-recent diffusion-convection layers which shows sudden drop and maintaining near zero concentration. The propagating plateau concentration profile with nearly 60 % of c 0 was confirmed with in situ fluorescent dye visualization and in situ microelectrode conductivity measurements. To explain this anomalous concentration profile in general, a simple analytical investigation was carried out to confirm that the formation of this secondary plateau and its independence from the bulk concentration in the sample electrolyte. Our analysis revealed the competition between pressure-driven flow and electroosmotic flow as the key mechanism for the formation of the plateau region and showed that this region is separated from the standard diffusion layer by a zone involving flow stagnation. This secondary plateau concentration layer together with a stagnation point should be considered for the complete picture of ICP in microchannels and would play a key role not only for advancing novel micro-and nano-scaleelectrokinetic functionalities but also for proper quantitative analysis of existing applications. 