Optical physical unclonable keys are currently considered to be rather promising candidates for the development of entity authentication protocols, which offer security against both classical and quantum adversaries. In this work we investigate the robustness of a continuous-variable protocol, which relies on the scattering of coherent states of light from the key, against three different types of intercept-resend emulation attacks. The performance of the protocol is analysed for a broad range of physical parameters, and our results are compared to existing security bounds. Entity authentication (or identification) is a fundamental cryptographic task, which aims at providing a verifier with assurance about the identity of another entity (a claimant) In general terms, a PUF is a cryptographic primitive which converts an input challenge into an output response, by means of a random physical unclonable key (PUK). The randomness of the PUK is introduced explicitly or implicitly during its fabrication, and it is considered to be technologically hard to clone (hence the term physical unclonable). The physical mechanism underpin-ning the operation of a PUF, as well as the nature of the challenge, depend on the nature of the PUK. Hence, one can have electronic, optical, magnetic, biological PUFs, etc. For a rather extensive list of PUFs and their classification the reader may refer to Ref. Another advantage of optical PUFs is that they accept quantum states of light as challenges, thereby enabling for the design of EAPs whose security relies on fundamental principles of quantum physics tum states used for the interrogation of the PUK. This is the only way for the adversary to estimate the numerical challenges encoded on the quantum states, and to send the corresponding responses to the verifier by looking the estimated challenges up in the set of CRPs. However, fundamental theorems of quantum physics prevent perfect discrimination between non-orthogonal quantum states. As a result, the intervention of the adversary will inevitably introduce errors, that will be detected by the verifier, who can abort the authentication process. In this context, we proposed recently a continuousvariable quantum authentication of optical PUKs, which relies on standard wavefront-shaping and homodynedetection techniques The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we discuss briefly the EAP, while the intercept-resend attacks under consideration are formulated in Sec. III. Our main results and the robustness of the protocol are discussed in Sec. IV. A summary with concluding remarks is given in Sec. V. The EAP under consideration and the related verification set-up have been discussed in detail elsewhere The main parts of the verification set-up are shown in Fig. The set-up operates in the diffusive limit where Z N = {0, 1, . . . , N -1} and N 1. We associate a randomly chosen phase shift with each possible value of k, which is applied on the optimal phase pattern of the SLM when the probe state |α k is used. Hence, the optimal phase pattern for the probe state |α k becomes Φ k := Φ + ω k , where ω k denotes the applied global shift, and is chosen at random and independently from a uniform distribution over finite set Ω. In the diffusive limit, the action of the entire set-up on the input probe can be represented by a linear transformation, which depends on various parameters of the set-up, including the PUK, and the (shifted) phase pattern of the SLM. The main quantity of interest is the quantum mechanical expectation value of the θ-quadrature of the electric field in SMF B at the entrance of the HD set-up, which is given by where the mean number of photons μ R that reach the HD The angles θ = 0 and π/2 refer to the quadratures X and Ŷ of the field in SMF B at the entrance of the HD set-up, respectively (see Fig. Response set-up is smaller than μ P . Equation (2) encapsulates possible losses, and various other parameters pertaining to the set-up and the applied wavefront-shaping technique. For a fixed set-up with publicly-known parameters, μ R can be considered fixed and known, while the phase χ k is fully determined by the phase of the probe state φ k , the associated random phase shift ω k , and the PUK. For θ = 0 and π/2 one obtains the expectation values of the conjugate quadratures of the field X and Ŷ , respectively. There are two distinct stages in the EAP under consideration i.e., the enrollment and the verification stages (see Fig. The verification stage takes place each time the user wishes to authenticate himself. He has to input the PUK in a potentially unsecured verification set-up, which is connected to the database over a secure and authenticated classical channel. The server sends to the verifier a sequence of M 1 challenges, chosen at random from the available challenges, together with a sequence of M angles (θ 1 , θ 2 , . . . , θ M ) chosen at random and independently from a uniform distribution over {0, π/2}. The PUK is interrogated sequentially by the M challenges. In the jth challenge C kj := {k j , Φ kj }, the verifier measures the θ j -quadrature of the field in SMF B. Assuming very strong LO field, the outcome of the measurement in the HD set-up follows a normal distribution N ( Q(θ j ) kj , σ 2 ), which is centered at the expectation value of the measured quadrature and its standard deviation σ = 1/ √ 2η, is determined by the detection efficiency η of the HD set-up. The outcomes from all of the M measurements are returned to the server, over the classical channel. Acceptance or rejection of the PUK is decided upon the fraction of outcomes p in that fall within an interval (bin) of width ∆, which is centered at the expectation value of the measured quadrature Q(θ j ) kj . The theoretically expected probability for an outcome to fall inside the interval is given by with ∆ = ∆/σ, which is independent of k and θ. For sufficiently large values of M , one can ensure with high confidence, that for the true PUK and in the absence of cheating, the empirical probability p in will lie in an interval of size 2ε around the theoretically expected probability P (0) in The emulation attacks under consideration follow closely the general theoretical framework of Ref. Given that the probe states in the M queries are chosen at random and independently from a uniform distribution over the set S N , from now on we can focus on one of the queries and let |α k denote the incoming probe state. The adversary's task is to obtain an estimate of the integer k, which determines fully the challenge and the expected response. To this end, he performs a measurement on the incoming probe state, and based on the outcome, the adversary makes an educated guess about k, to be denoted by k. For the reasons discussed above, this guess may or may not be equal to the actual k used by the verifier, and thus the adversary's intervention will affect the probability with which the verifier obtains an outcome in the expected bin. More precisely, instead of Eq. ( where Qk (θ) and Q k (θ) denote the θ-quadratures of the response field, when the adversary deduces the correct and the wrong value of k. Both of them are given by Eq. (2) for k and k, respectively. Given that the verifier samples from both quadratures at random and independently, after M queries the verifier will obtain an estimate of the average probability where P (in|k, k, θ) is given by Eq. (4a) and is the probability for the adversary to make an error in his estimation of k. The probability P in takes into account all of the events irrespective of whether the adversary deduced the correct value of k or not. In the second equality of Eq. (4b) we have taken into account the uniform distribution of k over Z N and of θ over {0, π/2}. Moreover, we have used the fact that the state of the probe and the outcome of the adversary are independent of the quadrature to be measured by the verifier. A straightforward calculation basically quantifies the adversary's intervention. The adversary's intervention will be detected by the verifier when the observed deviations from P (0) in exceed the statistical deviations i.e., when As mentioned above, the security threshold 2ε is determined by the sample size M in the verification stage while, in general, the exact values of P err , P in , and D, depend on the measurement applied by the adversary. However, working along the lines of Ref. where P max (in|error) := max k, k P (in|k, k) . This bound is expected to hold irrespective of the adversary's measurement, and its dependence on various parameters of the protocol has been discussed in detail elsewhere In particular, it has been shown that for any given combination of parameters {ε, ∆, μ P , μ R }, the secure operation region for the protocol becomes wider for increasing η. Typical HD set-ups have η > 0.5, and η = 0.5 can be considered as the worst-case scenario for the security of the protocol. The size of the bin width ∆ relative to the detection efficiency is a free parameter that can be chosen at will, so that to optimize the performance of the protocol. For any given combination of {ε, η, μ P , μ R } it has been shown that the optimal value is ∆ 2σ. Hence, although our simulations have been extended to various combinations of η and ∆, throughout the present work we focus on numerical results for η = 0.5 and ∆ = 2σ. To facilitate the analysis of our results for the three different attacks, in Fig. In a dual homodyne-detection attack (DHA), for each probe the adversary performs a joint measurement of the non-commuting observables { Xk , Ŷk }, by means of an eight-port interferometric set-up where XA k and ŶA k refer to the expectation values of the quadratures of the electric field in SMF A, when the field is in state |α k . Assuming negligible losses in SMF A and in the set-up of the adversary we have Moreover, in Eq. (8a) we have assumed perfect detection efficiency for the adversary (σ DH = 1), which is the worstcase scenario for the security of the protocol. Hence, when the efficiency in the HD set-up of the verifier is η ≥ 0.5 we have σ ≤ σ DH . This suggests that, for either of the quadratures, the adversary samples from a distribution, which is at least as broad as the distribution sampled by the verifier. To proceed further, we have to define a strategy for the adversary to make an educated guess for the probe stare |α k , given the random outcome of the dual-homodyne detection (x, y). Recall here that the adversary has obtained a copy of the list of the CRPs for the particular PUK, which allows him to discretize the phase space as shown in Fig. where we have set x = ρ cos(γ), y = ρ sin(γ), and used Eqs. After the measurement, the adversary prepares and sends to the verifier a coherent state |β k , which is consistent with his educated guess about the probe state, and will induce the expected statistics at the HD set-up of the verifier. The average probability P (DH) in for the state |β k to result in an outcome within the expected bin is given by Eq. (4b), after substituting P ( k|k) by P (DH) ( k|k), which is given by Eq. ( The term inside the brackets is the joint probability for the adversary to deduce the wrong value for k, and the outcome of the HD of the verifier to fall within the expected bin. Assume now that the adversary applies an ideal unambiguous discrimination (UD) measurement to each probe, in order to deduce which of the N possible coherent states is used by the verifier The minimum probability for an inconclusive result is which is independent of the value of k i.e., independent of the probe state. In the case of a conclusive outcome the adversary will prepare and send a coherent state, which will induce the expected statistics at the HD set-up of the verifier. Hence, the probability for the verifier to get a result inside the bin, given that the adversary obtained a conclusive outcome, is equal to P (0) in [see Eq. ( Using this equation, the overall error probability reads Using the fact that a conclusive outcome always yields the correct value of k, while the occurrence of a conclusive or inconclusive result is independent of k, one readily obtains The average probability for the verifier to get an outcome inside the expected bin after an unambiguous-statediscrimination attack (UDA) is given by Eqs. ( where P (in|k, k, θ) is given by Eq. (4a). The third attack we consider relies on a minimum-error state-discrimination measurement where ρk := |α k α k |. When the adversary obtains the outcome k, he concludes that the probe was also in state |α k , and thus the response expected by the verifier is Given that the authentication scheme works with the symmetric set of states S N , the optimal measurement that minimizes the error probability is the square-root measurement with ρ := k ρk /N . The average probability for the adversary to deduce the wrong probe state is given by Tr ρk Πk . As in the previous attacks, given the outcome k, the adversary prepares and sends to the verifier a coherent state that will induce statistics compatible with the response R k . The probability P (SR) in for the verifier to obtain an outcome within the expected bin is given by Eqs. (4), after replacing P ( k|k) by P (SR) ( k|k), which is given by Eqs. ( We have performed extensive simulations on the aforementioned three different types of intercept-resend attacks, and in this section we discuss our main findings on the security of the proposed protocol. As discussed in Sec. III, the protocol is secure when the difference of probabilities (6a) exceeds the security threshold 2ε, attained by sampling. Hence, for a given value of ε, the main quantity of interest for the security of the protocol is the difference of probabilities D, which for the three different attacks is given in Eqs. ( in is the probability for the verifier to obtain an outcome inside the bin in the absence of any attack [see Eq. ( Both of P err and P (in|error) depend on the attack under consideration. Hence, it is instructive to look at them separately, in comparison with the corresponding quantities determining the lower bound in Eq. ( Let us turn now to the other quantity of interest, namely the conditional probability P (in|error) relative to P (0) in . As depicted in Fig. Keeping the mean number of photons μ P in the probe constant, and increasing the losses in the set-up (i.e., decreasing the mean number of photons that reach the HD set-up relative to μ P ), we find that lower security thresholds have to be attained by the verifier, so that to ensure the security of the protocol against both of the dual- homodyne-detection and the square-root-measurement attack. For example, we see that the protocol is not secure against the square-root-measurement attack when 2ε = 4 × 10 -4 and μ P = 600, with μ R = 0.05μ P , but it is secure against the dual-homodyne-detection attack if N > 50 [see Figs. 7(f) and (b), respectively]. Moreover, for the particular chosen value of 2ε, we find that the protocol becomes secure against both of these attacks if μ R = 0.1μ P and N > 110. Security against the two attacks when the losses in the set-up are such that μ R = 0.05μ P , requires N ≥ 110 and sufficiently large sample size M so that 2ε 3×10 -4 . By contrast, we find small changes in the variation of D (UD) with N , which suggests that the unambiguous-state-discrimination attack is weaker than the other two. In this work we have analysed the seurity of the verification stage in the EAP of Ref. Firstly, the probability for the adversary to deduce the wrong state is expected to be higher for the displacedphoton counting, than for the square-root measurement discussed here. This is because our protocol relies on a set of symmetric states, and it is well-known that the square-root measurement minimizes the probability of error in this case As far as experimental realisations of the present attacks are concerned, the dual-homodyne-detection attack can be implemented with current technology The present work focuses on the verification of a PUK, assuming that the user has already been verified successfully to the PUK (see Sec. I). In analogy to conventional smart cards, the verification of the user to the PUK can be achieved through a PIN which is known to the legitimate owner of the PUK. This is necessary for any EAP, so that to prevent impersonation in case the PUK is stolen. When the PUK is given to a legitimate user it is accompanied by the PIN, which has been generated during the enrollment stage, and it is not shown in Fig. In analogy to conventional smart cards, at the beginning of the verification stage the user types in his PIN, and inserts his PUK to the verifier's set-up. The verifier imprints the pattern Ψ on the wavefront of the incoming light by means of his SLM, and the speckle of the scattered light is processed to yield the classical string w. If the last n bits of w agree with the PIN of the user, the verifier proceeds to the verification of the PUK, otherwise the authentication is aborted immediately. For the verification stage, the verifier sends to the server the key w id over a secure and authenticated classical channel, and the server returns a sequence of M challenges chosen at random from the list of CRPs with identification number equal to w id . The verification stage proceeds as discussed in Sec. II, as well as in Refs. 