We compute the nominal magnetic penetration depth of RNiO2 (R = La, Nd) from first principles calculations and discuss the results in relation to the superconducting Tc. We find a marked discrepancy with the well established phenomenology that correlates these two quantities in cuprates (Uemura plot). We also consider the 2D ultrathin limit and estimate the maximum attainable Tc to be ∼ 180 K according to the Nelson-Kosterliz universal relation between the superfluid density and the transition temperature. The recent discovery of superconductivity in Sr-doped NdNiO 2 /SrTiO 3 thin films First-principles calculations based on densityfunctional-theory (DFT) consistently find that, among the five Ni 3d bands, only the 3d x 2 -y 2 one intersects the Fermi level The magnetic penetration depth λ is a fundamental quantity of superconductors as it is pivotal to explain the Meissner effect where the integral is over the Fermi surface with v F being the Fermi velocity (which is a measure of the DOS). We computed Eq. ( These results are summarized in Fig. Alternatively, superconductivity in (Nd,Sr)NiO 2 thin films can be a 2D phenomenon and hence a different rationale must be applied. This will be naturally the case in the ultrathin limit, and will also be relevant if superconductivity is driven by the interface with the substrate. The magnetic penetration depth, being a measure of the superfluid density, is also related to the superfluid stiffness D s . This relation can be exploited to set bounds on the superconducting transition temperature since fluctuations of the phase of the superconducting order parameter will be the ultimate limiting factor in 2D ( The 2D superfluid stifness can be estimated from our previous calculations as x , where d is the interlayer spacing (i.e. the c lattice parameter). This gives a maxium T c of about 145 K. By restricting the integral (1) to the k F z = 0 line of the 3D Fermi surface this value increases to 180 K. While formally rigorous, this estimate has to be understood as a rather conservative upper bound since the superfluid density at T = 0, and hence the corresponding stiffness, can reasonably be assumed to overestimate that at T c . In summary, we have computed the zero-temperature magnetic penetration depth λ(0) of the newly superconducting nickelate NdNiO 2 relying on first-principles DFT calculations to fully take into account its bandstructure specific features. λ(0) is a fundamental descriptor of superconductivity displaying a phenomenological correlation to T c in cuprates and in other unconventional superconductors. Our calculations confirm the system as a type-II superconductor. The in-plane component of λ(0) is found to be dominated by the hole Fermi-surface pocket and no substantial change is obtained with doping. However, the extra electron pocket has a non-negligible impact on the eventual anisotropy. Remarkably, the nominal λ(0) and the reported T c do not follow the same correlation observed in the cuprates. If the same correlation were to apply, NdNiO 2 would be a room-temperature superconductor. This suggests that either the reported band structure needs to be revisited or the superconducting nature of nickelates is different. In the 2D case relevant for the ultrathin limit, the maximum attainable T c is estimated to be ∼ 180 K from the Nelson-Kosterlitz universal jump of the superfluid density.