Higher efficiency, lower cost refrigeration is needed for both large and small scale cooling. Refrigerators using entropy changes during cycles of stretching or hydrostatically compression of a solid are possible alternatives to the vapor-compression fridges found in homes. We show that high cooling results from twist changes for twisted, coiled, or supercoiled fibers, including those of natural rubber, NiTi, and polyethylene fishing line. By using opposite chiralities of twist and coiling, supercoiled natural rubber fibers and coiled fishing line fibers result that cool when stretched. A demonstrated twistbased device for cooling flowing water provides a high cooling energy and device efficiency. Theory describes the axial and spring index dependencies of twist-enhanced cooling and its origin in a phase transformation for polyethylene fibers. Compared with conventional vapor compression refrigerators, a solid that changes entropy when deformed could possibly provide a higher efficiency; lower cost, weight, and volume; and more convenient miniaturization. An ordinary rubber band is an example, which was reported in 1805 to heat when stretched and to cool when stretch is released Efficiencies of about 60% of the Carnot efficiency can be obtained for vapor compression refrigerators Realization of close to this efficiency could have enormous consequences if the needed cycle life of vapor compression refrigerators could be obtained, since so much of global energy consumption goes to cooling. Refrigeration materials that undergo cooling because of any type of mechanical deformation are called mechanocaloric, and those that cool because of changes in uniaxial stress Vulcanized natural rubber (NR) fibers (18, figs. S1-S10) provide a prototypical twistocaloric material. Twisting these fibers causes coil nucleation and propagation, decreasing inter-coil separation, and finally nucleation of supercoils (Fig. Twistocaloric surface temperature changes occur inhomogeneously for coiled and supercoiled fibers. Hence, maximum (Tmax) and average (Tavg) surface temperature changes are reported. Surface temperatures were measured using a thermal camera, whose accuracy was established by comparison with thermocouple measurements in a temperature-controlled oven on fibers having different twist states The temperature swing on stretch and stretch release (between heating and cooling temperatures) is important for remotely optically readable strain sensors or mechanothermochromic fibers. For 300% isometric strain, this swing in surface-average temperature was 3.3, 6.5, and 7.7°C for highly twisted, coiled, and partially supercoiled fibers, respectively, compared to 2.4°C for a non-twisted fiber (Fig. Examples of cooling by untwist are shown in Fig. Hence, a twist-based cooler at 100% strain can be 2/7 th the maximum length of the above stretch-based cooler, and still provide 2.3°C higher surface-average cooling. Figure The heating and cooling during stretch and stretch release of a non-twisted fiber are approximately independent of fiber diameter (fig. The volume-average cooling upon untwisting a NR fiber was obtained from the cooling energy of this fiber in a water-containing plastic tube (fig. Figure Although the maximum twistocaloric specific cooling energy obtained (19.4 J/g) is lower than reported for releasing 600%-stretch from a non-twisted NR fiber (21.6 J/g) ( Using the above volume-average cooling on isometric twist release, the coefficient of performance (COP) for NR twist fridges was obtained. The COP can be described as the ratio of the cooling energy (the product of the volume-average cooling, the gravimetric heat capacity, and the mass of the fiber) to either the input mechanical energy or the net energy consumed during a mechanical cycle (called COPHC and COPFC, for a half-cycle and a full-cycle, respectively) Using the stretch-release-induced cooling of the non-twisted fiber (Fig. The COPFC and COPHC for cooling, either by twist release or by releasing twist and then stretch, are much higher than for cooling by stretch release from the non-twisted fiber when the volume-average cooling is above -0.4°C (Fig. The intrinsic efficiency of a material, which is the maximum theoretical efficiency for a refrigerator, is the ratio of COPFC to the COP of a Carnot cycle (COPCarnot). COPCarnot is TC/(THTC), where TC and TH are the minimum and the maximum temperatures in the cycle, respectively. These material efficiencies for cooling during isometric untwisting and during releasing twist and then stretch are much higher than for cooling during stretch release from a non-twisted fiber, for both full-cycle and half-cycle processes (fig. To demonstrate scalability, cooling was measured while isometrically unplying multiple NR fibers. Unplying seven-ply 2.2-mm-diameter NR fibers (Fig. Guided by the correspondence between twistocaloric cooling for single fibers having the same stretch, and a similar product of twist density and stretched fiber diameter (fig. Spatially complex surface temperature changes occur for twistocaloric processes for coiled or super-coiled fibers (Fig. The peak surface cooling increases with increasing distance from the site where coiling nucleates (fig. Twistocaloric cooling was also investigated for polymers used for fishing line and sewing thread. These polymers were made elastically deformable by isobarically twisting until the fiber coils, as is done to make powerful thermally-driven artificial muscles Initial experiments employed 0.41-mm-diameter, 65-pound test, braided polyethylene (PE) fishing line (fig. The highest temperature swing between maximum heating and cooling (12.9°C, for a spring index of 0.8) was obtained for 22.7% stretch and stretch release, which is much higher per strain change (0.57°C/%) than for a non-twisted NR fiber (0.04°C/% for 600% strain). This high sensitivity is useful for mechanothermochromic indicators (Movie S3). No degradation in performance occurred during the investigated 2500 stretch/release cycles to 13% strain (fig. The strain dependence of twistocaloric cooling generally increases with decreasing spring index for coiled, high-strength polyethylene yarn (fig. Theoretical results (18, fig. Since the above polyethylene and nylon 6 fibers are crystalline, it is challenging to explain the origin of the entropy decrease caused by stretching the coiled fiber. One possible explanation for polyethylene is the known deformation-driven orthorhombic-to-monoclinic phase conversion (fig. The entropy change contribution from the amorphous phase is apparently small, which is consistent with the negligible change in amorphous scattering profile and with the unchanged ratio of the integrated diffraction intensity of the amorphous phase to the total diffraction intensity for the crystalline phases (from 0.49 to 0.50 during 20% stretch). While stretch increases fiber twist for a homochiral coil, stretch causes fiber untwist for a heterochiral coil, which enables reversal of the temperature changes produced by stretch and stretch release. A heterochiral NR coil was made by wrapping a self-coiled 2.2-mm-diameter NR fiber onto a mandrel to provide a spring index of 2.5 An inverse twistocaloric effect was also found for heterochiral coils of nylon 6 and polyethylene, which can be thermally set to maintain their coiled shape without retention of a mandrel. Stretching heterochiral coils of nylon 6 and polyethylene, with spring indices of 2.0, induces cooling of 0.6 and 0.3°C, respectively, and stretch release produces heating of +0.5 and +0.5°C, respectively (Fig. Large, reversible temperature changes also result from twist insertion and removal from a single NiTi shape memory wire, and from plying and unplying these wires. The investigated 0.7-mm-diameter Ni52.6Ti47.4 wires had a martensite-to-austenite transition from -29.0 to 15.0°C during heating, and an austenite-to-martensite transition from 13.5 to -44.6°C during cooling (fig. Twistocaloric cooling resulted from isometrically untwisting a single NiTi wire (-17.0°C maximum and -14.4°C average surface temperature changes) at 0% strain and at a twist rate of 50 turns/s (Fig. The calculated time for internal thermal equilibration of a 0.7-mm-diameter NiTi wire was 2.5 ms A device that enabled one cycle of refrigeration was demonstrated for the cooling of a stream of water (Fig. 