We examine the atomistic scale dependence of material's resistance-to-failure by numerical simulations and analytical analysis in electrical analogs of brittle crystals. We show that fracture toughness depends on the lattice geometry in a way incompatible with Griffith's relationship between fracture and free surface energy. Its value finds its origin in the matching between the continuum displacement field at the engineering scale, and the discrete nature of solids at the atomic scale. The generic asymptotic form taken by this field near the crack tip provides a solution for this matching, and subsequently a way to predict toughness from the atomistic parameters with application to graphene. Predicting when failure occurs is central to many industrial, societal and geophysical fields. For brittle solids under tension, the problem reduces to the destabilization of a preexisting crack: Remotely applied stresses are dramatically amplified at the crack tip, and all the dissipation processes involved in the problem are confined in a small fracture process zone (FPZ) around this tip. Linear elastic fracture mechanics (LEFM) provides the framework to describe this stress concentration; the main result is that the near-tip stress field exhibits a square-root singularity fully characterized by a single parameter, the stress intensity factor, K where E is Young's modulus. Within LEFM theory, both Γ and K c are material constants, to be determined experimentally. Still, their value is governed by the various dissipation processes (viscous or plastic deformations, crazing, etc) at play in the FPZ. As such, it should be possible to infer Γ and K c from the knowledge of the atomistic parameters, at least for perfectly brittle crystals in which cleavage occurs via successive bond breaking, without involving further elements of dissipation. In Griffith's seminal work The factor two, here, comes from the fact that breaking one bond creates two surface atoms. This formula significantly underestimates Γ Here, we examined how the material's resistance to crack growth is selected in two-dimensional (2D) fuse lattices of different geometries. These model digital materials, indeed, both possess perfectly prescribed and tunable "atomic bonds" and satisfy isotropic linear elasticity under antiplane deformation at the continuum scale Numerics -Rectangular fuse lattices of size 2L × L in the x and y directions were created and a horizontal straight crack of initial length 4L/5 is introduced from the left-handed side in the middle of the strip, by withdrawing the corresponding bonds [Fig. Two different loading schemes were imposed: Thin strip (TS) configuration where the voltage difference, 2U ext , is applied between the top and bottom nodes of the lattice, and compact tension (CT) configuration in which the voltage difference is applied between the upper (above crack) and lower (below crack) part of the left-handed side [Fig. Results -Figure To understand the selection of Γ, we turned to the analysis of the spatial distribution of voltage [Fig. a series of elementary solutions Φ n : Here, r is the distance to the crack tip and θ is the angle with respect to the crack line. In the antiplane (mode III) crack problem examined here, Φ n write (Supplementary Materials [22]): The term n = 1 is the usual square root singular term and a 1 relates to K via K = Ea 1 √ 2π/4 (see e.g. The near-tip discrepancy above results from the mismatch problem between the continuum fields of LEFM and the lattice discreteness at small scale, yielding a crack tip mispositioning. A similar problem has been faced in experimental mechanics to find out the crack tip on samples, knowing the displacement field at a set of discrete points via digital image correlation Is it now possible to predict fracture toughness from scratch in the different lattices, without resorting to simulations? To do so, we use the singular nature of the near-tip field and make L → ∞. Consider now the very vicinity of the next bond about to break, call A and B the two edge atoms, and position, as a first guess, the crack tip at the center O of this bond [Fig. Shifting the reference frame origin from O to C leads to the disappearance of the super-singular term. Furthermore, the prefactor of the singular term is equal to a 1 = 4K c /E √ 2π when the force i AB = u(B) -u(A) applying to the bond A -B is equal to the breaking threshold i c = 1. This yields: where (r, θ) are the polar coordinate of the considered point in the new reference frame positioned at C. Equations 5 and 6 provide an approximation for K c in the three lattice geometries considered here. The values are reported in Tab. 1 (fifth line) and coincide with that measured on the numerical experiments within 1%, 11%, and 2% for square, honeycomb and triangular lattices, respectively. Note that the mispositioning d obtained by Eq. 5 is an approximation only since it involves Kirchhoff's law at a single point, A, and a single iteration in the shifting procedure. Actually, both assumptions can be released by imposing Kirchhoff laws to an arbitrary number of nodes and by applying more iterations. These refinements are described in Supplementary Material The analytical procedure derived here for model electric/scalar elastic crack problems can be extended to genuine 2D elastic (plane stress) crack problems. This comes about via several correspondences: (i) In such cases, the (vectorial) displacement field u(x, y) also follows Williams's asymptotic form Nevertheless, 2D crystals include an additional complicating element with respect to the fuse networks considered till now: the deformation are accommodated at the atomistic scale by two distinct modes: bond stretching and bond bending, characterized by the bond stretching stiffness k s and bond bending stiffness k b [both can be measured experimentally via infrared spectroscopy Quantitative predictions for fracture toughness have been reached here for bidimensional crystals. The analy-sis is expendable to 3D and non-linear cases. This necessitates to use the proper (and more complicated) asymptotic near-tip displacement fields; e.g. those obtained in anisotropic elasticity for 3D crystals, the asymptotic HRR solutions 