PN heterojunctions comprising layered van der Waals (vdW) semiconductors have been used to demonstrate current rectifiers, photodetectors, and photovoltaic devices. However, a direct or neardirect bandgap at the heterointerface that can significantly enhance optical generation, for high light absorbing few/multi-layer vdW materials, has not yet been shown. In this work, for the first time, few-layer group-6 transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) WSe2 is shown to form a sizeable (0.7 eV) near-direct bandgap with type-II band alignment at its interface with the group-7 TMD ReS2 through density functional theory calculations. Further, the type-II alignment and photogeneration across the interlayer bandgap have been experimentally confirmed through micro-photoluminescence and IR 2 photodetection measurements, respectively. High optical absorption in few-layer flakes, large conduction and valence band offsets for efficient electron-hole separation and stacking of light facing, direct bandgap ReS2 on top of gate tunable WSe2 are shown to result in excellent and tunable photodetection as well as photovoltaic performance through flake thickness dependent optoelectronic measurements. Few-layer flakes demonstrate ultrafast response time (5 μs) at high responsivity (3 A/W) and large photocurrent generation and responsivity enhancement at the heterostructure overlap region (10-100×) for 532 nm laser illumination. Large open circuit voltage of 0.64 V and short circuit current of 2.6 μA enables high output electrical power. Finally, long term air-stability and a facile single contact metal fabrication process makes the multi-functional few-layer WSe2/ReS2 heterostructure diode technologically promising for next-generation optoelectronic applications. Layered van der Waals (vdW) materials such as graphene, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), and hBN are being studied for applications in photodetection, The semiconducting group-6 TMD WSe2, generally found in trigonal prismatic phase, Higher photon absorption at the interfacial region of the heterostructure (overlap region) increases photogenerated carrier concentration leading to a larger external quantum efficiency that is essential for photovoltaic applications. Layered vdW materials have large absorption coefficients in the visible range for mono and few layers (nearly 10 5 cm -1 for 600 nm wavelength). Table Moreover, the interlayer bandgap allows infrared (IR) photodetection in energy range much lower than the bandgaps of the constituent WSe2 and ReS2. The ultrafast photoswitching (rise (τr) and fall (τf) times of ∼5 μs) shows efficient charge separation across the heterojunction and reinforces the predicted large type-II band offsets. Further, the large VOC of 0.64 V is in close agreement with the calculated interlayer bandgap value of 0.7 V. Flake thickness dependent optoelectronic measurements justify the choice of FL flakes to achieve improved photodetection and photovoltaic metrics. Finally, long term photoswitching stability over months in ambient storage conditions, and a single contact metal process highlight the technological relevance of this work. An atomistic study employing first-principles based density functional theory (DFT) calculations was carried out to gain insights into fundamental electronic properties of the WSe2/ReS2 vdW heterostructures. The DFT calculations were performed using the software package 'QuantumATK'. The indirect bandgap of 4L WSe2 was found to be 1.24 eV, whereas the direct bandgap of 2L ReS2 was 1.40 eV (Figure Calculated bandstructure in Figure at the Γ point. Comparing this with monolayer DFT results (Supporting Information, Figure Hence, this near-direct 41 electronic structure can lead to significantly large optical transitions at ΓS which may contribute to enhanced photogeneration. This strongly correlates to the high responsivity obtained from the heterojunction in our focused laser measurements. Furthermore, a closer look at Figure Information. The direct and indirect bandgaps as well as their energy difference (∆E) for the thicker and thinner heterostructures are compared with the aforementioned 4L/2L case in Figure Although the thick (4L/2L and above) structures exhibit indirect bandgaps around 0.7 eV, their ∆E values always remain close to or less than 0.02 eV, rendering a near-direct nature Device fabrication and physical characterization FL WSe2 and ReS2 flakes were exfoliated from bulk crystals onto polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) films. The WSe2 flake was transferred first onto a 280 nm SiO2/Si substrate. Next, the FL ReS2 flake was aligned and transferred over WSe2 ensuring a good overlap for the heterojunction. A schematic of the heterostructure showing the ReS2 flake on top of WSe2 is shown in Figure Raman spectra from the individual materials as well as the overlap region are shown in Figure For FL ReS2, Raman peaks at 161 and 212 cm -1 are identified as the E2g (in-plane) and A1g (out-ofplane) vibration modes, respectively. To examine the optical properties of the WSe2/ReS2 heterostructure, micro-PL studies were carried out using 532 nm laser with a spot diameter of ∼4 μm. In addition to the aforementioned FL/FL structure, two samples with thinner constituents: (1) FL/8L WSe2/ReS2 (65 layers of WSe2 and 8 layers of ReS2) and (2) 2L/2L WSe2/ReS2 (Figure For electrical characterization, multiple electrodes were fabricated on the heterostructures using electron beam lithography followed by sputtering of a Cr (< 5 nm)/Pt (50 nm)/Au (50 nm) metal stack. Pt has been reported to form ohmic contacts to ReS2 31 as well as WSe2. ), where d is the thickness of the barrier, m * is the effective mass of the charge carriers, ħ is the reduced Planck's constant, and φ is the height of the tunnel barrier. Hence, the presence of tunnelling mediated transport can be confirmed by a straight line with negative slope in the ln (I D V D 2 ) ⁄ against 1/V D plot. Figure Transfer characteristics across the heterostructure are shown in Figure The forward bias transfer curve exhibits prominent n and p branches owing to contributions from both materials. The VG dependent sheet carrier density of majority holes in WSe2 is represented by pW and majority electrons in ReS2 by nR. For VG near the VTh in WSe2 and ReS2 FETs, the ID is approximated by the respective carrier concentrations (n) using the contact resistance (RC) corrected drift current relation: Being in close proximity to SiO2, the Fermi level in thin WSe2 can be effectively modulated by the gate bias. The electron affinities (χ) of WSe2 and ReS2 are considered to be 4 eV The variation of Iph with VG under reverse bias (VD = -1 V) for the FL/FL heterostructure at 100 nW and 1 μW incident illumination is discussed in S13 of Supporting Information. As expected, the photocurrent increases with increasing illumination intensity and is significantly larger than the dark Normalized Iph for VD = 0 V, VG = -20 V is plotted in (ii) showing that the maximum current due to photogeneration is from the overlap region. In comparison to the individual WSe2 and ReS2 regions, the photocurrent shows 10-to-100 times increase in the overlap region, markedly higher than in BP/MoS2, 1 WSe2/SnS2, A distinct photovoltaic effect is seen in the I-V characteristics in Figure A modified Shockley diode equation Power generated (Pelec) by the FL/FL photovoltaic device as a function of VD for various illumination powers is shown in Figure For instance, a 1250 LPF would only allow wavelengths beyond 1250 nm to pass through it. Figure Transient photoresponse of the photodetector is a crucial measure for its use in high-speed applications. The three WSe2/ReS2 heterojunctions were exposed to laser illumination which was is calculated between 10% (90%) to 90% (10%) of the photocurrent. Figure For the FL/8L and 2L/2L heterostructures, the response times are ∼ 24 μs and 28 μs, respectively. Stability is an essential parameter in the design space of vdW photodetectors since materials like BP, InSe are unstable In order to benchmark the performance of our devices with published literature, a comparison of critical reported photodetector parameters, R and τr, are plotted in Figure This work demonstrates that an appropriate choice of n-and p-type materials from the group-6 and responsivity at the overlap region are reported for the WSe2/ReS2 pn heterostructure owing to the type-II near-direct bandgap, high optical absorption, and efficient charge carrier separation due to large heterointerface band offsets. High VOC (0.64 V) resulting from gate tunability of WSe2 and the 0.7 eV interlayer bandgap, large ISC (2.6 μA) and peak output power of 0.35 μW make this one of the best reported heterostructure photovoltaic devices. Further, flake thickness dependent optoelectronic performance justifies the choice of FL flakes with high absorption coefficients. Finally, long term ambient stability and ease of fabrication due to a single contact metal process without capping layers, coupled with the multi-functional and excellent optoelectronic performance, makes the FL WSe2/ReS2 pn heterostructure significantly advance the prospects of 2D layered semiconductors enabling next-generation optoelectronic applications. In order to carry out electronic structure calculations and geometry optimizations, density functional theory was employed using the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) exchange correlation in conjunction with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional. The heterostructures were fabricated on an SiO2 (285 nm)/ p + global back gate substrate. ReS2 (HQ Graphene) and WSe2 (SPI Supplies) were exfoliated onto PDMS stamps and selected flakes were transferred onto the substrate using a micromanipulator set-up. The heterostructure was cleaned in acetone to remove organic residues. The samples were spin coated with EL9/PMMA-A4 bilayer resist and electron beam lithography (Raith 150-Two) was followed by deposition of Cr (< 5 nm)/Pt (50 nm)/ Au (50 nm) stack (7-target sputtering system from AJA International) to define the contacts. Following metal lift-off in acetone, the heterostructure was annealed at 200 O C to remove resist residues. Raman measurements were carried out on LabRAM HR800 (HORIBA Scientific) with a 1 μm spot diameter using a 532 nm laser. AFM measurements were performed using MFP-3D (Asylum Research Inc.). For PL measurements, the samples were irradiated with a 532 nm frequency doubled Nd-YAG laser via a 50× objective. The emitted luminescence was collected using a 0.5 m focal length Triax550 monochromator and detected using a Si-charge coupled device detector. For low temperature measurements, the samples were cooled in a liquid He flow cryostat with optical access. Electrical measurements were carried out using a probe station connected to a Keysight B1500A parameter analyzer. For the photocurrent study, the metal contact pads on the substrate were wirebonded onto a custom-made PCB and mounted on a home-built measurement box fixed on the stage of an Olympus BX63 microscope. The radiation from a 532 nm diode laser was incident on the heterostructure through a 50× objective (spot diameter of ∼ 4 μm). Keysight B1500A was used for electrical measurements under illumination. For the photoswitching measurements, the laser beam was directly modulated by applying pulses from 100 Hz to 50 kHz using a function generator (Agilent 33220A). The current from the device was fed to an SR570 low noise current pre-amplifier and its output was recorded on an Agilent DSO6012A digital storage oscilloscope. DFT calculations were performed using the software package 'QuantumATK'. In order to optimize the geometries of the unit cells as well as FL WSe2/ReS2 heterostructures, the LBFGS (Limited-memory Broyden Fletcher Goldfarb Shanno) algorithm was utilized. Before performing these electronic structure calculations, the structures were optimized with a force tolerance value of 0.01 eV/ Å (along with a stress tolerance of 0.001 eV/Å 3 ). the direct band gap located at Γ point is ~1.476 eV. However, strictly speaking, the valence band maximum is not at Γ point (rather it lies in between Γ and Y points). Hence, monolayer ReS2 exhibits a near-direct band gap of 1.471 eV. On the other hand, monolayer WSe2 is a direct bandgap (~1.6 eV) semiconductor. The optimized lattice constants are a= b= 3.32 Å for the hexagonal WSe2 unit cell. For the composite 4L/2L WSe2/ReS2 heterointerface, the mean absolute strain on 4 layer-WSe2 (as well as on 2 layer-ReS2) was restricted to a small value of 0.66%. Besides, the stacking patterns for 4 layer-WSe2 and 2 layer-ReS2 were found to be in good agreement with previous studies. No. of layers This Work He et al. Pt is the choice of contact metal for our study. However, < 5 nm Cr is used as an adhesion layer to improve the sticking of Pt on Si/SiO2 substrate. The use of such thin layers of Cr or Ti has been frequently employed during sputtering to improve the adhesion of metals like Au and Pt on Si/SiO2 substrate. The transfer characteristics for the heterostructures without the thin Cr layer (above) are similar to those in Figure Thereafter, for VG > VTh of WSe2, region (3) shows an increasing current due to contribution from ReS2. A polynomial function of the nature I D ∝ A + B 1 x + B 2 x 2 can be employed to fit the curve in region (3); the fit parameters are similar to those for the transfer characteristic of the ReS2 FET. Finally, region (4) shows a nearly constant current defined by interlayer recombination, the magnitude diminished with respect to negative VG owing to the reduced pW, since WSe2 is now in the off state. The inset in Figure For the reverse bias case in Figures S10.2 a(iii) and b(vi), since the direction of the source-drain electric field (ED) is now reversed, the current is due to generation of charge carriers in WSe2 (intralayer) or across the heterojunction (interlayer). The generation current (Igen) takes the form, Igen ∝ γ(VG)Gteff. Here, γ is the charge carrier extraction efficiency which depends on VG of the gated diode. G is the generation rate and teff is a VD dependent length scale over which the generation processes take place. In addition to the electrostatic modulation of nR and pW, VG also determines the effective barrier for the transport of electrons and holes across the heterojunction. Unlike nR, pW shows good tunability with VG. Hence the dependence of γ on pW is evident. The difference in reverse bias ID between regions (5) and ( The generation current under reverse bias (Figure G ∼ TMD group, M ∼ Metal, Gr ∼ Graphene, η ∼ ideality factor, * denotes the material on top