Databases compiled using ab-initio and symmetry-based calculations now contain tens of thousands of topological insulators and topological semimetals. This makes the application of modern machine learning methods to topological materials possible. Using gradient boosted trees, we show how to construct a machine learning model which can predict the topology of a given existent material with an accuracy of 90%. Such predictions are orders of magnitude faster than actual ab initio calculations. We use machine learning models to probe how different material properties affect topological features. Notably, we observe that topology is mostly determined by the "coarse-grained" chemical composition and crystal symmetry and depends little on the particular positions of atoms in the crystal lattice. We identify the sources of our model's errors and we discuss approaches to overcome them. I. Topological insulators (TIs) and topological semimetals (TSMs) are solid state systems which exhibit robust edge or surface modes and quantized bulk response functions due to the topological properties of their electronic wavefunctions In particular, the theory of topological quantum chemistry A set of valence bands which cannot be decomposed as a sum of EBRs makes a material into a strong TI. A TSM is characterized by a set of bands below the Fermi level which does not satisfy the compatibility relations and can therefore not be separated from other bands. While TQC can also fully describe so-called fragile topology Applying the theory of TQC to the output of ab initio calculations, typically density functional theory The availability of these datasets, containing tens of thousands of materials, opens the door to modern machine learning (ML) methods In the present paper, we show how to construct a ML model which can predict the DFT-computed topology of a given material with an accuracy of almost 90 %, based on the dataset of Ref. 20. Our paper is part of the existing body of research on replacing or accelerating DFT by ML methods We provide online at https://www. topologicalquantumchemistry.com/mltqc a fast and efficient tool to predict the possible topological nature of a given material. Beyond the ML model itself, our results include an analysis of various crystal properties with respect to their relevance for the prediction of the electronic topology. We use machine learning models to probe how and how strongly different material properties affect topological features. We find that the model performance saturates at a small number of properties whose impact on the topology we show via a simplified model. In particular, information about the positions of atoms in the crystal lattice does not allow for better predictions, within the limitations of our type of ML model. This paper falls under the ML paradigm known as supervised learning This paper is organized as follows: First, we discuss in more detail the dataset on which we rely and the ML methodology which we apply. Next, we address the unique challenges which crystal structures pose in the context of ML. We present our model for the prediction of a material's topology and analyze its performance according to different metrics. We use a simplified model to shed light on how the ML model arrives at its predictions and analyze the reasons behind the model's errors. Finally, we highlight obstacles to more sophisticated approaches and discuss our results. This paper is based on a large catalog of topological materials which was compiled in Ref. 20 and which is accessible at http://topologicalquantumchemistry. org. First-principles calculations, using DFT as implemented in the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package 23 , were carried out for 70020 impurity free, crystalline materials selected from the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD) Each material is described by its stoichiometric formula, a space group (SG), a unit cell, and the positions of the atoms therein. Many ICSD entries are very similar to each other, describing, for example, different measurements (e.g., at different temperatures) of the same material. All in all, the unique combinations of SG and stoichiometric formula make up only 50% of the databasethe other materials are "duplicates". In 98% of cases, two materials exhibiting the same stoichiometry and SG also have the same topological classification. Exceptions are mostly due to the instability of DFT calculations (when a small change in the atomic fractional coordinates changes the topological class), or to extreme changes in the environmental conditions (such as ICSD entries describing high pressure measurements). For the purpose of this paper, we therefore group materials into equivalence classes with the same stoichiometry and space group and select only one representative from each group. Thus, the effective size of our dataset is 35009 instead of 70020. The materials in our dataset cover a wide range of complexity, one measure being the number of atoms per primitive unit cell (ranging from 1 to 60), belong to 215 of the 230 different space groups and contain 92 different chemical elements. Fig. In supervised learning, a classification model is trained by minimizing its prediction error on a sample for which the class of each sample point is known To evaluate a model after training, we test it by predicting the labels for a second sample or test set which was not used during the training process. A detailed description of our testing procedure is given in Appendix A. In particular, the scores reported in the body of this paper are computed using tenfold cross validation, where the sample is repeatedly (a total of ten times) split into a testing and a training set in different ways. Averaging over the scores eliminates the arbitrariness in the choice of the test set. One measure of the quality of predictions on some test set is the accuracy, the fraction of sample points which are classified correctly. When the dataset is imbalanced (i.e. classes are not equally frequent) the accuracy can, however, be misleading. It should be be compared to a naive baseline model which always predicts the most frequent class -in our case, the baseline accuracy is 49.5%, i.e. the percentage of trivial insulators. To define additional measures, consider a binary classifier (which distinguishes only two labels, positive/negative). For binary FIG. Precision measures the reliability of a classifier's positive predictions and recall measures its ability to find all the true positive sample points. The F 1 -score is the harmonic mean of these two quantities. If a classifier outputs the probability to belong to a class instead of a mere label, precision can be traded for recall and vice versa by changing the threshold probability after which a sample is classified as positive, yielding the precision-recall curve. When there are more than two classes, there is a precision, recall, and F 1 -score for each class, characterizing a model's ability to distinguish a specific class from all others. In this paper, we largely used the F 1 score as it provides a single score, largely independent of the choice of threshold, making the comparison between two models straightforward. In this paper, the models are constructed using the gradient boosted trees (GBT) algorithm GBT is a special case of the boosting technique: Instead of training a single, very complex classifier (a socalled strong classifier), boosting linearly combines the predictions of many simple or weak ones. Such a combination or ensemble 27 of weak classifiers is expected to have a lower tendency to overfit Standard ML algorithms like the decision trees of Sect. II B operate on real vectors of a fixed dimension d. Each component of such a vector is referred to as a feature. To apply ML models to the classification of crystalline materials, a map taking crystals to real vectors must be chosen. The choice of this descriptor is a non trivial problem the solution of which is crucial for the success of a predictive model. For example, clearly the descriptor must be independent of the choice of the unit cell and the labeling of a material's constituent atoms. In particular for small sample sizes, the descriptor should also make use of our understanding of chemistry and physics: Elements from the same column in the periodic table are known to be chemically similar. All the while, the dimension d should remain reasonable as the effectiveness of ML models tends to decrease in high dimensions In this paper we adopt an approach which we dub single-atom statistics, which has previously been proposed in Ref. 37 and used, for instance, in Ref. 38 to predict the critical temperature of superconductors. Singleatom statistics is based on a compound's stoichiometric formula. Each of a crystal's constituent atoms is described by a number of physical and chemical single-atom properties, for example, the number of s-shell electrons or the mass. The properties are concatenated to form a vector X i for each atom i. To derive the descriptor value for an entire crystal, we calculate statistics over all N atom atoms in a unit cell like the mean or the standard deviation: The advantage over a direct encoding of a compound's stoichiometric formula is that we can leverage our knowledge of the physically relevant properties. Let us illustrate this by an example. Elements from the same column in the periodic table are very similar. If we encode the stoichiometric formula directly, replacing an atom in a compound by an atom of a different element of the same column, the encoding vector changes completely. If we use the periodic table column as a descriptor, then the descriptor does not change. Thus, chemically similar substances are represented by nearby vectors, which makes it easier for a machine learning algorithm to infer patterns. Of course, more than one property has to be used, or very different materials might be represented by the same vector. To validate this approach, we will compare single-atom statistics to a direct encoding of the stoichiometric formula, which we call the baseline descriptor. It consists of a 92-dimensional vector. There are 92 different elements in our dataset, and the i th entry equals the fraction of atoms of element i in a compound. For example, NaCl corresponds to the vector 1 2 e 11 + 1 2 e 17 (Na is element number 11, Cl number 17) and, in general, a compound of the form X m Y n corresponds to the vector m m+n e X + n m+n e Y . In addition to single atom statistics, we describe crystals by a number of global properties like their space group, which pertain to the compound as a whole. Our approach does not take the numeric positions of atoms in the crystal into account. To decide which single-atom and global properties should be included in our descriptor we began with several hundred physically and chemically motivated quantities, listed in Appendix C. We carried out extensive testing to recursively eliminate irrelevant features. At each testing step, we selected one property and temporarily removed it from the descriptor. If the performance (as measured by the F 1 -scores for the three classes trivial, TI, and TSM) did not drop, the property was permanently deleted from the descriptor, else it was retained. Using this procedure we have extracted those features, discussed below, which are relevant for the prediction of a material's topology. A list of the irrelevant features is given in Table The filtering is essential: Indeed, the inclusion of irrelevant features in the descriptor will both decrease the the quality of a predictive model (due to the chance of spurious correlations between an irrelevant feature and the prediction target) and make its interpretation more difficult. We retained a final test set, not used during the filtering, to verify that the filtering did not lead to overfitting (i.e. that the selected properties work only on the sample used to select them -see Appendix A). The relevant global properties which we have identified are the SG, deciding which type of topology protected by crystalline symmetry is possible relevant ones are the mean number of s, p, d, f -shell valence electrons and the mean and standard deviation (as defined in Eq. 5) of the atom's row and column number in the periodic table. For example, NaCl has one atom from columns 1 and 31 each, giving a mean column number of 16 and a standard deviation of 15. We will refer to this collection of eight features (mean number of s, p, d, f , mean and variance of column and row number) as spdf +. Finally, the number of atoms in a compound from each column and row in the periodic table is relevant. As an example, half of the atoms in NaCl are in column 1 and 32 respectively, so the column fractions would be represented by the vector To include the numeric positions of atoms in a descriptor we used a technique described in Refs. 39-41. It calculates differences in single-atom quantities between nearest neighbors, weighted by the boundary area shared by two neighbors (computed using the Voronoi tessellation With the features described in Sect. II C and the ML models of Sect. II B we are able to build a classifier which can predict the topology of a given material with an accuracy of 90%, compared to a baseline of 49.5%. This is demonstrated by the first line of Table We can also configure the model to predict the topological subclass (NLC, SEBR, ES, and ESFD). Table Additionally, we can include partial information from ab initio calculations in the model. As most TIs are the result of band inversion driven by spin-orbit coupling (SOC) 2 , DFT must be performed with SOC to detect topological materials. However, as Let us first comment on the features chosen by our filtering procedure to describe a crystal. Table The important role of global properties like the SG is shown by the pronounced drop in performance when these features are left out. Finally, we also included much richer collections of properties, the nearest-neighbor differences defined in Sect. II C, which take into account the positions of atoms in the unit cell. Table Let us emphasize that when a feature does not increase the performance of our predictive mode, we cannot conclude that it is irrelevant for a material's topology -this could simply be due to the failure of the particular ML approach. Yet, the model performance without a certain feature gives an upper bound on the potential feature's influence on the prediction target. For instance, suppose the accuracy of a model on some sample is a%. We can then conclude that the features not available to the model only influence the label or class of (100 -a)% of the sample. The other way around, the relevance of some quantity for the model does not imply that it is physically deci-sive. Rather, it could be only correlated with a physically relevant quantity. However, we know that the input of our model is causally related to the topological class (for instance, TQC shows how changing a material's SG by breaking a crystal symmetry will change the topology), ruling out a mere correlation. Therefore, we believe that we can draw the following conclusions. Given the space group, the positions of a compound's atoms within the crystal lattice are of limited importance for the topology of a material. Rather, it is the "average orbital character", the mean number of s, p, d, f -shell valence electrons which counts. Furthermore, we showed the central importance of a material's SG. This hints towards the degrees of freedom which a minimal phenomenological model should take into account. Next, we want to understand how our model makes use of these features. ML models are often treated as "black boxes": the complexity of their inner workings which makes their high performance possible obfuscates how they arrive at predictions. In the case of a GBT model, the large number of trees which make up the model obstructs its analysis. To address this, we have developed a simplified model which uses only a single tree, depicted in Fig. We can also obtain some interesting physical insight from this simplified tree. It shows that a large number of d-or f -shell electrons help to turn a material into a TI. A necessary precondition is a SG which not only theo- retically permits but favors (crystalline) topological over trivial insulators. Typical examples are many SGs within the point group D 2h (and to a lesser degree, D 4h ), for instance, SG 55. As expected, we recover that TSMs are mostly determined by N e and SG (due to the "enforced semi-metal" property 6 ). See the supplementary material of Ref. 15 for a table indicating which combinations of SG and N e lead to a TSM. The main limitation of any ML model is the number of samples available for training. We show in Fig. Furthermore, we know that the DFT calculations used to determine the topological labels on which we rely can be unreliable. In such cases, the label may be somewhat random and therefore essentially impossible to predict. Based on a number of criteria (detailed in Appendix F), we selected a subset of 4009 materials for which we are rather confident of the DFT predictions. We will refer to them as high-confidence materials. In particular, we selected TIs with high gaps and excluded magnetic and f electron materials. The results are displayed in Table III. With respect to Table We can also pinpoint specific types of materials where our model performs poorly. Fig. The error rate also depends strongly on the chemical composition: For materials which contain alkali metals or halogens, the recall for TI is lower than average. This is unsurprising, as the ionic crystals typically formed by these elements are not typically TIs (see Fig. In Ref. 20, the authors compiled the largest-yet catalog of topological materials. Based on this work, we have investigated the prediction of topological classes with machine learning. We showed that a simple and robust ML model, based on gradient boosted trees, can predict the topology of a material's electronic structure with high accuracy, using only its chemical composition and symmetry properties, without costly DFT calculations. Since our ML model cannot guarantee that a real material has topological features, our approach does not claim to replace a full fledged DFT calculation. Still, it provides a fast and efficient tool to predict the possible topological nature of a given material. We also caution that a FIG. 96.0(4) 72( ML model is only as good as the dataset it was trained on: In spite of its success The main result of this paper -beyond the predictive model itself -is the use of ML models to probe the relevance of different properties of materials to their topology. We find that our algorithm performance saturates at a very small number of input features, which we identified. Notably, we observe that topology is mostly determined by "coarse-grained" chemical composition and crystal symmetry and depends little on the particular positions of atoms in the crystal lattice. We constructed a simplified model, where the impact of these features can be seen directly. In particular, materials with a large number of d-or f -shell valence electrons in general, and not only compounds containing heavy elements with strong SOC, are likely to be topological insulators. We investigated several approaches to overcome the limitations and improve the predictions of our model by including the atomic positions in our model, but without success, for instance, the following. TQC emphasizes the decisive role of the symmetry properties of the particular point in the crystal lattice on which an orbital is centered, its Wyckoff position. Orbitals on certain Wyckoff positions will induce split EBRs (and thus give rise to SEBR-type TIs). We refer to these positions as SEBRinducing Wyckoff positions (SEBRiWPs). It seems natural and has been conjectured 10 that compounds with atoms on SEBRiWPs will likely have topological bands. Note that while this does not necessarily imply topology at the Fermi level because these bands can have any energy, the existence of topological bands does make topology at the Fermi level more likely. However, we find that only 46% of SEBR-type materials have atoms on SEBRi-WPs. This number is not significantly higher than for the materials from other topological classes. Unsurprisingly, the information on whether a material has atoms on SE-BRiWPs does not help our predictive model. To make sense of this, let us note that an SEBR is not obliged to have atoms at some SEBRiWP -it is only adiabatically equivalent to a crystal which does. Our results suggest that the SEBR wave functions obtained by ab initio calculations are perhaps very different from the idealized ones to which they are adiabatically equivalent. This makes it difficult to use the atomic positions in a predictive model. Future research should try to take into account the spatial structure of crystals. Given the obstacles we encountered, we believe in the need for more sophisticated ML architectures (such as crystal graph convolutional networks (CGNNs) F 1 -score # of TIs in PG FIG. Cross-validation allows one to eliminate the dependence of the performance estimate on the way the sample is split into the testing and the training set At the beginning of the ML project, we split the dataset into two parts. We used 32179 materials to develop our GBT model (by analyzing the data and testing different models), and the remaining 2830 materials were used only to test the final model. We refer to them as the final test set. This practice safeguards against overestimating the performance we can achieve by choosing one among several models under investigation (in our case, mostly GBT models using different features as well as some other ML models investigated before we decided to use GBT). This can be understood as follows. A collection of many different models i = 1, ..., n can be thought of as a single "meta-model", in which the index i, i.e., which model to use, is an additional parameter. Optimizing i by choosing the model which performs best on a sample is then a training procedure precisely analogous to optimizing the parameters of a single model. Therefore, overfitting as described in Sect. II B can also occur and an independent final test set is necessary to faithfully evaluate the metamodel performance. However, because of the limited number of materials in the database and the strong variability of the model error between different materials as discussed in Sect. II F, our final test set is too small to give accurate estimates of the model performance. This is evidenced by the standard deviations of the cross-validated scores given in Table In Table V we provide a list of the features which we tested in the course of developing our model, but which in turn proved irrelevant for the prediction of a material's topological class. In particular, we tested a number of features related to the Wyckoff positions of atoms in the crystal lattice. All the descriptors we tested failed. We believe this to be due to the effect discussed in Sect. III: Wyckoff position related features can give information about the topology if the wave function of a compound is similar to the non-interacting one (i.e., a wave function made out of atomic orbitals centered on the locations of the actual atoms). This is not necessarily the case for the DFT-calculated wave functions underlying the topological class given in our database. However, we cannot exclude that we simply have missed the relevant Wyckoff-related features, due to the large possible variety of such features. In addition to the features of Table V which were used together with GBT models, we also experimented with a number of machine learning models different from GBT. In particular, we tried to directly use the CGNN architecture of Ref. 34, which is available as open source software, however without success. CGNNs are similar to the convolutional neural networks which have been immensely successful in image recognition We also used another CGNN model from Ref. 34 in an unsuccessful attempt of so-called transfer learning accurate), the general strategy, which is related to the ML concept of stacking 27 , seems promising. In particular, it can make use of datasets for which some relevant quantities like the band gap have been computed, but the topological class has not been computed and combines different descriptors which would be unsuccessful on their own. Further, we considered some of the descriptors previously discussed in the literature Finally, approximately 80% of the materials in the ICSD are classified into so-called material prototypes according to their crystal structure In particular, when we evaluate a model using a training and a test set, Eq. D1 is calculated using the materials in the training set only. Else, information about the test set (namely, how topological class and SG are related in the test set) would indirectly be available when the model is trained (this is called target leakage in ML). Note that using only Eq. D1 and not the raw SG number only lowers the TI-F 1 score by approximately 1% point. For similar reasons, N e is not fed directly into the model but instead represented by the digits in its binary representation, e.g. N e = 7 would be represented by the vector [1, 1, 1]. This makes it easy for a decision tree to check for example whether N e is odd. Recall that the leaf of a decision tree corresponds to a connected region in the space of the input vectors (see Fig. We also tested different ways of encoding the SG. One often-used option to encode categorical features is onehot encoding. For the case of N c different classes, it is defined by the following mapping: ) where e i is the i th unit vector. However, the method described above proved superior. Each PG contains a different fraction q of TIs, so according to Eq. E2 a random classifier will perform differently on them. While these F1-scores are of course much lower than those of Fig. as in the entire dataset, to avoid any distortions when testing a model on the HC materials.