This report introduces the electromagnetic absorption of the catalyst as a novel knob in optimizing chemical vapor deposition of graphene. A chromium film initially deposited at one side of a catalyst copper foil absorbs radiative thermal energy several times higher than the plain copper foil and migrates to the other side of the foil in the form of microscale grains. The process involves local melting of the copper which together with the increased operation temperature, improves the crystalline quality of growing graphene. Local melting of copper replaces the otherwise-necessary annealing process; dramatically lowering the process duration and costs. Now a continuous graphene film can be grown in only five minutes, nominating the protocol as the shortest ever reported. The observations reported in this manuscript boost the general knowledge about metal mixture, additional to promoting graphene growth science and technology. Since the introduction of chemical vapor deposition as an efficient approach to synthesize graphene Thanks to the low carbon solubility of carbon in copper, the growth is self-limited to produce (primarily) monolayer graphene. Interestingly, the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process temperature -in annealing and growth phases -approaches the melting point of the copper (T m Cu ). Though it is technically complex, graphene can be grown on molten copper also Mixing (alloying) metals enable to combine the favorable properties of different metals for specific applications; this remains yet a seldomly touched strategy in the growth of graphene. As one of the few successful reports, nickel and molybdenum were rationally combined to achieve self-limiting growth with outstanding reproducibility In this paper, we report a peculiar approach in growing graphene on a bi-component substrate composed of copper and chromium: chromium species, initially deposited at the backside of the copper foil migrate thought the bulk copper to the other side, where graphene is to be grown. Copper serves as the traditional catalyst to mediate cracking of methane molecules into carbon radicals. Dilute chromium species on the other hand, locally melt the copper and run the defect healing mechanism to improve the crystalline quality of forming graphene lattice. CVD of graphene is traditionally performed in tube oven (= "hot-wall") chambers We demonstrate that our approach -uniquely feasible in the cold-wall chambers -considerably boosts the crystalline quality of graphene while minimizing the growth time and costs. The test sample is a copper foils (Alfa Aesar, 99.999% purity, 25 μm thickness) on which a chromium film of 50 nm was evaporated. We placed the sample on the hot stage of a cold-wall CVD set-up (nanoCVD-8G, Moorfield Nanotechnology) with the chromium deposited side facing the stage (we will refer to this side as the "bottom side" throughout this manuscript, see the schematic in inset Figure We characterize the quality of the grown graphene by means of Raman spectroscopy (Figure The migration of the chromium from the bottom to the top side is evident in the optical micrograph in a. We identified low-frequency Raman spectral bands which are sensitive to the chemical constituents of the substrate. The chromium phase manifests itself as a strong peak centered at 85 cm -1 and is distinct from the background mattress with a low-amplitude signature at its right shoulder (inset Figure Mappings of the Raman characteristic peaks of graphene are provided in panels d to f. The narrow 2D peak (FWHM < 50, panel d) and large I2D/IG ratio (> 1, panel e) are the signatures of a monolayer graphene The graphene is of pronounced crystalline quality evidenced by a negligible ID/IG ratio (panel f). Interestingly, the properties of the graphene is independent of the local structure (texture) of the underlying substrate as no correlation between the mappings in d-f and b are observed. This is an important evidence to explain the migration of the chromium and the improved quality of the graphene which will be discussed later. The migration of the chromium from the bottom to the top side of the copper starts during the annealing phase of the growth. Figure The optimized process duration depends on how fast chromium migrates to the top side of the copper foil which itself is a strong function of the growth temperature. Figure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis of the samples, furthermore, revealed the concentration of the chromium in the top copper side exceeds 40% (Supplementary Information); indeed the governing mechanism in our system, shifts a high concentrated chromium region from one side to the other side of the foil. Thermal diffusion of solids in which a temperature gradient energizes a material of a certain thermodiffusion coefficient to diffuse, might explain the directionality of the observation: in-contrast to the tube-oven chambers which provide a uniform heating zone, there is a huge thermal gradient between the heating stage (T > 1000 °C) and the walls (~ 100 °C) in cold-wall reaction chambers. A naive hypothesis may argue that the foil "feels" this thermal gradient, causing the chromium atoms to diffuse from the hotter side (facing the heater) to the colder side (facing the cold wall, in-contact with the fresh operation gases) of the copper foil, but not in reverse direction. Our finite element simulations, however, rules out this scenario as the high thermal conductivity of copper results in a negligible temperature gradient in between its faces (Supplementary Information). Any successful scenario explaining our observations has to be built-up based on two important facts. Firstly, at the elevated operation temperature, the heating stage acts as a (semi-) black body radiator, emitting electromagnetic waves in near-infrared spectrum (inset Figure We modeled the heat flow inside the oven considering thermal convection (by the process gases) and radiation to the cold-walls (Figure As another important fact, certain observations demonstrate that the migration of the chromium is accompanied by locally melting the copper foil. A first evidence appears by comparing the morphology of the foils (top surface) with and without chromium (Figure Experimentally, defect-free graphene achieved by chemical vapor deposition has already been demonstrated on molten copper foil We now propose a potential mechanism to explain our observations (Figure We note that the improved radiation absorption by the chromium cannot directly cause the melting of the copper foil as the temperature of the heating stage remains below the melting point of copper. Particularly we noticed the migration of the chromium at temperatures as low as 870°C (~ 200°C below the melting point of copper). Surface melting phenomenon We introduce a peculiar approach in chemical vapor deposition of graphene in which the migration of a chromium film, initially deposited on one side of a copper foil to the other side causes the local melting of the foil and eventually boosts the quality of the graphene. A continuous graphene sheet now is grown in less than five minutes as a result of eliminating the surface activating the copper foil by thermal annealing. We investigate the mechanism driving the chromium species through the copper. Our report nominates electromagnetic absorption as a novel tool in the CVD toolbox to further improve the efficiency of the approach, being of great potential in scalable and cost-effective preparation of high-quality graphene. The findings in this report promote the science of interfacing metals.