An outstanding feature of topological quantum materials is their novel spin topology in the electronic band structures with an expected large charge-to-spin conversion efficiency. Here, we report a charge current-induced spin polarization in the type-II Weyl semimetal candidate WTe2 and efficient spin injection and detection in a graphene channel up to room temperature. Contrary to the conventional spin Hall and Rashba-Edelstein effects, our measurements indicate an unconventional charge-to-spin conversion in WTe2, which is primarily forbidden by the crystal symmetry of the system. Such a large spin polarization can be possible in WTe2 due to a reduced crystal symmetry combined with its large spin Berry curvature, spin-orbit interaction with a novel spin-texture of the Fermi states. We demonstrate a robust and practical method for electrical creation and detection of such a spin polarization using both charge-to-spin conversion and its inverse phenomenon and utilized it for efficient spin injection and detection in a graphene channel up to room temperature. These findings open opportunities for utilizing topological Weyl materials as non-magnetic spin sources in allelectrical van der Waals spintronic circuits and for low-power and high-performance non-volatile spintronic technologies. known as the Edelstein effect Moreover, in crystals with lower or broken symmetry compared to conventional metals Here, we report a highly efficient and unconventional charge-to-spin conversion (CSC) and its inverse phenomena (ICSC), in the type-II Weyl semimetal candidate WTe2 up to room temperature. Importantly, the detected spin polarization in WTe2 is found to be different from the conventional spin Hall effect (SHE) and 2D Rashba-Edelstein effect (REE) which is an order of magnitude higher than used for detection of conventional CSC in WTe2 For the measurement of the unconventional charge-spin conversion effects, an electric current is applied vertically through the WTe2 flake, which generates and injects a spin current into the graphene channel (Fig. Figure To prove that the origin of the signal is purely due to a spin current, the Hanle measurements were performed with a perpendicular magnetic field Bz sweep along the z-axis (Fig. In a WTe2-graphene hybrid device, the source of the spin polarization can have several origins, such as spin Hall effect (SHE) and Edelstein effect (EE) from the bulk WTe2, Rashba-Edelstein effect (REE) from the surface states We first examine the bias current direction dependence of the unconventional CSC signal (Fig. where the direction of the generated spins s in WTe2 is found to be dependent on the polarity of the applied current bias. Reversing the bias current direction (Idc =+/-50 μA) in WTe2 results in an opposite spin polarization and hence an inverted hysteretic behavior of the measured spin-valve signal. These measurements show that the direction of spin polarization can be controlled by electrical means, and the spin density is observed to scale linearly with the applied bias current (see Supplementary Fig. All these control experiments indicate that the current component in Kz direction in WTe2 is the primary source for the generation of spin polarization in the measurement geometry of WTe2-graphene devices. Therefore, the origin of the spin signal can be attributed to the out-of-plane current-induced spin momentum locking of the spin-polarized Fermi states at room temperature nearly no surface states would contribute to the observed unconventional CSC signal (see details in Supplementary Note 5). Moreover, according to our control experiments (Fig. To further confirm the orientation of spin polarization from WTe2, we also performed angle-dependent measurements of the unconventional CSC signals both with in-plane and out-of-plane B field sweeps in Dev 4 (see Supplementary Fig. Considering the direction of the spin current js, the spin polarization s, and bias current Kz, the contribution of the conventional CSC from WTe2 can also be ruled out. These systematic measurements again support the observation of the unconventional CSC in bulk WTe2. The unconventional CSC measurements in WTe2 using both the spin valve and Hanle geometry were also performed as a function of gate voltage (Vg) in Dev 4 (see Supplementary Fig. In comparison to the symmetric Hanle curves in other devices, Device 2 shows an in-plane asymmetric characteristic in the Hanle spin precession signal (Fig. because the momentum difference for Weyl points (WPs) is beyond the resolution of ARPES measurement To check the reciprocity We estimate the unconventional CSC efficiency αCSC (=js/jc) in WTe2 to be up to 9% at room temperature by fitting the Hanle curves of (I)CSC signals (see details in Supplementary Note 2). The calculated lower limit of Edelstein length is λEE = αCSCλWTe2 ≈ 0.72nm (considering spin diffusion length of WTe2 λWTe2=8nm MoTe2 In summary, we demonstrated the electrical creation, detection, and control of the unconvention al charge-spin conversion and its inverse phenomenon in type-II Weyl semimetal candidate WTe2 up to room temperature. Contrary to conventional bulk spin Hall effect and surface states dominated Rashba-Edelstein effect, the charge-spin conversion is shown here to be created in WTe2 due to unconventional spin Hall effect or (and) Edelstein effect. The unconventional spin conductivities in WTe2 are allowed by considering strain as well as the WTe2/graphene interface to break the crystal symmetry. The spin polarization created in WTe2 is shown to be utilized for spin injection and detection in a graphene channel in an all-electrical van der Waals heterostructure spintronic device at room temperature, which circumvents the problem existing in topological insulators for spin injection into graphene below 20K After submission of our manuscript, we noticed two very recent papers on the multidirectional and unconventional charge-spin conversion in MoTe2 The devices with monolayer CVD graphene on Si/SiO2 substrate (from Groltex) were patterned by electron beam lithography (EBL) followed by an O2 plasma etching. The WTe2 (from Hq Graphene) flakes were exfoliated and dry transferred on to the CVD graphene in the N2 atmosphere inside a glovebox. The few layers graphene devices were mechanically transferred onto the n-doped Si substrate with 300 nm SiO2. The WTe2 flakes were exfoliated and dry transferred on to the few-layer graphene in by a transfer stage in a class 100 cleanroom environment. For the preparation of ferromagnetic tunnel contacts to graphene, a two-step deposition and oxidation process was adopted, 0.4nm Ti was deposited, followed by a 30 Torr O2 oxidation for 10 mins each, followed by 100 nm Co deposition. Measurements were performed inside a vacuum cryostat and a PPMS measurement system in the temperature range of 10-300K with a magnetic field and a sample rotation stage. The electronic measurements were carried out using current source Keithley 6221, nanometer 2182A, and dualchannel source meter Keithley 2612B. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors on reasonable request.