Probabilistic (p-) bits implemented with low energy barrier nanomagnets (LBMs) have recently gained attention because they can be leveraged to perform some computational tasks very efficiently. Although more error-resilient than Boolean computing, p-bit based computing employing LBMs is, however, not completely immune to defects and device-todevice variations. In some tasks (e.g. binary stochastic neurons for machine learning and p-bits for population coding), extended defects, such as variation of the LBM thickness over a significant fraction of the surface, can impair functionality. In this paper, we have examined if unavoidable geometric device-to-device variations can have a significant effect on one of the most critical requirements for probabilistic computing, namely the ability to "program" probability with an external agent, such as a spin-polarized current injected into the LBM. We found that the programming ability is fortunately not lost due to reasonable device-to-device variations. The little variation in the probability versus current characteristic that reasonable device variability causes can be suppressed further by increasing the spin polarization of the current. This shows that probabilistic computing with LBMs is robust against small geometric variations, and hence will be "scalable" to a large number of p-bits. Index Terms-Low barrier nanomagnets, p-bits, probabilistic computing, device-to-device variations. Probabilistic p-bits are random bits which fluctuate between 0 and 1 A popular platform for implementing p-bits is a low barrier nanomagnet (LBM) with two degenerate energy minima separated by a low energy barrier on the order of the thermal energy kBT (kB = Boltzmann constant and T = absolute temperature) If the energy barrier is symmetric between the two degenerate minima, then bits 0 and 1 will be generated with equal probability. However, one can change that by passing a spin polarized current through the nanomagnet with spins polarized along one of the two orientations. This will bias the probability, either toward 0 or toward 1, depending on the current's magnitude and spin polarization (say, for example, 30% probability of 0 and 70% of 1 for a current of magnitude 1 A with spins polarized in the direction representing bit 1). Such an approach provides a means to "program" the probability, which is the basis of probabilistic computing. It is also the basis of binary stochastic neurons frequently used in stochastic neural networks and machine learning. The programmability (or "control") will be lost if the magnitude of the current needed for a particular probability distribution (e.g. 30% for 0 and 70% for 1) varies significantly from one nanomagnet to another because of small variations in the nanomagnet's lateral dimensions or thickness. This will be debilitating for probabilistic computing and, at best, limit the number of p-bits that can be harnessed to build a "p-circuit", thereby making p-bits suffer from similar limitations on scalability that afflict qubits. It is this problem that we study. In the past, we have shown that extended defects in an LBM (e.g. thickness variation over a significant fraction of the purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. - To investigate this issue, we have carried out stochastic Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert simulations to study magnetization fluctuations in an LBM (with in-plane magnetic anisotropy) at room temperature in the presence of a spin polarized current injected perpendicular to the plane of the LBM. These simulations allow us to generate the probability of bit 1 (encoded in the magnetization state of the LBM) as a function of the spin polarized current magnitude and polarization, and examine how this probability function varies with small variations in the nanomagnet's lateral dimensions and thickness. Our results show that the probability function is insensitive to reasonable variations. This is reassuring since it establishes that probabilistic computing with p-bits is not impaired by reasonable device-to-device variation and hence a large number of p-bits can be harnessed for pcircuits, meaning that p-bits are largely scalable. We consider an elliptical cobalt nanomagnet of nominal thickness 6 nm, major axis 100 nm and minor axis 99.7 nm (Fig. The last term in the right hand side of Equation ( The coefficients a and b depend on device configurations and following  is the magnetic permeability of free space, Ms is the saturation magnetization of the magnetostrictive soft layer, kT is the thermal energy is the volume of the nanomagnet given by , a1 = major axis, a2 = minor axis, and a3 = thickness, t is the time step used in the simulation (0.1 ps), and x G t are three uncorrelated Gaussians with zero mean and unit standard deviation are calculated from the dimensions of the nanomagnet following the prescription of ref. and that the spin polarization in the current is . The spin current is given by where ẑ is the unit vector along the major axis as shown in Fig. e. the magnetization is initially pointing in one direction along the minor axis. We run the simulation for 10 ps and note the final value of z m . If it is positive, then we interpret the magnetization state to represent the bit 1, while if it is negative, we interpret it as bit 0. One would measure the z m component with a magneto-tunneling junction (MTJ) whose hard layer is magnetized in one direction along the z-axis, and hence the resistance of the MTJ will be a measure the z m component. The ------------------------------------- We run 10,000 simulations of the magnetization dynamics for each value of spin polarized current (in steps of 0.1 mA) and calculate the fraction of simulations where the final state after 10 ps represents the bit 1. That fraction is the probability that the p-bit is 1 or P( In Fig. In Fig. , where I is the spin-polarized current and I0 is a constant, as discussed in ref. Clearly, the plots show that the probability curves are not affected much by reasonable variations in either thickness or lateral dimensions. In the case of thickness variation, we see a significant difference only for the 15 nm thickness. Variation in thickness by 1  nm is reasonable since nanomagnets are usually fabricated on substrates with surface roughness of 0.3 nm, but the 15 nm thickness would require the thickness to vary by 9 nm from the target thickness of 6 nm and is not reasonable. Therefore, we can conclude that the probability curves are not affected significantly by reasonable thickness variations. Variation in the lateral dimension (minor axis length) is even more forgiving. A variation of more than 9 nm, which is 9% of the minor axis dimension, does not make a significant difference in the probability curves. The little variation that there is can be further suppressed by increasing the degree of spin polarization in the current. All this means that the controlled probability generators are very reproducible and it is possible to make multiple generators with nominally identical characteristics because the device-to-device variation in the characteristics will be small. That also tells us that pbits implemented with low energy barrier nanomagnets will be scalable up to a large number of p-bits because of the immunity to device-to-device variation. Increasing the degree of spin polarization also decreases (expectedly) the magnitude of the current needed to pin the bit to either 0 or 1. All this is reassuring since it implies that the "control" over p-bits exercised with spin polarized current is not impaired by reasonable device-to-device variations and therefore a fairly large number of p-bits can be harnessed for "p-circuits" in many applications, i.e. p-bits are generally "scalable". This is in sharp contrast to qubits where only a small number can be entangled for quantum operations (the largest number entangled so far appears to be 53 Finally, we clarify that the variations we have considered are uniform variations in thickness and lateral dimensions. Studying the effect of spatially inhomogeneous variations (e.g. surface roughness) would require running micromagnetic simulations instead of macrospin simulations (stochastic Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert). Since running 10,000 micromagnetic simulations for each current value will be computationally prohibitive, we have not addressed the effect of spatially inhomogeneous variations (e.g. surface roughness) here. That will be addressed in a future work.