Polymorphic transitions in layered transition metal dichalcogenides provide an excellent platform for discovering exotic phenomena associated with metastable states, ranging from topological phase transitions 1 to enhanced superconductivity 2 . In particular, the transition from 2H to 1T -MoTe2, which was thought to be induced by high-energy photon irradiation 3-5 among many other means 6-9 , has been intensely studied for its technological relevance in nanoscale transistors 3 . Despite the remarkable electrical performance arising from this 2H-to-1T transition, it remains controversial whether a crystalline 1T phase is produced because optical signatures of this putative transition are found to be associated with the formation of elemental Te clusters instead Tailored, ultrashort pulses of light can be used to manipulate metastable states in functional materials, such as triggering insulator-to-metal transitions Despite the high technological impact of this polymorphic transition in MoTe 2 , recent studies have cast doubt on the existence of the purported 1T structure upon optical photon illumination. In particular, the main evidence for the 1T polymorph was the A g phonon peaks around 120 cm -1 and 140 cm -1 in Raman spectroscopy In this work, instead of using visible light, we report By contrast, the A1g and E2g modes of the 2H phase are strongly reduced. The Raman measurements were conducted with a 1-μm-diameter laser spot and were therefore averaged over regions that had been subjected to differently enhanced THz field strengths. the successful transition from 2H to 1T -MoTe 2 using single-cycle, field-enhanced terahertz (THz) pulses. The transition can be induced with as few as a single THz pulse on atomically thin crystals of 2H-MoTe 2 . Using Raman spectroscopy, we show that the induced phase reflects an intrinsic 1T structure In our experiments, we positioned a flake of 2H-MoTe 2 encapsulated by hexagonal-boron nitride (h-BN) on top of two parallel gold strips separated by a gap (Fig. To further investigate this structural transformation, we conducted experiments on a series of monolayer 2H-MoTe 2 samples. Since the induced 1T phase is longlived, each measurement required a fresh specimen that was carefully positioned over the gap between the gold strips, as indicated in Fig. The THz-induced transition is not restricted to monolayer samples, and we observed similar phenomenology in bilayer and multilayer (∼ 10 layers) 2H-MoTe 2 (see Figs. To gain microscopic insights into the THz-driven transition, we next examine the photo-induced dynamics to trace out the temporal evolution of the crystalline lattice. This investigation cannot be accomplished by conventional time-resolved spectroscopy methods because their stroboscopic approach precludes the study of irreversible processes. We therefore developed a specialized apparatus for THz pump-SHG probe single-shot spectroscopy, which is well suited for probing the formation dynamics of the long-lived metastable 1T state. A schematic illustration of our experiment is presented in Fig. Figure To rationalize our findings, we theoretically explored different effects that can account for the 2H-to-1T transition. Based on the nanosecond phase transition timescale, a natural hypothesis involves a THz fielddriven carrier excitation mechanism. Microscopically, an intense electric field at THz frequency can gener-ate high carrier densities through mechanisms such as Poole-Frenkel ionization, which liberate carriers and accelerate them to multi-eV energies (see Supplementary Note 5). These processes lead to impact ionization, liberating more carriers and evolving as a cascade event The results of our calculations are shown in Fig. Our joint experimental and theoretical studies establish intense THz fields as a viable route to steer the polymorphic transition in atomically thin MoTe 2 . Crucially, this transition cannot be induced by photons at higher energies The fabrication of the metal microslit array was based on a standard photolithography and lift-off process. Image reversal photoresist AZ5214 was spin-coated on a fused silica substrate at 3000 rpm for 30 s, soft baked at 110 • C for 50 s on a hotplate, UV exposed by a maskless aligner MLA 150 with a dose of 24 mJ/cm 2 , and post-exposure baked at 120 • C for 2 min followed by flood exposure and development in AZ422. A thin film of 2-nm Cr was deposited onto the substrate as an adhesion layer by thermal evaporation followed by a 98-nm-thick Au thin film. The sample was soaked in acetone and PG remover for lift-off to complete fabrication of the field enhancement structure. Layered MoTe 2 integration with the field enhancement structure The monolayer, few-layer MoTe 2 , and layered h-BN were exfoliated on SiO 2 /Si substrate from bulk MoTe 2 (HQ graphene) or h-BN crystals. Monolayer and bilayer MoTe 2 were identified by optical contrast and Raman spectroscopy. The layered materials were picked up by a transfer slide composed of a stack of glass, a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) film and a polycarbonate (PC) film, as described in ref. High-field THz pulses were generated in a Mg:LiNbO 3 crystal by tilting the optical pulse front of an 800-nm pump pulse to achieve phase matching Spontaneous Raman scattering was performed on samples before and after THz irradiation using a commercial Raman spectrometer (Horiba LabRAM) with a HeNe laser (λ = 632.8 nm). The laser beam was focused on the samples by a 100× objective into a spot with a diameter of approximately 1 μm. To prepare the samples for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) characterization before and after THz excitation, we designed a special TEM grid with a THz field enhancement structure. The enhancement pattern made of a 50-nm-thick gold film is deposited on a silicon nitride TEM window. The enhancement structure is a 300-μm-long, 2-μm-wide air gap within the gold film, as shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. The THz pump arm was combined with SHG pulses from a second, temporally synchronized 12 W amplified Ti:sapphire laser (repetition rate 1 kHz, central wavelength 800 nm, pulse duration 35 fs). SHG light was focused to a near-diffraction-limited size (1 μm) at the sample with a 50× objective. The SHG light was collected by the same objective and detected by a PMT with a confocal microscope to selectively probe the area at the focus with single-optical-pulse irradiation. The power level of the SHG excitation pulse was well above the damage threshold of MoTe 2 , but the ultrafast nature of the pulse enabled us to obtain a reliable SHG signal before the sample was damaged. The temporal overlap of the counter-propagating THz field and SHG optical pulse was determined by THz field-induced second harmonic signal from a 30-μm-thick LiNbO 3 slab. All of the optical measurements were conducted on a single-shot basis under ambient conditions. More details are given in Supplementary Note 8 and Figs. S12d, S13, and S14. We performed density functional theory (DFT) calculations using the VASP code In these barrier calculations, the in-plane lattice constants were all constrained to the value of the neutral state 2H phase, even for the charged state conditions in which the lattice tends to expand. We note that the treatment of constant area was mainly due to the difficulty of convergence when the lattice vectors were allowed to relax during CI-NEB calculations of charged slabs. It simulates the situation where the lattice of monolayer MoTe 2 is strongly constrained by its interaction with substrates. Based on the converged electronic ground state with spin-orbit coupling in a given crystal structure, we further constructed the Wannier electronic model using the Wannier90 code 