Unconventional superconductivity arises at the border between the strong coupling regime with local magnetic moments and the weak coupling regime with itinerant electrons, and stems from the physics of criticality that dissects the two. Unveiling the nature of the quasiparticles close to quantum criticality is fundamental to understand the phase diagram of quantum materials. Here, using resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) and Fe-K β emission spectroscopy (XES), we visualize the coexistence and evolution of local magnetic moments and collective spin excitations across the superconducting dome in isovalently-doped BaFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 (0.00≤x≤ 0.52). Collective magnetic excitations resolved by RIXS are gradually hardened, whereas XES reveals a strong suppression of the local magnetic moment upon doping. This relationship is captured by an intermediate coupling theory, explicitly accounting for the partially localized and itinerant nature of the electrons in Fe pnictides. Finally, our work identifies a local-itinerant spin fluctuations channel through which the local moments transfer spin excitations to the particle-hole (paramagnons) continuum across the superconducting dome. It is now well established that unconventional superconductivity (SC) originates from a unique and augmented manifestation of the electronic correlation properties that arises as the system is driven towards a quantum critical region via various tuning parameters such as doping and pressure The physics which determines the evolution of the spin excitations is crucially dependent on the interaction strength of the electrons compared to their bandwidth. We explain this phenomenon schematically in Fig. (i) In the weak coupling limit, the low-energy spin excitations (χ ii , see Fig. In the strong coupling limit, the spin excitations across the Mott-bands (χ ll , see Fig. FePns have a layered structure that reduces dimensionality and the parent compounds exhibit a spin-density wave with collinear antiferromagnetic (AF) order (see Fig. netism, being able to detect magnetic fluctuations in the full Brillouin zone (BZ) The detection of spin excitations is enabled in RIXS thanks to the spin-orbit coupling of the intermediate state mixing the quantum numbers L and S thereby activating a channel for the detection of magnetic excitations In this article, we use RIXS to systematically unveil the persistence and gradual hardening of the spin excitations in isovalently-doped BaFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 across the phase diagram (see Fig. In Fig. The persistence of spin excitations in unconventional superconductors outside the antiferromagnetic parent compound is also a hallmark of the cuprates One approach able to describe the regime of intermediate coupling is Momentum Resolved Density Fluctuations (MRDF) theory. MRDF dissects the electronic spectrum into strongly renormalized, incoherent 'local' states, and low-energy, itinerant Bloch states as displayed in Fig. Within the quantum field theory, these effects are captured by the real and imaginary part of the self-energy correction To describe the spin excitations probed by RIXS, the dynamical susceptibility (χ) has The low energy χ ii excitations have an energy in the order of the spin gap (≈1-10 meV) and are not observable by RIXS due to current limitations of the energy resolution but are observed in INS In Fig. To complement our measurements of the spin excitations and assess the local magnetism of BaFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 , we employed X-ray Emission Spectroscopy (XES) -a classical technique that has been established as a sensitive probe of the local magnetic moment (μ bare ) XES is sensitive to the local fluctuating magnetic moment and does not require a net magnetization or ordering, such as X-ray Magnetic Circular Dichroism (XMCD) or neutron diffraction, but detects directly the paramagnetic moment [carried out with FeCrAs (0 μ B ) and BaFe 2 As 2 (set arbitrarily to one to define a relative scale)] μ bare can be determined In Fig. FeCrAs and the respective difference spectra. Clearly, a gradual decrease of μ bare is inferred from the difference spectra depicted in Fig. x =0.28, and μ bare = 0.4 ± 0.1 for x =0.52), but not fully quenched by doping, despite the complete disappearance of the ordered magnetic moment observed by neutron scattering This evidence is remarkable in light of the constancy of the Fe oxidation state observed in XAS (see Supplementary Fig. We compare the doping dependence of the local moment with the strength of the Fermi surface (FS) nesting at the antiferromagnetic wavevector. In Fig. Our XES results are puzzling and assuming spectral weight sum rules, there has to be spectral weight transfer from localized moments into spin excitations as probed by RIXS. In Fig. Single crystals of BaFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 were grown either by stoichiometric melt X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy and Resonant Inelastic X-ray Scattering X-ray Absorption Spectra (XAS) and RIXS experiments were performed at the ADRESS beamline of the Swiss Light Source, Paul Scherrer Institut, Villigen PSI, Switzerland and post-cleaved in-situ at a pressure better than 2.0×10 -10 mbar. The reciprocal space directions studied are (0, 0)→(1, 0) and (0, 0)→(1, 1) according to the orthorhombic unfolded crystallographic notation. The values of in-plane momentum transferred are expressed as relative lattice units (RLU) (q // a / 2π). We use the convention of 1 Fe per unit cell. All the measurements were carried out at 13 K by cooling the manipulator with liquid helium. XAS spectra were measured in both Total Fluorescence Yield (TFY) and Total Electron Yield (TEY) modes. No difference was observed between TEY and TFY which indicates the sample integrity across the thickness probed in our experiment. We measured Fe L 2,3 XAS spectra for all samples at 15 degrees of incidence angle relative to the sample surface. All the XAS spectra are reported in Supplementary Figure The RIXS spectrometer was set to a scattering angle of 130 degrees and the incidence angle on the samples surface was varied to change the in-plane momentum transferred (q // ) from (0, 0) to (0.44, 0) and from (0, 0) to (0.31, 0.31). All RIXS measurements in the present paper were recorded in grazing incidence configuration as depicted in Supplementary Figure RIXS spectra were normalized to unity and the main emission line was fitted according to Ref. with and In the first formula, the first part is a 2 nd order polynomial function describing the emission line at low energy loss, the second part is an exponential decay describing the emission line at high energy loss. The two behaviours are swapped into each other by the g γ term. The third term is a gaussian curve (G) observed at around -4.2 eV energy loss. An exemplary fitting of the full RIXS spectra is drawn in Supplementary Figure In Supplementary Figure Overall, the three spectra resemble a metallic system with the lineshape not being affected by doping. Due to changes in the band structure upon doping, small energy shifts and changes in the RIXS intensity are detected. We complemented the momentum dependence along (0, 0)→(1, 0) with (0, 0)→ (1, 1) and display the raw data for all the dopings and momenta with the fitting in Supplementary Figure We performed the Fe-K β x-ray emission (XES) experiments at BL11XU of SPring-8, Japan. The incoming beam was monochromatized by a Si (111) double-crystal and a Si (400) secondary channel-cut crystal. The energy was calibrated by measuring x-ray absorption of a Fe foil and set to 7.140 keV with π polarization. We employed three spherical diced Ge (620) analyzers and a detector in Rowland geometry at 2 m distance. The total combined resolution was about 400 meV estimated from Full Width Half Maximum (FWHM) of the elastic line. We scanned the absolute emission energy between 7.02 keV and 7.08 keV and normalized the intensity by the incident flux monitored by an ionization chamber. We carried out the measurements at 15 K. The experimental geometry of the experiment is depicted in Supplementary Figure Two extreme doping regimes of the BaFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 samples, namely BaFe 2 As 2 (x = 0.00) and BaFe 2 P 2 (x = 1.00) have been studied within density functional theory (DFT) Also accurate tight-binding models are available to reproduce the DFT band structure, consistent with Angle Resolved Photoemission Spectroscopy (ARPES) data (after including renormalization effects). However, P-doping effects on the As site, which does not change the carrier concentration, is neither trivial to accurately calculate within the DFT framework, nor within a simple rigid band shift technique which works reasonably well for electron and hole doping cases Å at x = 0.00 to ≈12.4 Å at x = 1.00. This explains why the three-dimensionality of the sample (i.e. k z dispersion) increases considerably with doping, as consistently demonstrated in both ARPES where k is the crystal momentum and i = 1 -5 is the orbital index. i k is the momentum dependent part of the dispersion which arises from the nearest, next, and higher neighbour hoppings between the same orbitals, ∆ i is the corresponding on-site potentials, and F is the chemical potential. As the unit cell volume decreases monotonically with P doping, it is expected that the electron hopping amplitude increases monotonically with doping. We model this effect by a simple renormalization factor λ as i k → λ i k , where λ increases with doping. Similarly, due to the monotonic increase of the pnictogen coordinate and the height (z P n , h P n ), the on-site potential also changes. Interestingly, we find that an orbital dependent modification of the on-site potential is required to properly reproduce the experimental behaviour of the k z dispersion and FS changes. We set ∆ i → ∆ i + δ for the sum procedure at different q points produces a propagation of the errors, so we set a slightly higher upper boundary. Yamamoto, Y. et al. Origin of Pressure-induced Superconducting Phase in K x Fe 2-y Se 2 studied by Synchrotron X-ray Diffraction and Spectroscopy. Scientific Reports 6, 30946 (2016). URL