This article assesses whether it is profitable to store solar PV electricity in the form of heat and convert it back to electricity on demand. The impact of a number of technical and economic parameters on the profitability of a self-consumption residential system located in Madrid is assessed. The proposed solution comprises two kinds of heat stores: a low-or medium-grade heat store for domestic hot water and space heating, and a high-grade heat store for combined heat and power generation. Two cases are considered where the energy that is wasted during the conversion of heat into electricity is employed to satisfy either the heating demand, or both heating and cooling demands by using a thermally-driven heat pump. We compare these solutions against a reference case that relies on the consumption of grid electricity and natural gas and uses an electrically-driven heat pump for cooling. The results show that, under relatively favourable conditions, the proposed solution that uses an electrically-driven heat pump could provide electricity savings in the range of 70 -90% with a payback period of 12 -15 years, plus an additional 10 -20% reduction in the fuel consumption. Shorter payback periods, lower than 10 years, could be attained by using a highly efficient thermally driven heat pump, at the expense of increasing the fuel consumption and the greenhouse gas emissions. Hybridising this solution with solar thermal heating could enable significant savings on the global emissions, whilst keeping a high amount of savings in grid electricity (> 70 %) and a reasonably short payback period (< 12 years). The energy consumption in buildings represents around 40% of the world energy consumption and one-third of global CO2 emissions Among them, the so-called combined cooling, heating and power (CCHP), or trigeneration systems In the last decade, the dramatic cost reductions of solar PV technology have triggered the interest on self-consumption of PV electricity in both commercial and residential buildings With an average growth rate of 51% Small-scale solar PV systems in distributed applications, mostly building integration, accounts for a significant share of these new PV additions (~ 38% In all these cases, the self-consumption of PV electricity is limited due to the lack of synchronization between solar irradiance and local consumption. For systems where PV electricity is used exclusively to satisfy the electric power demand, self-consumption ratio (defined here as the fraction of the PV generated electricity that is used to supply the loads) is usually limited to 25 -30% To increase the self-consumption levels, solutions must integrate a system that stores the excess of PV electricity, such as electrochemical batteries Although it might sound counterintuitive, among the many possible energy storage options, those that are particularly interesting for CCHP applications are those with low round-trip (electric-to-electric) efficiency, as they may deliver part of the stored energy in a form of heat. Some examples are compressed air Recent studies have established a few conceptual PHPS embodiments, which differentiate in the way that heat is produced, stored, and converted back into electricity. A particularly promising concept is pumped heat electricity storage (PHES), in which a high temperature heat pump cycle transforms electricity into heat, which is stored inside two large regenerators, and a thermal engine cycle transforms the stored heat back into electricity theoretically enabling an increment of the round-trip conversion efficiency up to ~ 50% Regardless of the particular system implementation, it is still unclear under what circumstances a PHPS system could be profitable. In In this study we assess the integration of a PHPS system in a CCHP solution for the selfconsumption of solar PV electricity in the residential environment. To the best of our knowledge, no comprehensive techno-economical assessment of PV generation coupled with a PHPS system has been evaluated so far. Thus, we will answer some of the most fundamental questions regarding the profitability of this solution, such as the maximum cost, the minimum PGU conversion efficiency, or the maximum heat insulation losses that are tolerable in order to provide reasonably low payback periods and significant energy savings. Figure ⁄ , being 8760 × T the total number of hours during the entire system lifetime T (in years). The cooling power (C c ) is satisfied by either an EHP (case PHPS-E, Figure In this study we use simplified models for each device of the PHPS system. The detailed model equations are shown in Figure This is because the lower temperature also brings a lower energy density, counteracting to keep a similar amount of heat losses. The evident way to reduce the losses is the use of advanced thermal insulation designs with a very small a HTES value. Possible options include the use of vacuum insulation or other advance concepts, such as the use of heat pumps An additional possibility to reduce heat losses in the HTES is to use eutectic alloys, instead of pure elements, with enhanced latent heats at lower melting temperatures, such as Al-12Si (549 kWh/m 3 at 577 oC) Time-dependent profiles of heating (space and hot water), cooling, and electricity consumptions (C hh and C c , C e ) are obtained by the Energy Plus software Finally, from the energy simulations, hourly global energy demand of the reference building over a year is calculated. Thus, 1-hour step data of electricity for lighting and other appliances, cooling, domestic hot water (DHW) and space heating demands is obtained. The hourly PV electrical power generation per kW of installed PV capacity (G e * , in equivalent hours) in Madrid is calculated by means of the PVsyst software For this calculation monocrystalline silicon PV modules of 318 Wp from the manufacturer SunPower and a Sunny Boy series inverter of the manufacturer SMA have been considered. PV modules are orientated to the South and their tilt angle is 34o, which is the optimum value that maximises the annual PV generation in Madrid. For the comprehensive system model, energy output after the inverter is considered. The total PV electricity generated during one hour (G e , in kWh) is estimated from these simulations as G e = G e * P nom,PV , being P nom,PV the nominal PV installed power (in kW). E max,HTES = 33.7 kWhth. As it will be seen in the discussion section, the sizing of the three key elements of this system, i.e. the PV, HTES and PGU, has been optimized to minimize the cost of the consumed electricity all through the lifetime of the installation. The proper selection of the merit function that must be minimized is of extreme relevance, as different merit functions provide completely different optimum solutions. For instance, a key performance indicator of the system could be its levelized cost of total (consumed) energy or LCOE, which is defined in this work as: where CAPEX is the total capital expenditure (in €), t ′ is the time variable (in years), T is the total lifetime of the installation (in years), OPEX(t ′ ) are the total operational expenditures in year t ′ (in €), and ∑ C e (t) + C h (t)Δt 8760 t=1 is the total energy consumption (in kWh) during a year, evaluated at time intervals of Δt = 1 hour. WACC nom and WACC real are the nominal and real weighted average cost of capital, respectively, and are mutually related The CAPEXof the solution is the addition of the individual CAPEXof each element (PV, HTES, LTES, PGU, Boiler, and THP or EHP), each of which are assumed proportional to the element's nominal capacity. For instance, the CAPEX of the PV system is estimated as CAPEX PV = CAPEX PV * P nom,PV , being CAPEX PV * the capital expenditure per kW of a PV installation. A key difference of equation ( This subsequently resulted in large PV, HTES and LTES systems. Despite the fact that this brings some economical savings after the entire lifetime of the installation, the very high CAPEX results in an intolerable increase of the discounted payback period. As a consequence, we opted for using the levelized cost of consumed electricity (LCOEel) as merit function, which is defined in this work as: and differentiates from equation The minimization of LCOE el will guide us towards the best system configuration in terms of maximum savings of grid-electricity, which is the most relevant contributor to the total OPEX. Minimizing LCOE el appears to be a more reasonable approach that produces shorter payback periods at the expense of obtaining slightly higher LCOE. The search for the minimum LCOE el is performed in this work by means of the multi-variable direct search (Nelder-Mead) algorithm Finally, the discounted payback period is calculated in this study by computing the annual discounted saves (in current money) in the OPEX due to the reduced consumption of external electricity and fuel, with respect to the reference case in Figure All the variables used in this study to describe the PHPS+PV solution are summarized in Table to less favourable (Scenario 4). The most favourable scenario assumes a PV CAPEX of 900 €/kW, while the rest of scenarios assume a price of 1200 €/kW (taxes included). These data are selected based on the estimations of the European JCR, according to which the worldwide average price of a residential PV systems without tax was 1150 €/kW Concerning the CO2-equivalent emissions reported in Table In the case of natural gas, the CO2-equivalent emissions are typically reported in the range of 220 -280 gCO2eq/kWhth It is also worth commenting on the assumption of an identical CAPEX for both EHP and THP. Some studies have reported air conditioning prices ranging from 500 to 700 €/kWcool A constant COP is assumed for the EHP all through the year. A value of 4 has been used in most of the cases, as this is the average seasonal energy efficiency ratio (SEER) for residential air conditioners installed worldwide, as reported by the IEA in 2019. However, the best SEER available in the market are up to ~ 12. According to the IEA, it is unlikely that these efficient devices reach the market in many countries, but it illustrates the huge potential for improvement Concerning the energy prices, two main components have been assumed: energy and network. Typically, energy and taxes are charged per kWh of consumed energy, while the network component is charged annually per contracted kWel. The share of the fixed and variable components in the price of natural gas and electricity varies significantly among countries . The increasing amount of grid-connected distributed renewable power systems is triggering a trend to increase the fixed components of the price This work aims at determining under which circumstances a PHPS system could be profitable for the self-consumption of solar PV electricity in the residential sector. To afford this analysis, we will search for the optimal sizing of the three main elements of the system, i.e. the storage capacity of HTES in kWhth, the peak power output of the PGU in kWel, and the nominal power of the solar-PV installation in kWel, which result in the minimum costs of the consumed electricity after the entire lifetime of the installation. This optimal sizing depends on a number of parameters, such as the cost of grid-electricity and fuel, or the cost and productivity of the PV system, among many others. In this study, we will pay special attention to those parameters related to the PGU and HTES components, as they are not typically used in residential applications and subsequently, there are no reliable data on their cost and performance. Such , a HTES and ∆T HTES that leads to profitability will be determined assuming a favourable economic scenario. Thus, the outcome of this analysis will be the technological requirements for each element of the solution in order to reach profitability. This information will be useful to assess the candidate technologies. Nevertheless, despite the fact that we will mention a few possible specific options, it is not the aim of this study to provide a thorough assessment of the most suitable technological implementation. To quantify the "profitability" of the solution we will look at the amount of electricity savings enabled by the PHPS system. Electricity savings can only be attributed to the presence of significantly large PV, HTES and PGU systems (optimized variables) that provide a significant reduction of the cost of consumed electricity (merit function for the optimization). The first part of the discussion focuses on the PHPS-E configuration (Figure Figure Besides, the minimum attainable savings of electricity are about 30%, and correspond to the case of direct self-consumption of PV electricity, without storage. The results shown in Figure It is worth noticing that high thermal-to-electric conversion efficiencies (> 40%) and low costs (< 1000 €/kW) are attainable by current state of the art Rankine and open-cycle Brayton engines of large (> 1 MWel) for both terrestrial and space-power applications, have either low conversion efficiency (e.g. Rankine/ORC) or high cost (Brayton) Therefore, the selection of the optimal operation temperature should be made based on an overall techno-economic analysis of the entire solution, being the main objective the achievement of high PGU efficiency and low thermal insulation losses at low cost. In this regard, the results shown in Figure The results in Table a HTES = a LTES = 0). Despite the fact that this ideal situation is unattainable in practice, these results are valuable to set the upper bounds of the technology. If compared with the results in Table CAPEX of HTES, PGU and PV, PGU efficiency, WACCnom and energy price inflation rate) from the most favourable economic scenario indicated in Table The first important observation is that there exists a threshold value for the PGU conversion efficiency beyond which the PHPS-E system becomes profitable, i.e. the optimal sizes for the PGU (Figure Notice that such high self-consumption ratios are attributed to the use of solar PV electricity to produce low-grade heat that is stored in the LTES. This explains why such high selfconsumption ratios are combined with small electricity savings (~ 30%, Figure When the PGU efficiency is higher than the profitability threshold, the optimal PHPS-E system comprises significantly large HTES, PGU and PV systems (Figure This critical efficiency is ~ 40% for the scenarios 1 and 2, and ~ 60% (~ 80%) for the scenario 3 For instance, in the Scenario 1, the payback period is reduced only 3 years (from 14 to 11 years) when the PGU conversion efficiency increases from 40% to 80%, while the electricity savings are not improved. This illustrates that increasing the PGU conversion efficiency beyond a certain critical value (which depends on the boundary economic conditions) might not be as important as it could be intuitively expected. Other interesting observation concerns the very small self-consumption ratios (35 -60%) that are obtained, meaning that a high amount of PV electricity is finally wasted. To understand the source of these losses, Figure However, these losses are not very significant in absolute value, as they enable very high selfconsumption ratios of ~ 80% (Figure Analysing this and other possible improvements could be the aim of a future work. This last part of the article focuses on the analysis of the PHPS-T system (Figure and in the PHPS-E solution (Figure In this regard, Figure In this case, the PHPS-E solution would be the preferable solution, with payback periods significantly shorter than those of PHPS-T. Very high THP COPs (more than ~ 1.3) would be needed for PHPS-T to reach reasonably low payback periods (< 12 years) when the EHP COP is considerably high (~ 6 or beyond). In this case, the PHPS-T solution could provide significantly shorter payback periods than PHPS-E. It is worth noticing that the improvement of the EHP COP is beneficial not only for the PHPS-E system, but also for the reference case. Thus, improving the EHP COP does not bring a significant reduction of the payback period for the PHPS-E system with respect to the reference case. For this reason, the only way to drastically reduce the payback period is to adopt the PHPS-T solution with a very highly efficient THP. High THP COPs of 1.2 -1.7 can be attained with current state of the art double-stage or triplestage absorption chillers operating at temperatures in the range of 150 -250 oC This implies that a PHPS-T solution should rely on the use of PGU with a high-grade rejected heat (> 150 oC) able to power an efficient double-or triple-stage absorption chiller. Otherwise, the PHPS-E system would be a preferable solution. This will impact on the selection of the PGU. High rejection temperature dynamic engines or solid-state devices are preferable. In this regard, the low rejection temperature of TPV devices is detrimental. High TPV cell temperatures lead to a significant reduction of the conversion efficiency. Thus, the requirement of higher temperature rejected heat points in the direction of an interesting research line for TPV, which is the development of highly efficient TPV cells able to operate at temperatures of ~ 200oC Figure The other main difference observed when comparing PHPS-T (Figure Choosing other kinds of merit functions (e.g. the total LCOE in eq. 1) would lead to larger HTES and PGU systems that bring higher savings in CO2 emissions at the expenses of increasing the payback period. Another obvious strategy to reduce the CO2 emissions could be hybridizing a PHPS-T solution with a kind of renewable heat source, such as solar thermal collectors. The resultant hybrid PHPS-T solution would enable a significant reduction in the CO2 emissions of up to 4.5 ton/year (from the total reference emissions of 5.2 ton/year), as well as a low payback period of 12 years or below. In this article we have evaluated the implementation of a power-to-heat-to-power storage solution for the self-consumption of solar PV electricity in a dwelling in Madrid. Our results indicate that the solution has potential to provide a significant amount of savings in the consumption of grid electricity (> 70%) with reasonably short discounted payback periods (< 15 years), if compared to a solution that uses fuel for heating and grid-electricity. This holds true even when the heat-to-power conversion efficiencies is moderately low (20 -30%), provided that the economic conditions are favourable. If the cost of the technology is sufficiently low, there exists a certain thermal-to-electric conversion efficiency (~ 40% in the most favourable case analysed in this study) beyond which the power generation system can be made slightly smaller, but the amount of savings in electricity does not increase, i.e. increasing the efficiency might not be as important as it could be intuitively expected. Besides, the inefficient power conversion process results in a large amount of rejected heat that can be used to satisfy other kinds of energetic demands. For instance, if an electrically driven heat pump is used for cooling, the rejected heat could be used for providing space heating and domestic hot water, bringing additional savings in the fuel consumption in the range of 10 -20%, and global savings in CO2 equivalent emissions in the range of 1.2 -1.6 ton/year (24 -31%). If a thermally driven heat pump is used instead, the generated heat could be also used for satisfying the cooling demands. This leads to shorter payback periods if the COP of the thermally driven heat pump is significantly high (> 1.3). This condition is attainable by current state of the art double-or triple-stage absorption chillers operating at temperatures in the range of 150 -250 oC, meaning that a high rejection temperature would be necessary in the conversion of the stored heat into electricity. However, the very large cooling needs during summer in Madrid may not be fully satisfied by the rejected heat in the system, in which case an extra consumption of fuel is needed, subsequently leading to a small reduction (or even an increment) in the greenhouse gas emissions. A possible solution consists of replacing the use of fossil fuels by a renewable heat source, such as solar thermal. In this case, the entire power-to-heat-to-power solution comprising a highly efficient thermally driven heat pump and solar thermal collectors could provide a drastic reduction of the emissions (~ 4.5 ton/year, or 86%) while keeping reasonably short payback periods (< 12 years). Notice that a clearer economic advantage would be obtained if we compared the proposed PHPS solution with a reference case that uses an electric-powered boiler, instead of a fuel-powered one. This most favourable scenario is not analysed in this study, and should be assessed in future works. The main drawback of the proposed solution, independently of using a thermally-or an electrically-driven heat pump, concerns the small self-consumption ratios of PV electricity (40 -60%), which are mainly attributed to the large amount of heat losses in the high temperature thermal store. Possible ways of minimizing these losses include the development of novel ultradense heat stores at moderately low temperatures, or more advanced thermal insulation systems. Another disadvantage concerns the low readiness level of heat-to-power generation technologies that are highly efficient at small scales (~ 1 kW). Some solid-state power generators, such as thermophotovoltaics, show potential to reach the required conversion efficiency and low cost. However, they are not readily available in the market. Next works should assess the use of PHPS systems in larger residential buildings, where the use of market-available dynamic engines, such as Stirling generators, could be profitable. Future analyses should also assess the possibility of selling the excess of PV electricity to the grid, which has been disregarded in the current work. This could negatively impact on the profitability of the solution as it is considered in this study. Finally, regardless of the particular system implementation, the system model and methodology presented in this article becomes a quite powerful tool which will allow to answer fundamental questions regarding the profitability of different energy solutions (including novel energy storage technologies) by evaluating payback periods and energy saving as well as optimal sizing that results in minimum costs of energy, among many other parameters. Figure Table and OPEX fuel,var * are the annual costs of externally-purchased electricity and heat (in €/kWhel and €/kWhth) expressed in current money. Equation ( ⁄ [7]. This equation results in CAPEX of 395 and 590 €2012/kWheat for systems with large (20 kWheat) and medium (10 kWheat) heating capacities, respectively. Unfortunately, the price of THPs is not as well reported in the literature. In 2002, Grossman [65] estimated the cost of LiBr-water absorption chiller technology in the rage of 165 -200 $/kWcool. However, in 2008, Kim and Infante Ferreira a solution without HTES nor PGU devices, in which the PV electricity is directly consumed without being stored. This illustrates how important are the economic boundary conditions on the potential of the PHPS-E concept.