The broad application of polymer composites in engineering demands the deep understanding of the main damage mechanisms under realistic loading conditions and the development of proper physics-based models. Towards this goal, this study presents a comprehensive characterization of the main damage mechanisms in a selection of notched composite structures under multiaxial fatigue loading. Thanks to a synergistic combination of X-ray micro-computed tomography (μ-CT) and Digital Image Correlation (DIC), the main failure modes are identified while the crack volume associated to each mechanism is characterized. This study provides unprecedented quantitative data for the development and validation of computational models to capture the fatigue behavior of polymer composite structures. The broad application of polymer composites in engineering requires the insightful understanding of their damage mechanisms both under quasi-static and fatigue loading. These mechanisms affect the mechanical behavior of composites significantly Towards this important goal, a range of non-destructive inspection techniques has been developed and applied in the last few decades. The most attractive techniques include acoustic emission However, infrared thermography and ultrasonic C-scan are typically employed to have a rough estimation of the damage progression in composite structures. A noticeable example was provided by Although the forgoing techniques led to a remarkable progress in the damage characterization, the identification of individual damage types is still not clear since the damage analyzed using the forgoing inspection tools is usually homogenized. In this context, microscopic techniques (Optical and Scanning Electron Microscopy) are extensively used to visualize different damage types in specimens. Carraro et al. Thanks to the emergence and development of X-ray micro-computed tomography (μ-CT), a detailed damage morphology throughout the entire composite structure can be obtained even under an in-situ inspection test. An interesting study was provided by Yu et al. By leveraging μ-CT technique, the growth of different type of damage was also successfully quantified as a function of fatigue lifetime. A further step towards an even more insightful damage analysis requires a synergistic approach combing μ-CT technique and other aforementioned methods. In this way, this work presents a comprehensive damage analysis via X-ray micro-computed tomography and Digital Imaging Correlation techniques on notched quasi-isotropic [+45/90/-45/0] s and cross-ply [0/90] 2s laminates under multi-axial quasi-static and fatigue loading. Thanks to the synergistic approach, a detailed analysis of the damage mechanisms and quantification of damage evolution was achieved. This result, which is of utmost importance for the development and validation of fatigue computational models for notched composite structures under multiaxial loading, has never been obtained before. Following The application of the combinations of nominal normal and shear stresses on notched laminates was achieved by using an Arcan rig (Fig. In the definition of stress, P is the instantaneous load, w is the specimen width, a 0 is the crack length or hole diameter, t is the specimen thickness and θ is the angle between loading direction and axial direction of the specimen. A detailed description on the test method and loading conditions can be found in To study the damage evolution of notched laminates under multi-axial tests, specimens with the same dimensions but featuring different types of notches were prepared as shown in Figure The procedure of damage evaluation leveraging Digital Image Correlation (DIC) and X-ray micro-computed tomography (μ-CT) is illustrated in Figure The strain distribution of notched laminates was investigated for three multiaxiality ratios (λ = 0, 0.785 and 1.571) by using an open source DIC system programmed in MATLAB software developed at the Georgia Institute of Technology The sub-critical damage of notched laminates was studied in detail by means of a NSI X5000 X-ray micro-tomography scanning system [35] with a X-ray tube setting of 90 kV in voltage and 220 μA in current. To have a better understanding of the damage evolution under multi-axial tests, damaged specimens taken from the multi-axial quasi-static tests were analyzed at 90% and even later stage of the entire life whereas the ones taken from the multi-axial fatigue tests were analyzed at 40% and 70% of the entire life. It is worth mentioning here that the total quasi-static life corresponded to its life reaching the critical load whereas the total fatigue life corresponded to its lifetime to failure. Prior to the scanning, a dye penetrant composed of zinc iodide powder (250 g), isopropyl alcohol (80 ml), Kodak photo-flow solution (1 ml) and distilled water (80 ml) was used as a supplement to improve the visualization of the damage mechanisms The sub-critical, distributed damage occurring under fatigue loading of notched composite structures generally leads to a local reduction of the material stiffness with consequent increase of the local strain. Accordingly, to have a qualitative idea of the overall damage distribution notched [0/90] 2s and [+45/90/-45/0] s specimens were analyzed through DIC as described in section 2.3.1. As illustrated in Figure It is worth mentioning that the maximum principle strains were normalized against their maximum values in the area of interest in order to have a comparison between quasi-static and fatigue loading condition. In fact, the focus was not on the magnitude of the strain field but the overall damage distribution. However, the critical magnitude in the maximum principle strain field for quasi-isotropic specimens featuring a central hole under multi-axial tests provides an insightful information on the quasi-static and fatigue fracturing behavior. As can be noted in Figure On the other hand, before moving to the following section on the investigation of damage mechanisms via μ-CT technique, the fracturing features can be roughly known based on the overall strain distribution leveraging DIC. As can be noted in Figure To shed more light on the characteristics of the fracturing morphology of notched laminates under multiaxial quasi-static and fatigue loading, damaged specimens were analyzed leveraging X-ray μ-CT using the parameters described in the section 2.3.2. This non-destructive technique was particularly important to guarantee that no additional damage was created during the damage visualization process. Thanks to this technique, the sub-critical damage can be observed through the reconstructed 3D images in order to have a quantitative comparison on the crack volume and delamination area of the specimens under multi-axial tests. With the supplement of the dye penetrant, the sub-critical damage can be easily visualized as illustrated in Figures 6-14. Thanks to the great contrast provided by the use of the dye penetrant, the analysis of the greyscale value can be used to roughly estimate the crack volume and delamination area of the specimen. Figure The final failure is triggered by the additional splitting in 0 • plies away from the notch tip and the breakage of 0 • fibers. As illustrated in Figure (1) splitting initiates in 90 • plies (Fig. (2) splitting initiates in 0 • plies at notch tip (Fig. (3) splitting develops in the corresponding piles (Fig. (4) a small amount of delamination between 0 • and 90 • plies starts to initiate (Fig. (5) additional splitting in 0 • plies away from the notch tip happens simultaneously with the breakage of 0 • fibers (Fig. When the multiaxiality ratio λ = 0.785, 1.309, a mix of nominal normal and shear stresses is applied on specimens and failure behavior follows Mechanism B. In this case, the dominant mechanism transitions from splitting to a combination of delamination and splitting. The final failure happens with the growth of splitting in 0 • plies at the notch tip and the delamination between 0 • and 90 • plies. As illustrated in Figure (1) splitting initiates in 90 • plies (Fig. (2) splitting initiates in 0 • plies at notch tip simultaneously with the formation of delamination between 0 • and 90 • plies (Fig. (3) splitting and delamination develop in/between the corresponding plies (Fig. (4) fibers in 0 • plies start to kink due to the shear stress (Fig. (5) delamination between 0 • and 90 • plies grows together with the significant splitting at notch tip (Fig. (c) Mechanism C When the specimens are only subjected to pure shear loading, the dominant mechanisms are the delamination between 0 • and 90 • plies and then fiber kinking in 0 • plies. The final failure is due to the unstable growth of the inter-laminar crack enabling the splitting in 0 • plies at notch tip. As illustrated in Figure (1) a small amount of splitting initiates in 90 • plies at notch tip (Fig. (2) delamination initiates between 0 • and 90 • plies (Fig. (3) fibers in 0 • plies start to kink significantly due to the shear stress (Fig. (4) delamination develops between the corresponding plies (Fig. (5) delamination grows dramatically and drives the significant splitting in 0 • plies at notch tip (Fig. The crack volume and delamination area as a function of the percentage life were plotted in Figures With the comparison to the fatigue case, similar damage mechanisms were observed in the case of quasistatic loading for all the multiaxiality ratios as shown in Figures (1) splitting initiates in 90 • plies at notch tip (Fig. (2) splitting initiates in 0 • and ± 45 • plies at notch tip (Fig. (3) delamination between the foregoing plies initiates (Fig. (4) splitting and delamination develop in/between the corresponding plies (Fig. (5) splitting in ± 45 • plies grows significantly and delamination reaches critical condition accompanying the emergence of 0 • plies breakage (Fig. The specimens fail following Mechanism B when the shear load component is involved (λ = 0.785, 1.309 and 1.571). In contrast to mechanism A, a significant reduced delamination between all the plies was observed. On the other hand, the direction of shear loading was established so that the +45 • plies are in compression while the -45 • plies are in tension. Considering the fact that the compressive strength of an unidirectional ply is generally lower than its tensile strength, the dominant mechanism is the micro-buckling in +45 • plies and the final failure is triggered by the significant growth of the micro-buckling due to the compression at the very late stage of the fatigue life. The paths of the micro-buckling usually start in a straight way at the two ends of the hole but not on the same line and then additional micro-buckling paths almost perpendicular to the +45 • plies happen. These micro-buckling paths are usually in collaboration with the significant splitting in +45 • plies as mentioned in the foregoing discussion of DIC analysis in Section 3. Similar conclusions were drawn by Tan et al. (1) splitting initiates in 90 • plies at notch tip (Fig. (2) splitting initiates in 0 • and ± 45 • plies at notch tip (Fig. (3) a small amount of delamination between 90 • and ± 45 • plies starts to initiate (Fig. (4) splitting and delamination develop in/between the corresponding plies (Fig. (4) micro-buckling initiates in +45 • plies at notch tip (Fig. (5) micro-buckling in +45 • plies grows unstably in collaboration with the significant splitting in +45 • plies (Fig. The similar quantitative analysis on the sub-critical damage as discussed in section 4.1.2 was proceeded. As can be noted from Figure In the case of quasi-static loading, specimens follow the similar damage mechanisms for the foregoing fatigue case. However, in mechanism B, the straight paths of the micro-buckling in +45 • plies at the two ends of the hole have a pronounced propagation with the increasing multiaxiality ratio as can be noted in Figures In the fatigue case as shown in Figure Another similarity was found in terms of the evolution of total crack volume confirming a similar gradual stiffness degradation throughout the fatigue life for various multiaxiality ratios. Despite these similarities, the specimens weakened by a central crack have a significant larger amount of total crack volume compared to the ones weakened by an open hole. However, this does not occur for the quasi-static scenario which shows the central crack case having less amount of total crack volume. This indicates a different evolution of the Fracture Process Zone (FPZ) in quasi-static regime compared to fatigue which is significantly important for structural design since the previous study shows that specimens featuring a central hole behave better than the ones with the same layup but featuring a central crack in fatigue case but not for the quasi-static case Leveraging a synergistic combination of DIC and micro-computed tomography, this study investigated the fracturing morphology and the damage mechanisms of notched quasi-isotropic and cross-ply laminates under multi-axial loading. Based on the results obtained in this study, the following conclusions can be elaborated: 1. For the composite layups and specimen configurations investigated in this work, the sub-critical damage mechanisms under multi-axial fatigue were similar to the ones identified under quasi-static loading. However, it is worth mentioning that in notched quasi-isotropic laminates under shear-dominated loading a more pronounced straight micro-buckling paths ahead of the notch or hole was reported in the quasi-static case compared to the fatigue loading; 2. leveraging the μ-CT results, it is shown that the damage mechanisms of the notched cross-ply laminates are dominated by splitting in 0 • plies under tension-dominated loading whereas a mix of delamination and fiber kinking in 0 • plies occurs with increasing shear load; 3. in the case of notched quasi-isotropic laminates, significant delamination and the splitting in ± 45 • plies characterizes the tension-dominated fatigue behavior whereas the main damage mechanism for the shear-dominated case is the micro-buckling in +45 • plies in combination with splitting in the same plies; 4. The quantitative analysis of the crack volume via μ-CT and of the maximum principal strain distribution by means of DIC reveals a substantial difference in the damage evolution between the quasi-static and fatigue loading conditions. In fatigue, the sub-critical damage is distributed across a larger volume compared to the quasi-static case, leading to a significant strain redistribution. Further, the rate of crack volume increase throughout the life of the specimen is substantially different. While in the quasi-static case the crack volume increases quickly at almost a constant rate, in fatigue it exhibits a slow change followed by an abrupt increase towards final failure; 5. the foregoing results are of utmost importance for the structural design of polymer matrix composites under multi-axial loading condition but so far rarely investigated. This study provides a comprehensive damage evaluation on the fracturing behavior of notched laminates which can be used to validate the existing models for the design of composite structures under multi-axial stress states. 