We present a theoretical proposal for the design of a thermal switch based on the anisotropy of the thermal conductivity of PbTiO 3 and of the possibility to rotate the ferroelectric polarization with an external electric field. Our calculations are based on an iterative solution of the phonon Boltzmann Transport Equation and rely on interatomic force constants computed within an efficient second-principles density functional theory scheme. We also characterize the hysteresis cycle of the thermal conductivity in presence of an applied electric field and show that the response time would be limited by speed of the ferroelectric switch itself and thus can operate in the high-frequency regime. A longstanding goal ? of phononics 1-3 -the discipline that studies phonon manipulation-is the implementation of a phonon-based Boolean algebra, where operations rely on a high and a low conductance state, which are used to encode the logical values of 1 and 0. A fundamental requisite to perform logic operations is having access to two conductance states that are as different as possible and being able to commute back and forth between them. Many materials are anisotropic and thus provide naturally access to such distinct conductance states, but practical implementations are nevertheless hindered. On the one hand, the anisotropy is often small, like in wurtzite crystals Ferroelectric perovskite oxides are anisotropic materials whose anisotropy is determined by the off-center displacement of the cations with respect to the surrounding oxygen cages. This distortion of the lattice has an associated polarization that can thus be reoriented or fully reversed with an external electric field. This property allows designing materials with tunable thermal properties a) Electronic mail: rrurali@icmab.es by the continuous control of the distortion of the lattice We study PbTiO 3 , a paradigmatic oxide with a perovskite structure that is ferroelectric below 760 K. We calculate its ground state structure, the harmonic and third-order anharmonic interatomic force constants (IFCs) within second-principles density-functional theory (SPDFT) as implemented in the SCALE-UP code where i and j are the spatial directions x, y, and z. where k B , h, T , Ω and N are, respectively, Boltzmann's constant, Planck's constant, the temperature, the volume of the 5-atom unit cell, and the number of q-points. The sum runs over all phonon modes, the index λ including both q-point and phonon band. f λ is the equilibrium Bose-Einstein distribution function, and ν λ and v i,λ are, respectively, the frequency and group velocity of phonon λ. The mean free displacement F j,λ is initially taken to be equal to τ λ v j,λ , where τ λ is the lifetime of mode λ within the relaxation time approximation (RTA). Starting from this guess, the solution is then obtained iteratively and F j,λ takes the general form τ λ (v j,λ + ∆ j,λ ), where the correction ∆ λ captures the changes in the heat current associated to the deviations in the phonon populations computed at the RTA level where κ ⊥ and κ are the thermal conductivities that account for heat transport when phonons flow perpendicular or parallel to the polarization, P. The computed values of the thermal conductivity are plotted in Figure We now take a closer look at the way the thermal conductivity, κ, switches between the low and the high state. To this end we vary adiabatically an electric field, E, perpendicular to the polarization to rotate the latter back and forth between two equivalent ground states of the PbTiO 3 lattice. In the limit of very slow variations of E we can assume to be always in equilibrium and thus we can define and calculate the thermal conductivity. Notice that we assume this adiabatic approximation only to study the evolution of the thermal conductivity with the electric field, i.e. with the rotation of the polarization, and discuss its hysteretic response. This is a not a requisite for the operation of the switch and, of course, in an application one would like to commute between conductance states as fast as possible. We discuss this situation below. We take as initial state the one with the polarization parallel to the phonon flow, that is, the low conductivity state. Then we start to apply a perpendicular electric field of increasing strength: P starts precessing and the conductivity is reduced (curve 1a in Figure The relation between E, P, and κ is more clearly illustrated in Figure In the discussion above the electric field was varied with slow ramps, so that the transition could be considered adiabatic, the system was always in equilibrium and κ could be computed all along the hysteresis cycle. Of course one would like to commute between 1 and 0, i.e. high-and low-conductance, as quick as possible and thus would rather use short electric field pulses to rotate the polarization. Although κ cannot be calculated in these (strongly) out-of-equilibrium conditions, we can infer on the overall relaxation time of the low-to-high and high- to-low commutation, which is an important information to estimate maximum operation frequency of the thermal switch. In general, if at a given time all the modes propagate along, say, x under a certain lattice potential, and then something happens (change of potential, removal of temperature gradient), such a propagation will continue for a time that will depend on the phonon lifetimes. More precisely, we introduce an effective relaxation time as where the relaxation time of each mode τ λ is weighted with its contribution to the thermal conductivity, κ ⊥ λ /κ ⊥ or κ λ /κ , depending on the transport direction. Therefore we consider only those phonons that carry a significant fraction of the heat and neglect the relaxation times of those that do not contribution to the thermal conductivity In this way we estimate an upper bound of the time needed for the conductance to change from low to high and vice versa when the polarization is rotated, giving more weight to the modes that carry more heat. In Figure In conclusion, we present a proof-of-concept of a thermal switch that takes advantage of the anisotropy of the thermal conductivity in PbTiO 3 and, thus, of the availability of built-in low and high conductivity states. At variance with common anisotropic materials, the electrically-triggered rotation of the ferroelectric polarization can be used to switch between the two conductivity states. We also present a detailed study of the hysteresis cycle in the response of the thermal conductivity, showing that its value depends on how the electric field changed in the past. Finally, from the computed phonon relaxation times and contributions to the ther-mal conductivity, we argue that the response of such a ferroelectric thermal switch will be quite fast and only limited by speed of the ferroelectric switch itself; hence, our proposed device should be able to operate in the high-frequency regime. The proposed scheme can be extended to any material that (i) has a high anisotropy of the thermal conductivity and (ii) whose anisotropy is directly related with a structural distortion that can be manipulated with an electric field.