Computational formulations for large strain, polyconvex, nearly incompressible elasticity have been extensively studied, but research on enhancing solution schemes that offer better tradeoffs between accuracy, robustness, and computational efficiency remains to be highly relevant. In this paper, we present two methods to overcome locking phenomena, one based on a displacement-pressure formulation using a stable finite element pairing with bubble functions, and another one using a simple pressureprojection stabilized P 1 -P 1 finite element pair. A key advantage is the versatility of the proposed methods: with minor adjustments they are applicable to all kinds of finite elements and generalize easily to transient dynamics. The proposed methods are compared to and verified with standard benchmarks previously reported in the literature. Benchmark results demonstrate that both approaches provide a robust and computationally efficient way of simulating nearly and fully incompressible materials. Locking phenomena, caused by ill-conditioned global stiffness matrices in finite element analyses, are an often observed and extensively studied issue when modeling nearly incompressible, hyperelastic materials From mathematical theory it is well known that approximation spaces for the primal variable u and p have to be well chosen to fulfill the Ladyzhenskaya-Babuŝka-Brezzi (LBB) or inf-sup condition In this study we introduce a novel variant of the MINI element for accurately solving nearly and fully incompressible elasticity problems. The MINI element was originally established for computational fluid dynamics problems Robustness and performance of both the MINI element and the pressure-projection approach are verified and compared to standard benchmarks reported previously in literature. A key advantage of the proposed methods is their high versatility: first, they are readily applicable to nearly and fully incompressible solid mechanics; second, with little adjustments the stabilization techniques can be applied to all kinds of finite elements, in this study we investigate the performance for hexahedral and tetrahedral meshes; and third, the methods generalize easily to transient dynamics. Real world applications often require highly-resolved meshes and thus efficient and massively parallel solution algorithms for the linearized system of equations become an important factor to deal with the resulting computational load. We solve the arising saddle-point systems by using a GMRES method with a block preconditioner based on an algebraic multigrid (AMG) approach. Extending our previous implementations The paper is outlined as follows: Section 2 summarizes in brief the background on the methods. In Section 3, we introduce the finite element discretization and discuss stability. Subsequently, Section 4 documents benchmark problems where our proposed elements are applied and compared to results published in the literature. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper with a discussion of the results and a brief summary. Let Ω 0 ⊂ R 3 denote the reference configuration and let Ω t ⊂ R 3 denote the current configuration of the domain of interest. Assume that the boundary of Here, Γ D,0 describes the Dirichlet part of the boundary and Γ N,0 describes the Neumann part of the boundary, respectively. Further, let n 0 be the unit outward normal on ∂Ω 0 . The nonlinear mapping φ : X ∈ Ω 0 → x ∈ Ω t , defined by φ := X + u(X, t), with displacement u, maps points in the reference configuration to points in the current configuration. Following standard notation we introduce the deformation gradient F and the Jacobian J as and the left Cauchy-Green tensor as C := F F . Here, Grad(•) denotes the gradient with respect to the reference coordinates X ∈ Ω 0 . The displacement field u is sought as infimizer of the functional over all admissible fields u with u = g D on Γ D,0 , where, Ψ denotes the strain energy function; ρ 0 denotes the material density in reference configuration; f denotes a volumetric body force; g D denotes a given boundary displacement; and h denotes a given surface traction. For ease of presentation it is assumed that ρ 0 is constant and f , g D , and h do not depend on u. Existence of infimizers is, under suitable assumptions, guaranteed by the pioneering works of Ball, see In this study we consider nearly incompressible materials, meaning that J ≈ 1. A possibility to model this behavior was originally proposed by Flory Here, F vol describes the volumetric change while F describes the isochoric change. By setting F vol := J where κ is the bulk modulus. The function U (J) acts as a penalization of incompressibility and we require that it is strictly convex and twice continuously differentiable. Additionally, a constitutive model for U (J) should fulfill that (i) it vanishes in the reference configuration and that (ii) an infinite amount of energy is required to shrink the body to a point or to expand it indefinitely, i.e., For the remainder of this work we will focus on functions U (J) that can be written as In the literature many different choices for the function Θ(J) are proposed, see, e.g., As we also want to study the case of full incompressibility, meaning κ → ∞, we need a reformulation of the system. In this work we will use a perturbed Lagrangemultiplier functional, see We will now seek infimizers (u, p) ∈ V gD × Q of the modified functional To guarantee that the discretization of ( with H 1 (Ω 0 ) being the standard Sobolev space consisting of all square integrable functions with square integrable gradient, and Q = L 2 (Ω 0 ). Existence of infimizers in V gD cannot be guaranteed in general. However, assuming suitable growth conditions on the strain energy function Ψ , and assuming that the initial data keeps the material in the hyperelastic range, one can conclude that the space V for the infimizer u contains V gD as a subset, see To solve for the infimizers of (4) we require to compute the variations of (4) with respect to ∆u and ∆p with abbreviations as, e.g., in Next, with notations c(p, ∆q) R upper (u, p; ∆v) := a isc (u; ∆v) + a vol (u, p; ∆v) l body (∆v)l surface (∆v), (16) R lower (u, p; ∆q) := b vol (u; ∆q)c(p, ∆q), for all (∆v, ∆q) ∈ V 0 × Q. To solve the nonlinear variational equations ( which is looped until convergence. In our case, we have and F = (R upper , R lower ) . We obtain the following linear saddle-point problem for each where with abbreviations where C isc is given in Since (20)-( (i) The inf-sup condition: there exists c 1 > 0 such that (ii) The coercivity on the kernel condition: there exists c 2 > 0 such that for all v ∈ ker B, where (iii) Positivity of c: it holds c(q, q) ≥ 0 for all q ∈ Q. Upon observing that F -: Grad v = div v, see Assuming that Θ (J) ≥ 1, we can conclude the inf-sup condition from standard arguments, see The positivity of the bilinear form c is always fulfilled. However, it is not possible to show the coercivity condition Let T h be a finite element partitioning of Ω into subdomains, in our case either tetrahedral or convex hexahedral elements. The partitioning is assumed to fulfill standard regularity conditions, see the spaces needed for further analysis in the following sections. 3.1 Nearly incompressible linear elasticity for all (v, q) ∈ V 0 × Q. Here, μ > 0 and λ denote the Lamé parameters, and ε(v) := sym(grad v). The regularity of ( for all (v h , q h ) ∈ V h,0 ×Q h . Coercivity on the kernel condition ( The discrete inf-sup condition puts constraints on the choice of the spaces V h,0 and Q h . A finite element pairing fulfilling ( In this paper, we will focus on two different finite element pairings, the MINI element and a stabilized equal order element. The stabilized equal order pairing has been used in this context for pure tetrahedral meshes, see In the following, we present a stabilized lowest equal order finite element pairing, adapted to nonlinear elasticity from the pairing originally introduced by Dohrmann and Bochev We choose V and Ŷ in ( for all (v h , q h ) ∈ V h,0 × Q h , where and μ * > 0 a suitable parameter. We note that the integral in Theorem 1 There exists a unique bounded solution to the discrete problem 3 and p ∈ L 2 (Ω)∩H 1 (Ω) solve the problem (31)- Proof Due to the similarity of the linear elasticity and the Stokes problem the proof follows from [ where (ξ 0 , ξ 1 , ξ 2 ) ∈ K, see also In the literature mostly two dimensional quadrilateral tessellations, see for example To motivate our novel ansatz for hexahedral bubble functions, we will first give an overview of Stenbergs main results. A macro-element M is a connected set of elements in T h . Moreover, two macro-elements M 1 and M 2 are said to be equivalent if and only if they can be mapped continuously onto each other. Additionally, for a macro element M we define the spaces Denote by Γ h the set of all edges in T h interior to Ω. The macro-element partition M h of Ω then consists of a (not necessarily disjoint) partitioning into macroelements The macro element technique is then described by the following theorem, see Theorem 3 Suppose that there is a fixed set of equivalence classes E j , j = 1, . . . , q, of macro-elements, a positive integer L, and a macro-element partition M h such that (M1) for each M i ∈ E j , j = 1, . . . , q, the space N M is onedimensional consisting of functions that are constant on M ; (M2) each M ∈ M h belongs to one of the classes E i , i = 1, 2, . . . , q; (M3) each K ∈ T h is contained in at least one and not more than L macro-elements of M h ; (M4) each E ∈ Γ h is contained in the interior of at least one and not more than L macro-elements of M h . Then the discrete inf-sup-condition (35) holds. Conditions (M2)-(M4) are valid for a quasi-uniform tessellation of Ω into hexahedral elements and, thus, it remains to show (M1). To this end, we consider a macroelement M i ∈ M h consisting of eight hexahedrons that share a common vertex x i ∈ Ω, see Figure 3 and x 0 is a given node of M i . The case of M i not being the image of an affine mapping of K can be handled analogously, however, there are constraints on the invertibility of F Mi , see where the indices α, β are chosen such that ψα and ψβ are two ansatz functions belonging to two diagonally opposite nodes. Having this, we will form a basis for V 0,Mi by gluing together the images of the basis functions of each sub-hexahedron. So we can write a basis for V 0,Mi as Here, ψ xi corresponds to a piecewise trilinear ansatz function that has unit value in x i and zero in all other nodes of M i . Thus, we can calculate that dim(P Mi ) = 27 and dim(V 0,Mi ) = 51. For ease of presentation we will rename the elements of (43) as {φ i } 17 i=1 . Now, for q h ∈ P Mi and v h ∈ V 0,Mi we can write Next, we use the chain rule to get and a change of variables to obtain This means we can find a matrix where q and v encode the nodal values of q h and v h . The following ordering will be employed for To proof (M1) we need to show that the rank of the matrix D is 26. Due to the invertibility of J i the rank of the matrix D will remain unchanged by replacing M i by K. Thus, it suffices to compute the rank of the matrix D whose j th row is defined by By this formula the matrix D can be explicitly calculated, e.g., by using software packages like Mathematica TM and further analyzed. We can conclude that the rank of D is 26 and thus (M1) holds and we can apply Theorem 3. A Mathematica TM notebook containing computations discussed in this section is available upon request. Remark 1 Contrary to the two-dimensional case studied in Remark 2 Although not mentioned explicity, the stability of the MINI element holds also for mixed discretizations. Fig. Fig. One of the main differences between the linear and nonlinear case stems from the definition of the pressure p as remarked in with μ > 0 a material parameter. Then, S tot and C tot , evaluated at (u k , p k ) = (0, 0), are given by independent of the choice of Θ(J). Assuming that Ω := Ω 0 ≈ Ω t we obtain from Eqs. ( where ε d (u) := ε(u) -1 3 div(u)I. While the pressure in formulation ( Here, Ω t,h is the approximation of the real current configuration Ω t . Our conjecture is that stability of the chosen elements is given provided sufficient fine discretizations and volumetric functions Θ(J) fulfilling Θ (J) ≥ 1. However, we can not offer a rigorous proof of this, and rely on our numerical results which showed no sign of numerical instabilities. Concerning well-posedness of ( Here, the stabilization parameter μ * > 0 is supposed to be large enough and will be specifically defined for each nonlinear material considered. Note, that by modifying the definition of the lower residual, we introduced a mesh dependent perturbation of the original residual. An estimate of the consistency error caused by this is not readily available and will be the topic of future research. However, results and comparisons to benchmarks in Section 4 suggest that this error is negligible for the considered problems as long as μ * is well-chosen. If not specified otherwise we chose μ * = μ for neo-Hookean materials and μ * = c 1 for Mooney-Rivlin materials in the results section. For the pressure-projection stabilized equal order pair we can not transfer the results from the linear elastic case to the non-linear case, as the proof of well-posedness relies on the coercivity of a k (u, v) which can not be concluded for this formulation. However, no convergence issues occured in the numerical examples given in Section 4. The considerable advantage of the MINI element is that there are no modifications needed and that no additional stabilization parameters are introduced into the system. The equations presented in Section 2 are not yet suitable for transient simulations. To include this feature we modify the nonlinear variational problem R trans upper (u, p; ∆v) R trans lower (u, p; ∆q) := R lower (u, p; ∆q). For time discretization we considered a generalized-α method, see While benchmark cases presented in this section are fairly simple, mechanical applications often require highly resolved meshes. Thus, efficient and massively parallel solution algorithms for the linearized system of equations become an important factor to deal with the resulting computational load. After discretization, at each Newton-Raphson step a block system of the form has to be solved. In that regard, we used a generalized minimal residual method (GMRES) and efficient preconditioning based on the PCFIELDSPLIT 1 package from the library PETSc To verify our implementation we consider a very simple uniaxial tension test, see also see Figure with μ = 7.14 MPa and impose full incompressiblity, i.e., 1/κ = 0. For this special case, an analytic solution can be computed by u = (tx, ∆R(t)y, ∆R(t)z), 1 https://www.mcs.anl.gov/petsc/petsccurrent/docs/manualpages/PC/PCFIELDSPLIT.html where t ∈ [0, 1] corresponds to the load increment. Two meshes consisting of 5420 points and 4617 hexahedral or 27 702 tetrahedral elements were used. We performed 20 incremental load steps with respect to ∆L. In Figure The computational domain, studied by multiple authors, see, e.g., The same neo-Hookean material model as in with material parameters λ = 400 889.806 MPa, μ = 80.194 MPa. To test mesh convergence the simulations were computed on a series of uniformly refined tetrahedral and hexahedral meshes, see Table In Figure In this section, we analyze the same Cook-type cantilever beam problem presented in the same isotropic strain energy function was chosen with material properties c 1 = 21 kPa, c 2 = 42 kPa, and γ = 12c 1 + 24c 2 to satisfy the condition of a stress-free reference geometry. We chose a fully incompressible material, hence, with 1/κ = 0. First, mesh convergence with respect to resulting displacements is analyzed for the tetrahedral and hexahedral meshes with discretization details given in Table Figure In the third row of Figure Finally, we show the applicability of our stabilization techniques for the transient problem of a twisting column with parameters μ = 5704.7 kPa and κ = 283 333 kPa for the nearly incompressible and 1/κ = 0 for the truly incompressible case. For the results presented, we considered hexahedral and tetrahedral meshes with five levels of refinement, respectively; for discretization details of the column meshes see Table In Figure The computational costs for this nonlinear elasticity problem were significant due to the required solution of a saddle-point problem in each Newton step and a large number of time steps. However, this challenge can be addressed by using a massively parallel iterative solving method and exploiting potential of modern HPC hardware. The most expensive simulations were the fully incompressible cases for the finest grids with a total of 840 708 degrees of freedom and 400 time steps. These computations were executed at the national HPC computing facility ARCHER in the United Kingdom using 96 cores. Computational times were as follows: 239 min for tetrahedral meshes and projection-based stabilization; 283 min for tetrahedral meshes and MINI elements; 449 min for hexahedral meshes and projectionbased stabilization; and 752.5 min for hexahedral meshes and MINI elements. Simulation times for nearly incompressible problems were lower, ranging from 177 to 492 min. This is due to the additional matrix on the lower-right side of the block stiffness matrix which led to a smaller number of linear iterations. Simulations with hexahedral meshes were, in general, computationally more expensive compared to simulations with tetrahedral grids; the reason beeing mainly a higher number of linear iterations. Computational burden for MINI elements was larger due to higher matrix assembly times. However, this assembly time is highly scalable as there is almost no communication cost involved in this process. In this study we described methodology for modeling nearly and fully incompressible solid mechanics for a large variety of different scenarios. A stable MINI element was presented which can serve as an excellent choice for applied problems where the use of higher order element types is not desired, e.g., due to fitting accuracy of the problem domain. We also proposed an easily implementable and computationally cheap technique based on a local pressure projection. Both approaches can be applied to stationary as well as transient problems without modifications and perform excellent with both hexahedral and tetrahedral grids. Both approaches allow a straightforward inclusion in combination with existing finite element codes since all required implementations are purely on the element level and are well-suited for simple single-core simulations as well as HPC com-puting. Numerical results demonstrate the robustness of the formulations, exhibiting a great accuracy for selected benchmark problems from the literature. While the proposed projection method works well for relatively stiff materials as considered in this paper, the setting of the parameter μ * has to be adjusted for soft materials such as biological tissues. A further limitation is that both formulations render the need of solving a block system, which is computationally more demanding and suitable preconditioning is not trivial. However, the MINI element approach can be used without further tweaking of artificial stabilization coefficients and preliminary results suggested robustness, even for very soft materials. Consistent linearization as presented ensures that quadratic convergence of the Newton-Raphson algorithm was achieved for all the problems considered. Note that all computations for forming the tangent ma-trices and also the right hand side residual vectors are kept local to each element. This benefits scaling properties of parallel codes and also enables seamless implementation in standard finite element software. The excellent performance of the methods along with their high versatility ensure that this framework serves as a solid platform for simulating nearly and fully incompressible phenomena in stationary and transient solid mechanics. In future studies, we plan to extend the formulation to anisotropic materials with stiff fibers as they appear for example in the simulation of cardiac tissue and arterial walls. The bubble part of the stiffness matrix, K BB is local to the element and can be directly inverted. This gives the condensed system where the effective matrices and vectors are given as The effective matrices and vectors can then be assembled in a standard way into the global system. The bubble update contributions can be calculated once ∆u N and ∆p N are know as We use the following results from tensor calculus, for more details we refer to, e.g., For symmetric A it holds The isochoric part of the second Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor as well as the isochoric part of the fourth order elasticity tensor are given as S := 2 ∂Ψ (C) ∂C , = J -4 3 PCP + J - https://www.mcs.anl.gov/petsc/petsccurrent/docs/manualpages/Mat/MatGetInfo.html