ZrSiS, an intriguing candidate of topological nodal line semimetals, was discovered to have exotic surface floating two-dimensional (2D) electrons [Phys. Rev. X 7, 041073 (2017)], which are likely to interact with surface phonons. Here, we reveal a prominent Kohn anomaly in a surface phonon branch by mapping out the surface phonon dispersions of ZrSiS using high-resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy. Theoretical analysis via an electron-phonon coupling (EPC) model attributes the strong renormalization of the surface phonon branch to the interactions with the surface floating 2D electrons. With the random phase approximation, we calculate the phonon self-energy and evaluate the mode-specific EPC constant by fitting the experimental data. The EPC picture provided here may be important for potential applications of topological nodal line semimetals. Lattice and charge are definitely the two most essential degrees of freedom in condensed matter. The interplay between them, i.e., the electron-phonon coupling (EPC), as a prototypical many-body problem, has received intensive theoretical and experimental investigations EPC also manifests itself from the perspective of phonons, through linewidth broadening Recently a new kind of surface states due to the reduction of bulk nonsymmorphic symmetry was discovered in ZrSiS Here, employing the technique of high-resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy (HREELS), we systematically mapped out the surface phonon dispersions of ZrSiS. The results reveal a prominent signature of the surface EPC, manifesting as a strong Kohn anomaly of an optical surface phonon branch with a V-shaped minimum at approximately 2k F . Theoretical analysis attributes this strong renormalization of the surface phonon to the interactions with the surface floating 2D electrons of ZrSiS. Then an average branch-specific EPC constant of 0.15 is obtained from the fitting to the experimental dispersion data. The ZrSiS crystals investigated were grown from the chemical vapor transport method with iodine as the agent. High-purity elemental zirconium (99.99%), silicon (99.999%) and sulfur (99.99%) were firstly mixed together and sintered at 1000 • C for 5 days to attain polycrystalline powders. Then the polycrystalline powders and iodine were sealed in silica tubes under vacuum in a mass ratio of 1:0.07. The silica tubes were put in a gradient tube furnace with the source powders at 1050 • C and the cold end at around 950 • C for 7 days, to acquire rectangular plane-like ZrSiS crystals at the cold end. Single crystalline ZrSiS was cleaved in situ in ultrahigh vacuum (better than 5 × 10 -10 Torr) with the surface quality and the crystallographic orientation examined by low energy electron diffraction (LEED). The HREELS measurements were performed in a state-of-the-art spectrometer with the capability of 2D energy-momentum mapping First-principle lattice dynamical calculations were performed to obtain the phonon band structures and the corresponding surface local density of states (LDOS). Here, force constants were calculated by a (3 × 3 × 3) supercell using Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) ZrSiS has a tetragonal structure with space group P 4/nmm (No.129) and point group D Figure To analyze the measured phonon dispersions of ZrSiS in detail, we carried out first-principle bulk and surface lattice dynamical calculations. Figure The most noticeable feature from the comparison is the optical mode encircled by the white rectangle (OP1 mode) in Fig. Similar softening of surface optical phonon modes, interpreted as strong Kohn anomalies, have been observed in quite a few topological materials The impact of EPC on phonons can be taken into account using the Dyson equation that describes the relation between perturbed and bare phonons, Here, D (0) s (q, iω n ) and D s (q, iω n ) are the bare phonon and perturbed phonon Matsubara Green functions, respectively, and ω n is the Matsubara frequency for phonons. Under random phase approximation (RPA) the phonon self-energy Π(q, ω n ) can be substituted by where |g q,s | is the electron-phonon interaction matrix, P(q, iω n ) is the electron polarization function and ε(q, iω n ) = 1 -v c (q)P(q, iω n ) is the RPA dielectric function. For surface electrons, v c (q) is chosen to be the 2D Fourier transformation of the Coulomb potential, v c (q) = 2πe 2 κ|q| . The electron polarization function can be calculated from the bare electron Matsubara function G (0) (k, ik n ) by (3) which describes an electron of momentum k and energy k n scattered to a state of momentum k + q and energy k n + ω n by a phonon of wave vector q and energy ω n . The following analysis focuses on the phonon dispersion along Γ X, which involves two orthogonal axes of the Fermi ellipse at two inequivalent X [ Fig. Cst. 1 Cst. 2 Cst. 3 where Ω = ω E F and Q = q k F are the normalized frequency and normalized wave vector of phonons. These constraints require the phonons to fall into the regions (3), (2) and (1) in Fig. The renormalized phonon dispersion is given by the real part of the singularity of the Dyson equation in Eqn. (1), q,s ) |g q,s | 2 Re P(q, ω q,s ) ε(q, ω q,s ) , (4) where ω q,s and ω (0) q,s correspond to the real and bare frequency for a specific phonon branch s at wave vector q with or without EPC, respectively. For the surface phonons, we take the assumption |g q,s | = From the perspective of phonons, one may assess the branch-specific coupling constant λ s (q) as a function of momentum q for specific phonon branch s by where N (E F ) is the electron density of states at the Fermi energy. Shown in Fig. The averaged EPC constant over q for the branch OP1 is evaluated to be λ ≈ 0.15. This implies the renormalized mass of involved electrons is m * = (1 + λ)m e ≈ 1.15m e , where m e is the bare electron mass. The quantum oscillation experiment has confirmed an unconventional mass enhancement in ZrSiS in the range of 1 ∼ 1.5 m e of electrons within the bulk dog-bone-like Fermi pockets under magnetic field In conclusion, we measured the surface phonon dispersions of ZrSiS, a candidate of topological nodal line semimetal, along the high symmetry directions in the SBZ. Comparing with DFT calculations, we verified an obvious softening of a surface optical mode due to EPC. Detailed theoretical analyses, via an EPC model within RPA, revealed that the strong renormalization of the surface phonon originates from the interactions with the surface floating 2D electrons of ZrSiS. Under this model, we calculated the polarization function, evaluated the phonon self-energy, and obtained the mode-specific and q-dependent EPC constant. The average EPC constant for the softened surface optical phonon branch is λ ≈ 0.15, indicating the effective mass of renormalized electrons due to surface EPC is m * ≈ 1.15 m e . Similar renormalizations of phonons and EPC behaviors are also expected to be observed in isologues like ZrSiSe, Zr-SiTe and HfSiSe, for the similarity of structure and consequent surface floating states. The findings and the detailed studies of EPC in this work will be important for potential applications of these semimetal materials. In this work the interaction between electrons and phonons are analyzed by a standard Green function technology. We now focus on the estimation of Eqn. 3. Using the Matsubara frequency summation relation one can rewrite the polarization function as where n F (ξ k ) is the Fermi distribution of electrons. This formula can be expressed into two parts Make the substitutions k → -k -q, and k + q → -k in the second term and notice that the energy ξ k is an even function of k, thus we have ξ k → ξ k+q , ξ k+q → ξ k , n F (ξ k ) → n F (ξ k+q ), and n F (ξ k+q ) → n F (ξ k ). Then the formula turns into Here we choose the Fermi distribution at zero temperature, n F (ξ k ) = θ (E F -ξ k ). Using the relation 1-θ (E F -ξ k+q ) = θ(ξ k+q -E F ), and the analytical continuation iω n → ω + iδ, the polarization function turns into With the relation lim [here P () means Cauchy Principle Value], we arrive at the imaginary part of the polarization function Now, the most important is to obtain the explicit expression of ξ k in order to get the value of the integral in Eqn. (A.4). For simplicity, we will take the case with phonon momentum along Γ X as an example. Fermi surface from the surface floating 2D states can be well approximated by ellipses with the expression , where k a = 0.15 Å-1 and k b = 0.11 Å-1 are half of the major and half of minor axes of the ellipse, corresponding to the Fermi wave number along Γ X and X M, respectively. And θ is the angle between the electron momentum and Γ X. We choose the vertex of the cone to be energy 0, and thus E F = 350 meV. For a given k along the direction with angle θ [Fig. After interacting with a phonon mode with momentum q along Γ X, the electrons transfer from k (initial states) into k +q (final states) with angle θ (Fig. In orthogonal coordinates, they are expressed as Let's return to Eqn. (A.4). For ξ k has a linear dispersion, the step functions θ(E F -ξ k ) and θ(ξ k+q -E F ) require |k| < k F and |k + q| > k F . There are two situations: Schematics of the scattering momentum. A simple illustration of the relation between momentums of electrons before (k) and after (k+q) interacting with phonons q. • |q| > 2k F , all electrons inside the Fermi ellipse can be the initial states satisfying the requirements [Fig. where the zone R is the allowed scattering zone in the momentum space above k x axis [light blue part above k x in Fig. where R is the mapping area of R. And the hyperbolic curve function (A.8) turns to The Fermi surface turns to a circle Now, we are going to derive the constraint condition for Ω and Q. The hyperbola described by Eqn. (A.11) intersects with the horizontal axis at m the horizontal values of the intersection points). If the frequency of phonons (ω or Ω) is too low or too high, the hyperbola will not intersect with the Fermi circle or just does not exist. To make sure the hyperbola exists, its real axis length should be shorter than the focus length This is the first constraint condition for Ω and Q. To make sure the hyperbola intersects with the Fermi circle, we have m 0 > -1, i.e. Because the hyperbola is right-oriented, we must have m 1 > m 0 or m 2 > m 0 [Fig. For q < 2k a (Q < 2), the hyperbola may enter the banned zone [Fig. Constraint conditions (Cst.1), (Cst.2) and (Cst.3) help to define the allowed zone for phonon energy and momentum transfer. The permitted value area of Ω and Q is illustrated in Fig. After some algebra with n integrated out in (A.10), we get With substitution t = m + Q/2, we arrive at Im [P (q, ω)] = F (q, ω, t ul ) -F (q, ω, t ll ) (A. 14) where and t ul and t ll are the respective upper and lower integral limits. We notice that in different regions of Fig. 2Q . The lower limit for region (2) and (3) is t 0 = m 0 + Q 2 = Ω 2 , while for region (1) is t 2 = m 2 + Q 2 = 2Ω-Ω 2 2Q . Considering the constraint conditions, the integral in the three regions can be expressed as [F (q, ω, t 1 ) -F (q, ω, t 2 )] I 2 (q, ω) =θ (Q -Ω) θ (2 -Q) θ [(Ω + Q) -2] • [F (q, ω, t 1 ) -F (q, ω, t 0 )] [F (q, ω, t 1 ) -F (q, ω, t 0 )] (A. 16) respectively. And the total imaginary part of P (q, ω) is Im [P (q, ω)] = I 1 (q, ω) + I 2 (q, ω) + I 3 (q, ω). The experimentally corresponding polarization function is Im [P (q, ω q,s )] = I 1 (q, ω q,s ) + I 2 (q, ω q,s ) + I 3 (q, ω q,s ), where ω q,s is the experimental phonon energy. With the help of Kramers-Kronig transformation, the real part of the polarization function at ω q,s can be calculated Re [P (q, ω q,s )] = 2 π ∞ 0 ωIm[P(q, ω)] ω 2 -ω q,s 2 dω (A.17) Then we can calculate both the imaginary and real parts of the RPA dielectric function by ε(q, iω n ) = 1 -2πe 2 κ|q| P(q, iω n ). In the small phonon momentum range (q < 2k F ), we can assume the following expression of electron-phonon interaction matrix |g q,s | for an optical phonon mode 40 where M is the unit cell mass and N is the number of unit cells in a sample, γ || is the interaction constant within ab plane and γ ⊥ is the constant out of plane. Thus Eqn. (4) turns to ( ω q,s ) 2 = ω (0) Re P (q, ω q,s ) ε (q, ω q,s ) (A.18) where we leave The fitted renormalized dispersion is illustrated as yellow line in Fig. ) 2 Re[ P(q, ω q,s ) ε(q, ω q,s ) ] Im[Π (q, ω q,s )] = N 2M ω ) 2 Im[ P(q, ω q,s ) ε(q, ω q,s ) ] Finally, the EPC constant can be obtained from Eqn. ( * xtzhu@iphy.ac.cn † jdguo@iphy.ac.cn 1 G. Grimvall, The Electron-Phonon Interaction in Metals, Vol. 8 (North-Holland Amsterdam, 1981). 2 E. G. Maksimov, D. Y. Savrasov, and S. Y. Savrasov, The Electron-phonon Interaction and the Physical Properties of Metals, Phys. Usp. 40, 337 (1997). 3 E. Pavarini, E. Koch, R. Scalettar, and R. Martin, eds., The Physics of Correlated Insulators, Metals, and Superconductors, Schriften des Forschungszentrums Jlich Reihe Modeling and Simulation, Vol. 7 (Forschungszentrum Jlich GmbH Zentralbibliothek, Verlag, Jlich, 2017) p. 450.