Integrating patterned, low-loss magnetic materials into microwave devices and circuits presents many challenges due to the specific conditions that are required to grow ferrite materials, driving the need for flip-chip and other indirect fabrication techniques. The low-loss (α = (3.98 ± 0.22) × 10 -5 ), room-temperature ferrimagnetic coordination compound vanadium tetracyanoethylene (V [TCNE] x ) is a promising new material for these applications that is potentially compatible with semiconductor processing. Here we present the deposition, patterning, and characterization of V [TCNE] x thin films with lateral dimensions ranging from 1 micron to several millimeters. We employ electron-beam lithography and liftoff using an aluminum encapsulated poly(methyl methacrylate), poly(methyl methacrylate-methacrylic acid) copolymer bilayer (PMMA/P(MMA-MAA)) on sapphire and silicon. This process can be trivially extended to other common semiconductor substrates. Films patterned via this method maintain low-loss characteristics down to 25 microns with only a factor of 2 increase down to 5 microns. A rich structure of thickness and radially confined spin-wave modes reveals the quality of the patterned films. Further fitting, simulation, and analytic analysis provides an exchange stiffness, A ex = (2.2 ± 0.5) × 10 -10 erg/cm, as well as insights into the mode character and surface spin pinning. Below a micron, the deposition is non-conformal, which leads to interesting and potentially useful changes in morphology. This work establishes the versatility of V [TCNE] x for applications requiring highly coherent magnetic excitations ranging from microwave communication to quantum information. Interest in low-loss magnetic thin films has been growing due to potential applications in magnonics and quantum information as well as the potential for compact, highefficiency magnetoelectric devices. Here we present a method for depositing and patterning V [TCNE] x using standard electron-beam lithography techniques with additional steps to preserve its high T c and lowloss characteristics. The primary hurdles to micron-scale pattering of V [TCNE] x are its sensitivity to oxygen and solvents traditionally used in fabrication. Our past work has addressed air-sensitivity via encapsulation in a commercial organic lightemitting diode (OLED) epoxy, increasing its lifetime in air from hours to months, The CVD thin-film growth process typically results in a smooth blue-black V [TCNE] x film uniformly distributed across the substrate surface. When a resist is applied to the substrate before growth, however, V [TCNE] x deposition results in non-uniform coverage and poor V [TCNE] x quality. This is attributed to chemical reactions between the released solvents and the precursors (tetracyanoethylene and vanadium hexacarbonyl). Solvents present in common resists including LOR, MICROPOSIT S1800 series, and poly(methyl methacrylate) result in macroscopically inconsistent deposition of V [TCNE] x across the resist's surface as well as inside patterned areas. In order to address this solvent sensitivity, a 3 nm layer of aluminum is thermally deposited after development to encapsulate the resist layer. The aluminum is then oxidized with a ten-minute ultraviolet ozone clean in a UVOCS T10x10/OES prior to V [TCNE] x deposition. In prior V [TCNE] x precipitation synthesis studies, away from the planned shape shown by each AlO x peak. Figures To explore the utility of this patterning technique for magnonic and magnetoelectric devices, the magnetization dynamics of these microstructures are studied using FMR. Measurements are performed at room temperature in a Bruker EPR spectrometer with the microwave frequency held near 9.83 GHz while the applied magnetic field is swept across the V[TCNE] x resonance. Scans are then repeated for multiple polar angles, θ , from out-of-plane (θ = 0 • , OOP) to inplane (θ = 90 • , IP) and for multiple azimuthal angles, φ, from parallel to the x-axis (φ = 0 • ) to perpendicular to the x-axis (φ = 90 • ). Figure The formalism developed by Smit, Beljers, and Suhl 34-36 is used to model this anisotropy. A Cartesian coordinate system is defined with x parallel to the length, y parallel to the width, and z parallel to the thickness of the bars as shown in Fig. where H i are the components of the applied magnetic field, M i are the components of the magnetization, and N i j are components of the demagnetizing tensor, which leads to shape anisotropy, with i, j, k defined with respect to pattern axes. Solving for harmonic solutions with respect to time and minimizing F with respect to θ and φ yields where N x , N y , N z are the diagonal components of the demagnetizing tensor, θ is the polar angle, and φ is the azimuthal angle that the sample magnetization makes with the pattern axes, Fig. The other potential source of anisotropy is the crystal field which arises from the local coordination of the exchange interaction. For uniaxial crystal-field anisotropy, this crystal field can be decomposed into components acting along the pattern axes with the same angular dependence as the demagnetizing anisotropy. As a result, the N i that are extracted from the fit to Eq. 2 are a combination of demagnetizing-field and crystalfield components with the form where A i is the observed anisotropy tensor component, N i,demag is the geometric demagnetizing tensor component, and H i,crystal is the additional crystal field along that axis. Three anisotropy tensors are used to determine the strength of the crystal field in the bars and the disks. The first, A i, f it , is generated from simultaneous fits to the three red anisotropy curves in Fig. These fits yield 4πM s = 76.57 ± 1.67 G and | γ 2π | = 2.742 ± 0.040 MHz/Oe, which agree with literature values, x,demag = 0, N bar y,demag = 0.21, and N bar z,demag = 0.79. x,demag = N disk y,demag = 0.028 and N disk z,demag = 0.944 based on SEM measurements and demagnetizing expressions from the literature. is therefore a better metric to use to compare samples with different saturation magnetizations. The difference between the exchange length from this study of λ ex = 9.7 nm and the previously reported value of 21 nm 20 could be due to differences in grain structure between the patterned and unpatterned films Numeric modeling is performed using time-domain micromagnetic simulations with the open-source GPU-based software MuMax3 while using the material parameters determined from the fits to the experimental data. In addition to analyzing anisotropy and mode structure, FMR can be used to determine the total magnetic loss, or damping of these magnon modes. This damping potentially contains both homogeneous and inhomogeneous sources as parameterized via the Gilbert damping factor, α. in combination with phenomenological inhomogeneous broadening. when one uses θ = 0 for the OOP geometry. Standard electron-beam lithography of PMMA/P(MMA-MAA) bilayers is used in conjunction with pre-growth aluminum encapsulation and post-growth dichloromethane liftoff to pattern V[TCNE] x thin films with no degradation of the microwave magnetic properties. The sidewalls of structures patterned in this way are sloped, allowing for the investigation and quantitative modeling of spinwave confinement in magnetic structures with soft boundary conditions. Patterned V [TCNE] x films with features down to 25 μm exhibit a high Q of over 3,700 and ultra-low damping of (4.60 ± 0.44) × 10 -5 which are competitive with unpatterned YIG and lower than all existing reports of patterned YIG microstructures. See supplementary material for the a detailed description of sample fabrication, measurement techniques, simulations, and analytic calculations. measurements are then performed by sweeping the static field with 200 μW of applied microwave power and a modulation field of 0.1 Oe. The quartz tube has a pointer fixed to it, allowing for alignment within 0.5 degrees of the sample with respect to a custom made goniometer. The larger error of ±2 degrees seen in Fig. Frequency-resolved microwave measurements are done with a broadband ferromagnetic resonance (BFMR) setup with a B4003-8M-50 microstrip test board from Southwest Microwave that is sourced by an Agilent N5222A vector network analyzer (VNA), transduced via a Krytar 203BK Schottky diode, and measured with an Ametek 7265 Dual Phase DSP lock-in amplifier. The microstrip is positioned inside a 10 kOe electromagnet in the out-of-plane (OOP, θ = 0) field geometry. Measurements are performed with an input power of -10 dBm and a modulation field of roughly 0.1 Oe oscillating at 577 Hz. Micromagnetic simulations are done to gain insight into the measured FMR spectra. The micromagnetic simulations are done using MuMax3 2 with the following parameters for the V [TCNE] x : saturation magnetization 4πM s = 76.57 G (6093 A/m), exchange constant A ex = 2.2 × 10 -10 erg/cm (2.2 × 10 -15 J/m), and a damping parameter of α = 0.0001, where α is larger than the smallest measured damping value for V [TCNE] x and was chosen to ensure that the simulations would converge in a reasonable amount of time. Cells of 40 x 40 x 4.6875 nm 3 are used. Selected simulations are repeated with smaller cells with similar results because the 40 nm cell sizes are still small compared to the wavelengths of the spin-wave modes. A ex is determined by fitting the mode spacing of the thickness confined modes from the OOP spectra of the disks blue anisotropy curves in Fig. The simulations are done with the static field, H bias , applied OOP. The field magnitudes are chosen to result in a resonance frequency near 9.83 GHz to be similar to the measurement frequency used in the experiments. The structures are relaxed in the presence of H bias and a small additional field H dynam of roughly 50 Oe, chosen such that the spins tilt by about 1% from the static equilibrium position, is applied in the x-direction. The dynamics are monitored as a function of time after removing H dynam and the simulated spectra are obtained by taking the Fourier transforms of the x-component of the magnetization for each run. Mode profiles are calculated for selected peaks in the spectra by running driven simulations at the selected resonance frequency and extracting the spin distributions as a function of time for a full period after the simulation has reached a steady state. Since the pinning of the structures is unknown and the exact profile is uncertain, a matrix of different combinations of pinning and cross-sectional profile is investigated. Three geometries are considered based on the growth characteristics of the bar in Fig. All fitting is performed in Python with the emcee package solving for H then yields where To account for deviations from high-symmetry directions, θ and φ are parameterized in terms of a new parameter, t. This parameterization allows for fitting through a path along any great circle of the unit sphere by using the expression where v m points to a location on the great circle that intersects v 1 and v 2 . The location is determined by the parameter t which steps from t i = 0 to t f = π η in steps of t step = t f -t i 18 to produce 10 • steps from 0 • to 180 • . This correction is only necessary for the bar sample scanned IP to OOP with the applied field perpendicular to the bar axis (red diamonds in Fig. so each derivative lorentzian in the fit is represented by where a is the height of the derivative of the absorptive component, d is the height of the derivative of the dispersive component, Γ is the full-width at half-maximum of the lorentzian, f is the independent variable, and f 0 is the peak of the lorentzian. Here we find an analytical expression for the spin-wave (or magnetostatic mode) resonant fields for a normally magnetized cylinder with thickness d and radius R. We first solve Maxwell's equations within the magnetostatic regime. Application of the proper boundary conditions at z = ± d 2 , the top and bottom surfaces of our cylinder, yields the following transcendental equations (S.11) . The indices n, m and l represent the radial, angular, and thickness mode numbers, respectively. The resonant fields in Eq. S.11 are derived using the SI electromagnetic equations and B z nml has units of Tesla (T). To obtain the resonant fields H z nml in Oersted (Oe) unit, the values obtained from Eq. S.11 should be multiplied by 1 × 10 4 Oe/T. Eq. S.11 does not account for the demagnetization field. A good match with the experimental data is obtained using the approached described in Kakezei 9 that considers an effective demagnetization per mode N nml . To account for the effect of the demagnetization field, we substitute M s → M s N nml with N nml < 1. Fig. 