Thin molecular films under model conditions are often exploited as benchmarks and case studies to investigate the electronic and structural changes occurring on the surface of metallic electrodes. Here we show that the modification of a metallic surface induced by oxygen adsorption allows the preservation of the geometry of a molecular adlayer, giving access to the determination of molecular orbital symmetries by means of near-edge x-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy, NEXAFS. As a prototypical example, we exploited Nickel Tetraphenyl Porphyrin molecules deposited on a bare and on an oxygen pre-covered Cu(100) surface. We find that adsorbed atomic oxygen quenches the charge transfer at the metal-organic interface but, in contrast to a thin film sample, maintains the ordered adsorption geometry of the organic molecules. In this way, it is possible to disentangle π* and σ* symmetry orbitals, hence estimating the relative oscillator strength of core level transitions directly from the experimental data, as well as to evaluate and localize the degree of charge transfer in a coupled system. In particular, we neatly single out the σ* contribution associated with the N 1s transition to the mixed N 2px,y-Ni 3dx 2 -y 2 orbital, which falls close to the leading π*-symmetry LUMO resonance. Planar heterocyclic compounds play a crucial role in the development of novel organic-based technologies, such as biosensors, OLEDs, and photovoltaic devices Valence band spectroscopy (VB) and near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS), together with other absorption-based spectroscopies, are often used to probe the occupation of the LUMOs, as well as the symmetry of the molecular orbitals (MOs) in organic networks. In order to correctly identify the molecular orbitals involved in the charge transfer process and to evaluate the molecule-substrate and intermolecular interactions Based on these considerations, it becomes evident that it would be extremely convenient to find a reference substrate that preserves, at the same time, the long-range molecular order, the planar orientation and the electronic properties of the free molecule. This reference substrate may be obtained by reducing the molecule-surface interaction. The first step in this direction was to exploit the anisotropic surface corrugation of rutile-TiO2(110) to drive the oriented growth of both polyconjugated aromatics In the present communication, we show that the (√2 x 2√2)R45°-oxygen-reconstructed Cu(100) surface, besides quenching the molecule-surface interaction, allows the preservation of an ordered layer, as confirmed by low energy electron diffraction (LEED) and, therefore, can be employed as a template for reference systems to probe both symmetry and occupation of molecular orbitals. As test molecules, we used a tetrapyrrolic compound, namely Nickel Tetraphenyl Porphyrin (NiTPP), and we compared the results of the NiTPP adsorbed on the bare and on the oxygen-reconstructed copper (100) surface by means of valence band photoemission and NEXAFS. We show that, while NiTPP strongly interacts with the bare copper surface leading to the partial filling of the LUMOs, the charge transfer at the interface can be prevented by pre-adsorption of oxygen. Furthermore, the oxygen-induced decoupling preserves the flat adsorption geometry of the porphyrin macrocycle moiety, allowing us to identify the different LUMOs together with their symmetry, in contrast with the case of porphyrin multilayer, where the linear NEXAFS dichroism vanishes due to random molecular orientation. The valence band spectra were measured at the NanoESCA beamline of Elettra, the Italian synchrotron radiation facility in Trieste, using an electrostatic photoemission electron microscope (PEEM) set-up described in detail in Ref. The clean Cu(100) surface was prepared by a standard procedure: cycles of Ar + ion sputtering at 2.0 keV followed by annealing to 800 K. The oxygen-covered Cu(100) surface showing a (√2 x 2√2)R45° reconstruction, as confirmed by low energy electron diffraction (LEED) patterns, was prepared by exposing the Cu(100) surface to 800 L of O2 while keeping it at 500 K NiTPP molecules (Sigma Aldrich, ≥95% purity) were thermally sublimated at 570 K from a homemade Knudsen cell type evaporator onto the copper substrate kept at room temperature. As the monolayer coverage is long-range ordered, the achievement of the desired coverage was monitored using reflective high-energy electron diffraction (ALOISA) or LEED (NanoESCA). The valence band spectra of NiTPP monolayer deposited on the bare Cu(100) and on the O-Cu(100) surfaces are presented in Figure The nitrogen K-edge spectra of the NiTPP monolayer deposited on bare (bottom) and oxygen modified (middle) copper surface, together with the NiTPP multilayer (top), are compared in Figure The flat adsorption geometry of the macrocycle moiety is further confirmed by the dichroic behavior of the C K-edge spectra, both on the bare and on the oxygen pre-covered-Cu(100) substrates (see Figure The charge transfer occurring at the NiTPP/Cu(100) interface strongly affects the intensity of the π* resonances and of the σ* feature as well: all low energy LUMOs are partially filled (and shifted). On the contrary, the close similarity between the resonance intensity and the shape of the multilayer spectra with that of the monolayer grown on the oxidized surface confirms the weak interaction of the latter substrate with the porphyrin array, which now allows us to disentangle the symmetry of the orbitals. On the oxygen modified system, the low energy features in the N K-edge spectra measured with p-and s-polarized light are related to π* (N 1s→LUMO/LUMO+1 and LUMO+3) and to σ* (N 1s→LUMO+2) resonances, respectively Far above the ionization threshold, the intensity of the partial electron yield results from the photoemission from a core-level into a continuum of states, and it is independent of the polarisation of the impinging electromagnetic radiation. By normalizing to unity the high energy tail of the spectra measured with s-and p-polarization, we can evaluate the relative oscillator strengths (proportional to the intensity of the resonances) for the aforementioned low energy NEXAFS transitions (and in general, for the resonances below the ionization threshold). After evaluation of the areas of the spectral features, we get a ratio of 4.5 to 1 (π* to σ*). It is worth noting that the estimated ratio can be used as an input for the evaluation of the absolute absorption cross-sections in theoretical calculations. By means of NEXAFS and valence band spectroscopies, we confirmed that oxygen pre-adsorption on the Cu(100) surface is an efficient approach for suppressing the interaction at the metal-organic interface. Moreover, the O-Cu(100) substrate preserves the planar orientation of deposited NiTPP molecules, allowing us to unambiguously identify the symmetry of frontier molecular orbitals. The corresponding planar monolayer phases are better suited than thin-film NEXAFS measurements to properly model the fine details of the electronic structure, including the molecular orbital symmetry. This method of acquisition of reference spectra can be extended to other absorption based spectroscopies, such as high-resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy (HREELS) and Infrared Reflection Absorption Spectroscopy (IRAS), in the study of adsorption behaviour of heteroaromatic compounds.