We consider possible high temperature superconductivity (high-Tc) in transition metal compounds with a cubic zinc-blende lattice structure. When the electron filling configuration in the d-shell is close to d 7 , all three T2g orbitals are near half filling with strong nearest neighbor antiferromagnetic (AFM) superexchange interactions. We argue that upon doping, this electronic environment can be one of "genes" to host unconventional high Tc with a time reversal symmetry broken d 2z 2 -x 2 -y 2 ± id x 2 -y 2 pairing symmetry. With gapless nodal points along the diagonal directions, this state is a direct three-dimensional analogue to the two-dimensional B1g d-wave state in cuprates. We suggest that such a case may be realized in electron doped CoN, such as CoN1-xOx and (H, Li)1-xCoN. The superconducting mechanism of unconventional high-T c in cuprates Recently, we have identified that a key character, called the electronic gene, which separates these two classes of high-T c materials from other transitional metal compounds, is that the d-orbitals with the strongest in-plane d-p couplings in both high-T c families are isolated near Fermi energy In order to justify the above idea, we must discover new families of high-T c . We have suggested to realize the gene condition in the d 7 and d 8 filling configurations. Up to now, we have predicted that the d 7 gene condition can be realized in a 2D hexagonal layer formed by edge-shared trigonal bipyramidal complexes To realize the gene condition, it is easy to notice that a quasi-2D layer is generally required because of the nature of * Electronic address: jphu@iphy.ac.cn the d-orbital spacial configuration. In fact, all above examples are quasi-2D. However, there may be one exception. In the d 7 filling configuration with corner shared tetrahedra, all three T 2g orbitals can participate in superconducting pairing. These three orbitals together form a three-dimensional (3D) irreducible representation in a cubic lattice structure. Therefore, even in a 3D cubic lattice structure, they can be fully isolated near Fermi energy. The zinc-blende lattice structure which is formed by corner shared tetrahedra is an ideal lattice structure to test this potential exception. Different from the previous examples and proposals, the lattice of the shared tetrahedra in the zinc-blende structure is essentially 3D. Locally, the tetrahedra symmetry is fully respected. The three T 2g orbitals are degenerate and have kinematics in all three spacial directions. If we consider a transition metal compound with the zinc-blende structure, the transition metal atoms form a face center cubic (FCC) lattice as shown in Fig. In this paper, we study the possible superconducting state of a t-J model in a 3D FCC lattice. Both one-orbital and threeorbital models are considered. In both cases, we find that a d 2z 2 -x 2 -y 2 ± id x 2 -y 2 pairing superconducting state, which breaks the time reversal symmetry, is the most favored near half filling upon hole doping. This d ± id state is a spacial 3D analogue to the 2D B 1g d-wave state in cuprates. Similarly, the gap function vanishes along the diagonal lines, resulting in nodal points in the superconducting states if Fermi surfaces insect with the lines. The extended s-wave state is the least favored followed by chiral t-wave states. We suggest that the case can be potentially realized in electron doped CoN We first consider a one-orbital t-J model in a FCC lattice. We assume that the effective hopping between the d-orbitals is mainly through d-p couplings and is dominated by the nearest neighbor(NN) hopping. As we will show later, if we ignore the inter-orbital hopping, the kinematics of each T 2g orbital in the zinc-blende lattice is close to that of an isotropic sorbital. Therefore, for simplicity, we start with an isotropic single-orbital model. By setting the second NN distance as one, the kinetic part of the Hamiltonian can be written as where c α ≡ cos ( kα 2 ), α = x, y, z and σ is the spin index. Here t is the nearest neighbor hopping amplitude and μ is the chemical potential, with μ t = -0.92 at half filling. The band structure along the high symmetry momenta is shown in Fig. where P is the projection operator to forbid double occupancy at a single site and S i (n i ) denotes the spin (density) at site-i. In a mean field solution, the above Hamiltonian in 2D is known to result in a phase diagram between a long range AFM state and a superconducting state Upon doping, the superconducting state of the above 3D model is more interesting because the lattice symmetry is much larger in three dimensions than in two dimensions. The FCC lattice is governed by the O h point group. The superconducting pairing functions belong to the irreducible representations of the O h group. As the superconducting pairing is induced by the NN AFM interaction, the superconducting order must be in the spin-singlet pairing channel and carry specific momentum form factors. Considering the equal pairing strength for all NN bonds, we have where s α = sin( kα 2 ). ∆ A represents the extended s-wave, ∆ E± represents a time reversal symmetry broken superconducting state d 2z 2 -x 2 -y 2 ± id x 2 -y 2 that belongs to a 2D E g irreducible representation. It can also be written symmetrically as 4δ d (c x c y + e ±i2π/3 c x c z + e ±i4π/3 c y c z ). Obviously, this d ± id gap function vanishes along the diagonal lines as a 3D analogue of the 2D B 1g d-wave for the cuprates. However, in this one-orbital model, near half filling upon hole doping, there is no Fermi surface along the Γ-L lines as depicted in Fig. We use the slave boson mean-field approach This result can be easily understood by the Hu-Ding principle We simplify the band structure in a tight binding model with only the NN hopping among three orbitals. We find that the model is a very good approximation to describe the band dispersion as indicated by the red solid lines in Fig. Due to the time reversal symmetry, the mirror symmetry on the plane ( 110) and the two-fold rotation symmetry along z-axis, there are only four free hopping parameters: with t 1,2,3,4 being real numbers. The hopping matrix along other directions can be obtained by symmetry operations: g . The three-orbital tight-binding Hamiltonian matrix can be written as here g ∈ T d ensures that R g a 1 runs over all the 12 NN vectors. Specifically, the matrix elements in H 3t (k) are and other terms can be obtained by cyclical permutation of the suffixes x, y, z. For CoN, we find that a set of the parameters with (t 1 , t 2 , t 3 , t 4 , μ) = (0.214, 0.206, 0.235, 0.084, -0.889)eV fits reasonably well to the DFT calculations as shown Fig. By adding the AFM exchange interactions, we replace the kinetic energy term in Eq.2 by H 3t to consider a multi-orbital t-J model For the superconducting pairing in this multi-orbital t-J model, the intraorbital pairing is always dominant over the inter-orbital pairing as shown in previous work with the δ 2,3 terms defined in App.III The first terms in all above three pairing equations represent isotropic pairing among all three orbitals. As shown in the inset of Fig. Under the slave boson mean-field approach, we study superconducting pairings in the hole doped three-orbital model. Due to the high degeneracy of the three T 2g orbitals, the carrier occupancies in the three orbitals are identical, leading to an equal renormalization factor for all the hopping interactions In summary, guided by the recent ideas on searching for potential new high temperature superconductors, we studied the superconducting states of a 3D t-J model in both one and three orbital cases under the slave boson meanfield approximation. It was found that the time reversal symmetry broken d 2z 2 -x 2 -y 2 ± id x 2 -y 2 wave superconducting state wins over all other superconducting states upon hole doping. The state has gapless nodal points along the diagonal directions, being a direct3D extension of the d-wave superconducting state of cuprates. It is also proper to mention that the 3D d ± id pair- FIG. ing symmetry was theoretically suggested previously for the β-pyrochlore CsW 2 O 6 To realize the physics studied in this paper, we must have a zinc-blende transition metal compound with a d 7 filling configuration at transition metal atoms. As we have mentioned in the paper, CoN is a material close to a realization of our model. However, the Co atom in CoN has valence Co 3+ , it is a d 6 filling configuration, namely it is heavily hole doped material with respect to a T 2g half filled d 7 configuration. Thus, we may consider CoO with a zinc-blende structure to be the parental compound since the Co atom has valence Co 2+ with a T 2g half filled d 7 configuration. The zinc-blende CoO was known to be a metastable The model has very high symmetry in both orbital and lattice spaces. Here we only consider the superconducting states with respect to the full lattice symmetry. In principle, the degeneracy among three orbitals and the cubic lattice symmetry can be broken spontaneously in many different ways by a variety of mechanisms. Therefore, it can be extremely interesting to explore novel electronic states in future. The pairing form can be a linear combination of the basis function of a representation ∆(k) = i δ i f i (k) with f i (k) being the basis functions and δ i being the pairing amplitude. In our consideration, the electron pairing takes place on the NN bond mediated by AFM superexchange. Considering an equal on-bond pairing amplitude, as mentioned in the main text, the pairing belongs to the E representation is fixed as δ d (e 1 ± ie 2 ). However, for the T 2 representation, ∆ T = δ x s z s y + δ y s x s z + δ z s x s y , there is additional phase freedom among the δ i 's. We now use Ginzburg-Landau theory to explore the phase freedom of T 2 representation. The free energy respects all the symmetries including point group, time reversal, U (1) gauge symmetry and spin rotational SU (2) symmetry Those are essentially the polynomial invariants as we project |δ x + δ y + δ z | 4 on the basis functions. Only three of them are independent and they can be rephrased with three independent parameters in the fourth order term: Considering the equal NN bonds pairing amplitude δ = δ t (1, e iθ1 , e iθ2 ), mediated by the NN AFM exchange interactions, the free energy becomes The minimization of ∆F 4 (δ) gives the following phases characterized by (θ 1 , θ 2 ): • TRI states: antiferro: (0, π) or (π, 0) (π, π); • Chiral states: In the pairing part of Eq.(9-11) of the three-orbital model, the orbital quadratic forms Â1 and Ê are: where the spin and momentum labels are omitted for the momentum conserved spin-singlet pairing forms. The additional pairing forms of δ 2,3 are [a(k) Ê] E =4(c x c y + c y c z + c x c z )( Ê1 ± i Ê2 ), [e(k) Ê] E =(e 1 Ê1 -e 2 Ê2 ± i(e 1 Ê2 + e 2 Ê1 )), [t 2 (k) Ê] T =s y s z ( Ê1 -√ 3 Ê2 ) + e iθ1 s x s z ( Ê1 + √ 3 Ê2 ) + e iθ2 2s x s y Ê1 , with e 1 = 2c x c y -c x c z -c y c z and e 2 = √ 3(c y c z -c x c z ). The TRI state s z s y ± s x s z ± s x s y are fourfold degenerate and the chiral state s z s y ± ωs x s z ± ω * s x s y state are eight-fold degenerate with ω = e ±i2π/3 . The states marked with T 20 and T 21 are the states (0, 0) and (4π, 2π)/3, respectively.