Since last decade, graphene has materialized itself as one of the phenomenal materials to modern researchers because of its remarkable thermal, optical, electronic, and mechanical properties. Graphene holds enormous potentials for lab on chip (LOC) devices and can provide diverse fabrication routes and structural features due to their special electronic and electrochemical properties. A LOC device can manipulate fluids using microchannels and chamber structures, to accomplish fast, highly sensitive and inexpensive analysis with high yield. Hence, the graphene based LOC devices can constitute a wellcontrolled microenvironment for both advanced chemical/biological evaluation and low-cost point-ofcare analysis etc. This review critically debates the graphene as a prime candidate for microfluidic devices and their future applicability towards various practical applications. Finally, the opportunities and challenges for the future of graphene with respect to their commercial challenges and sustainability perspectives are discussed. "Miniaturization" has become an important aspect of electronic devices which downsized it initially to microelectronics and now to nanoelectronics technology in order to fabricate devices for a wide range of applications. The miniaturization started in the late 1950s with the advent of "planner" process to integrate maximum circuit components within a small area and moved forward with the incorporation of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and miniaturized total chemical analysis systems (mTAS). The term "Lab on Chip" was probably first coined by Moser et al. The LOC employs microfluidics technology for the fabrication, operation and final outcome of the device. Mark et al. The commonly used techniques for the fabrication of LOC devices can be divided into two major groups namely top-down and bottom-up. Top-down processes are based on initial patterning on large scale and afterwards reduction of lateral dimensions down to nanoscale. Top-down methods are further classified into three categories: (a) bulk-/film-machining; (b) surface-machining; (c) mold-machining. Bottom-up processes arrange atoms or molecules to create nanostructures by precisely controlled chemical reactions. In the microfluidics based LOC devices fluid transport occur either via laminar co-flow of miscible streams or via segmented-flow of immiscible streams within small channels. Under the main fabrication processes there are many sub processes which are solely or collectively used to achieve the final form of the LOC device. A brief description of the different fabrication subprocesses are delineated here followed by the materials used therein (Fig. In this process the resist coated substrate is irradiated through a mask to transfer the geometric shapes on a mask onto the surface of the substrate. The exposed resist areas are either soluble or insoluble in a particular solvent named developer. If the irradiated areas are dissolved by the developer then a positive image of the mask is produced and the resist material is called positive resist. When the non-irradiated regions are soluble in the developer then a negative image of the mask appears and the resist is called a negative resist. This principle is identical for all lithography process however the source of irradiation differs, such as UV light, electron beam, X-ray and ion beam. Thus, the related resists and lithography methods are also named after the source. In this method a thermoplastic sheet is heated till its softening temperature and then pressed against the contours of a mold and later on it cools down and solidifies into the desired shape. The process of thermoforming can be subdivided into six sub process namely drape forming, straight vacuum forming, plug-assist forming, vacuum snap-back forming, pressure-bubble plug-assist vacuum forming, and mechanical forming. In this method of manufacturing the shape of a pliable material is tailored by employing a rigid frame called mold. There are various processes by which molding can be performed such as injection molding, sintering, transfer molding, reaction injection molding, compression molding, and resin transfer molding. However for the microfluidic applications the most widely used molding process is injection molding. It is the process of stamping of a pattern using high pressure onto a polymer which has been softened by heating the polymer up to its the glass transition temperature. The stamp can be made by different manner with the most popular being the micromachining of silicon which is used to govern the pattern in the polymer. Microstructures in polymer can also be obtained using ablation of polymer via conventional mechanical drilling, sawing, laser machine and powder blasting. Among these methods laser ablation is preferred due to its higher efficiency over others. Different kinds of laser sources such as excimer laser, CO 2 laser, UV laser etc. are used for the ablation of polymer. In this process the negative of the required design is created with a hard material called mold and then liquid polymer is poured on it. The polymer is cured employing heat or UV radiation and finally peeled off from the mold. Even polymer membrane can be casted directly for the fabrication of microfluidic device. To create enclosed fluid channels for fluid handling, the base plate and the cover plate must be bonded after patterning all features on substrates. Different methods are used to achieve a good quality bonding such as silicon direct bonding, glass bonding, plasma-activated bonding, anodic bonding (for silicon or glass plates), thermal bonding (for polymer or glass plates), Glass Frit Bonding, reactive bonding and adhesive bonding, fusion bonding, polymer, and eutectic bonding. Different kinds of materials are used to manufacture microfluidic devices and they can be broadly categorised as inorganic, organic and composite materials. At the infant stage of LOC, the semiconducting material Si was used as a platform for the production of microfluidic device due to its good mechanical properties, suitability for etching, ability of structuring, medical compatibility and chemically stability. However production cost of Si is on the higher side. Glass which is an insulator by nature is also used as building material for microfluidic devices as it is economical, optically transparent, and biologically adaptable with low thermal expansion coefficient. For the fabrication of LOC devices low-temperature cofired ceramic (LTCC) Different kinds of organic materials are used for the fabrication of LOC devices such as polymer, paper and hydrogel. In polymer category mainly two kinds of polymers likewise elastomers [Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), thermoset polyester (TPE)], and thermoplastic [polystyrene (PS), polycarbonate (PC), poly-methyl methacrylate (PMMA), poly-ethylene glycol diacrylate (PEGDA), polyurethane (PU)] are used. A new class of polymer namely cyclic olefin copolymer(COC) is also used for the manufacturing of LOC device. In recent times, paper the cellulose-based, flexible material has become a prospective microfluidic substrate as it is readily available, biocompatible and inexpensive. However the poor mechanical properties restrict the extensive use of the paper as a substrate material. Hydrogel is a macromolecular polymer gel made of cross-linked polymeric network and demonstrates the capability to swell and absorb a significant portion of water within its structure, but not dissolvable in water. Nowadays it is used for the fabrication of LOC devices especially in biological research however the bonding of hydrogel remains a critical issue for fabrication. A detailed process flow for the fabrication of microfluidic device can be found in the article by Lake et al. Graphene can be synthesised using two approaches namely top down and bottom up (Fig. This approach involves the methods to produce single graphene sheet by disassembling the stacked layers of graphite. In this method adhesive tapes (e.g. scotch tape) is used to peel off the layers from graphite and can be used to synthesise mono-, bi-and few-layer graphene. This is the first method 3.1.1.2. Electrochemical exfoliation. At the initial stage graphite was used as a sacrificial electrode in the electrochemical set-up for the exfoliation of graphite, and the exfoliated material was collected from the electrolyte solution. With the advancement of the techniques, nowadays surfactant (to prevent reagglomeration of the graphene) and H 2 SO 4 eKOH solutions (H 2 SO 4 is a strong oxidation of graphite and KOH lowers the acidity of the electrolyte solution) are mixed within electrolytes. In general a mixture of graphite flakes with varying thickness can be produced by electrochemical exfoliation and few-layer graphene is isolated by centrifugation. In this process graphite is reduced to graphene via intercalation, on application of thermal energy. Various chemical species can be inserted between graphite interlayer spacing to synthesise graphite intercalation compounds (GIC). In general, firstly, the graphite is exposed to strong acids to yield a GIC and later exposed to rapid thermal heating or to microwave radiation in order to thermally decompose the intercalates into gaseous species which breaks the layers apart. Different intercalates will results in numerous GICs having unique properties to enhance electrical, thermal and magnetic performance. 3.1.1.4. Reduction of graphene oxide. Graphite oxide is exfoliated more easily than graphite and this phenomenon is utilized to produce graphene from graphite oxide via chemical reduction. The synthesis of GO is generally performed via the oxidation of graphite employing oxidants and concentrated acids via Hummers 3.1.1.5. Arc discharge. In this method a DC current is passed inbetween graphite electrodes of high purity in presence of high pressure of hydrogen gas or hydrogen-inert gas mixture to synthesise few-layer graphene. Shen et al. 3.1.1.6. Unzipping carbon nanotubes. Single or multi-walled carbon nanotubes can be unzipped using physical (such as laser irradiation, electric field and plasma etching) or chemical method (using wet chemistry methods) to produce graphene or few-layer graphene, respectively. This unzipping results in a thin elongated strip of graphene called graphene 'nanoribbons', with ribbon widths governed by the tube diameter. Fission via CeC bond of carbon nanotube is solely responsible for the unzipping, which is often initiated at defect sites, leading to irregular edges 3.1.1.7. Sonication. In this method, ultrasonic energy is used for the exfoliation of unmodified, natural flake graphite to separate graphene flakes dispersed in solvents. Though different types of ionic solvents are used till date, but the experimental evidence revealed that NMP (N-methyl-pyrrolidone) is the best solvent with respect to the dispersion percentage of monolayer graphene, however cyclopentanone offers the highest absolute concentration (monoand few-layer graphene). In general, concentration of graphene in solution can be increased by longer sonication time. Sonication can also be performed in aqueous surfactant solutions, which allows avoiding the use of expensive solvents while the surfactants prevent re-aggregation of the graphene. These methods involve preparation of larger graphene using alternative carbon containing sources of smaller dimensions. 3.1.2.1. Pyrolysis. In this process graphene is synthesised by lowtemperature flash pyrolysis of a solvothermal product of sodium and ethanol. Initially the graphene was obtained as fused sheets, which is separated out into individual sheets by mild sonication in ethanol. The advantage of this process was scalable low-cost fabrication of high-purity graphene at low temperature using non-graphitic precursors. However, the quality of graphene was not up to the mark as it consists of a large number of defects. 3.1.2.2. Chemical vapor deposition. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) can be used to grow graphene and few-layer graphene (FLG) by decomposition of hydrocarbon gases on catalytic surfaces or by surface segregation of C dissolved within the bulk of specific metals. Solubility limit of carbon in the metal is responsible to decide whether the former or the latter will be the dominant growth process. Though various metal substrates like Ni, Fe, Ru, Co, Rh, Ir, Pd, Pt, Cu, Au and semiconductor like Ge even insulator 3.1.2.3. Epitaxial growth on silicon carbide. When SiC crystal (3CeSiC, 4HeSiC or 6HeSiC) is subjected to high temperature annealing under vacuum for graphitisation, the top layers of SiC crystal is thermally decomposed resulting in desorption of Si atoms. The C atoms remaining on the surface rearrange themselves and re-bonded to form epitaxial graphene layer. Presence of argon or small quantities of disilane reduces the rate of silicon sublimation, resulting in allowance of higher temperatures to get higher quality graphene. Graphene formation initiates at the top surface of SiC and nearly three SieC bilayers decompose (~0.75 nm) to form one graphene layer (~0.34 nm) and proceeds inwards further. Functionalization of graphene and its derivatives is precisely significant to amend their characteristics and inflating the opportunities in both fundamental studies as well as in different device platforms such as LOC. Graphene possesses exotic physical characteristics; however, it has tendency to agglomerates or even restack that could hinder its potential application especially in microfluidic devices. This phenomenon can be countered through functionalization of graphene as it will create strong polar-polar interactions of hydrophilic groups to avoid agglomeration. Though graphene is considered as chemically inert, however experimentally produced graphene has several defects (e.g. vacancies, edges, curvatures and chemical impurities) which increases the reactivity of the graphene Atoms or groups of atoms having an unpaired electron are called free radicals which are highly reactive and it interacts with the graphene to form covalent bonds via thermal or photochemical treatments. The radicals which are commonly used are aryl diazonium salts, benzoyl peroxide employing the processes like the Bergman cyclization Various kinds of cycloadditions can be performed on graphene such as The electron-rich nature of graphene makes it possible to functionalize graphene using electrophilic substitution reactions. The FriedeleCrafts acylation On the other hand, high specific surface area of graphene is advantageous for non-covalent functionalization by physical adsorption of molecules which relies on hydrophobic effects, peffects, van der Waals forces and electrostatic effects. Though the use of graphene in LOC is still in its infant stage but already a wide variety of devices is fabricated using graphene. Since its birth, Graphene has been widely used for the purpose of electrochemical sensing Graphene based LOC is a promising candidate for biological analysis (Fig. Point of care analysis is another area which can be addressed well with the help of graphene based LOC (Fig. In recent past, graphene evolved as a favorable choice for optoelectronic applications specially photodetection Recently, Zou et al. Increase in global production quantities and a broadened application spectrum of graphene have raised the human and environmental exposure to graphene based nanomaterials. This in turn augmented the anxiety about the potential adverse effects on of graphene on living organisms Arvidsson et al. studied the LCA of graphene synthesised by ultrasonication and chemical reduction Researchers are trying to make graphene and its composite more sustainable in order to achieve a greener world. There are few reports Graphene based microfluidics combines the advantages of exotic properties graphene with peerless analytical characteristics of microfluidics such as minimal reagents consumption, super fast detection, ease of use along with high sensitivity. This paper firstly introduces the process technology for the fabrication of graphene based LOC and later reviews the major application areas of graphene-based microfluidics which spreads from the detection of chemical food contaminates to electrical signal of retina or even to detection of early stage cancer. The prospective economical perspective of graphene based LOC accelerates the growth of such devices. However issues like toxicity and sustainability are still to be addressed. The reproducibility is of major concern of any nanoscale devices and graphene based LOC falls in it. Since many of graphene based LOCs are used in point of care analysis so the integrity and reproducibility has to undergo extensive quality check which may increase the cost. In summary, although there are still some hurdles to achieve inexpensive, eco-bio friendly, sustainable and reproducible graphene based LOC but it can be hoped that graphene based LOC will surmount the barriers in near future with the help of its enormous potential. 