Perovskite semiconductors have demonstrated outstanding external luminescence quantum yields, enabling high power conversion efficiencies (PCE). However, the precise conditions to advance to an efficiency regime above monocrystalline silicon cells are not well understood. Here, we establish a simulation model that well describes efficient p-i-n type perovskite solar cells and a range of different experiments. We then study important device and material parameters and we find that an efficiency regime of 30% can be unlocked by optimizing the built-in potential across the perovskite layer by using either highly doped (10 19 cm -3 ), thick transport layers (TLs) or ultrathin undoped TLs, e.g. self-assembled monolayers. Importantly, we only consider parameters that have been already demonstrated in recent literature, that is a bulk lifetime of 10 μs, interfacial recombination velocities of 10 cm/s, a perovskite bandgap (E gap ) of 1.5 eV and an EQE of 95%. A maximum efficiency of 31% is predicted for a bandgap of 1.4 eV. Finally, we demonstrate that the relatively high mobile ion density does not represent a significant barrier to reach this efficiency regime. Thus, the results of this paper promise continuous PCE improvements until perovskites may become the most efficient single-junction solar cell technology in the near future. Over the last 10 years perovskite solar cells have triggered an enormous research interest and with power conversion efficiencies of 25.5% 1 they are close to the efficiencies of monocrystalline silicon solar cells (26.7%). Finally, we demonstrate that 30% efficient perovskite solar cells are within reach by only using parameters that have already been demonstrated in recent literature, i.e. a bandgap of approximately 1.5 eV, a bulk carrier lifetime of 10 μs, an interfacial recombination velocity of 10 cm/s and an EQE of 95% throughout the spectrum. The key to unlock this efficiency regime is to maximize the device built-in field by either increasing the doping concentration in the TLs to at least 10 19 cm -3 , or using ultrathin (≈10nm), undoped TLs, if a strong built-in field can be created by other means. Finally, we show that although the mobile ion density is very significant in our triple cation perovskite devices (≥6x10 16 cm -3 ), it will most likely not represent a significant barrier for reaching such near-ideal solar cell performances as the relative impact of the mobile ions decreases with reduced interfacial and bulk recombination. In the first part of the study, we optimized our SCAPS Despite the good fits shown in Figure JV-scan, bulk and interface recombination currents as well as ideality factor. We note that we used similar simulation parameters for both programs, however, in order to compensate the detrimental effect of the significant ion density in IonMonger, we used a slightly higher builtin voltage (+100 mV). Overall, this comparison shows that both programs provide very similar results and although the mobile ion density significantly redistributes the V BI , its effect on the device performance is rather small (i.e. ~1.5% in PCE), which is obtained by comparing the PCE in case with and without mobile ions in IonMonger. Starting from this simulation set, we aim to find the most promising ways to improve the PCE of perovskite solar cells. A large set of simulations was performed to check most parameters accessible in SCAPS and IonMonger. We note, that in the following, we will show the results as obtained from SCAPS, while IonMonger simulations are shown again towards the end of the paper. We also emphasize that we have cross-checked each simulation with IonMonger which led to very similar results and identical trends. A generic approach to optimize the performance of a solar cell is to maximize the carrier mobility to improve the charge-extraction efficiency. To this end, we first varied the majority carrier mobility in the HTL and ETL simultaneously as well as both carrier types in the perovskite layer (Supplementary Figure The relative importance of these effects is further discussed in Supplementary Figure It is also interesting to note that both TLs need to be doped simultaneously as otherwise (if only one TL is doped) the other interface becomes the limiting component of the cell. Therefore, doping of the C60 layer allows considerable improvements until the PTAA/perovskite interface and the absorber layer itself are limiting the performance (Supplementary Figure In a next step, we aimed to understand the impact of the built-in electrostatic potential difference (V BI ) and the energy-level alignment (E maj ) on cells with doped and undoped TLs. Both parameters have been shown to be critical for the device performance. Note, that we assumed V BI = 1.2 V in the standard settings which is consistent with Mott-Schottky analysis in our cells. However, we acknowledge that we do not precisely know its origin considering the almost equal work function of ITO and Cu. As to the impact of the energy level alignment, Figure The impact of the device built-in potential (V BI , here defined as the work function difference of the contact metals) and (b) the energy alignment between the perovskite and the transport layers (TLs) on the JV-characteristics and performance parameters of cells with doped and undoped TLs. In panel (b), the V BI was kept constant (1.2 V). In the case of intrinsic TLs, increasing the V BI from 1.2 V (standard cell) to 1.6 V allows to improve the FF to 83.5%. Doped TLs are more tolerant with respect to the V BI . Considerable losses appear below 1.0 V (marked with *), however, we attribute this to a limitation of the simulation model as discussed in the main text. In contrast, the energy level mismatch between the perovskite and the transport layers has a large impact on the device V OC regardless of the doping of the TLs. Having analysed the impact of the charge-carrier mobility, doping, mobile ions and the energetics on the device performance, we now focus our attention on supressing the defect recombination in the bulk of the material and at the interfaces. In the following we tried to maximize the PCE using undoped TLs. First, we note that all simulations so far were performed by using an absorption model for a direct semiconductor which matches the experimentally measured absorption coefficient, α and reproduces the shortcircuit current in our standard cells with an average EQE slightly below 88% (Supplementary Figure To check whether such high EQEs are reasonable in our devices, we also performed transfermatrix simulations In the next step, starting from the simulation with optimized recombination parameters (light blue, max PCE = 25.3%), we further checked the impact of TL doping (using again 10 19 cm Based on the bandgap-dependent analysis in Figure The second cell shown in Figure For example, implementing two 100 nm thick TLs for this particular device reduces the PCE to 27%, which is due to the increased interface loss when lowering the V BI across the perovskite. Nevertheless, we note that the SAM is likely beneficial in terms of parasitic absorption compared to doped TLs and in terms of device stability. Finally, by implementing the above quantified ion density (n ion ~6×10 16 cm -3 ), we observed that the steady-state performance of both proposed high-efficiency cells is hardly affected by the mobile ion density (red dotted lines in Figure In summary, in this work we explored possible optimization strategies to advance the PCEs of perovskite solar cells beyond those of monocrystalline silicon (>26%) and GaAs cells (>29%). To this end we established a standard simulation to describe our reference (standard) p-i-n type cells with an efficiency of close to 20% using SCAPS and IonMonger to incorporate mobile ions. We then checked a wide range of simulation parameters and discussed the importance of μ, n ion , n dop , V BI , E maj , E gap , S, τ bulk as key parameters in defining the cells' performance. In combination with transient capacitance measurements and charge extraction, we demonstrated that the ion density is rather significant (≥6x10 16 cm -3 ) which significantly redistributes the internal field. Starting from the standard cells, we showed that (10 fold) optimization of the mobilities of the TL and the perovskite layer will result in comparatively marginal PCE improvements (~1% absolute). Instead, doping the transport layers relaxes the need of electrodes with large work function offsets and enables drastic FF and V OC gains. We attributed this result to an effective increase in the V BI across the perovskite layer which drives minority carriers away from the interfaces. We further discussed the need of a high built-in field across all stack layers including the absorber layer, at least at its surfaces. Also, energy level matching between the perovskite and the TL remains a necessity to avoid PCE losses irrespective of the TL doping. We then varied the perovskite bandgap for cells with supressed defect recombination in the bulk and/or the interface. In combination with doped TLs, we identified that recombination parameters that have already been demonstrated in recent literature (τ bulk = 10 μs and S = 10 cm/s) would allow PCEs of up to 31% for a perovskite with a bandgap of 1.4 eV, if an average above-gap EQE of 95% can be realized. Based on these findings we numerically demonstrated the feasibility of 30% efficient perovskite cells with comparatively thick (≈ 100 nm), doped TLs (~10 19 cm -3 ) by implementing a perovskite layer with realistic interface recombination velocities (S = 10 cm/s) and a bandgap of 1.5 eV. Alternatively, cells with ultrathin TLs (e.g. by implementing self-assembled monolayers at the bottom contact) may also allow to reach the 30% milestone, if the V BI across the perovskite layer can be maximized to supress the critical interface recombination. However, although doped TLs allow to relax several strict requirements to realize such near-ideal solar cells; e.g. by allowing to use thicker TLs and by increasing the tolerance against interfacial defects; SAMs are beneficial in terms of optical losses and device stability, which is a key for future developments. Finally, we also demonstrated that the rather high ion density does not represent a major roadblock to unlock efficiencies at the radiative limits and therefore, we expect that perovskite solar cells will become the most efficient single-junction solar technology in the near future. Here, we establish drift-diffusion simulation parameters to describe efficient (20%) p-i-n type perovskite solar cells. Using this parameter set, we explore effective strategies to improve the performance further. We find that the key to reach the 30% efficiency milestone is maximizing the built-in voltage across the perovskite layer by implementing doped-or ultrathin transport layers like self-assembled monolayers. ), where τ eff and τ bulk is the effective and bulk lifetime respectively, d the film thickness (400 nm), S the interface recombination velocity, D = μV th is the diffusion coefficient, which is the product of mobility and thermal voltage (25.86 meV at 300 K), we can quantify the interface recombination velocity S = dDπ 2 (τ bulk -τ) (Dπ 2 τ bulk τ eff -4d 2 (τ bulk -τ)) to be approximately 2000 cm/s at the perovskite/C60 interface, and 100 cm/s at the PTAA/PFN-Br/perovskite interface. We note, the improvement in lifetime upon addition of LiF at the ninterface is also shown, which we have used to model the cell shown in Figure . Considering that the conductivity is σ = enμ and using a mobility of 1 cm 2/ Vs yields an equilibrium carrier density of 6x10 11 cm -3 . We note any equilibrium carrier density below 1x10 14 cm -3 has no effect on the simulation results. Hole mobility in PTAA μ p,PTAA 1.5x10 -4 cm 2 / Vs Fit to thickness dependent PTAA JV-curves (Figure The Recombination in the bulk material is given by the following equations