A theory is presented to describe the heat-flux radiated in near-field regime by a set of interacting nanoemitters held at different temperatures in vacuum or above a solid surface. We show that this thermal energy can be focused and even amplified in spots that are much smaller than those obtained with a single thermal source. We also demonstrate the possibility to locally pump heat using specific geometrical configurations. These many body effects pave the way to a multi-tip near-field scanning thermal microscopy which could find broad applications in the fields of nanoscale thermal management, heat-assisted data recording, nanoscale thermal imaging, heat capacity measurements and infrared spectroscopy of nano-objects. Heat flux focusing radiated by a hot object at temperature T is limited in far-field regime by the diffraction to λ th /2 where λ th = c/k B T is the thermal wavelength associated to this source. However at subwavelength distance from the source the situation can radically change. The near-field scanning themal microscope (SThM) In the present Letter we theoretically investigate the electromagnetic field radiated by a multi-tip SThM setup (Fig. where the electric and magnetic field can be related to local fluctuating dipoles p i f luc by the following relations where G EE and G HE are the full electric and magnetic dyadic Green tensors at the frequency ω which take into account all many body interactions and eventually interactions with an interface [15]. Hence, using the fluctuation dissispation theorem with α i the polarizability associated to i th dipole), the spectrum of Poynting components reads where is the mean energy of a harmonic oscillator at temperature T and ) with summation over the repeated index γ, β and η. To discuss the specificities of the multi-tip near-field thermal microscopy let us consider a triangular three-tip configuration as depicted in the inset of Fig. A(u) being the apparent surface of system in the direction u along which it is shined. On the contrary, for a system out of thermal equilibrium, the situation radically changes. In particular the Kirchoff's law fails to describe its thermal behavior in far-field regime since according to expression (5) light emission and therefore light absorption is not anymore an intrinsic property of the system but it closely depends on its local thermal state, that is on its temperature. Hence we see in Figs. 3 by heating up the base of triangular system that the heat flux can be focused on a much smaller spot than with a fully thermalized system (Fig. We also observe in Fig. The above analysis holds when the overall system is in vacuum. In the following we discuss how the highlighted effects are impacted by the presence of an interface. To do so we consider similar dipolar systems held close to the ambiant temperature which are brought, at subwavelength distances, from a simple silicon (Si) sample. In the spectral range where most of heat exchanges take place the dielectric permittivity of Si is close to Si = 11.5 In summary, we have introduced the concept of multitip near-field scanning thermal microscopy and demonstrated that it can be used to tailor heat flux at nanoscale. We have shown that this flux can be focused and even amplifield in tiny regions which are much smaller than the diffraction limit and even smaller than with a single tip near-field SThM. The relatively simple model used to describe the tips does not allow to setups with tips close to the contact. For such separation distances the dipolar approximation fails du describe properly the thermal behaviour of emitters and the high orders modes have to be taken into account. These modes give a supplementary degree of freedom to sculpt the field radiated by the sources and we can expect even better performances with such configurations. The significance of multi-itp scanning thermal microscopy to analyze at nanoscale the thermal state of solid surfaces is obvious. It could also find broad applications in many other fields to measure for instance thermal properties such as heat capacity and the infrared spectra of nano-objects. The author acknowledges discussions with Riccardo Messina and thanks Mondher Besbes for his help on graphical representations.