The manufacturing cost of quantum cascade lasers is still a major bottleneck for the adoption of this technology for chemical sensing. The integration of Mid-Infrared sources on Si substrate based on CMOS technology paves the way for high-volume low-cost fabrication. Furthermore, the use of Si-based fabrication platform opens the way to the co-integration of QCL Mid-InfraRed sources with SiGe-based waveguides, allowing realization of optical sensors fully integrated on planar substrate. We report here the fabrication and the characterization of DFB-QCL sources using top metal grating approach working at 7.4 μm fully implemented on our 200 mm CMOS pilot line. These QCL featured threshold current density of 2.5 kA/cm2 and a linewidth of 0.16 cm -1 with a high fabrication yield. This approach paves the way toward a Mid-IR spectrometer at the silicon chip level. These two last decades, hybrid photonics circuits using both silicon based materials and III-V materials have been successfully developed for data communication and are a complementary technology to advanced CMOS for high performance computers too. In 2006, Soref suggested to consider a similar technological approach to make photonics circuits dedicated to the mid/long wave infrared region QCLs are commonly based on III-V materials depending on the chosen wavelength range. Nowadays, most of the QCL emitting in the MIR region (in particular between 3 μm and 11 μm) are made from a stack of InGaAs / AlInAs layers on InP substrate. These heterostructures are significantly more efficient than the GaAs / AlGaAs stacks and have the optical power record by reaching up to few watts To fabricate the laser on the 200 mm CMOS pilot line, we directly bonded a 2 inch InP wafer with the active layers on a 200 mm Si wafer via a thin oxide layer. This process step is a now mature technology but it requires high-quality defect-free epilayers. This key process step has been addressed first by the study of the impact of the surface quality of the InP wafers with epitaxial QC stack from different providers. The bonding is very sensitive to defects and requires a low roughness and a low bow. If the availability of defect-free epitaxial layers are primordial, the quality of the InP substrates is also critical. Provided that the surface defects are low enough on the epitaxial wafers, we achieved direct bonding of more than 90% of surface on oxidized 200 mm Si wafer. The InP substrate was first grinded and then fully removed by chemical etching of the different sacrificial layers in order to leave a perfect upper surface for further processing. It is worth to mention that a single Si wafer can receive up to four 2 inch wafers so that the number of devices fabricate on a single wafer can be increased from 2700 up to 10000 single lasers per wafer. This QCL manufacturing is fully compatible with standard microelectronics processes as it directly exploits the top metal grating technology, which does not require any further process on the InP wafer before the molecular bonding, ensuring the high volume rate. The implementation of QCL fabrication process on silicon benefit from the specific DFB technology developed a few year ago As aforementioned, the fabrication of QCLs on 200 mm substrate enables to use large-scale characterization tools. Thus, 2700 devices (corresponding to single QCLs and QCL arrays) were measured at wafer-level on an automatic 200/300 mm test prober to determine the emission threshold levels. To do so, V(I) and P(I) characteristics were systematically measured using synchronized IR detector (VIGO system, Poland) to measure the output light emission. The measurements were performed in pulsed mode at low duty cycle (3%) and at 17 °C to avoid any self-heating effect. The pressure exerted on the electrical contact pads as well as the positioning of the prober tips remain delicate and may modify the series resistance (typically in the order of 1  or less). Calibration of our prober has shown an average contact resistance of a few tens of m (and a dispersion in the order of 1 m), which is negligible compared to the differential resistance of our QCLs that are typically around 40. We extracted the repartition of threshold current densities, J th , per wafer, which enables the selection of functional dies and the evaluation of the fabrication yield. In particular, we computed the average threshold currents and the standard deviations for each geometry of ridges. In Figure To go further, it is interesting to compare the disparity of the threshold current values with the dimensional dispersion related to our lithography/entching processes, used to structure the laser ribbon and DFB grating. The tolerance of the manufacturing process is better than 100nm over a ridge width and does not induce the relative dispersion of few percent observed in Fig. When the current density reaches J max , the injection band level becomes higher than the transition level and the Stark rollover effect appears. In this regime, the optical power drops with the current. From the curve at different temperature, we estimated the variation of J th (T) and extracted the characteristic temperature T 0 according to In the figure A differential optical power dP dI ⁄ of ~83 mW/A can be easily estimated from measurements presented in Fig. In this paper, we report the fabrication of QCL sources on silicon substrate within 200 mm CMOS/MEMS pilot. To do so, we have successfully transferred the top metal grating process on an appropriate fabrication process flow that fully respects the design and the process rules of a standard CMOS manufacturing line. This fabrication run achieves performance at the state of the art, that are comparable with those of QCL fabricated on InP substrate. The first characterizations done at wafer level have demonstrated average threshold current densities between 3 kA/cm2 and 2.5 kA/cm2 with a relative dispersion around 3%. The measurements have demonstrated fabrication yields of 98% per wafer having electro-optical features shown in this paper. The optical power can reach 1 mW at ambient temperature, 1.5% duty cycle. This value can easily be increased up to ten mW, which is enough to address many applications in industrial process monitoring or even medical and health fields, by increasing up to reasonable duty cycle value that is estimated around 15%. At this repetition rate, the self-heating will probably affect the quantum wells stack and the electro-optical properties will be degraded. Immediate works on this approach will hence consist of studying the self-heating processes and propose a technological way to define a thermal drain toward the silicon tank. In next fabrication batches, Si wafers will also receive up to four 2 inch wafers for multiplying the number of functional dies. In parallel, development of InAs/AlSb layers grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) on (100 mm and then 200mm) silicon substrate The fabrication in a CMOS/MEMS pilot line and wafer-level tests on probe stations should greatly accelerate the commercialization of QCLs by further decrease the fabrication cost of such components. Furthermore, the integration on a common technological platform implemented on Si substrate is crucial to the realization of miniaturized and cost-effective MIR photonic devices. MIR sources fabricated on Si should penetrate a number of new markets beyond the gas sensing for professional applications. With these preliminary results, we added a capital milestone to our works initiated a couple of years ago on passive MIR photonics circuits and integrated photoacoustic detectors 