Solid-state nanofoaming experiments are conducted on two PMMA grades of markedly different molecular weight using CO2 as the blowing agent. The dependence of porosity of the nanofoams upon foaming time and foaming temperature is measured. Also, the microstructure of the PMMA nanofoams is characterized in terms of cell size and cell nucleation density. A one dimensional numerical model is developed to predict the growth of spherical, gas-filled voids during the solid-state foaming process. Diffusion of CO2 within the PMMA matrix is sufficiently rapid for the concentration of CO2 to remain almost uniform spatially. The foaming model makes use of experimentally calibrated constitutive laws for the PMMA grades, and the effect of dissolved CO2 is accounted for by a shift in the glass transition temperature of the PMMA. The observed limit of achievable porosity is interpreted in terms of cell wall tearing; it is deduced that the failure criterion is sensitive to cell wall thickness. Polymeric nanofoams are polymer foams with an average cell size of below 1 micrometer This relatively new class of porous solids has the potential to offer unique and attractive combinations of thermal, mechanical, and optical properties Wang et al. The review by Costeux The microstructural requirement for polymeric nanofoams with a thermal conductivity lower than the thermal conductivity of air is currently beyond the practical limit of the state-of-theart solid-state nanofoaming process The final porosity and final cell size in solid-state nanofoaming can be predicted by simulating void growth. In contrast to the substantial body of experimental work on polymeric nanofoams produced by solid-state foaming, as reviewed by Costeux PMMA nanofoams are produced from two PMMA grades of widely different molecular weight; a solid-state foaming process is used with CO2 as the blowing agent. We characterize the microstructure of the nanofoams in terms of porosity f , cell size l , and cell nucleation density d N . In addition, we develop a void growth model, based on the constitutive law of PMMA grades close to the glass transition temperature, by building on the recent study of Van Loock and Fleck Foaming experiments were conducted on two PMMA grades: pelletized PMMA (Altuglas PMMA is close to the glass transition temperature ( g T = 116.5 C) of the high w M PMMA as measured by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) using a heating rate of 10 C min -1 . Foaming precursors of the low w M and high w M PMMA grades were made as follows. The low w M PMMA pellets were heated to 250 C for 450 s, then compressed for 60 s between two heated plates at a pressure equal to 17 MPa. The resulting sheet was cooled to room temperature with the pressure of 17 MPa maintained. Cuboid precursors of dimension 20x10x3 mm 3 were machined from the low w M PMMA sheet and from the as-received high w M PMMA sheet. Foaming experiments were performed using a pressure vessel 2 with a pressure controller 3 and temperature controller 4 . Medical grade CO2 (> 99.9% purity) was used as the blowing agent for the foaming experiments. The two step solid-state foaming process was employed, as detailed in the study of Martin-de León et al. The mass concentration 5 C, at equilibrium, is close to 24 wt% for both the low and high w M PMMA, according to the measurement procedure detailed by Martin-de León et al. The density f  of the foamed samples was determined by the water-displacement method with a weight balance 9 . A surface layer of depth 200 μm was removed by polishing 10 to ensure that the solid skin (of thickness below 100 μm ) was absent before the density measurements were made. The porosity f of the samples is obtained by: where p kg m ) is the density of solid PMMA. Foamed samples were cooled in liquid nitrogen and then fractured. The fracture surfaces were coated with a layer of gold by sputtering 11 , and micrographs of the coated fracture surfaces were taken by a scanning electron microscope 12 (SEM). The cellular structure of each material was characterised by analysing the micrographs with dedicated in-house software based on ImageJ/FIJI The open cell content of the foamed samples was measured by gas pycnometry 14 with nitrogen in accordance with the ASTM D6226-15 standard -= m 2 s -1 is the thermal diffusivity of PMMA at room temperature where g V is the geometric volume of the foam, p V is the pycnometer volume and s V is a penalty volume to account for the volume of the cells at the surface of the foam. The penalty volume s V is assumed to be close to zero in the case of nanofoams. The geometric volume g V is measured by the water-displacement method as detailed above. Foamed samples were subjected to a pressure scan from 0.02 MPa to 0.13 MPa in the gas pycnometer. The pycnometer volume initially decreases as the gas pressure increases until the interconnected open cells are completely filled with gas and the pycnometer volume remains constant at increased pressures. We take this constant value of pycnometer volume p V in order to calculate v O via Eq. (2). The measured porosity f , average observed cell size l , standard deviation s of observed cell sizes, and cell nucleation density d N of the nanofoams are reported in Tables The measured porosity f of the nanofoams is plotted as a function of f t in Figure ) is approximately 25% higher than that of the high w M PMMA nanofoams ( max 0.60 f = ). At a foaming temperature of f T = 100 C, the porosity decreases with increasing foaming time beyond f t = 60 s, and this is due to collapse of the foamed structure. This behavior is also illustrated in plots of f versus f T , over the explored range of foaming times, see Figures A void growth model is now developed to predict porosity as a function of foaming time and foaming temperature for the PMMA nanofoams. The expansion of a pre-existing as-nucleated cavity during solid-state nanofoaming is simulated by means of a one dimensional single cell growth model A cross-section of the undeformed (reference) configuration of the spherical void, with initial radius 0 a and initial outer radius 0 b , along with the adopted spherical coordinate system ( , , ) r  , is shown in Figure Assume that the void remains spherical during growth and that the solid surrounding the void is incompressible. Then a material point, initially at radius R, is displaced to a radius r such that: by incompressibility. For later use, this relation is re-arranged to the form: Note that / rR is a function of the time-like variable ( 0 / aa) and of the Lagrangian position variable 0 / Ra. The von Mises effective strain e  is defined in the usual manner as where   is the hoop strain. Now insert Eq. ( and take the time derivative of r in Eq. ( where r v is the radial velocity of a material element at r. Consequently, the effective strain rate e  reads: as the active stress components in the spherical coordinate system. Radial equilibrium dictates that ( ) Due to symmetry,    = and Eq. ( where p is the gas pressure inside the cavity for a given radius a, and a p is the ambient pressure. Upon making use of Eq. ( The effective stress e  is a function of the effective strain e  , the effective strain rate e  , and the normalized temperature g / TT via the constitutive law for the PMMA-CO2 solid, of general functional form F where: ( ) F , , / TT The choice of F is given below. We emphasize that the glass transition temperature g T of the PMMA is a function of CO2 concentration and that the effective strate rate e  scales with a as prescribed in Eq. ( At the start of the foaming process, the chemical potential of the CO2 molecules in the nucleated voids is lower than chemical potential of CO2 molecules in the PMMA-CO2 solid. Consequently, CO2 gas molecules migrate from the PMMA-CO2 solid into the voids. The concentration of CO2 gas molecules ( , ) C r t at time t and position r (for a r b  ) can be obtained by solving Fick's second law of diffusion in the deformed configuration, where D is the diffusion coefficient for CO2 in PMMA. Measurements of D at temperatures and pressures typical for solid-state nanofoaming of PMMA by CO2 are available in the literature as follows. Guo and Kumar Consequently, we do not need to solve the diffusion equation to predict void growth during solid-state nanofoaming of PMMA by CO2. We shall assume that the mass of gas molecules in the voids and in the surrounding solid is constant; leakage of gas molecules to neighbouring voids or the sample's environment is neglected. The resulting mass conservation statement for CO2 reads: where p  is the density 15 of the PMMA-CO2 solid and g  is the density of the CO2 in the voids. The relations Eq. ( The dissolution of CO2 into a linear, amorphous polymer such as PMMA reduces the glass transition temperature g T of the PMMA-CO2 solid. This plasticization effect is attributed to the increased mobility of PMMA chains due to lubrication by the CO2 molecules, and the decrease of the intermolecular bond strength, as the CO2 molecules increase the spacing between the PMMA chains [32], Wissinger and Paulaitis Here, p w M is the molecular weight of the polymer repeat unit ( p w M = 100.12 g mol -1 for a methyl methacrylate monomer), g w M is the molecular weight of the gas ( g w M = 44.01 g mol -1 for CO2), and z is a lattice coordination number equal to 2, as suggested by Chow where R is the universal gas constant and p C  is the change in specific heat capacity of the polymer at the glass transition temperature at constant pressure. The normalized glass transition temperature is then predicted by: ( ) ( ) ( ) Equation ( We assume that the effective stress e  of the PMMA-CO2 solid at a given strain e  , strain rate e  and normalized temperature g / TT is the same as that given by PMMA in the absence of CO2: the effect of CO2 is accounted for by a shift in the value for Tg. The deformation mechanisms for PMMA in uniaxial tension close to the glass transition temperature have been reviewed recently by Van Loock and Fleck where 0 R E is a reference modulus, R  is a temperature sensitivity coefficient, R  a reference strain rate, and n a strain rate sensitivity coefficient. Note that the rubbery regime above the glass transition is absent for PMMA grades of relatively low molecular weight, i.e. w M < 150 -1 kg mol where  is a temperature-dependent viscosity [37,38]:  is assumed to be governed by Eq. ( The equilibrium concentration C of CO2 in PMMA is a function of CO2 pressure p and of temperature. Here, we assume that Henry's law suffices such that where Henry's law coefficient H K is assumed to be independent of both temperature and pressure. Assume that the concentration of CO2 at the surface of the cavity ( 0 Ra = ) is in equilibrium with the CO2 pressure within the void via Eq. During the rapid release of pressure at the end of the saturation phase, the samples cool down from the saturation temperature equal to 25 ̊C to a temperature 17 0 T = -15 ̊C due to adiabatic cooling of the expanding gas. The samples are subsequently placed in a thermal bath at a maintained foaming temperature f T . Upon submersion in the foaming bath, assume that the temperature profile () Tt is of the form: where  is a time constant associated with the heat conduction into the PMMA, as measured by a thermocouple. Void growth during solid-state foaming is simulated by solving the equilibrium Eq. (  , e  and g / TT (Eqs. ( Consider the deformation mechanism maps for the low w M PMMA (see Figure We proceed to explore two alternative hypotheses for cell wall failure which could lead to open-celled microstructures as observed for the PMMA nanofoams: (i) achievement of a critical hoop strain at the void, or (ii) achievement of a minimum (critical) value of ligament thickness between neighbouring voids. Assume that the solid surrounding the expanding void is incompressible. Then, by Eq. ( Recall that the initial (as-nucleated) porosity 0 f equals 3 00 ( / ) ab as defined in Eq. ( Tearing of the cell wall occurs when s  equals the / g TT-dependent 20 true tensile failure strain f  . The critical porosity f f corresponding to this ductility-governed failure criterion reads: The alternative failure hypothesis assumes that there is a minimum number of confined polymer chains separating individual cells to prevent rupture of the solid between the cells. ( ) 20 We assume f  to be insensitive to strain rate , and Eq. ( Write c h as the critical cell wall thickness, and assume that it is independent of the value of / g TT . The corresponding critical value of porosity c f is given by Eq. ( The ductility-governed porosity limit f f as given by Eq. ( PMMA as detailed in the Appendix) and assume that the initial porosity 0 f equals 3 10 -. The measured values of final porosity f and the predictions of the void growth model exceed the porosity limit as given by f f . We now plot the porosity limit c f in Figure Solid-state nanofoaming experiments are performed with two grades of PMMA of markedly different molecular weight ( w M = 92 500 g mol -1 and w M = 3 580 000 g mol -1 ). It was found that the molecular weight of the PMMA has a profound effect upon the microstructure of the PMMA nanofoams. When subjected to identical foaming conditions, the observed cell size l  35 nm of the high molecular weight PMMA nanofoams is an order of magnitude less than that of the low molecular weight PMMA nanofoams, l  250 nm. This is consistent with the observation that the nucleation density, d N . In addition, a limit in attainable porosity max f was observed: max f equals 0.65 for the high molecular weight PMMA and max f equals 0.75 for the low molecular weight PMMA. The microstructure of the PMMA nanofoams transitions from closed-celled to open-celled at a porosity close to max f . A void growth model has been developed to simulate cavity expansion during solid-state nanofoaming of PMMA by CO2. Experimentally calibrated constitutive laws for the PMMA grades close to the glass transition are used in the simulations. The predicted porosity of the nanofoams versus foaming time, at selected foaming temperatures, are in good agreement with the measured responses for porosities well below the maximum observed porosity. There is also close agreement between the predicted and observed sensitivity to molecular weight. This suggests that the observed difference in constitutive response close to the glass transition between the two PMMA grades leads to the measured difference in porosity. Moreover, cell wall tearing accounts for the observed limit in final porosity. Our analysis suggests the existence of a limiting minimum cell wall thickness of magnitude close to that of the end-toend distance of the polymer chains. When the cell wall thickness approaches this minimum value during foaming, rupture of the cell walls occurs; resulting in an open-celled structure, and to a limit on foam expansion. Table Table -1