Hybrid lead halide perovskites, such as CH3NH3PbX3 (X=I, Br), are direct gap semiconductors that offer many superior optoelectronic properties combined with extremely simple solutionprocessing fabrication methods. This makes them very attractive for use in applications like solar cells or light-emitting devices. Recently, also their nonlinear optical properties have received increased attention due to reports of high nonlinear refraction in thin films and nanoparticles. However, understanding of the underlying mechanisms is poor and limited by the lack of knowledge of fundamental parameters like the nonlinear refractive index of the bulk material. Here, we measure both nonlinear absorption and nonlinear refraction in a CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystal using the Z-scan technique with femtosecond laser pulses. At 1000 nm, we obtain values of 5.2 cm/GW and 9.5•10 -14 cm 2 /W for nonlinear absorption and nonlinear refraction, respectively. Sign and magnitude of the observed refractive nonlinearity are reproduced well by the two-band model. To our knowledge, these measurements mark the first characterization of nonlinear refraction in any metal halide perovskite single crystal and thus will serve as an important reference for assessing the potential of this emerging material class for nonlinear optical applications. Metal halide perovskites have seen a tremendous interest recently due to the demonstration of high efficiency solar cells with thin film processed devices offering the prospect to revolutionize the field of photovoltaics in both fabrication costs and efficiency. To verify the properties of the synthesized MAPbBr3 single crystals, we initially determined the linear absorbance and the one-photon induced PL (in reflection geometry) of the single crystal MAPbBr3 sample excited by a frequency-doubled, mode-locked Ti:Sapphire laser at 440 nm. The optical characteristics agree well with the results of Wenger et al. and are displayed in Figure where the parameters A = 5.75 GW/cm, σ = 0.95 and φ = 2 yield good correspondence with the measured data. The large value of the anisotropy parameter σ thereby highlights the highly crystalline structure of the sample compared to other values reported in literature. where q0(z)=βI0Leff/(1+z 2 /z0 2 ) with β being the two-photon absorption coefficient, I0 the on-axis peak intensity of the probe laser pulse, Leff= with x=z/z0, l=L/z0 and z0 =n0πw0 2 /λ being the Rayleigh range within the sample. Here, n0 is the linear refractive index, which has been taken as 2 according to Park et al., Non-resonant, nonlinear absorption and refraction is often modeled by the two-band model, which relates the nonlinear optical absorption via Kramers-Kronig relations to nonlinear refraction. and for nonlinear refraction, with the material independent parameters K=3100, the Kane parameter Ep=21 eV and the dispersion functions F2(x) and G2(x) (with x being the photon energy normalized to the band gap), as specified in Sheik-Bahae et al., More importantly, we can compare our results to previous measurements of nonlinear refraction in perovskite thin films and nanocrystals (Table Lu et al. claim negative nonlinear refraction of MAPbBr3 nanoparticles of -4.01•10 -13 cm 2 /W at 800 nm probed by femtosecond pulses. For MAPbI3 thin films, both Kalanoor et al. and Zhang et al. report large values of nonlinear refraction, 1.9•10 -11 cm 2 /W with fs pulses and 3.7•10 -11 cm 2 /W with ps pulses, respectively. It is important to note that substantially smaller numbers for nonlinear refraction of CsPbBr3 nanocrystals in the range of 1•10 -14 cm 2 /W and 290•10 -14 cm 2 /W were obtained at wavelengths from 600 nm to 800 nm if lower repetition rates of 1 kHz and femtosecond pulses were used. In conclusion, we have measured nonlinear refraction in a MAPbBr3 single crystal. We find a nonlinear refractive index of 9.5•10 -14 cm 2 /W at 1000 nm, which is in good agreement with the twoband model. These results show that the significantly larger values of nonlinear refraction reported in the literature for thin films and nanoparticles cannot be explained with an intrinsically high nonlinear refractive index in metal halide perovskites but rather by carrier or confinement effects. Our results provide the first report of nonlinear refraction in a high-quality metal halide perovskite single crystal. We expect that our findings will trigger further investigations of the underlying mechanisms of nonlinear refraction in perovskite single crystals and nanostructures. MAPbBr3 single crystals were grown by the inverse temperature crystallization procedure. The MAPbBr3 single crystals were cleaved from both sides to achieve a fresh surface. Au electrodes (thickness 150nm) were thermally evaporated onto both fresh surfaces in a vacuum chamber. The I/V characteristics were recorded in darkness using a Keithley 236 source measure unit. The trap density has been derived following the procedure detailed in Saidaminov et al. For Z-scan measurements of nonlinear refraction, we use a 1 kHz regenerative amplifier system (Spectra-Physics Spitfire Ace), that drives an optical parametric amplifier, which emits pulses centered at 1000 nm. The 1 kHz repetition rate of the probe laser prevents cumulative heating of the sample that otherwise might lead to strong thermal lensing and thus overshadows an ultrafast Kerr nonlinearity. This has been confirmed by reducing the repetition rate with a chopper down to 100 Hz without observing a significant difference in the Z-scan measurement (see the inset of Figure The setup for the measurement of the polarization-resolved two-photon absorption as depicted in Figure &* 8345$ & *98 345$ 6 & &* 8345*