We theoretically suggest and experimentally demonstrate a broadband composite optical rotator that is capable of rotating the polarization plane of a linearly-polarized light at any chosen angle. The device is composed of an even number of half-wave plates rotated at specific angles with respect to their fast-polarization axes. The frequency bandwidth of the polarization rotator in principal increases with the number of half-wave plates. Here we experimentally examine the performance of rotators composed of two, four, six, eight and ten half-wave plates. Broadband polarization manipulation of light has been a topic of great interest in optics for many years In this paper, we further develop the idea of broadband polarization rotator by using a set of an even number of half-wave plates rotated at predetermined angles. The even number half-wave plates is crucial for the proposed rotator due to the fact that combination of any two rotators is a rotator, therefore we arrange a sequences of rotators, each of which is combination of two half-wave plates. The realized rotators are theoretically predicted by the use of the additional free parameters in order to perform of the rotator bandwidth. The wave plates (or retarders) and rotators are two of the basic elements in polarization optics The combination of two rotators is also a rotator, S I 1 L 1 I 2 L 2 P 1 P 2 L 3 F wave plates AvaSpec 3648 Fiber Optic Spectrometer FIG. In the HV basis, the Jones matrix for a retarder when the optical axes are aligned with the horizontal and vertical directions is given by where φ = 2πL(n f -n s )/λ is the phase shift, with λ representing the vacuum wavelength, n f and n s the refractive indices along the fast and slow axes, respectively, and L is the thickness of the retarder plate. The most commonly used retarders are the half-wave plates (φ = π) and the quarter-wave plates (φ = π/2). If the fast and slow optical axes of the retarder are rotated at an angle θ with respect to the coordinates of the HV basis then the Jones matrix J is given as or explicitly Now let us consider a sequence of two half-wave plates rotated at angles θ 1 and θ 2 with respect to the HV basis. We multiply the Jones matrices of the two half-wave plates (φ = π) given in Eq. ( which is a Jones matrix for a rotator up to an unimportant minus sign. For a sequence of N such pairs the Jones matrix is By using the property of Eq. ( which is a rotator with a rotation angle α given as It is easy to see that we can have the same rotation matrix J α (π) if each individual rotator is rotated at an additional angle, Therefore we can use the additional angles δ 1 , δ 2 , . . . δ N as free parameters to optimise the bandwidth performance of our rotator. We now define the fidelity F, If the two operators R(α) and J α (π + ε) are identical then F = 1, but if the two matrices differ from one another then fidelity drops. Here ε represents the systematic deviation from the half-wave plate. Obviously, for the central wave length at which the wave plates serve as half-wave plates, we have ε = 0 and F (0) = 1. In order to find the optimized angles of rotation of each wave plate we use the Monte Carlo method and for each number of wave plates and each rotator angles and we generate 10 4 sets of random angles θ 1 , θ 2 , . . . , θ 2N . We pick up solutions, which in the interval of ε ∈ [-π, π] deliver the biggest area of the fidelity F (ε) and also ensure a flat top. The angles are presented in Tables We note that by using the numerical solution of many optimized angles of rotation we managed to derive exact analytic formulas for the angles of rotation for the case of four wave plates. A broadband rotator at angle α composed of four half-wave plates is given as with Unfortunately, we could not find analytical formulas for longer sequences of wave plates, but we suspect such formula may exists for 8 and 12 wave plate series. Experimental investigation of the composite linear polarization rotator described above was performed by analysing polarization of the passed light beam. The light source was a halogen lamp TUNGSRAM powered by a 6V d.c. power supply. It covered a broad continuous spectral region from 400 nm to 1100 nm. A set of two irises and two planoconvex lenses, respectively L 1 , f 1 = 20 mm and L 2 , f 2 = 150 mm, were used for producing a collimated white light beam with a diameter of about 3 mm, see Fig. The linear polarization rotators were built as stacks of an even number of ordinary multi-order quarter-wave plates (WPMQ10M-780, Thorlabs Inc.), the fast axes of which were rotated at the respective theoretically calculated angles given in Tables Here we focus at the region where the wave plates act as half-wave plates. The measurement started with taking the reference signal before applying the rotation procedure. The measurement's series of steps were similar to those taken in Ref. The reference signal presents zero rotation of the linearly polarized light. The next step was to realize the linear polarization rotator by rotating the fast axis of each WP at the respective angle θ n . The measurements were accomplished at 6 rotation angles of the polarization α ∈ {15 0 , 30 0 , 45 0 , 60 0 , 75 0 , 90 0 } for each set. The analysis was done by rotating the polariser P 2 at the target angle α. Angle tunable broadband polarization rotators comprising 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 wave plates were experimentally demonstrated and the results correspond very accurately to the predicted theoretically ones. In Fig. In this paper, we introduced and experimentally demonstrated a novel type of broadband composite polarization rotator that can rotate the polarization plane of a linearly-polarized light at any chosen angle. The experimental results show strong broadening of the bandwidth of the polarization rotator in case of 4 and 8 half-wave plates and moderate broadband increase in other cases as the number of half-wave plates grow. 