As the quantum generation of electronics takes the stage, a cast of important support electronics is needed to connect these novel devices to our classical worlds. In the case of superconducting electronics, this is a challenge because the Josephson junction devices they are based upon require tiny current pulses to create and manipulate the single flux quanta which guide their operation. Difficulty arises in transitioning these signals through large temperature gradients for connection to semiconductor components. In this work, we present nano superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUID) with critical dimensions as small as 10 nm from the high-transition-temperature superconductor YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ (YBCO). We integrate these nano-SQUIDs with nano-isolated inductively coupled control lines to create a low power superconducting output driver capable of transimpedance conversion over a very wide temperature range. Superconductive electronics (SCE) based on Josephson junctions could play a key role in delivering high-speed, low-power, high-performance, centralized and specialized computing. With demonstrated switching speeds of several hundred GHz 1 and energy dissipation on the order of 10 -19 Joules per transition 2 , single flux quantum (SFQ) logic 3 is one of the most mature and viable post-CMOS technologies. Unlike CMOS, which is based on electric charge, Josephson junctions are quantum devices with operation based on the quantum mechanical wave functions of the superconducting electrons Quantum annealing processors based on SCE can efficiently solve certain optimization problems Neuromorphic computing In all of these SCE technologies, CMOS plays a key role in connecting the inputs and outputs of these cryogenic technologies to our lives at room temperature. SCE and Josephson junctions are low impedance (1-2 Ω) flux-based devices that rely on mA level current pulses for operation. Where CMOS, on the other hand, are voltage devices requiring higher impedance millivolt level signals. Therefore there is a critical need for low power transimpedance amplifiers for matching SCE to room temperature electronics. Furthermore, it is also highly desirable to operate over a wide cryogenic temperature range to move the power dissipation from 4 K or 10 mK (in the case of quantum computing) to higher temperature such as the upper 40 K cooling stage in typical refrigeration systems to lower the cooling power required for the system. SCE from ceramic high transition temperature (high-T C ) superconductors could fill this role, however these materials are notoriously difficult to process and breakthroughs are needed in device fabrication. The most commonly studied high-T C superconductor (HTS) is YBa 2 Cu 3 3O 7-δ (YBCO). It crystallizes in a distorted perovskite orthorhombic structure. As a result the electrical transport is highly anisotropic and varies in every direction. The resistivty along the b direction is the lowest (∼ 100 μΩ•cm) and is 3 and 10 times higher along the a and c directions respectively The irradiation causes disorder in the YBCO lattice that at moderate doses (10 15 ions/cm 2 ) converts the material from superconductor to insulator The FHIB nano-SQUIDs are not visible using optical microscopy because of their small size and the fact that no materials have been removed in the direct writing process. However, excellent contrast between insulating and conducting regions can be observed with helium ion microscopy. Fig. Several FHIB nano-SQUIDs with integrated control lines were written with square SQUID loops with side ranging from 900 nm to 10 nm with (300 × 2 nm) Josephson junctions to determine the optimum size for our transimpedance amplifier. After fabrication, I-V characteristics were measured in a liquid helium, dip probe with a three-layer magnetic shield. Subsequently, devices were DC biased slightly over critical current I C (∼1.2I C ), and a current I M was swept through the on-chip control line, which generated a relative strong magnetic field, and the voltage across the device was measured to examine V -I M . The process was found to be reliable and reproducible. The data recorded for all of these devices is included in supplemental Fig. Helium ion images of the two smallest nano-SQUIDs with 10 nm and 50 nm square loops are shown in Fig. While these smallest devices are an advance in scaling down the size of nano-SQUIDs, unfortunately, the inductive coupling strength of our integrated control line was too weak for operation of the nano-SQUID as a transimpedance amplifier. Our further studies in this effort focused on devices with 400-nm square SQUID loops because they exhibited the best combination of output voltage and inductive coupling between the control line. Current-voltage (I-V) characteristics for a 400-nm square loop device are shown in Fig. The local minimal points in the voltage-magnetic field (V-B) curves in Fig. We measured the noise properties of the nano-SQUID by using a open loop method. The voltage noise was recorded by spectrum analyzer, when a bias current ∼60 μA and flux bias -0.13 Φ 0 were used to achieve the steepest slope in the V-B curve. Dividing the voltage noise by the corresponding transfer function yielded a flux noise of ∼ 300 nΦ 0 /Hz 1/2 at 100 kHz at 4.2 K, as shown in supplemental Fig. To characterize the coupling of the nano-isolated control line to the 400-nm square loop SQUID a current was swept through the control line and the voltage response of the SQUID was measured (Fig. The shape of the characteristics and maximum amplitude of the modulation voltage V max were found to be in good agreement with that measured using externally applied magnetic field (Fig. Our findings demonstrate the nano-SQUID as a promising low power trans-impedance amplifier for connection of superconducting circuits to room temperature silicon electronics. Gas field ion source direct-write patterning of HTS has given us the ability to aggressively scale and integrate device features in superconducting electronics. The integration of nano-scale Josephson junctions, SQUID loops and in-plane insulators for control lines to build and test a trans-impedance amplifier is an example of the power of this technique. The possibilities for other SCE circuit implementations are countless as we move into a new era in HTS electronics. Sample fabrication A 35-nm-thick YBCO thin-film was grown on CeO 2 buffered r-plane sapphire by reactive coevaporation by Ceraco GmbH. After deposition a 200 nm thick gold film is thermally evaporated in-situ. The wafers were coated with a thick layer of photo resist and diced into 5 mm × 5 mm chips along the YBCO a-b axis with a Disco DAD321 automatic dicing saw. The substrates were spin coated with Fuji film OCG 825 resist at 5000 rpm, and baked for 60 s on a 90 • C hotplate. A Microtech LW405 maskless laser direct-write photolithography system was used to expose the resist with a 405 nm wavelength laser in raster scanning mode. After exposure, development was performed using Fuji film OCG 934 for 90 s. Subsequently, the pattern was etched into both the Au and YBCO layers in a 21 cm Ion Tech argon ion mill with power 150 W, Ar pressure 1.7E-4 torr and energy 500 eV. A second photolithography step was performed to mask the electri-cal contacts and Transene gold etchant was used to expose the YBCO film for FHIB direct writing. The sample was loaded into a Carl Zeiss Orion Plus Helium Ion Microscope. A 0.5-nm-diameter, 32-keV focused helium ion beam was formed by aligning the atomically sharp tungsten tip with the help of the electrical extracting, accelerating, and focusing system. The custom-defined vector pattern (direct-writing) was generated by NanoPatterning and Visualization Engine (NPVE). For Josephson junctions the single line irradiation dose 600 ions/nm was used with a dwell time of 1 μs, a point spacing of 0.25 nm. For the SQUID loop, and other insulators an area irradiation dose was used 3200 ions/nm 2 with spacing 0.25 nm in both x-axis and y-axis. The chip was mounted with Devcon epoxy 14270 and wedge wire bonded to a 44-pin copper plate chip carrier with a Lake Shore silicon diode DT-670 to ensure the accurate monitoring of the local temperature of the chip. The whole chip carrier was mounted on a vacuum tight dip probe with twisted pair wires and pin-type low pass EMI filter with bandwidth 1 MHz. The test signal was generated by an Agilent arbitrary waveform generator A33522, which was conditioned through a custom made iso-amplifier. The output voltage of the nano-SQUID was amplified by a Stanford Research preamplifier SR560. The data was recorded by a National Instruments analog ot digital converter NI9215 connected to a PC. For noise measurements the chip was mounted on a G10 fiberglass dip probe to avoid any noise from normal metals. A niobium can and cryoperm shield was used to reduce the background magnetic noise. Lead acid batteries were used for the bias current and control current for the on-chip coils. The bias current was also filtered by a second order low pass RC filter working at low temperature. mV at 40 K in the nano-SQUID with 50 nm square SQUID loop, as shown in Fig. The optimal size of the square SQUID loop was found to be ∼400 nm, where the coupling of the on-chip coil is strong, the output voltage is high, the FHIB direct-write time is short (less than 1 minute), and the flux noise is small. The flux noise of a nano-SQUID was measured by an open loop method. The nano-SQUID with a 400-nm square SQUID loop and a junction of 200 nm at 100 kHz was measured to have a flux noise of 300 nΦ 0 /Hz -1/2 at 4.2 K, as shown in Fig. Characterizations of the tran-impedance amplifier Nano-SQUIDs with 400-nm square SQUID loop of ∼ 50 Ω with better impedance matching was made to transfer the current signal in on-chip coil to output voltage. The I-V characteristics from 4.2 K up to 40 K are shown in Fig. 