Recent experimental advances in the reconstruction of the Wigner function (WF) for electronic systems have led us to consider the possibility of employing this theoretical tool in the analysis of electron dynamics of uniaxially strained graphene. In this paper, we study the effect of strain on the WF of electrons in graphene under the interaction of a uniform magnetic field. This mechanical deformation modifies drastically the shape of the Wigner function of Landau and coherent states. The WF has a different behavior straining the material along the zigzag direction in comparison with the armchair one and favors the creation of electron coherent states. The time evolution of the WF for electron coherent states shows fluctuations between classical and quantum behavior around a closed path as time increases. The phase-space representation shows more clearly the effect of nonequidistant relative Landau levels in the time evolution of electron coherent states compared with other approaches. Our findings may be useful in establishing protocols for the realization of electron coherent states in graphene as well as a bridge between condensed matter and quantum optics. Quantum systems are traditionally described by using a probabilistic interpretation of them. From this notion, the so-called wave function ψ arises, with which we can calculate the probability of finding a particle in some space region by taking its square norm |ψ| 2 or the probability that a certain system is in one state or another. Applying the so-called evolution operator, we can know how the probabilities change over time On the other hand, the emergence of strain engineering has opened an important platform for exploiting the outstanding electronic, transport, and optical properties in graphene . This topic started with the possibility of obtaining a gap opening For these motivations, we propose the study of quasi-probability distributions for describing the time evolution of electron dynamics in uniaxially strained graphene under a uniform and perpendicular magnetic field. We start by developing an effective Dirac-Weyl (DW) model based on the tight-binding (TB) approach to nearest neighbors around a Dirac point. We relate the geometrical parameters of the elliptical Dirac cones with the components of the strain tensor, showing a good agreement with recent density functional theory (DFT) calculations 2 Effective tight-binding Hamiltonian in uniaxially strained graphene For describing the WM in strained graphene, we start using the TB approach to an anisotropic hexagonal lattice where ν is the Poisson ratio of graphene while for the A direction they are where a 0 is the bond length in pristine graphene To obtain an effective model based on the TB approach, we develop the following TB Hamiltonian in the Fourier basis from a plane-wave ansatz The hopping parameters t j can be modeled using an exponential decay rule t j = texp[-β(δ j /a-1)], where β is the Grüneisen constant, t is the hopping in pristine graphene, and δ j are the deformed bond lengths while for uniaxial strain along the A direction The electronic band structure of uniaxially strained graphene is obtained from the eigenenergies of the Hamiltonian (4) where the band index s = 1 (-1) corresponds to the conduction (valence) band. The energy bands can be modified applying uniaxial strain, as shown in Fig. where the quantities are expressed as functions of the lattice vectors and hopping parameters. Taking into account the relation cos[ which is obtained from the Dirac points equation 3 j t j e -i K D • δ j = 0, it is possible to show that It is important to mention that the parameters a and b can be related to the extremal angle of the elliptical Dirac cones The effective Dirac-Weyl Hamiltonian (8) has validity in the energy range of 0-0.3 eV, where DFT and TB calculations agree very well where the geometrical parameters a and b are given by Eq. ( the linear momentum p y = k, with k the wave vector in y, is conserved and therefore we can write the pseudo-spinor ansatz as Substituting ( These equations are decoupled to obtain where This effective one-dimensional potential has been discussed in a supersymmetric point of view where ω ζ is a frequency defined by ω ζ = 2eB ζ . Since this problem is very similar to solve the quantum harmonic oscillator, the LL spectra are straightforwardly obtained where v F = v F √ ab is the effective Fermi velocity. The Landau-level index n runs over 0, 1, 2, ... and the positive (negative) energy corresponds to electrons in the conduction (valence) band, as given by the band index s. When one performs the same analysis in the other elliptical Dirac cone K D , the LL spectra are very similar to those shown in The exact solution for the wave function of electrons in strained graphene with a uniform magnetic field turns out to be and the components of the pseudo-spinor are given by The quantity δ mn denotes the Kronecker delta, ψ - n ≡ ψ n , ψ + n ≡ ψ n-1 and λ = +/-describes Dirac fermions at the K D /K D valley. It is worth remarking that the wave function in the upper (lower) component of the pseudo-spinor 3 Electron coherent states of strained graphene First, for obtaining coherent states in electronic systems, we introduce the definition of creation and annihilation operators for electrons of strained graphene in the presence of a uniform magnetic field. Thus, let us define the following dimensionless differential operators that satisfy the commutation relation This relation implies that the set of operators {θ + , θ -, 1} generates a Heisenberg-Weyl (HW) algebra so that θ -(θ + ) is the annihilation (creation) operator. In terms of these ladder operators, we can define the following dimensionless 2 × 2 Hamiltonian H that acts on the x-dependent pseudo-spinors in Eq. ( To build coherent states in graphene, one can define a generalized annihilation operator Θ - as such that where N = θ + θ -is the number operator. The parameter δ ∈ [0, 2π] in Eq. ( On the other hand, the operators Θ ± satisfy the following commutation relation that also generates the HW algebra. We obtain the coherent states Ψ α (x, y) as eigenstates of the operator Θ -: where α is the eigenvalue of Θ -. The |α| 2 indicates the average electron number, while the α phase is the polar angle in phase space. The electron coherent states are expanded in the Landau states basis Upon inserting these states into the corresponding eigenvalue equation, we get the following relations where α = α exp (-i δ). This means that the δ parameter translates as a phase factor, that will affect the eigenvalue α, and a 0 is a free parameter that can be determined by the normalization process. After straightforward calculations, the coherent states turn out to be where Eq. (33b) corresponds to the wave function of an un-normalized standard coherent state. 4 Phase-space representation The Wigner function W ( r, p) is the cornerstone of quantum mechanics in phase space. It is a quasiprobability distribution defined as [2, 3, 9, 14] where ρ is the density matrix; r = (r 1 , r 2 , . . . , r n ) and p = (p 1 , p 2 , . . . , p n ) are n-dimensional vectors representing the classical phase-space position and momentum values, respectively; and r = (r 1 , r 2 , . . . , r n ) is the position vector in the integration process. The normalization condition is given by It is a real function that can take negative values, in contrast with the probability density of any quantum state. Such negativity has no physical meaning if it is thought of like a probability distribution. In several works, the negativity in the WF is considered as an indicator of the nonclassicality of a state and being interpreted as a sign of quantumness. This feature has been tested experimentally To calculate the Wigner matrix for the Landau state n in the valley K D , we have to take into account that the n = 0 level presents a four-fold degeneracy due to the pseudospin of the sublattice and valley, while the ground state n = 0 has only two-fold degeneracy where the components W α,β (x, p x ) and W (y, p y ) are given, respectively, by ψ α and ψ β being the wave functions of the quantum harmonic oscillator For computing the function W α,β (x, p x ), we define the following quantities Hence, by substituting Eq. ( An identical solution for the WM in Eq. ( where τ = ln 2/ω ζ . Eq. ( Figures To observe the effect of strain on the WM for electron coherent states, we substitute the components of coherent states (33a) and (33b) into the integral matrix representation where, by using properly Eq. ( where (z) and (z) denote the real and imaginary part of a complex number z, respectively. Expression (44c) corresponds to the scalar WF of un-normalized coherent states as expected. The off-diagonal components indicate a sign of interference by the superposition of the electron wave function from the sublattices A and B. Fig. On the other hand, when we change the parameter α it is possible to identify two main effects on the WF. First, the increasing of |α| 2 shifts the maximum of the WF far away from the phase-space origin. This is identical to the displacement observed in light coherent states, where |α| 2 also corresponds to the average photon number Now, we investigate the time evolution of the coherent states in phase space by applying the time evolution unitary operator U (t) = exp (-iHt/ ) on the states Ψ α (x, y) in Eq. ( where E n are the LLs By substituting Eq. ( is implemented and the temporal function A nm (t) = (α n α * m e i(Em-En)t ) has been defined. Setting t = 0, we recover the expressions √ abT ], while in light coherent states such a contraction does not exist because E n ∝ n and the eigenvalue α evolves as α(t) = α exp(iωt). For light coherent states, the variation of the phase of α causes only rotation of the corresponding WF around the phase-space origin without changing its shape Note that, in contrast to that discussed in We studied the electron dynamics in uniaxially strained graphene in the presence of a uniform and perpendicular magnetic field to the layer from a phase-space representation perspective. The Wigner matrix is a powerful theoretical tool that has been very useful for investigating quantum optics systems and quantum information, and so far has been scarcely used for condensed matter. Since mechanical deformation modifies the atomic positions in the lattice and distorts the reciprocal space, Wigner matrix representation allows evidence of the effect of strain on the electron dynamics simultaneously in both spaces. Moreover, it indicates which electronic states present a nonclassical behavior. This is of relevant importance for the realization of entanglement. By using a tight-binding approach to nearest neighbors, it was possible to derive an effective Dirac-Weyl model, where we obtained Landau-level spectra and their corresponding wave functions. This effective model has a direct connection with other methods frequently used for studying strained materials such as the geometrical approach We think that our findings might help to establish protocols for the preparation of electron coherent states in the laboratory. Moreover, these results suggest the possibility of a feedback between electron and light quantum optics due to the analogy of approaches in condensed matter and quantum optics. Also, it is worth remarking that the phase-space representation presented in this paper has an advantage over canonical quantization, since it has allowed us to investigate the time evolution of electronic coherent states, which is difficult to perform using the notion of the wave function because the energy spectrum ( In the QDF, the eigenvalue equation Hψ = Eψ is replaced by a -genvalue equation, namely: for describing the eigenvalue energy E, where the star product ( ) represents a deformation performed on the algebraic structure in phase space of classical mechanics, which carries a noncommutative algebra in that of quantum mechanics. One of the star products defined in the DQF framework is the so-called Moyal star product ( M ) indicates that the derivative acts on the function to the left (right). Alternatively, the Moyal star product can be rewritten as Thus, the WF satisfies the M -genvalue equations where E is the energy eigenvalue of Hψ = Eψ. According to H D ( r, p) W ( r, p) = EW ( r, p), (A.5) where This means that the WF is a 4 × 4 matrix but that in an adequate representation it can be reduced to a diagonal partitioned matrix, as is shown in Eq. (A.6) , (A.10) and using the variables ξ and s defined in Coming back to the WF obtained by the integral representation (Eq. ( 1,n ( r, p) = n + 1 2 ω B W n-1,n ( r, p), H 2 W n-1,n ( r, p) = i ω B 2 W n-1,n ( r, p),