Spin-transfer magnetic random access memory is of significant interest for cryogenic applications where a persistent, fast, low-energy consumption and high device density is needed. Here we report the low-temperature nanosecond duration spin-transfer switching characteristics of perpendicular magnetic tunnel junction (pMTJ) nanopillar devices (40 to 60 nm in diameter) and contrast them to their room temperature properties. Interestingly, at fixed pulse voltage overdrive the characteristic switching time decreases with temperature, in contrast to macrospin model predictions, with the largest reduction in switching time occurring between room temperature and 150 K. The switching energy increases with decreasing temperature, but still compares very favorably to other types of spin-transfer devices at 4 K, with < 300 fJ required per switch. Write error rate (WER) measurements show highly reliable (WER ≤ 5×10 -5 with 4 ns pulses at 4 K) demonstrating the promise of pMTJ devices for cryogenic applications and routes to further device optimization. Spin-transfer torque (STT) magnetic memory elements are interesting for cryogenic applications, such as computing systems based on superconducting circuits Recently, three-terminal cryogenic spin-Hall-based memory devices have been demonstrated In conventional STT-MRAM devices operating at or above room temperature, the angle between the magnetization of layers is always non-zero. This reduces the time required to reverse the magnetization and hence reduces write errors. In other words, elevated temperature helps the write process but at the same time reduces the data retention time. For cryogenic memory devices, on the other hand, a simple macrospin model predicts that in absence of temperature the switching time would increase substantially In this letter we report the low-temperature highspeed spin-transfer switching characteristics of pMTJs and compare them to those at room temperature. We find that at a fixed pulse voltage overdrive the characteristic switching time decreases with temperature, in contrast to macrospin model predictions. The largest reduction in switching time occurs between room temperature and 150 K. Further, at low temperatures there is a factor two increase in the device magnetoresistance, providing a much large readout signal. Remarkably, the write energies (103 fJ, AP→P and 286 fJ, P→AP at 4 K) are much lower than devices with a metallic write channel, and thus a lower impedance We studied pMTJ nanopillars with a perpendicularly magnetized CoFeB composite free layer (FL) consisting of CoFeB layer with a thin W insertion layer, CoFeB(1.5)/W(0.3)/CoFeB(0.8), where the numbers are the layer thicknesses in nm. The W insertion layer increases the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy and therefore enhances the thermal stability of the device The devices are first characterized by measuring their field and current pulse resistance hysteresis loops. Figure The measurement procedure thus consists of applying two square pulses-reset and write pulses-with opposite pulse polarities and reading the junction resistance and thus the junction state (P or AP) after each pulse. We start by applying a reset pulse to bring the device to a known state, either P or AP. We then verified the desired state by measuring the device resistance. The subsequent write pulse is applied by the pulse generator and the end state is determined by measuring the device resistance. The whole procedure is repeated about 100 times for each write pulse amplitude and duration combination to determine the switching probability. We systematically vary the pulse amplitude and duration to create the phase diagrams shown in Fig. Figure In order to characterize the data trends we consider a macrospin model, a simple model that provides analytic expressions for the switching times in the ballistic limit and how they vary with material and device parameters where τ is the pulse duration, τ 0 is the characteristic time for switching and V c is the switching voltage in the long pulse duration limit. The fits of the switching boundary (i.e. the 50% switching probability versus pulse duration) to Eq. 1 are displayed as blue lines in Fig. In Figs. The threshold voltage in the macrospin model is given by: where A is the disk area, R is a device resistance, t is the free layer thickness, P is the spin polarization and H k,eff is the effective perpendicular magnetic anisotropy. H k,eff = 2K/(μ 0 M s ) -M s , the perpendicular anisotropy associated with spin-orbit coupling K minus the demagnetization field M s . In our fits to the data we find that V c increases with decreasing temperature and saturates at temperatures less than about 150 K for both AP→P and P→AP transitions (see Table The characteristic switching time scale τ 0 is given by where α is the damping, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, μ 0 is the permittivity of free space, and θ 0 is the average magnetization initial angle. θ 0 is related to the temperature and the energy barrier to magnetization switching by θ 0 ≈ 1/(2 √ π∆), where ∆ is the ratio of the energy barrier to reversal to the thermal energy, ∆ = E b /(k B T ). Hence τ 0 is, again, related to material parameters that depend on temperature: As V c is independent of temperature below about 150 K it seems reasonable to assume that the relevant junction material parameters, like E b and α, are also independent of temperature below 150 K. Eq. 4 then predicts that the characteristic switching time would increase by about 20% at 4 K relative to its value at 150 K. This predicted behavior reflects the decrease in magnetization fluctuations as the temperature decreases. This behavior is clearly not seen experimentally and shows that the macrospin model cannot explain the low temperature data trends. In addition to characterizing the temperature dependence of the characteristic switching time and switching threshold we have measured write error rates for nanosecond current pulses. Figure Bases on these results we can determine the write energies and compare them to other types of cryogenic magnetic memory devices. The optimal (i.e. lowest) write energy is for pulse durations at the characteristics time τ 0 These results clearly show an advantageous scaling of the switching energy with device diameter, the switching energy decreases as the device size decreases. These write energies are also comparable to write energies of all metal spin-valves with a Permalloy free layer The low energy consumption of pMTJ devices at 4 K as well as their increased switching speed makes them very interesting as a low-energy cryogenic data storage solution. Foremost, the increased device magnetoresistance at low temperatures makes it possible to further reduce the resistance area product of the magnetic tunnel junction (reducing the device resistance and therefore the write energy) while maintaining a fast readout. It is also possible to significantly reduce the switching energy. The most straightforward way would be by further reducing the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (see Eq. 2), as the FL in these studies are thermally stable at room temperature (∆ > 26, determined by using a read disturb rate method described in Ref. Note added: We are aware of related research by Dr. Li Ye at the Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Their work focuses on the low-temperature switching characteristics of pMTJs at longer time scales and the relation between the magnetic anisotropy, the magnetization and the switching voltages at low temperatures. Their paper will also be posted on the arXivs. 4 Write