In this work, we present a novel device that is a combination of a superconducting nanowire single-photon detector and a superconducting multi-level memory. We show that these devices can be used to count the number of detections through single-photon to single-flux conversion. Electrical characterization of the memory properties demonstrates single-flux quantum (SFQ) separated states. Optical measurements using attenuated laser pulses with different mean photon number, pulse energies and repetition rates are shown to differentiate single-photon detection from other possible phenomena, such as multiphoton detection and thermal activation. Finally, different geometries and material stacks to improve device performance, as well as arraying methods are discussed. Detection of single-photons is essential to applications such as optical communications, astronomical measurements, and quantum-information processing. Superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPDs) are prominent tools for these applications because of their > 90% detection efficiencies, near GHz count rates, few picosecond timing jitter, broad spectral sensitivity from ultra-violet to infrared wavelengths, and sub-Hz dark count rates SNSPDs operate by amplifying photon-absorption events through the growth of a hotspot (i.e. a normal domain in the superconductor), across which a significant (few mV) voltage develops. However, the high kinetic inductance of the superconductor leads to slow recovery (i.e. longer period for hotspot to grow), causing the possibility of latching and increased power dissipation. If the hotspot's growth could be regulated, these effects could be avoided with the limiting case being the absorption of a single photon resulting in the passage of a single flux across the nanowire. In this paper, we attempt to achieve the minimal state of single-photon to single-flux conversion by shunting a nanowire both electrically and thermally with an underlying normal metal film. Unfortunately, direct measurement of the dynamics of single-flux events in a shunted superconductor is extremely challenging due to the low signal-to-noise ratio. Instead, we used a nanoSQUID to detect the fluxon-tunneling event post-facto. This approach has the attractive feature of storing fluxon state of the nanoSQUID as a persistent current in the loop. As a result, the number of firing events of the nanowire can be integrated and read out later. We suggest this new device may prove analogous to a charge-coupled detector (CCD), as the photon detection events lead to accumulation of flux (instead of charge for CCDs), which can provide the number of single-photon detection events (analogous to intensity). The further development could devise schemes for readout of large-scale arrays of such devices for use in imaging and spectroscopy. The single-photon single-flux coupled detector demonstrated in this work is a superconducting loop that employs a shunted constriction The state of the cell can be read by the yTron terminal, using a geometric effect called current crowding The main idea behind this device is to trigger these switching events via optical illumination, as photons can create hotspots on superconducting nanowires biased closed to I SW . Here, the constriction is more than 4 times narrower than the loop and the read arm. Therefore, when the constriction is critically biased, currents in other parts of the wire are well below their switching current, ensuring the photon-triggered counting events being predominantly from the constriction. In this scenario, each detection event shuttles additional flux inside the loop, changing the state of the cell memory incrementally. Consequently, the state difference between the two successive readouts (∝ ∆I circ ) gives the number of photons registered by the device in that time interval. It should be noted that each photon detection increases the circulating current in the loop, leading to a decrease in the effective bias over the shunted nanowire (Fig. The devices described above were fabricated with 25 nm thin-film NbN on a metal shunting stack of 20 nm Ti capped with 5 nm Pt 2 . Sheet resistance and critical temperature (T C ) of the unshunted superconducting NbN film were 94 Ω/2 and 10.5 K respectively. The superconducting layer was patterned such that the constriction portion of the loop resides on the metal layer (in-situ shunting) and yTron side does not. The constriction is 100 nm wide while both yTron arms are 400 nm wide with a connection angle of 75 mrad. Figure We first characterized the device electrically in liquid helium (LHe) immersion conditions (4.2 K), by programming the device into different states to quantify the circulating current inside the device at each step as a fraction of the switching current of the shunted nanowire (Fig. For the optical characterization, we first used an 80 μW, continuous waveform laser centered at 680 nm to illuminate the sample at different programming currents. Note that the actual photon flux entering the active area was small ( 8.2 × 10 4 ), as we flood illuminated the chip with large divergence angle from ≈ 2 cm distance, while the area ratio of the active area to the beam spot size was ≈ 3 × 10 -10 (See Sec.6.3). Considering that the effective bias (I prog -I circ ) is the same ( 0.95I SW ) at any given state (Fig. To further investigate the optical response of the device, we illuminated the device using an ultrafast laser centered at 1030 nm, with pulse duration ≈ 400 fs, variable repetition rate between 250 kHz and 4 MHz, and pulse energies between 10-200 pJ. This setup allows us to control the number of pulses sent, pulse energy and pulse repetition rate. To demonstrate the incremental counting behavior, we have set the device to a baseline 3 The inductance ratio of the two arms is a strong function of what portion of the yTron branch is shunted. It can be seen from Fig. So as to understand the nature of these counts (single-photon, multi-photon or bolometric), we have proceeded with changing the energy of each pulse and recorded the average number of pulses sent before the first count at a constant laser repetition rate of 1 MHz. As shown in Figure Furthermore, the counting probability here is on the order of 10 -4 1, also suggesting that the detector is operating in the single-photon regime In order to distinguish between single-photon-based or bolometric detection mechanisms, we have sent pulses with the same energies but varying repetition rates. Doing so allowed us to controllably deliver the same number of photons with different optical powers and hence different amount of heat on the device. As shown in Fig. For a bolometrically operated device, the mechanism would rely on switching current suppression through the increased temperature. In order to understand if the devices worked this way, we have determined how much temperature change would be required to actuate the state changes we observed with these devices. Figure The results show that a suppression in I SW , that is equal to the ∆I circ between 3-countseparated-states (operation limit shown in Fig. Finally, we have characterized the dark count performance by biasing the device for 10 hours without any illumination, while periodically performing readout. We have not observed any change in the device state for this period (See Fig. In this work, we present a hybrid device that combines the advantages of SNSPDs and CCDs through single-photon to single-fluxon conversion. The device fabricated in this work can count up to three photons incrementally without any feedback circuitry. The states of these devices were nonvolatile and did not suffer from dark counts. This architecture is suitable for constructing large arrays to produce contrastive information under longexposure and low-illumination scenarios at the expense of time-resolution of the photon arrival. Note that the single-photon to single-fluxon conversion observed in these devices are not expected to be coherent, considering the thermal nature of the switching event. Optimization of the optical design was not pursued in this work due the complicated nature of the shunted detectors we have demonstrated. Readout of a stand-alone shunted SNSPD (i.e. not connected to a loop for post-facto measurements) would prove to be very difficult, as the low resistance change would be buried under the noise level. Moreover, as the metal layer significantly changes the behavior of the superconducting NbN (via electrical and thermal shunting as well as the proximity effect), an unshunted detector with identical geometry and superconducting film thickness cannot be used as a reference either. Therefore, a high performance readout circuitry would be necessary to further investigate and optimize the photon detection properties of these novel family of SNSPDs in separation. On the other hand, multiple improvements can be implemented on this device idea to improve performance. First of all, the device area can be increased by replacing the short nanowire with a long, meandering geometry. This modification would also require a balance inductor on the yTron side, to keep the biasing ratio the same. Secondly, a detector with detection efficiency saturating at an earlier biasing current would increase the number of photons the device can count up to. We suggest using WSi detectors, which has shown saturated detection efficiency at bias levels down to 0.375I SW In conclusion, the devices demonstrated in this work have the potential to realize largescale single-photon detectors with CCD-alike characteristics through single-photon singleflux coupling. Following the implementation of the suggested modifications, the devices can have high detection efficiency, a wider range of counting, faster readout and effective arraying as well. We fabricated these devices on 100 nm Si 3 N 4 on Si substrate. The first metal layer was patterned by a liftoff process (for the fabrication of the shunting islands). Unlike fabrication described in The NbN layer was then sputtered using magnetron sputtering at room temperature, following the process described in Ref. A Zeiss Orion SEM was used to image the devices at 5 kV acceleration voltage at 4.8 mm working distance using the in-lense detector with 30 μm aperture size. A plurality of devices were fabricated in this study, using different material stacks and geometries. We have observed that the devices that could be programmed using electrical signals, could also be programmed optically with varying sensitivities and noise levels. The results reported in this work are based on one hero device out of these trials. In Fig. Note that due to the imperfections of the yTron, most of the negative states (counterclockwise currents) resolved in the same output, leading to utilization of 25 states out of 46. We have determined this property using the sign of the I circ for different states, where ideally, there should be an equal number of states on both polarities. The results shown in Fig. The dark count rate is characterized by biasing the device for 10 hours without any illumination, while periodically performing readout. We have not observed any change in the device state for this period (Fig. Current flowing through the yTron branch is ignored based on the high inductance ratio, for simplicity of the analysis.