High-pressure synthesis techniques have allowed for the growth of Sn1-xInxTe samples beyond the ambient In-saturation limit of x = 0.5 (Tc ∼ 4.5 K). In this study, we present measurements of the temperature dependence of the London penetration depth ∆λ(T ) in this superconducting doped topological insulator for x = 0.7, where Tc,onset ≈ 5 K. The results indicate fully gapped BCSlike behavior, ruling out odd-parity A2u pairing; however, odd-parity A1u pairing is still possible. Critical field values measured below 1 K and other superconducting parameters are also presented. The potential applications of exploiting the non-Abelian statistics of Majorana-like quasiparticle excitations in topological superconductors for quantum computing schemes Intrinsic superconductivity below 0.3 K arising from antisite defects in SnTe and InTe have been known since the late 1960s In this work, we report on magnetization measurements and low-temperature measurements of the London penetration depth λ in the highly doped TCI-derived superconductor Sn 0.3 In 0.7 Te down to ∼0.46 K. The observed temperature dependence of λ indicates a full superconducting gap, which eliminates one of two possible candidate topological superconducting states for Sn 0.3 In 0.7 Te. Polycrystalline ingots of Sn 0.3 In 0.7 Te were grown following the method of Ref. 36. High purity powder of Te, Sn, and shots of In were weighed in stoichiometric ratio and sealed in an evacuated tube. The mixture was heated at 850 °C for a day to obtain cubic SnTe and tetragonal InTe. The pelletized powder was placed in the high pressure cell and treated at 500 °C under 2 GPa for 30 min. Powder x-ray diffraction of ground samples was taken at room temperature with a Rigaku 1100 diffractometer. Following synthesis, samples were kept in a freezer to avoid the deformation from the metastable cubic phase into the tetragonal InTe form. Measurements were performed before the deformation takes place. Preliminary magnetometry measurements were performed on an irregularly shaped single ingot (∼5 mm x 3 mm x 2 mm) with a custom-built SQUID magnetometer with a small conventional magnet down to 1.2 K. Further magnetization measurements were performed on a thin sliver cut from this piece with a Quantum Design MPMS dc SQUID magnetometer with a superconducting magnet down to 1.8 K. The tunnel diode oscillator (TDO) technique Powder XRD measurements are shown in Fig. Normalized magnetization vs temperature measurements on a single piece of Sn 0.3 In 0.7 Te are shown in Fig. 2 , we extrapolate μ 0 H c1 (T = 0) to be 4.5 mT for Sn 0.3 In 0.7 Te. The shift of the TDO oscillator frequency with field and/or temperature is a measure of the degree of screening of magnetic flux in the sample which is either due to superconductivity or the normal-state skin depth The low-temperature penetration depth measurements were carried out via the TDO technique in the temperature range from 0.46 to 10 K. In the TDO technique, the frequency shift ∆f of the resonator is proportional to the change of the penetration depth where ∆ 0 and λ 0 are the zero-temperature values of the energy gap and the penetration depth, respectively. In a nodal superconductor, the enhanced thermal excitation of quasiparticles near the gap nodes results in a powerlaw variation instead, with ∆λ ∼ T n38, In Fig. As no spontaneous rotational symmetry breaking is yet known to occur in the Sn 1-x In x Te system, theoretical considerations In summary, we have investigated the superconducting gap symmetry and critical fields of the TCI-derived superconductor Sn 0.3 In 0.7 Te, which is beyond the previously known In-saturation limit of x = 0.5. This doping regime, only available via high-pressure synthesis techniques, shows a higher T c than the previous optimally doped samples with x ≈ 0.45, with a maximum T c at x = 0.7. We see no additional superconducting transitions down to ∼0.46 K. Magnetic phase diagrams have been extended to below 1 K. The extrapolated H c2 at T = 0 is not increased over that found for x = 0.45, but the observed decrease in λ 0 is consistent with trends from lower doping levels. Samples with x = 0.7 are found to have a full superconducting gap which is likely weakly anisotropic. This gap structure is consistent with either the conventional, topologically-trivial A 1g state, or the odd-parity, topologically-nontrivial A 1u state. We eliminate the odd-parity, nodal A 2u state as a possibility. V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS TDO and magnetization measurements at Argonne were supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division. Crystal synthesis was supported by Grant-in-Aid from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology (MEXT) under Grants No. 18K03540 and 19H01852.