The discovery of nearly room-temperature superconductivity in superhydrides has motivated further materials research for conventional superconductors. To realize the moderately high critical temperature (T c ) in materials containing light elements, we explored new superconducting phases in a scandium borocarbide system. Here, we report the observation of superconductivity in a new ternary Sc-B-C compound. The crystal structure, which was determined through a Rietveld analysis, belongs to tetragonal space group P 4/ncc. By complementarily using the density functional theory calculations, a chemical formula of the compound was found to be expressed as Sc 20 C 8-x B x C 20 (x = 1 or 2). Interestingly, a small amount of B is essential to stabilize the present structure. Our experiments revealed the typical type-II superconductivity at T c = 7.7 K. Additionally, we calculated the density of states within a first-principles approach and found that the contribution of the Sc-3d orbital was mainly responsible for the superconductivity. Exploring new superconductors with a higher critical temperature (T c ) is still one of the main topics in the fields of materials science and condensed matter physics. In the case of conventional phonon-mediated superconductors, the pairing mechanism of which is explained by the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) model, bands derived from the B-sp 2 orbitals. In the present study, we explored new superconducting phases in the Sc-B-C system. Although a moderately high-T c superconductor is expected in combination with the comparatively small ionic radius of Sc and the potentially high Debye frequencies originating from B and C, there are no reports on the observation of superconductivity thus far, as listed in Table Polycrystalline samples were synthesized using the arc-melting method in an inert gas environment. As starting materials, we used powders of graphite (C) and amorphous boron (B), and ingots of scandium (Sc) prepared in a specified molar ratio. B and C were preliminarily mixed in a zirconia mortar and then pelletized so that the Sc ingot was sandwiched between the mixture. These procedures were performed in a dry nitrogen-filled glovebox to prevent the oxidation of the Sc metals. The prepared pellet was arc-melted on a watercooled copper hearth in an argon atmosphere. To ensure chemical homogeneity, we turned over and remelted the button at least thrice. The resultant sample was metallic silver in color. The powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) pattern was measured using Cu Kα radiation. The intensity data were collected at approximately 293 K using a diffractometer (Ultima-IV, Rigaku) equipped with a one-dimensional high-speed detector (D/teX Ultra, Rigaku). To refine the crystallographic parameters, we conducted Rietveld analyses using BIOVIA Materials Studio Reflex software(version 2018 R2). The magnetic susceptibility was measured using a commercial SQUID magnetometer (MPMS-XL7, Quantum Design) under a magnetic field of H = 10 Oe. The data were collected on warming after zero-field cooling (ZFC process) and then cooling under the field (FC process). Additionally, we measured the isothermal magnetization in the field, ranging from -30 to 30 kOe. Electrical-resistivity measurements down to T = 2 K were performed by the conventional four-probe technique at several fields between H = 0 and 90 kOe using a physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design). Furthermore, using the PPMS, we measured the specific heat below 20 K using the thermal-relaxation method under zero field and 90 kOe. We conducted first-principles calculations using the full-potential linearized augmented planewave method (FLAPW) on the basis of density functional theory (DFT). The computer program WIEN2k 27 was used to implement the whole calculation. The exchange-correlation potential was approximated by the generalgradient approximation (GGA). We attempted to synthesize the ternary Sc-B-C system under various conditions of the starting composition, and then we examined the superconductivity by measuring the magnetic susceptibility down to 2 K. The magnitude of the diamagnetic signals for each sample is depicted as the contour plot in Figure We performed PXRD measurements using the sample that exhibited the largest diamagnetic signal, the nominal molar ratio of which was Sc : B : C = 35 : 2 : 63. Figure The crystal structure of Sc 20 BC 27 is depicted in Figure The magnetic susceptibility (M/H) of Sc 20 BC 27 is plotted as a function of temperature in Fig- Figure A similar feature was reported on the resistivity of some carbides 32 and B-doped diamond, We defined the T c from the midpoint of the superconducting transition. As indicated by the solid curve, H c2 (T ) obeyed the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) prediction, Figure We estimated H c1 (0) to be 90 Oe and calculated the London penetration depth of λ 0 ≈ 271 nm using an approximation of H c1 (0) ≈ φ 0 /πλ 2 0 . The GL parameter of κ GL = λ 0 /ξ 0 was also determined to be κ GL ≈ 42(> 1/ √ 2), strongly supporting the type-II superconducting nature. Figure where μ * = 0.13 is the Coulomb pseudopotential for polyvalent transition metals. First, we calculated the DOS of Sc 20 C 28 using the experimentally determined crystallographic parameters, as presented in Table The polycrystalline samples of ternary borocarbide Sc 20 C 8 -x B x C 20 (x = 1 or 2) were successfully synthesized. The Rietveld refinements demonstrated that the crystal structure belongs to the tetragonal space group of P 4/ncc, and possesses the distorted Sc 6 octahedra and eight units formed by the C 3 group. The unit cell was also regarded as a layered structure made of ScC-and C-meshes along the c-axis. Using the DFT calculations to examine the positional stability of B, we found that one or two C atoms at the 8f site (isolated C-layer) were replaced by B. The magnetic susceptibility, electrical resistivity, and specific heat data revealed that the compound exhibited the typical type-II superconductivity at T c = 7.7 K. To summarize, the physical parameters determined in this study are listed in Table I obs. -I cal. ) and results from the Rietveld fitting (I cal. ) at approximately 293 K. The chemical composition was assumed to be Sc 20 BC 27 . A difference between I obs. and I cal. is shifted downward by 1 × 10 4 counts. Arrows and a circle indicate the peaks from Sc 15 C 19 and unknown phases as impurities, respectively. The inset depicts a magnification near the main peak. a Space group: 20 C 8 -x B