The complete theoretical description of experimentally observed magnetoexcitons in cuprous oxide has been achieved by F. Schweiner et al [Phys. Rev. B 95, 035202 (2017)], using a complete basis set and taking into account the valence band structure and the cubic symmetry of the solid. Here, we extend these calculations by investigating numerically the autoionising resonances of cuprous oxide in electric fields and in parallel electric and magnetic fields oriented in [001] direction. To this aim we apply the complex-coordinate-rotation method. Complex resonance energies are computed by solving a non-Hermitian generalised eigenvalue problem, and absorption spectra are simulated by using relative oscillator strengths. The method allows us to investigate the influence of different electric and magnetic field strengths on the position, the lifetime, and the shape of resonances. Excitons are quasi particles, which occur in semiconductors and insulators. If an electron is raised from the valence band to the conduction band, the remaining positively charged hole in the valence band interacts with the negatively charged electron in the conduction band. This electron-hole pair is called an exciton. Depending on the spatial distance between electron and hole one distinguishes between Frenkel and Mott-Wannier excitons An ideally suitable crystal for the experimental investigation of Rydberg excitons is cuprous oxide (Cu 2 O), where excitons have been observed up to principal quantum number n = 25 The detailed comparison between the experimental and theoretical spectra shows excellent agreement. Similar is true for exciton spectra in the Voigt configuration, where the external magnetic field is perpendicular to the incident light and a weak effective electric field perpendicular to the magnetic field is induced by the Magneto-Stark effect The experiments and calculations mentioned above are restricted to bound states, and the experimentally observed linewidths are dominated by exciton-phonon interactions The dissociation of excitons in Cu 2 O by an electric field has been investigated by Heckötter et al In the present paper we want to go beyond these calculations and investigate the unbound resonance states of excitons in electric fields or combined electric and magnetic fields by fully including the effects of the valence band. To this aim we extend the method introduced in The paper is organised as follows: In section 2 we present the theory. After the introduction of resonance states and the complex coordinate-rotationmethod in section 2.1 we present in section 2.2 the Hamiltonian for the yellow excitons in Cu 2 O taking into account the non-parabolic valence band structure and the effects of the external electric and magnetic fields. In section 2.3 we discuss the setup of the non-Hermitian generalised eigenvalue problem by using a complete basis set. Formulas for the calculation of the relative oscillator strength and the simulation of the absorption spectra are derived in section 2.4. The results of our calculations are presented in section 3, and conclusions are drawn in section 4. For the convenience of the reader we briefly recapitulate the complex-coordinate-rotation method and the Hamiltonian of cuprous oxide in external fields. We then discuss the setup of a non-Hermitian generalised eigenvalue problem for the computation of the complex resonance energies and the corresponding eigenstates, and finally present the necessary equations for the calculation of the oscillator strengths and the simulation of the absorption spectra. Resonances are quasi-bound states with a finite lifetime. Simple examples are the radioactive decay of unstable atomic nuclei, an excited atom returning to its ground state, or a temporally trapped particle in an open potential. In the case of excitons the potential barrier of the Coulomb interaction between electron and hole can be lowered by an external electric field. To describe the temporal decay of such systems we use non-Hermitian Hamiltonians obtained with the method of the complex coordinate-rotation To introduce the formalism we calculate the energy expectation value of the 1S state of the hydrogen atom, with radial function R(r) = 2e -r . Since R(r) is an analytic function we can use Cauchy's integral theorem and rewrite the real line integral (1) into a complex one with z = re iθ and θ the angle between real and imaginary part. As long as we integrate from z = 0 to ∞ the integral (2) does not depend on the value of θ, because the wave function R(r) vanishes sufficiently quickly for r → ∞. Thus, the results of both integrals (1) and (2) are the same, i.e., an important property of the method is that bound states are invariant under complex rotation. To illustrate what happens to the scattering and continuum states, we substitute r → re iθ and k → ke -iθ in the result of the radial scattering problem The complex rotation implies a change of the energy (with m = 1, h = 1), which means that these states are now rotated into the lower half of the complex plane by the angle 2θ. The most important feature of the complex coordinate-rotation concerns the resonance states. For appropriately chosen θ, they appear as new eigenvalues on the lower half of the complex energy plane. A simple example is the inverted harmonic oscillator, which has no bound states. The complex rotated Hamiltonian is given by with purely imaginary energy eigenvalues The inverted harmonic oscillator thus has an infinite number of resonances with different widths The results of the complex rotation can be summarised by the following statements, which are also illustrated in figure For the calculation of the yellow exciton series in Cu 2 O we use the same Hamiltonian as Schweiner et al where the kinetic energy of the electron and hole are given by with the spin-orbit interaction Here, E g is the gap energy, m e is the effective electron mass, p = (p 1 , p 2 , p 3 ) are the momenta, {a, b} = 1 2 (ab + ba) is the symmetric product, ∆ is the spinorbit coupling constant, I is the quasispin, S h is the hole spin, and c.p. denotes cyclic permutation. The vectors I and S h contain the components of the three spin matrices S hj and I j of the hole spin S h = 1/2 and the quasispin I = 1, respectively. The quasispin I is introduced to describe the degeneracy of the valence band Bloch functions The electric interaction between hole and electron is given by the Coulomb potential with the dielectric constant . In references To take external electric and magnetic fields into account the Hamiltonian (7) must be extended. The electric field is included by adding the potential where F is the electric field vector. To describe a constant magnetic field we use the vector potential with symmetric gauge, A = (B × r)/2. The energy of the spins in the magnetic field is given by [5] g factor of the electron spin g c = 2.1 [8] g factor of the hole spin g s ≈ 2 and set the position and momentum of the centre of mass to zero (R = 0, P = 0). The complete Hamiltonian of excitons in external fields with relative coordinates finally reads More details of the derivations are given in references For the computation of eigenvalues of the yellow excitons in external fields we now express the Hamiltonian (15) as a matrix by using an appropriate basis set. For the radial part of the wave functions we use the Coulomb-Sturmian functions where L 2L+1 N are the associated Laguerre polynomials, the N N L are normalisation factors, and ρ = r/α, with α being a free parameter. N is the radial quantum number, which is related to the principal quantum number n via n = N + L + 1. Note that the Coulomb-Sturmian functions ( For the angular part of the basis we use the eigenfunctions of the effective hole spin J = I + S h , the effective angular momentum F = L + J, and the electron spin S e . At the Γ point, J is a good quantum number and distinguishes between the yellow exciton series (J = 1/2) and the green exciton series (J = 3/2). F and S e are coupled to F t = F +S e with z component M Ft . The complete basis set is then given by To obtain a finite size basis for the numerical computations the quantum numbers must be restricted. For each value of the principal quantum number n = N + L + 1 we use The excitonic wave functions can be expanded in the basis with the coefficients c. Using the Hamiltonian (15) and the basis set for the resonance energies E and the coefficients c of the corresponding wave functions which is achieved with a modified Gram-Schmidt process. With the eigenvalues and eigenvectors obtained by numerical diagonalisation of the generalised eigenvalue problem For circularly polarised light the relative oscillator strength is given by with and for an electric and/or magnetic field in [001] direction. We use the abbreviation |F t , M Ft D to denote the states where the coupling scheme differs from the one given in section 2.3. The spins couple in the following way with the total spin S, the quasispin I, the angular momentum L, the total angular momentum F t and its projection on the quantisation axis M Ft . With the relative oscillator strength we can furthermore calculate the spectrum. Rescigno and McKoy where α is the fine-structure constant, E 0 the energy of the ground state Ψ 0 , and E j the complex energy of the resonance state Ψ j . For excitonic spectra we replace the squared dipole matrix elements Ψ 0 |D|Ψ j (θ) 2 in (29) with the relative oscillator strengths f rel given in with E j the complex energies of the resonances. Note that the squared dipole matrix elements Ψ 0 |D|Ψ j (θ) 2 in (29) and the relative oscillator strength f rel in ( In this section we present the results of our calculations for excitons of cuprous oxide in external fields. We investigate the resonances in the complex energy plane and the corresponding absorption spectra obtained with circularly polarised light for excitons, first in electric fields, and then in parallel electric and magnetic fields. We restrict the presentation of results to resonances and ignore the bound states, which would appear as delta peaks in the absorption spectra. The linewidths of resonances in our calculations are solely caused by the external electric field, i.e., we do not consider exciton-phonon interactions In figures 2 and 3 we present the results for excitons in an electric field oriented along the [001] axis with field strengths F = 7200 V/m and F = 9000 V/m, respectively. The lower parts of the figures show the positions of resonances in the complex energy plane obtained as complex eigenvalues of the non-Hermitian generalised eigenvalue problem Long-lived resonances appear as thin peaks in the absorption spectra. In general, broader peaks belong to resonances with higher principal quantum numbers n or, within a given n-manifold, to resonances with lower energy Figure In reference Now we investigate the influence of an additional magnetic field parallel to the electric field. Both fields are in [001] direction. Figure Schweiner et al An interesting property of the complex generalised eigenvalue problem Nikitine 