In this work, we investigated a simple structured graphene terahertz (THz) metasurface (MSF) with perfect absorption, wideband, polarization insensitive, oblique incidence insensitive and frequency reconfiguration. The graphene MSF structure is composed of a two-dimensional periodic array of graphene meta-atoms deposited on the silicon substrate terminated by a metal ground plane. The performance of the proposed MSF is numerically analyzed. An equivalent circuit model of the structure and its closed-form solution is introduced. The graphene MSF thin structure at 2.5 THz provides 100% of absorption with wide bandwidth, zero reflection and zero transmission at normal incidence in both transverse electric (TE) and transverse magnetic (TM) polarization. Under oblique incidence, the absorption is maintained at higher than 95%. Moreover, the graphene MSF structure has the advantage of frequency reconfiguration. The excellent absorption performance is maintained at all reconfigurable frequencies upon reconfiguration. The results reveal the effectiveness of the THz MSF with graphene meta-atoms, which can be promising for THz wireless environment. Owing to its two-dimensional (2D) nature and the unique properties at THz frequencies, graphene has attracted a lot of attention to THz research community. It has found its applications in designing miniaturized devices required for THz wireless communication In recent years, MSF has gained significant attention due to its ability to control the wave propagation by patterning planar subwavelength structure. Hypersurface (HSF), a programmable MSF, design exhibits a high degree of MSF pattern customization and allows for a high degree of tunability In this work, we propose a simple structure of the graphene MSF at low THz frequencies. This work numerically investigates the absorption performance of graphene MSF structure. The performance of the graphene MSF is analyzed under normal and oblique incidences in both TE and TM polarization. Moreover, the impact of variation of the Fermi level on the graphene MSF is studied, which provide reconfigurable MSF. An equivalent circuit modeling of the structure and its closed-form solution is also introduced. The MSF with graphene meta-atom designs could act as a smart environment for THz communications. A smart THz MSF using graphene meta-atom is presented in this work. The graphene MSF structure is composed of a 2D periodic array of graphene elements deposited on silicon substrate terminated by a metal ground plane. Fig. In the literature, the periodic array of graphene meta-atoms on a dielectric layer over a metallic plane has been discussed The periodic array consists of the graphene square patches with dimension of d × d, set along the x-and y-directions with period P. The operational frequency is considered as f = 2.5 THz. To achieve thin absorber, the thickness of the substrate is considered as h = λ/13. The thickness t of 0.3 μm is chosen for the metallic plane. The patch width and the period are d = λ/14 and P = λ/10 respectively. All dimensions of the proposed structure are in μm units. We assumed the electron mobility of graphene μ g = 2000 cm 2 /Vs, the electron relaxation time τ = 0.1 ps, and temperature T = 300 K in this work. The properties and dimensions of the graphene MSF structure are chosen for the design of thin, perfect, wideband absorber at THz frequencies. The graphene elements are modeled as infinitesimally thin sheets with the surface impedance Z = 1/σ(ω), where σ(ω) is the frequency-dependent complex conductivity of graphene. The conductivity of graphene is described by the Kubo formula where e is the electron charge, k B is the Boltzmann's constant, ħ is the reduced Planck's constant, T is the temperature, μ c is the chemical potential (Fermi energy), τ is the relaxation time. 1 st and 2 nd term of the above equation represents intraband and interband contribution for graphene conductivity. In the low THz band, the intraband conductivity dominates over interband conductivity. For μ c ≫ k B T, the conductivity of graphene σ g at the low THz band can be expressed as Above equation in the Drude form can be calculated as, where The surface impedance of the graphene patch array can be approximated as where P is the period of graphene array, s is the space between the graphene elements, ε r is the relative permittivity of the substrate. Eq. ( From Eq. ( The total impedance of the graphene MSF structure is The reflection coefficient S 11 of the graphene MSF structure is where Z 0 is the free space impedance. Absorption of graphene MSF structure is The proposed graphene unit cell structure and the complete MSF structure are validated in CST Microwave Studio To investigate the reflection and absorption characteristics for both TE and TM polarization, we obtained the reflection spectra and the field distributions under normal incidence for both TE and TM polarization. Fig. ), which is approximately 100% for both TE and TM polarization. In addition, the frequency reconfiguration of the graphene MSF is achieved by tuning the chemical potential of graphene. The chemical potential of graphene can be tuned in a wide range by means of electrical gating or chemical doping method. Fig. 