The laser flash method is highly regarded due to its applicability to a wide temperature range, from cryogenic temperatures to the melting point of refractory metals, and to extreme environments involving radioactive or hazardous materials. Although instruments implementing this method are mostly produced on a commercial basis by major manufacturers, there is always room for improvement both in terms of experimental methods and data treatment procedures. The measurement noise, either due to the detector performance or electromagnetic interferences, presents a significant problem when accurate determination of thermal properties is desired. Noise resilience of the laser flash method is rarely mentioned in published literature; there are currently no data treatment procedures which could guarantee adequate performance under any operating conditions. In this paper, a computational framework combining finite-difference solutions of the heat conduction problem with nonlinear optimization techniques based on the use of quasi-Newton direction search and stochastic linear search with the Wolfe conditions is presented. The application of this framework to data with varying level of noise is considered. Finally, cross-verification and validation using an external standard, a commercial and an in-house built laser flash instrument are presented. The open-source software implementing the described computational method is benchmarked against its industrial counterpart. Nearly sixty years have passed since Parker et al. The ASTM standard E1461 -13 Assuming perfect delivery of the laser pulse to the sample's front surface, the performance of a laser flash instrument is influenced by the following factors: (i) The theoretical detector performance is given by its specific detectivity, a parameter equal to the output current (or voltage) per watt of incident thermal power per unit area of the active surface. The detectivity may vary over several orders of magnitude depending on the detector material and the spectral characteristics of the incident thermal radiation. For instance, when comparing near-infrared Peltier-cooled detectors, photovoltaic MCT (mercury cadmium telluride) are generally much better in terms of detectivity than the photoconductive PbSe detectors; however, Peltier-cooled detectors perform worse in general than the liquid-nitrogen cooled InSb detectors. When doing measurements at cryogenic or very high temperatures, even the best near-infrared detectors yield inherently noisy data, and detectors suitable for a different spectral range are desired; (ii) The analog signal generated by the detector is processed with a (cooled) pre-amplifier unit mounted within the detector assembly. The preamplified signal is then transmitted to the main amplifier in the processing unit, and later converted to a digital output with the digitalto-analog convertor. Additional electromagnetic noise may arise from the technological process involved in making the electrical connections (commonly soldering); (iii) As pointed out by Baba and Ono (iv) A poorly transmitting optical window, e.g. separating the detector assembly from the furnace interior, may lead to a drop in the signal quality. This sometimes happens due to the re-deposition of the material released from the sample, e.g. due to a decomposition process at high temperatures; Considering the systematic nature of most occurrences above, it would be impossible to correct them using repeat measurements. Some other uncertainties are intermittent: Sheindlin et al. To the best of authors' knowledge, the listed experimental uncertainties have not been studied with regard to their effect on the output of classical laser flash analysis. Likewise, neither does the ASTM standard set any acceptance criteria for the quality of the instrumental time-temperature profiles, which prevents effective quality control for commercially built instruments. Depending on the design solutions chosen by the manufacturer, the output signal may be of lower quality than required for reliable operation of the conventional data treatment procedures. The goal of this paper is to present a universal and easily verifiable method of data analysis that would: (a) not use cumbersome analytic expressions; (b) be independent of general-purpose commercially distributed mathematical packages and software; (c) be highly resilient to the experimental uncertainties of the classical laser flash analysis. This method would then be used to process data from a laser flash experiment in a commercial instrument using an external standard. Ultimately, the results would be benchmarked with the industrial software to asses its capabilities. The algorithm and procedures outlined in this work are part of the PULsE (Processing Unit for Laser Flash Experiments) software, which is an open-source, crossplatform Java code freely distributed under the Apache 2.0 license The computational framework described in this paper implements finite-difference schemes for solving a heat transfer problem, rather than relying on existing semi-analytical solutions by previous authors. Some of the remarks below may be specific to the way this solution is obtained. In the reverse heat conduction problem, two enumerated collections are compared against each other: the experimental data sequence ∆T ( t i ), i = 0, 1, ..., n exp , where n exp 1, 000 -5, 000 is the number of experimental data points; and the calculated dataset (containing only unique elements) representing the heating curve ∆ T (t j ), j = 0, 1, ..., n s , where an arbitrary n s 100 is chosen. Here we assume fixed time sampling for the latter, so that ∃ ∆t s ∈ R, ∀ j = 0, ..., n s -1 : t j+1j i = ∆t s . Note that generally t i = t j , i.e. the time values for the experimental and calculated data points may not overlap. To define a computational algorithm for the objective function, it is thus necessary to implement an interpolation procedure. Instead of interpolating over the experimental dataset ∆T ( t i ), which is guaranteed to produce interpolation errors (especially in the case of noisy detector data), the idea is to interpolate over the solution values ∆ T (t j ) (Fig. where square brackets denote the floor function, i.e. the greatest integer less than or equal to the argument, and k ∈ [0, n s ] ∩ Z is the index of the greatest element t k in the calculated dataset such that t k ≤ t i . The objective function f can then be calculated as the sum of squared residuals (SSR) as follows: where a, b ∈ [0, n exp ] ∩ Z are the lower and higher sum limits, respectively, defining the time domain for calculation. The voltage U(t) transmitted from the infrared detector to the data acquisition module determines the spectral radi- 1. An illustration of calculating the sum of squared residuals (SSR) using data from two enumerated collections of different size: the experimental data points ∆T ( t i ) (i = 0, 1, ..., n exp ) and the model solution ∆ T (t j ) ( j = 0, 1, ..., n s ). Eq. 1 is used to calculate the interpolated value ∆ T ( t i ) at t k < t < t k+1 using the nearest points of the model solution ∆ T (t k ) and ∆ T (t k+1 ) and the experimental time t i . ance [W × sr -1 × m -3 ], which is used to estimate the temperature rise of the sample's rear surface. Alternatively, the voltage U(t) from a thermocouple generated due to the Seebeck effect is converted to temperature via a characteristic function of the thermocouple. Whatever the tool used to measure the temperature, hereinafter it is referred to as the detector, and the voltage it measures is referred to as the signal. A linear relation between the signal U(t) and the heating ∆T (t) = T (t) -T 0 , where T 0 is the baseline test temperature measured by a separate detector, is assumed: ∆T (t)/C 2 = U(t) -C 1 , where the constant C 1 can be determined as the baseline level U min and C 2 -as the maximum relative heating ∆T max ∝ ∆U max (Fig. It is important though to correctly estimate the baseline signal U b (t) and the maximum change of voltage ∆U max , assumed to be proportional to the maximum heating ∆T max . This becomes challenging for some experimental assemblies with noisy (see Fig. As seen from Fig. The outliers in Fig. The idealized heat transfer model introduced by Parker et al. When the laser spot uniformly covers the sample's front surface and the sample diameter is much larger than its thickness (l d, but typically l/d ≈ 0.1 -0.2), the heat transfer is effectively one-dimensional. Assuming that heating is small, so that the thermal conductivity does not change across the sample's x coordinate (λ = λ (x)) and ∆T /T 0 1, the boundary problem may be linearized. Finally, it becomes possible to convert the heat equation and the boundary conditions to a dimensionless form by introducing the Biot (Bi) number, which determines the heat transfer resistance at sample's surface, and the Fourier (Fo) number, which characterizes transient heat conduction, as dimensionless quantities, thus allowing to simplify the solution by reducing the number of variables. 2. An example pre-processing of the experimental data (PbSe detector), showing: the baseline calculated by least-squares fitting to experimental data at t < 0; a running average curve generated by coarsening of experimental data using a default reduction factor of 32 and thus ensuring relative robustness to outliers; and the maximum U max of the running average, which roughly corresponds to the U p peak in the probability density function. A one-dimensional heat conduction problem for the laser flash experiment must include: (i) a heat source term QP(t)/(πd 2 /4), where Q is the heat current, P(t) ∼ 1/t las is the normalized time distribution of the laser pulse, and d is the sample diameter; (ii) the heat sink terms at both the front x = 0 and the rear x = l surfaces due to the radiant heat flux q 12 = S 1 ε 1 (T )σ 0 T 4 (x,t) -S 2 ε 2 (T )σ 0 T 4 0 from the sample's non-concave surface S 1 to the surrounding surface S 2 of the furnace interior (assuming the latter is kept at a stable temperature T 0 ), where ε 1 and ε 2 are the emissivities of the sample and the surrounding 'shell' of an arbitrary shape. In addition, heat flow is assumed to be axial, meaning radial heat fluxes of any kind are neglected. Under certain assumptions (Avduevskii et al. -1 is the reduced emissivity. Considering that S 2 S 1 , the latter expression reduces to simply ε ε 1 , so that the boundary problem is written as: where C p is the specific heat at constant pressure and ρ is the material density. The dimensionless quantities are then introduced as follows: Assuming that λ = λ (x) and (T -T 0 )/T 0 1, linearization of Eqs. (4) results in an alternative boundary problem: The laser pulse functions can be changed programmatically during the experiment and can take various forms, including the following as example (a rectangular, a triangular, and a Gaussian pulse functions -previously considered by Baranov et al. After changing the variables to dimensionless numbers and introducing a computationally efficient sign function sgn(x), a quantity Φ(Fo) := P(Fo) • l 2 /a may be defined, and Eqs. (7) can then be re-written: The spatial domain of Eqs. ( Even though the laser beam might not cover the sample completely, these difficulties can be avoided, and the effect of potential signal drift minimized, if the measurement time is kept as short as practically possible -which is precisely what the above-described truncation procedure does automatically. Thus, the rectangular domain of Eqs. ( The (semi)analytical solutions considered in The domain D (Sect. III C) is divided into a uniform grid by introducing the coordinate step size h = 1/(N -1), where N is the number of individual coordinate points on the grid, and the discrete time step τ = τ F h 2 , τ F ∈ R. The grid is used to discretize θ (y, Fo), which becomes θ (ξ j , Fo m ) = θ m j , j = 0, ..., N -1, m = 0, ..., m 0 , called the grid function. This section shows different ways to calculate θ m j , which can later be converted to T (t j ) (see Sect. II B). A. Application to the boundary problem (Eq. ( If σ ∈ [0, 1] ∩ R, the finite-difference representation of Eq. (6a) on a six-point pattern may be written as Three special cases of Eq. ( where a j = c j = 1/h 2 . For the fully implicit scheme: b j = 1/τ + 2/h 2 , F j = -θ m j /τ. For the Crank-Nicolson scheme: In the sweep algorithm, the following recurrent expression is introduced: Let Lφ (ξ α ) = (φ α+1φ α-1 ) /2h. The order of approximation for Eq. ( where Ξ = Ξ m+1 is the discretized pulse function defined by substituting Fo las , e.g. in Eqs. (8), with the discrete pulse width Fo las = Fo las {l 2 a -1 } τ • τ (square brackets denote the floor function). Note this effectively changes the magnitude of the heat source term in Eq. (12a) by ∼ O(τ), which only slightly affects the maximum heating (see Eq. ( To obtain the same order of approximation for the boundary conditions as for Eq. ( j (1σ )/σ and combining Eqs. ( (i) Fully implicit scheme (σ = 1): (ii) Crank-Nicolson scheme (σ = 0.5): Eqs. (14c) and (15c) are used to initiate the calculation of θ j , j = N -2, ..., 0 with the recurrent expression given by Eq. (11) where the α j and β j are calculated using standard expressions To verify whether the finite-difference scheme (Sect. IV A) and the boundary problem (Sect. III A) have been composed correctly, the numerical solution θ (y = 1, Fo) calculated using the described procedure is compared to the previously published analytical solutions by Parker et al. In each case, cross-verification of the different schemes (σ = 0.0, σ = 0.5, σ = 1.0) was performed. The probability density of residuals ∆ T -∆ T Parker in Fig. Thermal properties in a laser flash experiment are determined from the minimum of the objective function f (S) calculated using Eq. ( To find S, a nonlinear optimization algorithm is used to determine the minimum direction S min . Once it is found, a linear search determines the optimal magnitude of the step in the S direction. These actions are repeated iteratively. If proper algorithms are chosen, with each iteration the objective function f (S) is brought closer to the global minimum. If the model (given by Eqs. 6) is adequate, an unbiased estimate of thermal properties is produced at the global minimum of f (S). The calculation of the objective function gradient takes one of the central parts in the direction search routine. If ∆S i is a small variation of the i-th component of the search vector, the associated component of the gradient is ∆ f (S i + ∆S i )∆S i , or more precisely (Gill, Murray, and Wright 36 ): where a central-difference approximation is used; is the value of the objective function calculated at a new search vector S, all components of which are identical to S except for the i-th component, which is defined as S i = S i + ∆S i . Eq. ( Consider the following Taylor expansion to the second or- The minimum of this quadratic form then corresponds to the Newtonian condition: p k = -G -1 k g k . If the Hessian matrix G k is approximated by H k , the direction to minimum is then defined as: where H k is a positive definite matrix containing the curvature information for the objective function. A Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (BFGS) (Gill, Murray, and Wright 36 ) algorithm is used to calculate H k+1 at the next iteration k + 1 using the gradient value g k and the increment u k = g k+1 -g k : where I is a r × r identity matrix, r is the dimension of the search vector. Thus, the direction to the minimum at the first iteration coincides with the inverted gradient, same as in the gradient descent algorithm, which searches for a stationary point of f (S). The inverse of the approximated Hessian matrix H k is computed using a recursive procedure based on the Laplace expansion. Note Eq. ( After the vector p k is calculated, the search vector S k+1 at the next iteration may be expressed as S k+1 = S k + γ k p k . If γ k ∈ [0, γ max ], a linear search may be applied to calculate γ k , which minimizes the objective function f (S k + γ k p k ). In practice, it is convenient to choose where L i is a safety margin pre-set for S i prior to calculation. The Wolfe conditions are used to asses whether S k+1 is likely to be the minimum point. Here the strong Wolfe conditions are considered (Wolfe 37 , Wolfe where c 1 = 0.05, c 2 = 0.8. The computational procedure utilizing inequalities (20) starts by generating a random point α k = z internal to the [a, b] segment. The objective function is then calculated at this point, and if inequality (20a) is not satisfied, the segment is then reduced to [a, z]. Otherwise the second condition (inequality (20b)) is evaluated. If the latter is satisfied, then z is considered to be the minimum point, otherwise the computational domain is reduced to [z, b]. The procedure continues while the segment length is greater than E lin . The algorithm described above works particularly well with the quasi-Newton direction solver. An initial value S 0 is required and allows to reduce the computational costs if chosen reasonably. Fortunately, this is easy to do once the half-rise time (Sect. II B) has been estimated from the experimental data. The initial thermal diffusivity value is determined using the classic solution by Parker et al. After starting the search, a fixed-size buffer (the default is eight entries) is filled successively with S k values at each new iteration k; this is complemented by the SSR value (see Eq. ( A few previously measured time-temperature profiles were selected to represent a gradual deviation from the perfect experimental conditions. These deviations are introduced by different experimental factors, which affect either the perceived temperature rise or the actual heat transfer in the sample. The pre-selected data is then reverse-engineered following the procedure described above to produce an optimal S k . The performance of this procedure under real-world conditions is judged and the convergence is tested. The raw data was collected using two experimental installations: (a) the Kvant laser flash analyzer designed at the Moscow Engineering Physics Institute equipped with two temperature detection capabilities: (i) a thermocouple (pre-welded onto the rear surface of the sample coated with platinum black prior to each experiment) connected to a scalable amplifier with automatic constant-voltage subtraction providing rapid detection of heating with an error of less than 2.5 × 10 -3 K and (ii) an in-house designed InGaAs pyrometer (field of view d FOV = 6 mm). A combination of a rotary pump and a diffusion pump ensure high vacuum (0.01 Pa or 10 -4 mbar). An additional capability of controlling the oxygen partial pressure is provided by a solid-electrolyte galvanic cell; the oxygen partial pressure can be changed on-the-fly. A ruby laser (wavelength 694.3 nm) delivers 1.5 ms fixed-width pulses with an energy of 5 -7 J per pulse; (b) the Linseis Culham LFA, a prototype based on the Linseis LFA 1600 instrument, modified by the manufacturer to allow integration in a research room in the Materials Research Facility (MRF) at UKAEA for testing of mildly-radioactive samples. The furnace ambient temperature is measured using a low-resolution pyrometer, while a PbSe-based Peltier-cooled detector is used to register the rear-surface heating of the sample. A simple rotary pump is capable of pumping the chamber down to 0.1 -0.01 mbar. The pulse width and pulse energy (up to 31 J) of the Nd:YAG laser (wavelength 1064 nm), as well as the the detector gain and aperture can be changed by the operator during the experimental run. The materials under study were the following: a sintered sample of nearly-stoichiometric uranium dioxide (l = 1.7118 mm, d = 10.061 mm) with a porosity of about 8.5 %, an MPG-6 graphite sample (l = 2.9302 mm, d = 9.9654 mm), and two 10-mm Zr-1%Nb E110 alloy discs cut by electrical discharge machining (l = 0.414 mm and l = 0.199 mm). The raw heating curve analyzed here for the uranium dioxide pellet was reported previously (e.g., A quasi-Newton direction search (Sect. V A 1) with a linear stochastic search algorithm based on the Wolfe conditions (Sect. V A 2) was applied to reach the minimum of the objective function (gradient resolution ∆S i /S i = 10 -4 , linear search error E lin = 10 -7 , overall search error E gen = 10 -3 ). The model solution was calculated using a fully implicit (σ = 1.0) difference scheme (see Eq. ( Fig. When the data acquisition from the detector is slightly ahead or behind the laser pulse, the standard processing procedure will show systematic errors. This is illustrated in Fig. Fig. reaches the rear surface of the sample relatively fast. Because of this, the heat losses are negligible at this and even higher temperature, hence they can be excluded from the search vector. On the other hand, the baseline (initially defined at k lin = 0 as explained in Sect. II B needs to be adjusted due to the inaccurate baseline estimation based on the under-represented statistics at t < 0 from noisy data. Same as previously, full convergence is obtained after 24 iterations, with the average data spread of ≈ 0.25 mV. The search for the optimal baseline slope seems to be taking the longest time. Fig. FIG. 6. An illustration of the systematic error caused by a loss of synchronization in timing of the data acquisition and the laser pulse. The reverse heat problem is first solved using three variables (a, T max , and Bi), giving rise to the heating curve (1), which corresponds to R 2 = 0.99943 and a thermal diffusivity value a = a 0 . The distribution of residuals in this case differs from the ideal Gaussian function with a zero mean. When the time shift t 0 and the baseline intercept T lin are included in the search, the heating curve (2) is obtained as a result, which yields a Gaussian-type distribution of residuals and a markedly higher R 2 = 0.99993 value ((aa 0 )/a 0 = 9.73%). other hand, the data obviously showed either a detector signal drift or an ambient temperature instability, which needed to be corrected for by adjusting the baseline slope. Additionally, the data in Fig. An attested reference tungsten sample (l = 2.034 mm, d = 9.88 mm) was purchased from Netzsch to conduct an independent validation study. The sample arrived with a printed copy of a reference table listing the pre-measured thermal diffusivity values in accordance with the ASTM standard The recorded detector signal exported in ASCII-format and metadata files prepared by the operator were used as input when running PULsE. Again, as previously, a quasi-Newton direction search (Sect. V A 1) with a linear stochastic search algorithm based on the Wolfe conditions (Sect. V A 2) were adopted for data treatment (a gradient resolution ∆S i /S i = 10 -4 , a linear search error E lin = 10 -7 and a global search error E gen = 10 -3 ). A fully implicit (σ = 1.0) difference scheme was used to calculate T (t) (see Eq. ( Experimental data was processed individually for each curve, adjusting the time range only when such intervention was necessary; an example of this is shown in Fig. The default search variables were: the thermal diffusivity a, the maximum heating ∆U max , and the baseline intercept T lin . A linear negative drift of the detector signal could Netzsch reference PULsE Linseis Aprosoft FIG. Finally, a residual analysis was conducted for the thermal diffusivity datasets from the Linseis Aprosoft and PULsE software (shown in Fig. The following list of problems will be addressed in future publications. • A source of uncertainty associated with non-uniform heating has not been considered in the present study, but is listed in the ASTM document • An automated procedure for selecting an optimal number of variables to achieve the least influence of the systematic experimental errors on the values of thermal properties is currently lacking; instead, some parameters are selected manually. A better procedure will likely involve a constrained version of nonlinear optimization (to limit Bi ≥ 0) and a variable time domain. The latter will need to rely on a different statistic than the χ 2 -a possible solution would be using a Bayeseian information criterion, which has proven to be effective for a different problem considered recently by Fulton and Lunev 40 ; • Parker et al. • Current analysis does not cover: multi-layered heat transfer, a distributed heat source, and possible modifications to the original temperature detection concept. It is hoped that some of the limitations may be resolved in collaboration with other researchers. The following typical errors have been identified by analysing a large array of experimental data from two different instruments: (a) Partial interruption of data acquisition from the detector, e.g. due to an electromagnetic fault or because of the wrong gain setting, resulting in an incomplete measurement; (b) Synchronization failure causing a time shift in the raw data; (c) Periodically-occurring outliers, which are suspected to originate from the imperfect soldering used for electric connections; (d) Superimposed noise harmonics caused by a combination of factors including e.g. laser reflections due to a cracked sample holder cap, mains hum, mechanical vibrations, etc.; (e) High-amplitude white noise caused by low specific detectivity of the detector or a poorly transmitting optical window; (f) Unstable data acquisition (e.g. due to overheating of electric connections to the main amplifier) causing a linear baseline drift; (g) Conductive or radiative heat transfer between the sample and the sample holder. A computational method based on nonlinear optimization and finite-difference schemes (verified against some standard analytical solutions) has been designed specifically to handle data processing in experiments showing the above-listed problems. The implementation of this method in the PULsE software allows to control the search vector for data processing (by including or excluding search variables) and to target specific parts of the raw data -features not commonly present in the commercial software. A built-in tool for the residual analysis helps to identify systematic errors in the processed data. A cross-validation study has been conducted with data generated using Linseis equipment at the Materials Research Facility (UKAEA) on a Netzsch reference sample by benchmarking against the packaged Linseis software. Generally, PULsE outperforms Linseis Aprosoft due to wider data treatment capabilities and fine tuning. Future work will focus on extending its capabilities and improving batch-processing of data.