Tunable metasurfaces have demonstrated the potential for dramatically enhanced functionality for applications including sensing, ranging and imaging. Liquid crystals (LCs) have fast switching speeds, low cost, and mature technological development, offering a versatile platform for electrical tunability. However, to date, electrically tunable metasurfaces are typically designed at a single operational state using physical intuition, without controlling alternate states and thus leading to limited switching efficiencies (< 30%) and small angular steering (< 25 • ). Here, we use large-scale computational "inverse design" to discover high-performance designs through adjoint-based localoptimization design iterations within a global-optimization search. We study and explain the physics of these devices, which heavily rely on sophisticated resonator design to fully utilize the very small permittivity change incurred by switching the liquid-crystal voltage. The optimal devices show tunable steering angles ranging from 12 • to 144 • and switching efficiencies above 80%, exhibiting 6X angular improvements and 6X efficiency improvements compared to the current state-of-the-art. Liquid-crystal (LC) devices promise the possibility for rapid electrical steering of optical beams, yet the complexity of designing for multiple refractive-index states in a single geometry has severely restricted the resulting diffraction efficiencies (< 50%), switching efficiencies (defined below, < 25%), and steering angles (≤ 24 • ), even in state-of-the-art designs Thin optical films with complex lithographic patterns can control phases, amplitudes, diffraction-order excitations, and more general wave dynamics with high efficiency over large-area devices, comprising the basis for the emerging field of metasurfaces For dynamic applications, however, in which the properties of the metasurface are designed to offer varying functionality in multiple operational states, from electrical In this work, we show that large-scale computational design, an approach that efficiently optimizes over ar- When the voltage is off, the LC director is now parallel to TE-mode electric fields, thus maximizing the effective refractive-index change of the LC as seen by the fields. (c) Switching efficiency of our designed devices and existing devices over a wide range of steering angles. The efficiencies denoted within the figure (e.g. 83%/75%) represent the highest diffraction efficiencies of each type of device in the on/off states. Switching efficiency, defined in Eq. ( bitrarily many degrees of freedom, offers a pathway to high-efficiency dynamic (tunable) metasurfaces. We focus on beam-switching with liquid-crystal devices, which already have significant commercial development and which show promise for applications such as LIDAR. We discuss the complexity of the design space, and describe a combined application of adjoint-based local-optimization techniques within a larger global-optimization platform, and use this approach to discover two-state switching devices with high switching efficiencies and high steering angles. Figure which is the power in the target (desired) diffraction orders, P s tar (ω, g), averaged over state s, minus the total state-averaged power in all other diffraction orders, P s j =tar (ω, g), normalized by the forward transmission efficiency T . This definition of switching efficiency, which can be easily generalized to more states, linear combinations of diffraction orders, etc., enables comparison among different device designs. Figure In our adjoint equation indicated by Eq. ( (beyond wavelength-scale) parameters could be significantly compensated by separating them into pixelated local degrees of freedom (DOFs) that vary independently. However, they are fixed by fabrication constraints and must not be separated. Thus, to optimize these parameters, we embedded the grating-DOF local-optimization procedure into a global search to discover optimal thickness and periodicity values. Particle swarm optimization We apply the multi-state computational design process described above to discover the single-and multigrating designs depicted in Figs. In this section, we design tunable metasurfaces with a single grating layer. Single-grating metasurfaces can be designed by physical intuition using effective medium theory Figure In this section, we design tunable metasurfaces with three gratings-one in the silicon, and two in the TiO 2 surroundings-to discover an ultra-high-efficiency beamswitching device. Generally, multi-layer metasurface structures offer increased functionality through increased path-length enhancements and multiple-reflection interactions, and multilayer metasurfaces have been proposed for light concentration We start by reconsidering the problem of highefficiency switching from -12 • to +12 • . The optimal design, depicted in Fig. Among the many designs that were discovered across the single-, double-, and triple-grating architectures, for beam-steering angles from 24 • to 144 • , we highlight here the highest steering-angle designs, which employ a triplegrating structure to achieve steering from -72 • to +72 • . By avoiding a design with collections of locally varying "unit cells," we circumvent the limitations To understand the physics of the high-efficiency designs that we discover, we analyze the quality factors (Q) and resonance patterns for our high-efficiency struc-tures designed for -2 to +2 order switching. As shown in Fig. In this work, we have demonstrated high-efficiency, wide-angle, electrically tunable metasurfaces that operate at 1550 nm wavelength, achieving state-of-the-art steering angles and switching efficiencies. Our inversedesign approach can be applied more broadly to any multi-configuration-state optical functionality, for applications including next-generation LiDAR, spatial light modulators, and free-space data communication. In the liquid-crystal beam-steering design space, natural extensions include many-state operation (towards steering rather than switching) and three-dimensional beam control. In addition to the "bottom-up" large-scale optimization approach presented here, an interesting question is the limits of such design: for a given set of liquidcrystal and semiconductor refractive indices, is it possible to exploit sum rules 