Unidirectional photonic edge states arise at the interface between two topologically-distinct photonic crystals. Here, we demonstrate a micron-scale GaAs photonic ring resonator, created using a spin Hall-type topological photonic crystal waveguide. Embedded InGaAs quantum dots are used to probe the mode structure of the device. We map the spatial profile of the resonator modes, and demonstrate control of the mode confinement through tuning of the photonic crystal lattice parameters. The intrinsic chirality of the edge states makes them of interest for applications in integrated quantum photonics, and the resonator represents an important building block towards the development of such devices with embedded quantum emitters. The integration of quantum photonic elements on chip presents a highly promising route to the realisation of scalable quantum devices. A key requirement of such an approach is the development of optical waveguides exhibiting low loss and negligible back scatter. A schematic of the PhC forming the basis of our topological ring resonator is shown in Fig. A key parameter of the lattice is the distance R from the origin of the unit cell to the centre of each triangu-lar aperture, with a graphene-like structure formed when R = R 0 = a/3. We model the structure using a commercially available 3D finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) electromagnetic simulator, However, when a perturbation is introduced such that R = a/3, a bandgap is opened at the Γ point. This is shown for the case of PhCs formed using either expanded (R e > R 0 ) or shrunken (R s < R 0 ) unit cells in Fig. The topological character of the resonator modes can be seen in protection against certain defects, and in the helical nature of the modes. We consider a defect in the form of a single unit cell missing from the resonator interface. This is seen to have little effect on the mode spectrum (dashed line in Fig. Experimentally, we fabricate topological ring resonators in a nominally 170nm-thick GaAs membrane, using standard electron beam lithography and dry etching techniques. A scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of a representative ring resonator is shown in Fig. To characterise the devices, the sample is mounted in an exchange gas cryostat, and the waveguide modes of the resonator are probed using micro-photoluminescence (μ-PL) spectroscopy. We use an excitation wavelength of 808nm, and focus the laser to a spot size of ∼ 2μm. High power excitation is used to generate broadband emission from the QD ensemble. Mirrors in the collection path, with motorized adjusters, enable the collection of PL emission from a location either coincident with, or spatially distinct from, the excitation spot. We first position the excitation laser spot on one side of the ring (region 'b' in Fig. We next excite PL at several other positions on the resonator interface while collecting from the same location as previously, and observe that the mode structure remains unchanged (see Fig. To visualise the modes more clearly, we raster scan the excitation laser across the device, simultaneously acquiring PL spectra from the same (fixed) collection spot used above. For each excitation position on the device, we sum the measured PL intensity over three different bandwidths corresponding to the different resonator modes seen in Fig. Finally, we investigate the effect of the unit cell perturbation on the spatial confinement of the resonator modes. Fig. In conclusion, we have created a GaAs spin Hall topological photonic ring resonator, and used embedded In-GaAs QDs to probe the mode structure of the device. Using spatially resolved PL measurements, we demonstrated that the modes were confined to the PhC interface. Furthermore, we showed that by controlling the perturbation of the PhC unit cell, the spatial confinement of the modes could be tuned. The resonator represents an important building block in the development of integrated photonic devices using embedded quantum