Exploiting of nonlinearity has opened doors into undiscovered areas for achieving multiplexed performances in recent years. Although efforts have been made to obtain diverse nonlinear architectures at visible frequencies, the room is still free for incorporating non-linearity into the design of microwave metasurfaces. In this paper, a passive dual-band power intensitydependent metasurface is presented. Here, power-multiplexing performance is achieved by embedding PIN-diodes in the coding particles. The proposed digital metasurface has three operational states: 1) it acts as a normal reflector at low power intensities whereas provides a dual-band nonlinear response upon illuminating by high-power incidences where 2) it perfectly absorbs the radiations at f 1 =6.7 GHz and 3) re-distributes the scattered beams by arranging the meta-atoms with a certain coding pattern at f 2 =9.37 GHz. The nonlinear performance of the designed tri-state coding elements has been characterized by using the scattering parameters captured in the full-wave simulations where the accurate models of the nonlinear diodes are involved. The emergence of microwave self-biased metasurfaces with smart re-actions upon illuminating by incidences of different power level, revealing great opportunities for designing smart windows, smart camouflage coating surfaces and so on. Metasurfaces as the reduced dimensional version of 3D metamaterials can have the same electromagnetic (EM) functionalities as many bulky components while benefiting from extraordinary features of being ultra-thin, easy to build, and easy to integrate. These unique properties have received a broad interest in the engineering, physics and optics communities, leading to extensive theoretical and experimental investigations. Since their creature, a vast variety of intriguing potential applications has been reported for metasurfaces from microwave to visible spectra. The field of metasurface has witnessed rapid growth, and found a special place in obtaining negative refraction In recent years, a copious number of studies has incorporated nonlinearity into the metasurface design, yielding different multitasking types like frequency multiplexing while the power intensity is more than a specified threshold, are in On-state, acting as a small resistor; conversely, when the power intensity is less than that threshold, the diode operates in Off-state, acting as a small capacitor. In 2013 Nevertheless, the presented architecture can only manipulate the spectral (not spatial) properties of the high power incident signals. Digital metasurfaces were originally put forward to engineer the scattered waves, by designing two distinct coding elements with opposite reflection phases (e.g., 0 • and 180 • ) as the âĂIJ0âĂİ and âĂIJ1âĂİ digital bits In this paper, a self-biased dual-band coding metasurface is proposed, comprising of linear and nonlinear power-multiplexed I-shape meta-atoms, as illustrated in Figure The coding metasurface of Figure The principle mechanism of the nonlinear group of coding particles is based on changing the value of the equivalent lumped elements upon increasing the power level of the incident wave. Obviously, the voltage levels induced on both ends of the embedded diode strongly depend on the local field intensities stimulated by different incident power levels. If the induced voltage is not enough to turn the diode ON, it can be modeled as a small capacitance. In contrast, at the condition of high power illumination, such AC voltage can bias the diode mounted in the gap positively or negatively. For PIN diodes, carriers are injected into intrinsic layer during the half-cycle of positive bias and migrated out of intrinsic layer during the half-cycle of negative bias. Because the carrier injection rate is higher than the outgoing rate, a certain charge will be accumulated in the intrinsic layer, and the diode will work stably in the ON-state. The nonlinearity manifests itself to the time-domain response of the nonlinear group of metaatoms, clearly. In this section, a Macom MA4L401-134 PIN-diode with low parasitic capacitance, short switching time, and small ON-state resistance has been chosen. The nonlinear diode acts as a capacitance of about 0.25 pF at OFF-state, while it is equivalent to a series of resistor 1.2 Ω at ON-state. In our simulations, lumped element capacitors and resistors are deliberately employed to describe both OFF and ON states of the diodes, respectively. The commercial program, CST Microwave Studio, is utilized to observe the time domain waveforms of voltages induced on both terminations of the PIN-diodes, in low-and high-power situations. Periodic boundary conditions are applied to the x-and y-directions, while Floquet ports are assigned along the z-direction to form a transversally-infinite array from the meta-atoms of Figure The overall EM functionality of the designed nonlinear metasurface is determined by the reflection phase/amplitude spectra of the occupying digital elements and their spatial distribution over the surface. In this section, we aim at characterizing the EM responses of linear and nonlinear coding particles in the frequency domain. The EM response of the linear coding particles can be simply characterized using the conventional methods where the PIN-diode is replaced with its equivalent resistance. The corresponding results are given in Figures The minimum input power changing the status of the nonlinear elements can be specified through monitoring the current induced across the diode for different power levels. The results are illustrated in Figure When a y-polarized plane wave excites each particle, the complex reflection coefficient of the nonlinear meta-atoms can be tuned by the voltages induced across the PIN-diode. Using EM-circuit co-simulations carried out by CST Microwave Studio, the dispersive reflectivity of the nonlinear group of elements is studied for two different power levels. In this case, the diode is numerically replaced with a lumped port, allowing us to extract the S2P data. The numerical simulations of the nonlinear elements return the scattering parameters, i.e. the reflection coefficients on the reference plane. The scattering parameter module is then imported to the Circuit Simulator, where the second port is terminated by the SPICE model of the PIN-diode and the first one is connected to an external microwave source. After the circuit simulations, the complex reflection coefficient of the nonlinear particles are recorded and plotted in Figures As depicted in Figures 5, the proposed architecture is composed of linear and nonlinear I-shape meta-atoms whose spatial distribution over the surface constructs a tri-state intensity-dependent bi-spectral metasurface. In order to suppress the corner coupling effects, 4 × 4 linear I-shape meta-atoms are integrated into a lattice. The same scheme is realized for nonlinear lattices. The linear and nonlinear lattices are marked by red and blue colors where different arrangements of nonlinearity would lead to various EM functionalities at the upper frequency band. The nonlinearity distribution can be arbitrary. The tri-state metasurface with different arrangements of nonlinearity has been built in CST Microwave Studio to be numerically simulated. The Fig. in which, f e (θ, φ) is the pattern function of the lattice, θ and φ are the elevation and azimuth angles, respectively. D remarks the period of the digital lattices along both x-and y-directions, and k = 2π/λ refers to the wave number in free-space. Based on the generalized Snell's law, endowing the surface with spatially periodic coding sequences yields a metasurface deflecting the incident wave into multiple directions calculated by wherein, D x and D y indicate the spatial periods of the coding sequence along the horizontal and vertical directions, respectively. For instance, being programmed with the periodic coding sequence of 010101.../010101..., the nonlinear metasurface will split the normally incident wave into two symmetrically oriented beams along (θ 1 , φ 1 )=(11 • ,0 • ) and (θ 2 , φ 2 )=(11 • ,180 • ), whereas under the periodic coding sequence of 010101.../101010..., the incident beam will be mainly reflected to four symmetrically oriented directions (θ 1 , φ 1 )=( In summary, we proposed a tri-state bi-spectral power-dependent metasurface with arbitrary distribution of nonlinearity over the surface. The designed metasurface is composed of several diode-loaded I-shape meta-atoms whose EM responses are determined by the intensity of the incident fields without need to any active biasing circuit. Being excited by low-power radiations, the nonlinear architecture plays the role of an EM mirror while under high-power illuminations, it acts as an energy harvesting platform and an EM diffuser at the lower and higher frequency bands, respectively. It was shown that different distribution of nonlinearity over the surface would lead to diverse types of the scattering patterns at the higher frequency band. The numerical simulations verify the tri-state performance of the proposed nonlinear metasurface.